Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, John Hagerson, the Project Gutenberg
On-line Distributed Proofreaders and Cornell University





                         The American Missionary


                            November 1888

                          Volume XLII. No. 11.



CONTENTS

EDITORIAL
NOT QUITE FREE--ENCOURAGING RESPONSES TO OUR APPEAL
THE MOHONK CONFERENCE
ORDINATION--THE YELLOW FEVER
THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
GENERAL SURVEY
OUR SCHOOLS--CHURCH WORK--MOUNTAIN WORK--THE INDIANS--THE
  CHINESE--WOMAN'S BUREAU--FINANCES
STUDENT'S LETTER
STRUGGLES IN THE "LONE STAR STATE"
THE CHINESE
REVIEW OF THE YEAR
BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK
WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS
RECEIPTS



                              NEW YORK:

          PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

                       Rooms, 56 Reade Street.



                 Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second class matter.



                   American Missionary Association.



President, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.

_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. Behrends, D.D., N.Y.
Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Mass.
Rev. F.A. Noble, D.D., Ill.
Rev. D.O. Mears, D.D., Mass.
Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., Mo.

_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., 56 _Reade Street, N.Y._
Rev. A.F. Beard, D.D., 56 _Reade Street, N.Y._

_Treasurer._

H.W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 _Reade Street, N.Y._

_Auditors._

Peter McCartee.
Chas. P. Peirce.

_Executive Committee._

John H. Washburn, Chairman.
Addison P. Foster, Secretary.

_For Three Years._
Lyman Abbott,
Charles A. Hull,
J.R. Danforth,
Clinton B. Fisk,
Addison P. Foster,

_For Two Years._
S.B. Halliday,
Samuel Holmes,
Samuel S. Marples,
Charles L. Mead,
Elbert B. Monroe,

_For One Year._
J.E. Rankin,
Wm. H. Ward,
J.W. Cooper,
John H. Washburn,
Edmund L. Champlin.

_District Secretaries._

Rev. C.J. Ryder, 21 _Cong'l House, Boston._
Rev. J.E. Roy, D.D., 151 _Washington Street, Chicago._

_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. Chas. W. Shelton.

_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

Miss D.E. Emerson, 56 _Reade St., N.Y._



                            COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.

                     DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

                          FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.



                        The American Missionary.

                              VOL. XLII.
                           November, 1888.
                               No. 11.

American Missionary Association



NOT QUITE FREE.

In the November MISSIONARY of last year, the financial statement bore
the simple and joyous heading "FREE." This year we are compelled to
prefix two qualifying words. Our books closed September 30, with a
balance of $5,641.21 on the wrong side. While we regret that there
should be any debt, we rejoice that it is no larger.

The receipts applicable to current expenses fell off somewhat during
the year, while the expenditures, owing to general growth and some
special demands were greater than last year. The first of September,
therefore, found us confronting an impending debt. The appeal which we
felt constrained to make for September, and which was made under some
special disadvantages as compared with last year, was met with so
hearty a response in gifts and in expressions of interest in our work,
as to move us to gratitude to God and thankfulness to our friends. A
few of the donors gave $1,000 each, but the larger share of the
responses contained remittances of less than $100. Many of the sums
were quite small, and some of them indicated great self-sacrifice on
the part of the donors. A few brief extracts, all that our limited
space will allow, from a small portion of the letters received, will
be found below.

We thank God and take courage. We believe that our friends who
remembered us in the past will not forget us in the future, and that
our wants in October, and in all the following months, will not be
forgotten because they were so well remembered in September. One
thousand dollars a day represents our needs for carrying on the work
in its present development.

 _Encouraging Responses to our Appeal._

"I would like to send you more, but I send you the last dollar I have
($71.00,) and must trust the Lord for means to support us until my
next month's payment, and for means to go to the meeting of the
A.B.C.F.M., in case I attend."

"Twenty-five cents of this money was from a woman 82 years old. She is
almost helpless. The family in which she lives is very poor. She has
not a penny that she calls her own. She said to me, 'Here is the
widow's mite. I prayed that the Lord would send me something to give
away. You please take it and send it where it will do the most good.'
I send it to you trusting that with her prayers of faith, it may be
useful."

The writer of a letter enclosing a donation of $10 adds in a
postscript in regard to the donor: "Mrs. A---- was born May 5th, 1787,
and is an _old contributor_."

"I have expended all my appropriation for charitable purposes this
present year, yet I can, perhaps, curtail in some directions and so
remit to you $20 as a small tributary to swell the stream for meeting
indebtedness. I hope your appeal will accomplish the results desired.

"Through abounding grace, my wife and I are once more permitted the
joyful privilege of sending for the general work of the American
Missionary Association, $100 enclosed herewith in draft to your order.
(Their third contribution this year. Ed.) Say to the dear brethren in
the work of the Master: 'Be of good courage, fear not, for I am with
you'; _His_ own words enduring forever."

"Enclosed, please find check for $100. I am always glad to be
remembered on special appeals when they are necessary, even if I
cannot help. I do not know that I enjoy anything more than what I am
able to give to the A.M.A. I trust your appeal will find many generous
responses."

"Your kind and thoughtful letter of the 13th, received. It affords me
real pleasure to respond to your call for our Association. The good
Lord has more or less blessed me with opportunity and ability to
acquire money, and may He forbid that I should turn his blessings into
curses by hoarding the gifts of his providence, when the cry of the
poor and down-trodden is heard. I enclose my check for $100 for the
cause."

"It is a small contribution, but it comes from a small church.
Certainly it represents a genuine interest in the work of your society
and is accompanied with prayers for its success."

An executor, in remitting a legacy of $500 says: "It is not due
according to the terms of the will till next spring, but you may find
it useful at this time to help out the year."

We have received from Oaks, North Carolina, towards the extinguishment
of our debt, a contribution from forty-nine different persons,
amounting to $5.66. This represents a degree of sacrifice, not
surpassed, perhaps, by any who have contributed. Seventy cents of it
were in cash; sixty-six cents were value in fodder; one dollar and
thirty-four cents in potatoes and corn; one dollar and one cent in
work.

The missionary who is ministering to these very poor people says: "If
all who love the A.M.A. would do as well, according to their ability,
your treasury would be filled."



THE MOHONK CONFERENCE.

This Conference is unique in its character, and in the place where it
is held. Lake Mohonk was born in a great earthquake that sunk it in
its solid rocky bed, and piled up around it wonderful ranges of hills
and vast splintered rocks. The splendid summer resort built on the
margin of the Lake is the work of Mr. A.K. Smiley, a man of creative
genius, and of kind manners and a warm heart. The house, or rather the
range of houses, is picturesque, and the walks among the hills and
down the rocky gorges, and the forty miles of excellent roads, give
the widest scope for walking and driving.

The Conference is the invention of Mr. Smiley. To it, he invites
annually a hundred or more guests, giving them the freedom of the
house; and three days are spent in the discussion of Indian affairs,
interspersed with afternoon drives amid the striking scenery. The
invitation is extended to those who are supposed to be intelligently
interested in the Indians; but within that limit there is the freest
range--men and women of all political parties and of all religious
denominations being included. The acts of the Conference, like the
utterances of a Congregational Council, have only the authority of the
reason that is in them; yet it is wonderful what an influence this
peculiar body has had on public sentiment. Its utterances have been
discussed and have had their weight in the pulpit, the press, in
Congress and in the White House. The Indian and the Nation owe much to
the Mohonk Conference.

The Sixth Annual Conference, which closed September 28th, sustained
the interest of past years in the importance of the topics discussed,
in the divergency of opinion at first, and in the complete harmony at
the end. The points agreed upon in the platform were arranged under
five heads. The first relates to the establishment of Courts of
Justice in the Reservations and accessible to the Indians; the second
to the important need of education, demanding that the Government
shall undertake at once the entire task of providing primary and
secular education for all Indian children; the third urges that this
education shall be compulsory, under proper limitations; the fourth
emphasizes the duty of the churches to furnish religious instruction
to the Indians, and the immunity of their work from all governmental
interference where sustained wholly by missionary funds; the fifth
approves of the co-operation of the Government with the missionary
societies in contract schools during the present transitional
condition of the Indians. We append the last two items of the report.

  4. In view of the great work which the Christian Churches have
     done in the past in inaugurating and maintaining schools
     among the Indians, and of the essential importance of
     religious as distinguished from secular education, for
     their civil, political and moral well-being, an element
     of education which, in the nature of the case, the
     National Government cannot afford, the churches should be
     allowed the largest liberty, not, indeed, to take away
     the responsibility from the Government in its legitimate
     sphere of educational work, but to supplement it to the
     fullest extent in their power, by such schools, whether
     primary, normal or theological, as are at the sole cost
     of the benevolent or missionary societies. And it is the
     deliberate judgment of this Conference that in the crisis
     of the Indian transitional movement the churches should
     arouse themselves to the magnitude and emergency of the
     duty thus laid upon them in the providence of God.

  5. Nothing should be done to impair or weaken the agencies
     at present engaged in the work of Indian education. Every
     such agency should be encouraged and promoted, except as
     other and better agencies are provided for the work. In
     particular, owing to the anomalous condition of the
     Indians and the fact that the Government is administering
     trust funds that belong to them, what is known as the
     "contract system"--by which the nation aids by
     appropriations private and missionary societies in the
     work of Indian education--ought to be maintained by a
     continuance of such aid, until the Government is
     prepared, with adequate buildings and competent
     teachers, to assume the entire work of secular
     education. In no case should the Government establish
     schools to compete with private or church schools which
     are already doing a good work, so long as there are
     thousands of Indian children for whose education no
     provision is made.



ORDINATION AT NEW ORLEANS.

A council of Congregational Churches was held in New Orleans, Sept.
16th, for the purpose of ordaining Prof. Geo. W. Henderson, A.M.,
B.D., to the Christian ministry. Rev. R.C. Hitchcock, President of
Straight University, was chosen Moderator. Mr. Henderson sustained an
excellent examination, and was installed Pastor of the Central
Congregational Church. The entire service was impressive, and Rev. Mr.
Henderson enters upon a very responsible charge of a large church with
many encouragements and hopes of great success.



OUR SCHOOLS AND THE YELLOW FEVER.

We have been extremely gratified with the manifestations of faith and
courage on the part of our lady teachers in the South during the time
of fear and panic because of the yellow fever. Some were already at
their stations and in their schools, and some were on the way, subject
to the trials of quarantine. Not one hesitated in the path of duty.
Many teachers from the different parts of the North were ready to go
when the reports of the pestilence were most alarming, but not one of
the teachers who had previously been in the work, failed to await
instructions to go forward whenever we should speak the word. We have
been grateful to God during all these days of the autumn for the
splendid qualities of consecration and courage which have come out of
our correspondence with our honored teachers. Never did their fathers
or brothers, years ago, when deadly war called them to face the perils
of battle, show higher courage or a larger sense of duty. Almost all
of our Southern schools are now in session, and begin with increased
attendance.

SCHOOL ECHO.--A teacher writes: "One of my pupils who had been
teaching during the summer came to me in despair over a sum, saying:
"I can't understand _sympathizing fractions_."

(When we went to school years and years ago, "sympathizing fractions,"
meant broken candy. We understood, but the teacher didn't. Times
change, and we change with them.)



THE SAMARITAN WOMAN.

                     BY REV. C.J. RYDER, BOSTON.

  "And they marveled that he talked with the woman."

Why? She was a sinful woman. But these disciples must even thus early
in Christ's ministry have learned that he had come to call sinners,
not the righteous, to repentance. She was a Samaritan! That was a
larger reason for their marvel. They could rise above their hatred for
sin more easily than their race prejudice; so can we. The Samaritans
were an inferior people. Degraded they were. They had been degraded
for centuries. The Jews shunned them. Socially our Lord was making a
great blunder, perhaps a fatal blunder, in talking to this Samaritan
woman. His cause was in its infancy. The hand of social prejudice
would surely throttle it. Why antagonize the existing order of
society? How much better to utilize it for the establishment and
enlargement of the great and glorious kingdom of our Lord! This cause
needed the influence of Jewish leaders. Why risk this potent influence
for the sake of one miserable Samaritan woman, or, for that matter,
for a whole race of Samaritans? It seemed very poor management of a
cause, new in that country. "Far be such unwisdom from thee, Lord," we
can hear the impassioned and worldly-wise Peter exclaim. But our Lord
chose to sacrifice the temporary success of his kingdom that he might
be true to the eternal principles of that kingdom; and so he talked
with this sinful woman of this despised race just as considerately as
with Nicodemus. He invited her to his discipleship just as cordially,
and to the same discipleship. There is not a hint that the Good
Shepherd built another fold for the Samaritan sheep, lest some of the
Jewish flock should jump over the fence, if they were put into the
same fold.

These Samaritans were not only degraded and despised socially, but
they were also superstitious in their religious beliefs, and
semi-heathen in their forms of worship. It would take generations to
bring them up to a level with the Jewish Christians. They could not
comprehend much of the intelligent preaching that Christ addressed to
the Jews. Why not appoint a special missionary for them, and then
quietly exclude them from the ordinary gatherings? This course would
avoid criticism; it would not violate the established ideas of social
and religious propriety. Nothing need be said about it. It would not
be best to put it on parchment; just let it be quietly whispered about
that the disciples thought it was better for the Samaritan Christians
not to meet with the others. The disciples were surrounded by
prejudiced people, to be sure, but these prejudices were very old;
time would correct all these social and race inequalities. The
disciples thought it better to ignore them, and just organize and
carry on their work with no reference to these degraded and
superstitious Samaritans. Such seems to have been somewhat the
reasoning of these timid disciples. It was not our Lord's reasoning;
the doors of his blessed kingdom opened to all. It required no magic
sesame of race respectability to throw back these gates of pardon and
hope. Sin must be left outside, but the sinner of every race and tribe
was welcomed to all the privileges of this kingdom. We now see the
wisdom and the divinity of our Lord's course.

Had these marveling disciples had their way, the sect of the
Christians would have been added to the sects of the Herodians and the
Sadducees, and been buried in the same grave centuries ago. The voice
that talked with this Samaritan woman is heard round the globe now,
and every century only adds greater authority to its divine utterance;
and it is heard because it spoke with this despised Samaritan woman.
Our Lord did not ignore this race prejudice; he rebuked it. And so
these timid disciples, realizing only the temporary danger that
threatened, marveled that he talked with this woman. God pity them!
But how human they were. So to-day, in India, the missionaries of the
cross, true to their Lord's great example, talk with pariah and
Brahmin, and welcome them both to equal privileges in the kingdom of
his grace--and men marvel. And so in Alabama and South Carolina, the
missionaries of the cross, true to the same divine example, talk with
black and with white, and welcome them both to the same privileges in
this kingdom--and even some timid disciples marvel. But the principles
of this divine kingdom do not change; the Lord of that kingdom, who
talked with the sinful, weary, despised Samaritan woman, would, if
here in bodily presence now, talk with the sinful, weary, despised
black woman, no matter how much his worldly-wise disciples might
marvel. His kingdom is built upon this eternal truth of human
brotherhood, and it will endure because it is. Nothing short of this
is of his kingdom, but will crumble to dust.

_The Congregationalist_



Forty-Second Annual Report Of The Executive Committee,

              FOR THE YEAR ENDING SEPTEMBER 30TH, 1888.



General Survey.



The field of missions is the world which lieth in darkness. We have to
do with that part of it for which we are doubly responsible. It is in
darkness and it is our own.

We look upon our own land, with its States equal in extent and
capacity to foreign kingdoms. When we know that they hold the
certainty of a future influence of which their past power has been but
a prophecy, our fears press hard upon our hopes.

Nor are our work and our fears an intrusion. When the pestilence which
walks in darkness brings the destruction which wastes at noonday, it
is our call to feel deeply the distresses of those who are stricken.
But plagues consuming human lives are less grevious than those which
abide, and which, walking in the intellectual and moral darkness of a
people, waste the lives of men and the hopes of souls. This is our
call.

Remember that it is our own country where, in twelve great States,
like empires, forty per cent. of the population cannot read, where,
to-day, three-fourths of the illiteracy of the whole nation exists;
where the darkness is increasing more rapidly than it is being lighted
up; where much which passes for religion even among those who preach
it, is a travesty upon Christianity, openly divorced from relationship
with truth, purity, integrity and intelligence.

Our survey takes in questions that are painful; disturbing questions
that are not in the North, nor in the West. They are difficult to
meet. They are near, and the troubles which the questions hold are
near. They come close to the heart of Christianity. They are close to
the life of the churches. They are close to the first principles of
human rights. They are questions that can have only one final
solution, which may be so remote that fearful dangers will culminate
in terrible disasters before the only remedy can do its work. There
are now nearly eight millions of a Negro population, from four
millions twenty years ago. There are more than two millions of
mountain people in the South, one-half of whom cannot read. These
benighted people live where there has never been a public-school
system even for the more highly favored race, and where this more
highly favored race deliberately assigns those who are not of its
color to a permanent inferiority. The laws of caste are to be
inflexibly enforced against all people of color who would rise from
their low-down conditions. This is our Southern mission field, which
God has committed to us, according to our faith and opportunity.

Those of our own race in the South could not do this work, which is
upon our consciences and hearts, if they would. They do not see what
we see. They would not if they could. They do not feel what we feel.

We are sent, not as philanthropists who hear the cry of the poor and
needy, nor as patriots who realize the perils that overhang the State,
but as missionaries of Jesus Christ who believe that salvation takes
in the whole man, including philanthropy and statesmanship, and
whatever builds up man for time and for eternity.

We have, however, no other charter for our work than that of missions.
We have no other errand than that of the messengers of Christ. Only as
we go in his name and with his spirit do we ask the churches to listen
and hear with us, and with us to look and see.

 OUR SCHOOLS.

Our missionary work has been largely in schools. It was God's
providence. But these were always missionary centres.

Their number at the present time is ninety-three; seventeen of these
in the Southern States are Normal Schools from which a large
proportion of the pupils go forth as teachers. It is computed that of
the 15,000 Negro teachers in the South instructing 800,000 pupils,
13,500 became teachers from missionary schools, and that a great army
of more than 7,000 of these teachers received their education in the
institutions of the American Missionary Association. Thus the faith of
the churches multiplies and accelerates itself.

These Normal Schools are located in WILMINGTON, N.C., CHARLESTON and
GREENWOOD, S.C., ATLANTA, MACON, SAVANNAH, THOMASVILLE and MCINTOSH,
GA., MOBILE, ATHENS and MARION, ALA., MEMPHIS, JONESBORO, GRAND VIEW
and PLEASANT HILL, TENN., LEXINGTON and WILLIAMSBURG, KY., to which
must be added the large Normal and Industrial School at Santee Agency,
Nebraska, the Oahe Industrial School and the Fort Berthold Industrial
School, both in Dakota, and all three for the Indians, making
altogether 20. The Association provides also the entire teaching force
at the Ramona Indian School at Santa Fé, New Mexico. To these Normal
Schools, we may add the six normal departments in our colleges with
their superior normal instruction. From nearly all of these, strong
appeals for enlargement have come to meet the demands of a healthy
growth. We have cut, trimmed and denied, with a resolution that has
been painful both in the office and in the field, and yet the growth
is upon us. Without pushing our work, it is pushing us.

While ignorant millions need the truth and knowledge which we have,
and there are resources in the hands of the disciples of Christ enough
for this vast and increasingly urgent work, the necessity of denying
the provisions for the development of success becomes well-nigh
oppressive.

AT PLEASANT HILL, TENN., an important centre in our Mountain work, we
have now, in addition to the new church, a school building unequalled
in that region. A second building for a dormitory and boarding hall is
nearly completed.

THE GRAND VIEW ACADEMY in the Mountain region, has also increased its
school accommodations, and the look forward is to a large institution
with far-reaching influence in the valley of the Cumberland and on the
plateau. If we are to hold this region, we must take possession now.

We have also reassumed charge of a school at Beaufort, N.C. The people
are already appealing to us in the accents of their own sacrifices for
its immediate enlargement.

Providentially, and without our solicitation, a generous giver, of
Brooklyn, N.Y., who had already added to many large benevolences in
the South, the fine building known as Ballard Hall and the excellent
shops for industrial training at Tougaloo, made a proffer of $11,500
to erect at Macon, Ga., a school building of brick, capable of
accommodating six hundred pupils. This successful school had grown
until it had taken possession of the church building for school
purposes. This noble gift, bestowed after a personal inspection on the
part of Mr. Ballard, and upon personal conviction of its immediate
necessity, could not be refused, and the substantial and spacious
building, with its furnishings, is now nearly ready for occupancy. It
will call for increased contributions from the churches.

DORCHESTER ACADEMY, at McIntosh, Ga., is in a rice region remote from
civilization and educational privileges, among thousands of Negro
people very ignorant and poor. It cannot receive the pupils who beg
for admission. Children are punctual at school from a distance of
eight miles, lest they shall lose their privileges by tardiness or
absence. Africa itself could scarcely send out a cry of greater need.
We had decided to increase the capacity of this school, but are
compelled to wait.

AT GREENWOOD, S.C., the interests are so great and the appeals were so
reasonable, that it was voted to enlarge the facilities for the
growing institution; but at the last we could not do this, and the
laborers there continue their prayers and their hopes.

THE LINCOLN NORMAL INSTITUTE at Marion, Ala., was established in the
year 1868, by the A.M.A. In the year 1874, the State of Alabama asked
to assume the school, which had won a good name, and to increase its
facilities for the education of the Negro. This was done. Last year,
the work was deserted by the State and came anew into our hands. This,
also, is an enlargement upon our schedule of work.

At LEXINGTON, KY., our Normal School has grown to such a degree that
even the vestibules and halls of our insufficient building were
crowded with eager pupils. Teachers were teaching, and pupils were
studying, in conditions that none but missionary teachers would
accept. For lack of room, industrial training has been impossible. The
locality, meanwhile, has been surrounded by saloons, and houses that
are worse. A benevolent lady who became acquainted with these facts
offered $2,000 to purchase four acres of land for school and
industrial purposes, and to give money sufficient for a new brick
edifice with eight large school-rooms and all needful appointments and
furnishings; the gift amounting to $15,000.

We believe that we were not wrong in accepting this trust in your
behalf, even though it means more teachers and increased expenditures.
We are confident that your Christian faith would not decline this
Christian benevolence. Hence the plans for Chandler School are in the
hands of the builders. Could some like-minded wealthy steward of the
grace of God visit Williamsburg, Ky., in our Mountain White work, we
might be compelled to face another such dilemma.

AT MERIDIAN, MISS., where Christian parents have besought us for
years, past to open a missionary school, through which their children
might be saved to morality and integrity of character during the
formative periods of their lives, we have at last seen our way to
answer their pathetic appeal in part. A day school with an industrial
department is ready for the opening, the building having been
constructed during the months of summer. For valuable aid in sympathy,
counsel and influence in Meridian, we and the people to whom we are
sent are greatly indebted to Rev. Wm. Hayne Leavell, of Meridian.

WHITNEY HALL, for the Indian boys at Santee Agency, is another noble
gift of large Christian faith for our Normal School in Nebraska. We
summoned our courage to take this, also, with what the enlargement
includes.

These are the chief additions to our system of schools, though there
have been less marked enlargements in other places. They are simply
the growths of strong faith and strong life. They are the free and
special gifts which came to us through the convictions of others who
had realized the need.

The common schools, 35 in number, in eight different Southern States,
are in the hands of faithful teachers.

There are six Chartered Institutions, behind which we have stood the
year past.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE in Talladega, Ala., has had a year of exceptional
interest. The college work is developing and the theological school
was never better. The industrial departments in agriculture and the
mechanic arts offer fine advantages. The institution increases in
popular favor and is full of students.

ATLANTA UNIVERSITY in Georgia, under the temporary presidency of Prof.
Francis, who was also college preacher and pastor, has moved on in its
usual course. Through the successful solicitation of Prof. Bumstead,
with our cordial and constant endorsement, sufficient Christian money
came into the treasury to meet the deficiency caused by the withdrawal
of $8,000 from the State of Georgia. The Association was able in its
grants to share in this satisfactory result. At the last meeting of
the Trustees, Prof. Bumstead was elected President for the ensuing
year, and Prof. Chase, in view of a removal to New Mexico, resigned
the professorship which he had ably held many years.

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY at New Orleans, located in the most influential
city of the Southwest, draws its students from refined Creole homes
and from the rude cabins of the remote plantations. An interesting
report gathered from twenty-two of its students who taught school
during the summer vacation, tells us that they instructed 1,398 pupils
in day schools and organized thirteen Sunday-schools, in which were
taught 1,574 children, most of whom were absolutely unreached before.
This summer record of Straight University students is a partial
illustration of what is going forth from it year by year; and not from
Straight only, but from all of our higher schools. The theological
work in Straight is of incalculable importance.

TILLOTSON INSTITUTE, at Austin, Texas, has invigorated its normal
course and has inaugurated a hopeful college preparatory department.
The recipient of a special gift, it was enabled to complete a new
industrial building, in which has begun a course of industrial
training. It greatly needs a second dormitory hall for young women,
and were not the institution so remote, some prophetic giver would see
the urgency and the strategy of such a gift, and would make it. If,
without the sight, some one shall be led to do this for Tillotson, he
will reap the blessing of those who do not see and yet believe.

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, near Jackson, Miss., is an institution of
exceeding interest. It has a department of Biblical instruction added
to its course of study, in which students are prepared to preach the
gospel. Its industrial facilities are excellent, both for agricultural
and mechanical training. The students can take the timber from the
tree, and the iron in the rough, and make wagons and carriages
sufficiently good to compete with the best makers in the State. The
school in all of its parts is controlled by the missionary spirit.
Rev. F.G. Woodworth, of Connecticut, last year assumed the Presidency.

FISK UNIVERSITY, at Nashville, Tenn., is one of the oldest and most
complete of all our Southern colleges, and has no superior among all
the institutions in the country devoted to the education of the Negro.
Giving relatively less attention to the industries, it models itself
after our Northern colleges, and emulates them in the rigor of its
intellectual studies and in the thoroughness with which it seeks to
make good teachers and preachers; educators in the larger way for the
race. It also has a department of theology. It has made its place,
which it holds with enthusiasm and fidelity. If some one would give
us, or leave us, money to endow this institution, he could scarcely
send his influence further down the centuries than in this way. It
would tell upon the race and upon the Nation.

In this glance at our schools, we see Christian schools. But they are
more, they are missionary schools. We are bearing the torch of Christ
into places of darkness. We teach the industries to them because they
can be made tributary to the salvation of the people. They are the
leaves of the tree of life, and the leaves of the tree are for the
healing of the people.

We may not close this review of our school system without remembering
those institutions now standing alone; great Hampton, in whose rich
gifts we rejoice, and Berea, another child of the A.M.A., now grown to
strength.

TO HOWARD UNIVERSITY, at Washington, also, we extend the sympathy of a
common purpose, together with such financial aid as we may for the
support of its theological course.

We point to these great institutions which have been planted and
fostered by the A.M.A., together with those which are still upheld by
us, with a feeling akin to that of the renowned Cornelia when she
said, "Behold my jewels."

  Total Number of our Schools     South      58  Indian  18     76
Total Number of our Instructors   South     266  Indian  50    316
  Total Number of our Pupils      South   9,896  Indian 580 10,476
     Theological Students         South      87  Indian       87
         Law Students             South      73  Indian       73
       College Students           South      68  Indian       68
 Preparatory College Students     South     105  Indian      105
        Normal Students           South     836  Indian  10    846
    Grammar Grade Students        South   1,996  Indian  43  2,039
  Intermediate Grade Students     South   2,998  Indian 108  3,106
        Primary Pupils            South   3,831  Indian 419  4,250

We have, in addition, 17 Chinese Schools on the Pacific Coast, with 39
teachers.

 CHURCH WORK.

We turn now to our Church Work.

In every school we have an incipient church; in many of these are
organized churches. From all of them there is a continual going forth
of a predisposition towards Congregational Churches, which will make
for churches in the future.

The statistics are as follows:

     Number of Churches         South      131  Indian     5    136
   Number of Missionaries       South      102  Indian    13    115
  Number of Church members      South    8,065  Indian   397  8,452
    Added during the year       South      937  Indian    35    972
Added by profession of faith    South      721  Indian    30    750
 Scholars in Sunday-schools     South   16,023  Indian 1,091 17,114

Four new Churches have been organized during the year. These are at
Decatur, Ala., Crossville, Deer Lodge and Pine Mountain, Tenn. A fine
church edifice has also been erected in Ironaton, Ala., which is soon
to be dedicated. The members have sacrificed nobly to secure it. The
church at Meridian has united with the Association in the
erection of a beautiful house of worship which, with the new school
and the teachers' home, will be ready in a few weeks for occupancy.
The church at Knoxville has been enlarged and is practically new. It
will soon be re-dedicated. The church at Pine Mountain is a year old;
is already the center of four Sunday-schools, with an attendance of
415 children, only 10 of whom had ever been in a Sunday-school before.

Revivals of religious interest have been reported from our churches in
Washington, Wilmington, Charleston, Talladega, Mobile, Athens, Marion,
Selma, Birmingham and New Orleans. Those of the churches which are
side by side with our educational institutions are most hopeful; but
wherever we have planted churches, they stand forth to represent the
ethics of Christianity, the purity and truth of character which must
be contained in a worthy discipleship. A large proportion of our
pastors are children of the A.M.A. Parsonages have been built for our
churches in Mobile, Ala., and in Dallas, Texas.

 MOUNTAIN WORK.

This year has laid great emphasis on the fact that we have entered, in
the Southern mountains, a missionary field of vast importance,
pressing needs and unbounded hopefulness. We have in this region,
where a few years ago there was nothing, two normal schools, two
academies, five common schools, and twenty churches.

In a territory five hundred miles long, and more than two hundred
miles broad--twice the size of all New England--are at least between
three and four hundred counties with a population greater than that of
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island and Connecticut combined,
without schools worthy of the name, without Sunday-schools, without
prayer meetings, without an educated, spiritual, or even moral
ministry, without a weekly Sabbath religious service of any kind, or
any of the institutions of the gospel which really elevate them. They
have a religion which is not a pure Christianity and which does not
even involve morality.

The Christian work, lately introduced and already done among them,
demonstrates that they are capable of a rapid and radical change, when
once the vivifying touch of the gospel has reached their hearts.

Instead of twenty Congregational churches among them, there is room
for a thousand, and instead of nine Christian schools, if there were
twenty-five normal schools, it would be only one to each hundred
thousand people; and if there were a hundred common schools, there
would be one to each three or four counties for models. There should
be one good college. If there were Congregational churches in this
region in the same proportion as in New England there would be a full
thousand. If they were in the same proportion as Connecticut, there
would be twelve hundred churches; as New Hampshire, thirteen hundred;
as Vermont, sixteen hundred.

Congregationalism goes to these people as the representative of pure,
intelligent and progressive Christianity. We can gather them into
schools, Sunday-schools and churches, anywhere where we can put a
Christian worker. Our only limit is consecrated workers and the
support for them. The field is as ripe this very day for a thousand as
for a score. But the school and the church must go together.

This is one of the richest of the mineral regions of the world. Great
forests of black walnut, poplar, and other valuable timber, are
awaiting the woodman's ax and the lumberman's mill. Railroads are
either built, building or planned for every part to carry away its
wonderful natural resources. The people are poor, but the land is
rich, and a few years hence will see wealth in the place of poverty,
in the hands of either the natives, or those who will have displaced
them. All the motives which urge the establishment of the church and
the school for the incoming population of the West, press us to build
them in this great empire of the South; and they become doubly
imperative when we take into account the fact that a population of
between two and three millions is already in the land and needs to be
saved now. The motives for home and foreign missions are thus
combined, and impelling us for Christ's sake, for humanity's sake, and
for our country's sake, to give the gospel to this people.

We are not building pauper institutions in this mountain country to be
forever a dead weight for the Northern churches to carry, but
institutions which will very speedily take care of themselves, and
give to others as they have received.

This is a portion of the South where slavery scarcely existed. When
war came, it was loyal to the Union almost to a man. This fact shows
that they have a natural affiliation with "Northern ideas." The caste
spirit is among them--as it is indeed in the North to some extent--but
it much more readily yields to reason and loving teaching than in
other portions of the South. Vigorous and extensive missionary work
can and will mould the ideas and sentiments of this whole region, and
thus establish no-caste churches and schools, where they would
demonstrate to the South that they do not carry with them social
disorder and every baleful influence.

Amid the success, joy and hopefulness of the year's work, came the
affliction of the shooting of Prof. George Lawrence, while about his
duties in our school in Jellico, Tenn. It was the work of a miserable
creature whose brain was fired with whiskey, and who was urged on by
the saloon element as a retaliation for earnest temperance work. After
long and anxious weeks of intense suffering, a brave fight against
death proved successful, and we now hope that our missionary's life is
spared for many years of usefulness. Nearly a hundred men have been
shot already in this one place, and the place itself is not more than
six years old. Is it strange that these mountain people who have a
glimpse of better things, are appealing to us every week of the year
to plant institutions among them? Is it not the voice of Christ
clearly commanding us to possess and subdue this land, and to
transform it into a part of his peaceful and beneficent Kingdom, which
shall join hands with us to pass on the torch of Christ to others yet
in darkness?

 THE INDIANS.

The people of America are determined to press the Indian problem to a
speedy solution. Provision has been made for giving lands in
severalty, and the next great movement should be to induce the
Government to provide secular education, and the churches to furnish
religious instruction to all the Indians. The American Missionary
Association, during the year, has responded to this new impulse by
enlarging its work--in the opening of new stations, in the erection of
new buildings, and in the appointment of more missionaries and
teachers.

At the Santee Agency, Nebraska, our oldest mission station and school
has had marked prosperity in its normal, theological and industrial
departments, and, better than all, in a deep and wide-spread religious
interest that has pervaded the school and the church. The new
building, named Whitney Hall--from its giver--has been erected,
affording accommodations for twenty-two of the larger and more
advanced pupils, and furnishing rooms for the treasurer's family. A
liberal gift from Mrs. Henry Perkins, of Hartford, Conn., provides,
for the present at least, for the running expenses of the Boys' Hall,
and, in appreciation of the gift, and of the interest in the school
which the gift implies, the building will hereafter be called Perkins
Hall.

At Oahe, Dakota, on the beautiful Peoria Bottom, both the school and
church have prospered. The school is crowded to its utmost capacity
and a greater number of pupils has been granted in the contract with
the Government. A new building is urgently called for. The closing
exercises of the school were attended by a picturesque group of three
or four hundred Indians, who were encamped around the station. Some of
these came a hundred and twenty-five miles to attend the exercises.

One marked feature in the enlargement of the work has been the opening
of two more Central Stations: one at Rosebud Agency, the other located
at Fort Yates, near the junction of the Grand River with the Missouri.
The new mission house has been built, and by the aid of special gifts
from benevolent friends at the East, a commodious building has been
erected for a hospital.

A peculiar and very interesting feature of our Indian work is the
out-stations, located remote from the Central Stations. These
stations, numbering twenty-one, have been hindered and also enlarged
during the past year. The hindrance came from the interference of the
Government. In its well-intended zeal for the introduction of the
English language, it surpassed the limits which experience had fixed,
by requiring that the vernacular should not be taught, nor even
spoken, in any Indian schools on the Reservation including these
mission stations, which were wholly sustained by benevolent funds.
Under this ruling, thirteen stations were closed from September to
January. But the remonstrances coming from almost every denomination
of Christians in the land induced the Government to modify its orders,
and the schools have all been re-opened.

Some new buildings have been erected on this part of the field--a new
house for dwelling and school on the Grand River, and a cheap
structure at the Cheyenne River Agency, in which religious services
are held at the times for the disbursement of the rations, when large
numbers of the Indians assemble and remain for many days. A new
impulse has been given to this out-station work by contributions
received at one of the missionary meetings in Northfield, Mass. Four
new stations were provided for at that time by the contribution of
$400 for a building at each station, and $300 for the support of the
teacher. One was the gift of Mr. Moody, another of Mr. Sankey, whose
names these two stations will bear.

Fort Berthold, in the northern part of Dakota, has authorization from
the Government for a larger number of pupils under contract than last
year. But our exigencies require for this only a few and inexpensive
repairs and additions to be made on the buildings.

The Skokomish mission continues its stable progress. The missionary,
Rev. Myron Eells, has been tempted during the past year by several
calls to enter more lucrative fields of service, but his attachment to
the work, begun by his most honored father, and continued by himself,
is so great that he prefers to remain with his people, and to aid them
in their progress in civil and Christian life.

The Indian school at Santa Fé, New Mexico, has had some changes, but
the arrangement between the Association and the trustees is continued,
and the school, under the charge of Prof. Elmore Chase, maintains its
useful service in the training of the children of the Apaches, one of
the most hopeful and promising tribes of Indians on the continent.

 THE CHINESE.

The special interest of the year centres in the evangelistic work that
was commenced early in the winter. Of our 39 workers reported,
fourteen are Chinamen, who have been converted in our schools. Two of
these brethren were set apart last December as special evangelists,
one going to our missions in Southern California, and the other to our
more Northern missions. Subsequently another one entered the field.
The intention was to give one month of service at each mission, and
the gratifying experience has been that at no point has this one month
been deemed sufficient. At the end of five months the harvest reported
was forty souls brought to repentance.

Three new missions are upon our list this year; those at Los Angeles,
San Buenaventura, and Tucson. At Los Angeles no less than 75 pupils
were enrolled the first month, and at all these places Christian
Associations have been formed.

A minister on the Pacific Coast not in connection with our schools,
after giving a sketch of work accomplished which could not be
tabulated, says: "Socially, intellectually, spiritually, the Chinese
mission school does its beneficent work. But everything is made but
the means to the spiritual end. The whole drift of the teaching, the
songs, the pictures, the Scripture text, is to make known Christ.
Every evening's lesson ends with worship. In no year, may I add, have
there been so many conversions among the Chinese on this coast as in
the one just passed."

 WOMAN'S BUREAU.

There are thirteen Woman's State Organizations which co-operate with
us in our missionary work. These are in Maine, Vermont, Connecticut,
New York, Alabama, Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota,
Iowa, Kansas and South Dakota. Other States, also, not yet organized,
are assisting in definite lines, as Massachusetts and New Hampshire.
Our Bureau of Woman's Work has for many years proved its wisdom. The
state of black womanhood and girlhood taken together is pitiful. The
permanent and uplifting Christianization and civilization to be
engrafted on the Negro race in this land, can come only as the
womanhood of that people is imbued with right principles and led to
right practices. Unless the life of the woman is reached and saved,
there can be no true religion, family life, or social status. Hence
our industrial and boarding schools for the training of girls in
domestic work, in the trades of dressmaking and such like, in the art
of cooking, the cultivation of small fruits and flowers, so that the
sacred influences of Christianity shall circle around the thousand
firesides where now everything is coarse, and ignorant, and senseless.
With our large corps of lady teachers, the Woman's Bureau, as an
intermediary between the Woman's State Association and their sisters
who are teaching in the field, and the women and girls to whom they
are sent, has proved during the year its increasing efficiency.

 FINANCES

The receipts have been, $320,953.42, which with the balance on hand,
September 30th, 1887, of $2,193.80, makes a total of $323,147.22. We
have received in addition to this $1,000 for an Endowment Fund. The
total disbursements for the year have been $328,788.43. The churches
through the National Council have asked us to keep abreast with the
providence of God. "It is our duty," said the Ohio State Association,
"to see that this great work in which we have borne so large and
honorable a part, halt not, nor slacken in its energy because of our
failure to keep its treasury replenished and its faithful laborers
re-enforced and supported by our gifts and our prayers."

Said our good friend, the _Congregationalist_, in an editorial after
our inspiring meeting at Portland in October last: "Never did the
magnitude of the field, and the complex character of its labors,
appear in such startling lines. Either of the four departments of
labor demands the money and the force which is distributed among all.
But, in the providence of God, this society is called upon to
prosecute this fourfold work. It cannot abandon a single field and
must not be asked to. It can do in the next five years a work for
Christianity and for Congregationalism in the South and West which
will tell on the coming century. As Christians, and as Congregational
Christians, we must see to it that it be not obliged to pinch its
workers and to turn away from promising openings in order to keep free
from debt the coming year."

Thus charged, we have yet gone within our instructions. We have made
every dollar do more than its work. We have gathered up the fragments
that nothing be lost; and yet to-day our payments anticipate our
receipts by the sum of $5,641.21. We do not regret the anxiety and
pain which it has cost us to effect what we have. The generous words
of sympathy and confidence that have come to us of late, with noble
gifts, large and small, repay the solicitude and incessant care. We
thank God and his people, and hold firmly our faith in Him who said,
"Knock, and it shall be opened unto you." He opened the door. Our
faith is in Him who also said, "Ask, and ye shall receive."



The year opened with the Association bereft of its honored President.
We come to this new year happy in our choice of the Rev. Wm. M.
Taylor, D.D., of New York, to fill this most important position. In
his acceptance we congratulate the Association.

Since the year began, the churches have missed the stirring appeals of
our beloved Secretary Powell, who had the especial oversight and
burden of the collecting fields. Such a life as that of James Powell
is not common. It was a grand sacrifice of undeviating love for those
whose poverty made him a debtor to them. His consecration will not be
forgotten.

His sudden departure--our great bereavement--made necessary the
transfer of the Rev. C.J. Ryder from the field to the District
Secretaryship of the Eastern District in New England, who has brought
with his energy and zeal such an experience, and personal knowledge of
the entire field, as to insure him the most hearty welcome and
co-operation on the part of our pastors and churches.

The Rev. F.E. Jenkins, a graduate of Williams College and of Hartford
Theological Seminary, for some time earnestly engaged in our Southern
work, has been appointed a field superintendent for personal
examination and supervision of our churches and schools, and has
already entered upon his duties.

The Association, with its Superintendents continually in the field,
who report every fact to the Secretaries at the office, who in turn
submit the entire work to the churches, is thus continually made
better prepared to direct the sacrifices of the benevolent in ways
that shall not be irresponsible or unwise, than those which are
subject to no such scrutiny or supervision, and are held to no
responsibility. Much less money would be diverted from this authorized
and recognized servant of the Congregational Churches, and far greater
efficiency would be secured, if our friends would remember that their
own ordained agency can open as many missions as they will make
possible, which shall have, at least, one advantage over independent
and unsupervised work, in that, through us, they shall be under your
own constant Christian watch and care.

We may not close this review of our year's work and attendant
suggestions without remembrance of our indebtedness to the American
Bible Society, for its grant of Bibles; to the Congregational
Sunday-school and Publishing Society for the help given to our
struggling churches and Sunday-schools in its grant of books and
lesson helps. We rejoice in the unity of our societies, which make all
one in the blending of the parts for the great common purpose of
redeeming the lost and gathering them into the family of Christ.



Student's Letter.



Struggles In The "Lone Star State."

                           BY A.C. GARROTT.

My home, Marion, Ala., was also the location of the Lincoln Normal
Institute, and fortunately I had attended that school for several
years. Being next to the oldest of eight children, my parents decided
to take me from school in '83, that I might earn something. I had
often heard of Talladega College, and wanted very much to enter there,
but my father being only a poor carpenter, it was impossible for me to
get the means to accomplish my desires.

However, by the aid of Northern friends I entered the above named
school, October 2d, 1883. Evenings and Saturdays I worked by the hour
to help defray my expenses. Unable to obtain a school, I could be
found at the college, during the summers of '84 and '85, working about
the buildings or on the farm. The money earned there was used for
schooling. During my last year in school I had job work--sweeping and
caring for lamps. This work was done early in order that I might have
time for study. And each morning, before day, my broom could be heard
moving through the corridors. At the close of school, I had paid by
work, and a prize gained in speaking the year before, about $52.75. It
was agreed that the balance should be paid after leaving school. In a
class of ten I received a diploma from the normal department, June 17,
1886. My time during the summer was occupied in working with my father
at the carpenter's trade.

Texas was said to have good public-schools, and it was my plan to try
the "Lone Star State." I was working to secure means to pay the fare,
but father failed in being paid promptly, and this forced me to borrow
money for the purpose. Many tried to discourage me in my plan as it
was what is sometimes termed as a "wild goose chase." I remarked,
though, that if no schools could be found, there were other things to
be done--cotton to be picked; wagons to be driven; and ditches to be
dug. So the work-clothes were not forgotten when my trunk was packed.

On September 30, 1886, I arrived in Henderson, a stranger to all save
one, and with a very small purse. Then commenced my trials. I was in
my twenty-first year, but had a young appearance, and the trustees of
most schools objected to me for that reason. I walked many miles in
search of work, and it was not till the middle of November that my
first school opened.

Owing money for schooling, for fare to this State, and for board after
coming here, caused me to start far below the surface in pecuniary
matters. As I had made large plans, that was quite discouraging.

The school proceeded nicely and a Sabbath-school was organized in
connection. The latter was quite small, though there was a large
attendance in the day school. At the close of school, March 23, 1887,
all expressed a willingness for me to teach the next session, but
there was a trouble ahead which changed their views. The question of
prohibition was to be decided by the people in August. I am sorry to
say the majority of our people were on the wrong side. But most of the
teachers and preachers fought with an untiring energy against the
saloons. For this act of ours, many refused to give us work. Some even
sneered at the "prohib. teachers," as we walked along the streets.
Those were days of discouragement as our labor seemed to be in vain.

My summer's work lasted only a month, and being an independent school
the returns were quite small, $6.00 only. Having to aid my parents,
and a two months' sickness, caused me to be below the surface again at
the opening of my school, November 14. This work continued for six
months. A Sabbath-school was organized; and, unlike the previous year,
outnumbered the daily attendance.

It has been said that it is better to turn up something than to wait
for something to turn up. So I bought a small outfit for making
photographs. It is incomplete, but enough to get an idea of the art.
After looking at some of my work, our county Judge was heard to say.
"That's a good picture for that nigger." My summer school was nine
miles away, and I came here every Friday evening, that I might
practice at my new trade. To save the hire and feed of a horse, I
always walked here and back. The way at times seems dark, but I take
courage from the fact that roads to success must lead through
hardships.



The Chinese.



Review Of The Year.

                       BY REV. W.C. POND, D.D.

The fiscal year of our missions closed Aug. 31. I desire to set before
the readers of the MISSIONARY a statement of the year's work, made as
complete as the space at my command allows:

1. _Seventeen_ missions have been sustained during a part or the whole
of the year. Ten of these have had no intermission whatever, except
for a day or two at the holidays, and in one instance a fortnight's
vacation. Of the remaining seven, three are new missions, viz: Los
Angeles, San Buenaventura and Tucson. The work at these points is full
of interest and hope, and has indeed already begun to yield what seem
to us saving results.

2. _Thirty-nine_ workers have been engaged. Of these, fourteen are
Chinese brethren, converted in connection with our missions, and
trained to the work in the work itself. The aggregate number of months
of service is 295.

3. In comparison with the record of the previous year, but little
change can be noted. The total number enrolled is 1,131, being larger
by 87, but on the whole one record is about the equivalent of the
other. Indeed, it seems to me that in both years we reached very near
to the _outmost limit_ of what is possible with the means at our
command. The special interest of this year's history centers in the
attempt to do, and to learn better _how_ to do, evangelistic work.
Three of our brethren have been set apart to this, and have been
followed from place to place by the prayers of many. They had much to
learn when they started forth and have much yet to learn. It is by no
means clear to me that we have hit upon the wisest methods, and I know
that we have not yet entered into the fullness of power, either with
God or man. Yet I can see that these brethren are stronger and braver
and more eager in this work than they were a year ago. And the
blessing of God on their labors has been such as enables us to believe
that full sixty of their countrymen have been led to Christ. This
carries the whole number concerning whom this hope has been cherished,
since the beginning of our work, above 700.

4. THE FINANCES. Our expenditures have been: For salaries of workers,
$6,403.00; for rents of mission houses, $2,066.00; for incidental
expenses, $1,150.15; total, $9,619.75. Our resources have been: From
the parent society, $6,100; balance from previous year, $45.50;
offerings made through the treasury of this auxiliary, $2,590.80;
total, $8,736.30. This leaves a deficit of $882.85, a part of which
can be met from our Permanent Property Account, but fully $500.00
needs yet to be secured if we are to provide things honest in the
sight of all men. Thus far in the history of our mission, the account
of no year has closed with the blot of a deficit upon it. The account
of the year just ended is held open for awhile in the hope that the
good precedent of the past may be still maintained. And, oh, if we
might be a little less hampered by poverty;--if we might be set free
to enter opened doors, and to make the most possible of our
opportunities, how great would be the privilege and joy of showing in
blessed experiment that the truest economy is a wise and careful
generosity.



Bureau Of Woman's Work.

                    MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.



Woman's State Organizations.

        CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A. Woodbury,
Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Ellen Osgood,
Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171
Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. William Spaldlng,
Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary, Mrs. G.W. Andrews,
Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Rogers, Michigan
City, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead,
Wis.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H.L. Chase, 2750
Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella E. Marsh,
Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs, G.L. Epps,
Topeka, Kan.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, President, Mrs. F.H. Leavitt, 1216 H
St., Lincoln, Neb.

SOUTH DAKOTA,--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S.E. Young,
Sioux Falls, Dak.



Special fields have been assigned to Ladies' Societies contributing to
the work, and missionary letters will be sent to all who desire such
reports. If any fail to receive the letters, they can get them by
notifying Miss Emerson, at the New York office. The ladles will be
interested in the following list:

Maine Missionaries--Miss Lunt, of Selma, Ala., Miss Farrington, N.C.
Mrs. Hubbard, Williamsburg, Ky., Mrs. Hall, Fort Berthold, Dak.

Vermont sustains the McIntosh School, Miss Plimpton continues in
charge, assisted by Misses Ayer, Kuhl, and Head.

Massachusetts ladies are contributing to the Girl's Department of the
boarding school at Tougaloo, Miss. Letters are written by the teachers
in turn, thus reporting the different phases of work.

The industrial School, at Thomasville, Ga. appeals especially to
ladies of Connecticut. Mrs. Gordon and Miss Knapp will continue their
monthly letters, with occasional communications from other teachers.

The auxiliaries of the New York Union are entitled to letters from
Miss Edith Leonard, (in place of Miss Haynes,) for the Indians, Mrs.
Myers for the Mountain Whites, and Miss Evans for the Negroes.

The Ohio Ladies provide for Miss Collins of Dakota, and also for Miss
Stevenson of Atlanta, Ga.

The Illinois missionaries are Miss Kinney of Austin, Texas, and Miss
Pingree of Mobile.

The Michigan ladies find large opportunity to work for the blacks,
through the Trinity School, at Athens, Ala. So, also, the Minnesota
ladies, whose chosen field is the school at Jonesboro, Tenn.

Many others are working in definite lines and becoming better
acquainted with the needs and how to meet them.



                       RECEIPTS FOR SEPTEMBER, 1888.


                               MAINE, $551.62.
Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75; First Cong. Ch.,
30; Sab. Sch, First Parish Ch., 14; W.P. Hubbard, 10               129.00
Bath. Winter St. Ch.                                               100.00
Belfast. First Cong. Ch.                                            15.00
Bethel. Second Cong. Ch.                                            14.00
Buxton Centre. Mrs. M.G. Hill, _for Indian M._                       2.00
Brownville. Cong. Ch.                                                8.30
Camden.                                                           10.00
Cherryfield. John W. Coffin                                         30.00
Cumberland Center. Cong. Ch.                                        32.00
Eastport. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.50
Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
Fryeburg. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.00
Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.92; Mrs. Hunt, 5; Mrs. H.
Leavitt, 5; Rev. and Mrs. G.W. Reynolds, 5; Mrs. T. Robie,
2; Mrs. Crane, 2; Miss C. Frost, 2.                                 51.92
Kennebunkport. Mrs. E.M. Noyes, 10; Mrs. J.T. Agard, 10             20.00
Litchfield Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              12.00
Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch.                                        5.15
North Anson. "A Friend,"                                            15.00
Portland. State St. Cong. Ch. and Parish                            50.00
Presque Isle. C.F.A. Johnson                                         5.00
Rockland. Cong. Ch.                                                 12.00
Scarboro. Cong. Ch.                                                 12.00
Weld. Mrs. Dorcas Russell, 1; "Three Friends," 1                     2.00
West Gorham. Mrs. Mary P. Files                                      0.75

                          NEW HAMPSHIRE, $3,263.02.
Amherst. "L.F.B."                                                  150.00
Alstead Centre. Cong. Ch.                                            3.51
Auburn, Cong. Ch.                                                   10.00
Brentwood. Cong. Ch.                                                 6.35
Center Harbor. S.F. Emery and Sab. Sch. Class                        5.00
Colebrook. "E. & C."                                                 2.00
Conway. Second Cong. Ch.                                             5.00
Durham. Cong. Ch.                                                   20.00
East Alstead. Cong. Ch.                                              2.49
East Andover. Cong. Ch.                                              1.50
East Derry. First Ch.                                               33.91
East Jaffrey. Cong. Ch.                                             13.98
Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                        25.00
Gilmanton Iron Works. Cong. Ch.                                      6.50
Goffstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       57.63
Hampstead. Cong. Ch.                                                25.00
Hanover. Cong. Ch. Dartmouth College, 32.40; "Friends,"
Dartmought College Ch., 22                                          54.40
Hanover. Dartmouth Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._               25.00
Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                          18.17
Hopkinton. By Rev. M.W. Adams, Bbl. of C., etc., and 3
_for Freight_                                                        3.00
Jaffrey. Wm. W. Livingston                                          15.00
Jefferson. Mrs. S.A. Bradbury                                       50.00
Lisbon. First Cong. Ch.                                              5.39
Manchester. Franklin St. Ch., 133.69; J.W. Johnston, 25;
C.B. Southworth, 25                                                183.69
Milford. Cong. Ch.                                                  10.00
Milton. South Cong. Ch.                                             15.00
Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    24.50
Monroe. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                           3.00
Nashua. E. Spalding, M.D.                                          100.00
New Boston. "A Friend."                                             50.00
New Market. Cong. Church                                            14.00
North Hampton. Cong. Ch., 15; "Mrs. A.P.G.," 10.                    25.00
Orford. John Pratt                                                  50.00
Pembroke. Cong. Ch.                                                 20.00
Peterboro. Union Evan. Ch.                                          38.00
Rochester. Mrs. Mary E. Hidden                                      10.00
Tamworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                         2.00
Walpole. "Three Friends."                                           12.00
Winchester. A.S. Jewell                                              7.00
West Rindge. Geo. G. Williams                                        9.00
, for Moody Mission, _Indian M_.                                 600.00
                                                                       
                                                                 1,713.02


                                  ESTATES
Amherst. Estate of Miss Lucy W. Blunt, by E.O. Blunt, Ex.        1,000.00
Amherst. Estate of Elizabeth G. Lawrence, by A.A. Rotch,
Ex.                                                                500.00
Bennington. Estate of Rev. James Holmes, by James M.
Burns, Ex.                                                          50.00
                                                                       
                                                                 3,263.02

                             VERMONT, $1,577.71.
Ascutneyville. Newton Gage                                          10.00
Barton Landen. Children's Missionary Soc., by Kate B.
Joslyn, Treas. _for Share_                                          13.00
Bridport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
Burlington. First Ch.                                              165.78
Cambridge. First Cong. Ch. 29; Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
3.65                                                                32.65
Castleton. Rev. S.A. Barrett                                         5.00
Chelsea. Cong. Ch.                                                  29.58
Chester. J.L. Fisher                                                 5.00
Colchester. Cong. Ch.                                               15.00
Coventry. Cong Ch. and Soc.                                         20.00
East Berkshire. Cong. Ch.                                           10.25
East Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                           3.60
East Hubbardton. Mrs. James Flagg, 5; D.J. Flagg, 2.50               7.50
East Peacham, "A Friend."                                            5.00
East Poultney. Cong. Ch., 5; Miss Jane P. Harris, 1                  6.00
Enosburg. First Cong. Ch.                                           25.00
Essex Junction. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Ellen
D. Wild                                                              5.90
Essex Junction. Rev. O.H. White, D.D.                               13.00
Fairlee. "A Brother," for _Atlanta U._                               8.00
Guildhall. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00
Hardwick. Cal. Ch.                                                   5.50
Hartford. E. Morris.                                               100.00
McIndoes Falls. Cong. S.S. 11.39, and Bbl. of C., _for
McIntosh, Ga._                                                      11.39
Middlebury. Mrs, Emma B. Stewart, _for Student Aid_,
_Atlanta, U._                                                       25.00
Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                                9.62
Newbury. "A Friend." to const. MISS ELIZABETH L. DAME L.M.          30.00
New Haven.                                                         5.00
Lowell. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
Pawlet. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                                  5.00
Roxbury. Rev. H.C. Howard                                            1.00
Rutland. Cong. Ch., to const. CHAS. P. HARRIS and JOHN W.
TITCOMB L.M's                                                      100.00
Rupert. Cong. Ch.                                                   25.00
Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                                   379.80
Saxton's River. Rev. G.F. Chapin                                     2.00
Sharon. "Six Friends in Cong. Ch."                                  13.00
Sheldon. Dea. S.M. Hulbert, 5; Miss Emma Maynard, 1;
Members Cong. Ch., 4; Miss Maynard, 1                               11.00
Springfield. Cong. Ch. (12 of which for _Avery Inst._)             386.68
Springfield. F.V.A. Townsend, to const. AMASA W. TOWNSEND
L.M.                                                                30.00
Waterville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       3.11
West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                                         12.95
West Charleston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 11.50
Westminster. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Ellen D.
Wild                                                                 5.00
Windham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                      5.05
Vermont Women's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Wm. P.
Fairbanks, Treas., _for McIntosh, Ga._:
   Castleton, Ladies                                          4.85
                                                                
                                                                     4.85


                         MASSACHUSETTS, $10,350.70.
Alford. Rev. J. Jay Dana, 30, to const. PROF. JAMES D.
CRAWFORD L.M.; Cong Ch., 5.34                                       35.34
Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                                           12.70
Amherst. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 62.85, to const. MRS.
LIDA J. HASKINS and MISS BERTHA L. JOHNSON L.M's; Children
North Cong. Sab. Sch., "True Blue Cards," 32.15, to const.
MISS ELLA W. DICKINSON L.M.                                         95.00
Amherst. North Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._                     50.00
Amherst. Rev. Julius H. Seelye, D D., 25; Mrs. Wm. A.
Stearns, 10, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                        35.00
Amherst. Miss A. Dutton, _for Rosebud Indian M._                     5.00
Andover. South Cong. Ch., 75; West Cong. Ch, and Soc., 27;
Mrs. John Smith, 10                                                112.00
Ashby. Cong. Ch.                                                    12.43
Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                                   37.75
Beechwood. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                        1.50
Belchertown. Cong Ch.                                               33.00
Billerica. Cong Ch., 15, and Sab. Sch., 10                          25.00
Boston. Union Cong. Ch., Chas. P. Adams, to const. MISS
HELEN F. BRIGHAM, MISS MARY M. BRIGHAM, MISS HELEN M.
HALL, MISS FANNIE W. MERRILL, MRS. ELIZA S. MORSE, OLIVER
COBB, JOHN S. WINN, JOTHAM TWITCHELL and REV. WILLIAM
CORNELL, D.D., L.M's                                      1,000.00
   Shawmut Ch., _for Indian M._                             500.00
   J.W. Field                                               100.00
   J.T. Bailey                                              100.00
   "Friend"                                                  50.00
   T.D. Quincy                                               30.00
   "R.," _for Indian M._                                     25.00
   Mrs. S.E. Cooley, _for Indian M._                         25.00
   Olivet Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
   Rev. R.B. Howard                                           5.00
   Mt. Vernon Ch., add'l                                      5.00
                                                            5.00
Charleston. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                            81.14
   Sab. Sch., First Parish, _for Gregory Inst._,
_Wilmington, N.C._                                            5.00
Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. (30 of which from Mrs. Walter
Baker),                                                     151.31
   Mrs. Sarah A. Carruth                                     50.00
   Mrs. Eleanor J. Baker, _for Schp. fund, Tillotson C.
and N. Inst._                                                30.00
   Mrs. Eliza Bicknell                                        5.00
   Miss Mary A. Tuttle, _for Marie Adlof Schp. Fund_          2.00
Jamaica Plain. R.W. Wood                                    100.00
   Friends in Central Cong. Ch.                              25.00
   Central Cong. Ch., "A Friend"                             20.00
Roxbury. Eliot Ch.                                           71.94
   Mrs. Woodbridge Odlin, to const. MRS. ALMA O. ROBBINS
L.M.                                                         30.00
   Sab. Sch. of Immanuel Cong. Ch. _for Atlanta U._          25.00
   "Our Country A'ssn," _for Normal Inst._, _Grandview,
Tenn._                                                       22.00
West Roxbury. So. Evan. Cong. Ch.                            24.14
   Sab. Sch. of So. Evan. Cong. Ch, add'l, _for McIntosh,
Ga._                                                          5.00
                                                                
                                                                 2,502.53
Braintree. South Cong. Ch.                                          15.00
Brimfield. First Cong. Ch., 8.25, and Sab. Sch., 10                 18.25
Brockton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  28.00
Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                               50.00
Cambridge. Member of North Av. Ch.                                   6.00
Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch.                                         155.93
Carlisle. Cong. Ch.                                                  8.00
Centreville. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00
Chatham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                          8.75
Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                            30.00
Chicopee. "Earnest Workers," Third Cong. Ch., _for Student
Aid_, _Fisk U._                                                     25.00
Conway. Cong. Ch.                                                    9.00
Dalton. Mrs. Louisa F. Crane, 50, and Miss Clara L. Crane,
50, _for Mountain White Work_                                      100.00
Danvers. First Cong. Ch. and Soc, to Const. HARRIET E.
PRESTON, ISABEL B. TAPLEY and EDWARD A. GROVER, L.M'S.              97.08
Douglas. Individuals in Cong Ch.                                     6.00
Enfield. C.D. Haskell                                                5.00
Fall River. "Friends in Central Ch." _for Indian M._                15.00
Falmouth. First Cong. Ch., 3.94; Susie E. Herendeen, 1               4.94
Fitchburg. Rollstone Cong. Ch., 75; D.B. Whittier, 10; "A
Friend," 10                                                         95.00
Florence. Y.L. Mission Circle, _for Tougaloo U._                    20.00
Foxboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 41.49; "Two Friends," 10               51.49
Framingham. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch. _for Atlanta U._              25.00
Gloucester. Sab. Sch. of Evan. Cong. Ch., 53.05; "Knight,"
50; Mrs. Nancy E. Brooks, 5                                        108.05
Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                                   22.00
Greenfield. Miss Jeanette Thompson                                   5.00
Hadley. First Cong. Soc., 25; Miss Augusta A. Porter, 2             27.00
Hampden. Cong. Ch.                                                   3.00
Hanson. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._                      14.00
Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols                                     200.00
Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._       100.00
Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     28.00
Holbrook. Geo. N. Spear, 20; Dea. Edward White, 10, _for
Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                            30.00
Holland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                          7.00
Holliston. Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4.                         50.00
Holyoke. Mrs. A.M. Childs                                           10.00
Housatonic. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                  62.00
Hyde Park. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._                                                        50.00
Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 38.59
Ipswich. South Ch.                                                  50.00
Kingston. Mayflower Ch.                                             35.00
Lancaster. Cong. Ch.                                                38.65
Lanesville. Cong. Ch.                                               13.87
Lakeville. Mrs. Caroline L. Ward                                    25.00
Lee. First Cong. Ch., 120, and Sab. Sch. 100                       220.00
Leverett. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.00
Lincoln. "Two Friends."                                             12.50
Linden. Union Cong. Ch.                                              8.00
Lowell. Mary E. Fletcher 2; John A. Hodge, Bdl. of C.,
etc.                                                                 2.00
Malden. First Ch.                                                   42.00
Marlboro. Union Cong. Ch., to const. GEORGE F. NELSON,
EMERSON G. GIBSON and WILLIAM F. BARNARD L.M's                      93.47
Medway. E.F. Richardson                                            100.00
Melrose Highlands. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
Merrimac. Cong. Ch.                                                150.00
Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       28.76
Millbury. First Cong. Ch., 50.70; Second Cong. Ch. and
Soc., 38.29; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 25; Rev. Geo.
A. Putnam, 3; Miss Louisa Spaulding, 2                             118.99
Milton. Arthur H. Tucker                                             5.00
Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   150.00
Needham. Cong. Ch.                                                   6.00
New Bedford. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.47
Newburyport. Prospect St Ch., 25; Ann P. Bassett, 10                35.00
Newton. Eliot Ch.                                                  237.00
Newton Center. Cong. Ch., 30; Miss H.S. Cousens, 3                  33.00
Newtonville. Central Cong. Ch.                                      35.00
Northampton. First Cong. Ch.                                       246.34
North Andover. Cong. Ch., to const. CHARLES P. MORRILL,
FRANK W. FRISBEE and ANNIE L. SARGENT L.M's                        100.00
North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., 150, to const. ADA C.
CLAPP, MARY M. BEMIS, HENRY A. COOKE, and LOYAL E. TARBELL
L.M's; Union Cong. Ch., 100                                        250.00
North Carver. Cong. Ch.                                              6.75
North Chelmsford. Second Cong. Ch.                                  71.00
Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                                   2.52
Northfield. Miss Mary C. Collins, 50; "Friends," 23;
"Friend," 1, _for Indian M._                                        74.00
North Weymouth. Pilgrim Ch., _for Student Aid_, _Talledega
C._                                                                  8.00
Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                                   40.00
Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                                   17.36
Peabody. South Cong. Ch.                                            11.50
Peabody. J.K. Cole, _for G.W. Lawrence_                              3.00
Peru. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                             4.81
Pittsfield. Rev. Edward Strong, D.D., 10; MRS. REV. EDWARD
STRONG, 50, to const. herself L.M.                                  60.00
Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                                20.00
Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. 15; Washington St. Cong. Ch. 5              20.00
Randolph. Evan. Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._           139.70
Randolph. , to const. ANNIE T. BELCHER L.M.                       30.00
Raynham. First Cong. Ch.                                             6.78
Reading. Cong. Ch., 18; Cong. Ch., "Friend," 5, "Friend," 2         25.00
Rochester. Mrs. Jane N. Leonard                                      5.00
Rockland. Elijah Shaw                                               50.00
Rockport First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   20.93
Salem. Jos. H. Towne                                               100.00
Sandersonville. Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._            10.00
Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 29; and Sab. Sch. 10, to
const. LORING M. MONK, L.M.                                         39.00
Shelburne Falls. L.M. Packard                                        5.00
Sherborn. Pilgrim Ch.                                               25.00
Southboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       30.00
South Framingham. South Cong. Ch.                                  100.00
South Hadley Falls. "A Friend."                                      5.00
South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch.                                    27.00
South Weymouth. Primary Dept., Sab. Sch. of Second Cong.
Ch., _for Student Aid_, _Storrs Sch. Atlanta, Ga._                  18.00
Springfield. Sab. Sch. of North Cong. Ch., _for Straight
U._                                                                 16.50
Sterling. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                        39.00
Stockbridge. Cong. Ch., 86.12; "Lady Member, Cong. Ch." 5           91.12
Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                        35.53
Swampscott. Miss L.A. Hopkins                                       15.00
Sutton. E.L. Snow                                                   50.00
Taunton. Winslow Ch. and Soc.                                       51.74
Townsend. Cong. Ch., "A Friend."                                    10.00
Uxbridge. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. FRANK
L. BRISTOL L.M.                                                     40.00
Wareham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. DEA. HIRAM WEBSTER
BARROWS L.M., 52.54, J.I.W. BURGESS, 30, to const himself
L.M.                                                                82.54
Warren. Cong. Ch.                                                  100.00
Watertown. Phillips Ch. and Soc.                                   181.00
West Barnstable. Cong. Ch.                                          15.00
Westboro. "A Friend."                                                5.00
West Boylston. Chas. T. White                                        3.00
Westfield. Charlotte W. Fowler, 3; H. Holland, 3                     6.00
West Medford. Mrs. M.A. Fletcher                                     6.00
West Medway. "A Friend."                                             2.00
West Newton. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. 182.85, Sab. Sch.
of Second Cong., Ch. 25, S.E. Howard, 5                            212.85
West Springfield. Mrs. Lucy M. Bagg                                200.00
West Stockbridge Center. Cong. Ch.                                   1.00
Whately. Rev. Wm. C. Curtis                                          2.00
Whitman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                         85.00
Whitinsville. Mrs. Mary A. Batchelor                                50.00
Whitinsville. Mrs. Chas. P. Whittin, 40., Wm. H. Whitin,
35., Edward Whitin, 35, _for Sch'p Fund, Tillotson C. & N.
Inst._                                                             110.00
Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                                       12.25
Wilmington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_,
_Straight U._                                                       12.00
Woods Holl. First Cong. Ch.                                          8.37
Worcester. Union Cong. Ch., 223.67; Sam'l R. Heywood, 100;
Plymouth Cong. Ch., 100; Piedmont Ch., 65; Samuel A.
Pratt, 50; "A Friend," 20; Salem St., Ch., 17.50                   576.17
Worcester. "A.N.X." _for Atlanta U._                                50.00
Worcester. Geo. L. Newton, _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._            20.00
Worcester. Easter Concert, Old South Ch., _for Hampton N.
& A. Inst._                                                         11.62
Worthington. Cong. Ch.                                               3.82
. Mrs. H.C. Parish _for Indian M._                                10.00
Hampden Benevolent Association, by Charles Marsh, Treas.
   Chicopee. Third, (2.44 of which for Indian M.)            11.96
   Monson. E.F. Morris,                                      50.00
   Monson. E.A. Ward,                                         1.00
   Westfield. Second.                                        20.50
                                                                
                                                                    83.46
                                                                       
                                                                 9,800.70


                                  ESTATES
Haldey. Estate of Eleazar Porter, by J.E. Porter                   500.00
Hatfield. Estate of J.B. Woods by R.M. Woods, Trustee               50.00
                                                                       
                                                                10,350.70


             CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.
Baldwinsville, Mass. Hospital Cottages for Children, 2 Bbls.
East Cambridge, Mass. Miss Mary F. Aiken, Case of Chairs _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Foxboro. Rev. A.E. Tracy, 2 Boxes; Mr. Barron, 1 bundle.
Newton Highlands, Mass. Mrs. E.C. Wheeler, 1 Case.


                          RHODE ISLAND, $1,289.76.
Arnolds Mills. Alice Walcott                                        20.00
Central Falls. "A Friend"                                           50.00
Newport. United Cong. Ch.                                           48.00
Pawtucket. Cong. Ch., 104.76; Park Place Cong. Ch., 10             114.76
Tiverton. Ann E. Brown                                               3.00
Providence. Mrs. Geo. H. Corliss, Miss M.L. Corliss and
Mr. G.F. Corliss _in memorian Geo. H. Corliss_                   1,000.00
Providence. John McAuslan                                           50.00
Providence. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                              4.00


                           CONNECTICUT, $6,413.18.
Berlin. A few Ladies, by Mrs. W.W. Woodworth, _for Conn.
Indl. Sch., Ga._                                                     8.00
Birmingham. Wm. E. Downes, _for Schp_, _Tougaloo U._                70.00
Birmingham. Cong. Ch.                                               27.00
Brooklyn. Mrs. Wm. Woodbridge, 20; M.E. Ensworth, 10;
First Trin. Ch., 21                                                 51.00
Bristol. Mrs. J.T. Peck                                             10.00
Buckingham. Cong. Ch.                                                2.50
Buckingham. Ladies of Buckingham S.S. _for Conn. Indl.
Sch., Ga._                                                           5.00
Cheshire. "A Friend"                                                30.00
Clinton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_, _Atlanta
U._                                                                  7.78
Danielsonville. Thomas Backus                                       30.00
Derby. Miss Sarah A. Hotchkiss                                       5.00
Eastford. "The Gleaners," by Alice J. Carpenter, Sec.,
_for Conn. Indl. Sch., Ga._                                         10.00
East Hampton. First Cong. Ch.                                       32.64
East Hartford.                                                   100.00
East Hartford. "A Friend," to const. ROBERT E. OLMSTED
L.M.                                                                30.00
East Hartford. First Ch.                                            20.00
Easton. Cong. Ch.                                                    6.00
Fair Haven. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Indian
Sch._                                                               10.00
Farmington. Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._                            10.50
Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                                  7.00
Glastonbury. J.B. and W.S. Williams, 200; Mrs. N.W.
Goodrich, 150; Geo. G. Williams, 100                               450.00
Glastonbury. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_, _Fisk
U._                                                                 50.00
Glastonbury. Bernard T. Williams, _for Indian M._                   50.00
Goshen. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                      23.22
Green's Farms. Cong. Ch.                                            22.08
Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch., 62.16; David Banks, 10                 72.16
Griswold. Cong. Ch., to const. JOSEPH TYLER GEER L.M.               35.00
Guilford. First Cong. Ch, to const. MISS MINNIE M.
GRISWOLD, L.M.                                                      30.00
Hadlyme. R.E. Hungerford, 30.75; Cong. Ch., 5.25                    36.00
Hampton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                       20.00
Hartford. Mrs. S.E. Perkins, _for Talladega C._                    200.00
Hartford. Newton Case, 100; Mrs. H.A. Perkins. 100; Asylum
Hill Cong. Ch., L.T. Frisbie, 25                                   225.00
Ivoryton. "Friends," _for Tougaloo U._                              70.00
Ivoryton. Frank M. Rose and wife                                    10.00
Ivoryton. Miss Isabel Northrop and her S.S. Class, _for
Indian M._                                                          12.50
Jersey City. Mrs. Julia D. Talcott, _for Indian M._                 50.00
Ledyard. "A Friend"                                                  2.00
Long Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
Middlefleld. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. DEA. SETH E.
MILLER and HENRY J. CAMP L.M.'s                                     70.12
Middletown. Edward Payne, 10; Chas. Boardman, 10; Geo. T.
Meech, 5; W.H. Burrows, 5; Seth H. Butler, 5; Geo. A.
Cole, 5; J.H. Bunce, 10, _for Tougaloo U._                          50.00
Meriden. First Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for Indian M._), to
const. MISS LYDIA E. GLADWIN, A.C. BUMPIS, GEO. S.
HEMINGWAY, MISS ELLIE M. LINES, MISS MARY A.N. GILL and
FRANK L. LAWTON L.M's, 300; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
50                                                                 350.00
Meriden, Center Ch., 50; "N.T.," 3                                  53.00
Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                           100.00
Moodus. Miss Mary E. Dyer                                            5.00
Mount Carmel. W.W. Woodruff, 25; Mrs. J.M. Swift, 10; bal.
to const. ELLA L. DUNBAR L.M.                                       35.00
Naugatuck. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_,
_Fisk U._                                                           25.00
New Britain. First Ch. of Christ                                   200.00
New Haven. W.E. Downes, 100; Prof. E.E. Salisbury, 50;
College St. Cong. Ch., 39.05; "A Friend," 15; Alfred
Walker, 10                                                         214.05
New Milford. "A Friend"                                              2.00
Newington. Cong. Ch.                                                67.24
Newington. Mr. and Mrs. J. Deming, _for Tougaloo U._                10.00
New London. "Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven"                       100.00
New Preston. Mrs. Betsy Averill                                     10.00
New Preston. Mrs. Betsy Averill, _for Mountain White Work_           5.00
Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._            20.00
Norfolk. Mrs. Mary A. Curtiss, _for Schp_, _Indian M._               7.50
North Guilford. Cong Ch.                                            17.50
Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                            50.00
Norwich. "A Friend"                                              1,000.00
Norwich. First Cong. Ch., 75; Miss Sarah M. Lee, 25                100.00
Norwich. Rev. W.S. Palmer, D.D., _for Tillotson C & N.
Inst._                                                              10.00
Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                             33.88
Plainfield. First Cong. Ch.                                         26.41
Plainfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud
Indian M._                                                          11.22
Poquonock. Thomas Duncan                                            50.00
Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    20.00
Putnam. Second Cong. Ch., 19.46; Mrs. Mary A. Keith, 2              21.46
Rockville. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. JOHN G. BAIRD, MISS
SARAH K. GELBERT, MRS. GUY P. COLLINS and GEORGE W. VINAL
L.M.'S                                                             140.11
Rockville. Dea. Geo. Maxwell, 100; J.N. Stickney, 5 _for
Tougaloo U._                                                       105.00
Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                                17.23
Seymour. Cong. Ch.                                                  12.06
South Coventry. Mrs. Mary J. Bennett, _for Williamsburg,
Ky._                                                                20.00
Stafford. Mrs. T.H. Thresher                                         5.00
Stanwich. Cong. Ch.                                                  5.00
Southport. Cong. Ch., 134, to const. SIMON C. SHERWOOD,
HENRY C. BARNUM, WILLIAM MONTALON and SYLVESTER STRONG
BLISS L.M's; "A Friend," 70                                        204.00
Stonington. Rev. Chas J. Hill                                       12.00
Terryville. O.D. Hunter, 50; N.T. Baldwin, 50, _for
Talledaga C._                                                      100.00
Terryville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian
M._                                                                 27.54
Terryville. A.S. Gaylord                                            10.00
Thomaston. Dr. W. Woodruff, 10; E.C. Root, 5; Mrs. Geo.
Pierpont, 5; Mrs. Wm. Gilbert, 5; Mabel Freeman, 2; H.H.
Hotchkiss, 50c, _for Tougaloo U._                                   27.50
Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                                11.95
Torrington. L. Wetmore, 150: Third Cong. Ch. and Sab.
Sch., 51.59                                                        201.59
Torrington. "Valley Gleaners," _for Fort Berthold Indian
M._                                                                 50.00
Unionville. First Ch. of Christ                                     14.30
Voluntown and Sterling. Cong. Ch. to const. MISS MELINDA
GALLUP L.M.                                                         17.38
Wallingford. "A Friend." _for Tougaloo U._                           5.00
Watertown. "Friends," _for Indian M._                               15.00
Watertown. Mrs. Fred Scott's Class, _for Fort Berthold
Indian M._                                                          10.00
Webster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   50.00
Westbrook. Cong. Ch.                                                44.53
Westford. Cong. Ch.                                                  7.25
West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 54.98, Ladies' Mon.
Miss'y Prayer Meeting, by Mrs. Emeline Smith, 15;
Mrs. Emeline Smith, 5; Mrs. E.C. Kimball, 2                         76.98
West Torrington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                                     5.00
Willimantic. Mrs. E.G. Learned                                       4.00
Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                            50.00
Wolcott. "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._                               5.00
                                                                 100.00
 "A Connecticut Friend,"                                          30.00
 "A Friend in Conn.,"                                             20.00
                                                                       
                                                                 5,913.18


                                  ESTATES
Hartford. Estate of Mrs. Nancy H. Hills, by J.C. Hills,
Executor                                                           500.00
                                                                       
                                                                 6,413.18


                            NEW YORK, $8,942.27.
Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Ballard Sch. Building,
Macon, Ga._                                                      2,500.00
Brooklyn. E.C. Seecomb, 50; Dr. and Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 20            70.00
Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._,
37.50; CLARENCE F. BIRDSEYE, _for Indian M._, and balance
to const. himself L.M., 17.50                                       55.00
Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., Box of C., 1.30 _for
Freight_, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                                    1.30
Brooklyn. Mrs. Sarah A.M. Kent, Pkg. of C.
Brooklyn, E.D. New Eng. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
Cambridge. "Friends," _for Indian M._                               19.50
Canandaigua. C.W. Dixon, 5; "N.M.C," 5                              10.00
Copenhagen. Rev. W.J. Cuthbertson                                    5.00
Fairport. J.E. Howard                                               50.00
Jamestown. First Cong. Ch.                                          13.00
Kelloggsville. Miss Carrie Taylor                                   50.00
Lebanon. Thomas Hitchcock, 5; Ladies' Home Miss'y Soc., 5;
Mrs. S.G. Childs, 3; Alfred Seymour, 1.25; J.A. Head, 1;
Mrs. M. Day, 1; J.H. Wagoner, 1; John Fisk, 1; C.P. Day,
1; G.G. Grosvenor, 50c.; Mrs. I. Lyon, 25c.                         20.00
Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                           10.00
Malone. Mrs. H.R. Wilson                                             2.00
Middletown. First Cong. Ch.                                         35.00
New York. Z. Stiles Ely, 100; "A Friend," 100; "H.W.H.,"
100 to const. JOSEPH ANDREWS POWELL, JAMES THOMAS POWELL
and GRACE KNOWLES POWELL L.M's; Wm. Ives Washburn, 25;
Homer N. Lockwood, 25; Individuals, Tabernacle Ch., 21;
Rev. Stephen Angell, 10: B.B. Adams, Jr., 10                       391.00
New York. Bethany Sew. Sch., _for Fort Berthold Indian M._          43.00
North Pitcher. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                   0.50
North Walton. Cong'l Ch. and Cong., _for Mt. White Work_            15.20
Perkin. Miss A. Peck                                                25.00
Perry Center. William Butler, 10; Mrs. Sarah Lillibridge,
5; Miss Rachel Booth, 5; Miss Clara S. Cooper, 2                    22.00
Plattsburg. G.W. Dodds                                               5.00
Rochester. Geo. Thayer                                              20.00
Silver Creek. W. Chapin                                             10.00
Syracuse. Mrs. E.G. Washburn                                         5.00
Union Valley. Wm. C. Angell                                          5.00
Utica. Plymouth Ch.                                                  7.50
Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge, _for Woman's Work_                       5.00
Verona. E. Day                                                      10.00
Walton. Cong'l Ch. and Cong., _for Mt. White Work_                  72.45
 "Life Member."                                                   12.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb,
Treas., _for Womans' Work._
   Arcade. Y.L. Mission Circle                               15.00
   Churchville. Ladies' Aux.                                 50.00
   Copenhagen. Ladies' Aux., to const. HARRY MUNGER L.M.     50.00
   Homer. "Band of Hope."                                     5.00
   Riverhead. Ladies' Aux.                                   15.00
                                                                
                                                                   135.00
                                                                       
                                                                 3,684.45


                                  ESTATES
Brooklyn. Estate of Alfred S. Barnes by Alfred C. Barnes,
Ex.                                                              4,856.67
Franklin. Estate of Mrs. Mary Parsons Foote, by David
Foote, Ex.                                                         451.15
                                                                       
                                                                 8,942.27

                           NEW JERSEY, $1,242.46.
Arlington. Mrs. G. Overacre, _for Mt. White Work_                    3.00
Bernardsville. Mrs. M.L. Roberts                                    30.00
Montclair. J. Van Vleck, 100. Y.L.M. Soc. of First Cong.
Ch., by Effie A. Brown, Treas. 10.60                               110.60
New Brunswick. J.P. Langdon                                         15.00
Park ridge. Sab. Sch., of Cong. Ch.                                  8.86
Paterson. P. Van Houten                                              5.00
Plainfield. C.L. Goodrich                                            5.00
Salem. W. Graham Tyler                                              20.00
Trenton. Miss S.T. Sherman, 40, Mrs. E.B. Fuller, 5                 45.00
                                                                       
                                                                   242.46


                                  ESTATES
Montclair. Estate of Winslow Ames, by W.W. Ames, Ex.             1,000.00
                                                                       
                                                                 1,242.46

                           PENNSYLVANIA, $242.50.
Cambridgeboro. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.                     10.00
Canton. H. Sheldon                                                  15.00
Philadelphia. Chas. Burnham                                        100.00
Pittston. Jas. Challenger                                            2.00
Ridgway. First Cong. Ch.                                            15.50
West Alexander. Mrs. Jane C. Davidson                              100.00


                              OHIO, $1,557.10.
Ashtabula. First Cong. Ch.                                          13.80
Ashtabula. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._        25.00
Berea. James S. Smedley, to const. F.S. SMEDLEY L.M.                30.00
Brownhelm. Cong. Ch.                                                15.00
Bryan. S.E. Blakeslee                                                5.00
Burton. Rev. S.W. Pierson                                            5.00
Cedarville. Mrs. M.E. Edwards                                      200.00
Chagrin Falls. Cong. Ch.                                            21.63
Cleveland. First Cong. Ch. 74.01; Mrs. F.W. Low, 20                 94.01
Cleveland. H.H. Brown, _for Talladega C._                          100.00
Cleveland. Mrs. H.B. Spelman, _for Student Aid_, _Atlanta,
Ga._                                                                25.00
Columbus. Eastwood Cong. Ch.                                        21.00
Dover. Cong. Ch.                                                    17.60
Harbor. Cong. Ch.                                                    5.00
Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                          100.00
Lafayette. Cong. Ch.                                                 7.50
Lorain. Mrs. A.D. Barber, (deceased,) 50; Rev. A.D. Barber
and Daughter, 21; Mrs. Susan Beers, 5; Others in Cong.
Ch., 27.85                                                         103.85
Madison. Central Cong. Ch.                                          29.47
Medina. Cong. Ch., to const. DEA. C.E. CLARK, E.R. ROOT,
and MISS CLARA STEEB L.M's                                          98.06
Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch., 68.63, Ladies' Miss'y Soc. 19;
Chas. Cooper, 15                                                   102.63
Newark. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                              6.00
North Benton. Simon Hartzell                                         5.00
North Bloomfield. E.A. Brown, _for Talladega C._                   100.00
Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., 48.69; Dr. and Mrs. Homer
Johnson, 8                                                          56.69
Painesville. E.E. Johnson                                            4.00
Rootstown. Cong. Ch., 19.56; W.J. Dickinson, 10                     29.56
Steubenville. First Cong. Ch.                                        5.60
Toledo. Washington St. Cong. Ch.                                    10.00
Wellington. "A Friend," 20; Cong. Sab. Sch., 10                     30.00
Willoughby. Miss Mary P. Hastings                                    1.00
Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                            13.46
York. Cong. Ch.                                                     32.00
Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Phebe A.
Crafts, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
   Chester. St. Paul's Mission Band                           6.82
   Claridon. W.M.S.                                          10.00
   Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., H.M.S.                        25.00
   Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E.                     2.59
   Columbus. E.T.B.                                           2.00
   Columbus. Eastwood Ch., Mrs. P.L. Alcott                  10.00
   Columbus. Eastwood Ch., "F.M.B."                           7.00
   Coolville. L.H.M.S.                                       17.81
   Kent. Ladies' Aux.                                        11.50
   Lindenville. Miss Ellen Jones                              5.00
   Madison. Cong. Ch. W.H.M.S.                                1.00
   Madison. Cong. Ch. W.H.M.S.                                0.52
   Marysville. Aux.                                          12.00
   Medina. L.B.S.                                            25.00
   Mount Vernon. W.H.M.S.                                     5.00
   Oberlin. First Cong. Ch. L.A.S.                           75.00
   Painesville. L.H.M.S.                                     25.00
   South Kirtland. Cong. Ch., L.M.S.                          3.00
                                                                
                                                                    244.24


                              INDIANA, $205.00.
Versailles. Mrs. J.D. Nichols, (2.50 of which _for Indian
M._)                                                                 5.00


                                  ESTATES
Auburn. Estate of James Adams by D.Y. Husselman                    200.00
                                                                       
                                                                   205.00


                            ILLINOIS, $1,302.34.
Aurora. N.L. Janes                                                  10.00
Belvidere. Mrs. M.C. Foote, 10, _for Mobile, Ala._ and 3
_for Woman's Work_                                                  13.00
Buda. J.B. Stewart, 100; Cong. Ch. 25.52                           125.52
Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 120.25; New England Ch. "A
Friend," 100; D.H. Roe, 100; Rev. J.M. Williams, 50; Rev.
Jos. E. Roy, D.D. 30. to const. REV. S.J. HUMPHREY, D.D.,
L.M; A.L. Cole, 25; Randolph St. Mission of First Cong.
Ch., 20                                                            445.52
Chicago. Mrs. F.A. Noble, _for Student Aid Endowment
Fund_, _Fisk U._                                                    25.00
Collinsville. J.F. Wadsworth                                        10.00
Dover. Rev. R.M. Sargent                                             5.00
Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                                          90.00
Granville. Y.P. Miss'y Soc.                                         10.00
Hinsdale. J.W. Bushnell                                              5.00
Joliet. Rev. S. Penfield                                             5.00
Lewistown. Mrs. Myron Phelps                                        25.00
Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                                   10.00
Maywood. Cong. Ch.                                                  20.00
Morrison. William Wallace and Robert Wallace, to const.
MRS. AGNES RALSTON, L.M.                                            60.00
Park Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                                8.00
Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                                8.50
Princeton. Mrs. S.C. Clapp, 25; Mrs. P.B. Corss, 12; Cong.
Ch., 12                                                             49.00
Quincy. Lorenzo Bull, 50; Charles H. Bull, 50                      100.00
Ravenswood. Cong. Ch.                                               22.90
Rockford. Thos. D. Robertson                                        50.00
Rockford. Miss Blanche Goodall, _for Oahe Indian Sch._               2.00
Rockford. Mrs. E.W. Chandler, Box Papers, etc., _for
Sherwood, Tenn._
Roseville. Cong. Ch.                                                11.38
Rutland. Rev. L. Taylor                                              2.00
Sandwich. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.80
Sterling. Mrs. Catherine McKinney                                   10.00
Toulon. Cong. Ch., 23.18; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 5                 28.18
Toulon. "The Lamplighters," pkg. Patchwork, _for Sherwood,
Tenn._
Wauponsee Grove. Cong. Ch.                                          11.90
Western Springs. Union Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid
Endowment Fund_, _Fisk U._                                           9.00
Winnebago. N.F. Parsons                                             10.00
Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. C.E. Maltby,
Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
   Ill. Woman's H.M.U. (30 of which from Ladies of Lincoln
Park Cong. Ch., to const. HENRY W. HOBART L.M.)              45.65
   Ill. Woman's H.M.U. (30 of which to const. MRS. J.E.
POOLE L.M.)                                                  58.00
   Woman's Home Missionary Union                              6.26
                                                                
                                                                   109.91

                             MICHIGAN, $758.96.
Agricultural College. Prof. R.C. Kedzie                             10.00
Almont. Cong. Ch.                                                   25.00
Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch., 41; First Cong. Ch., add'l, "A
Friend," 15; Mrs. Maria Wood, 2                                     58.00
Benton Harbor. Rev. W.H. Brewster                                    3.00
Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                            21.00
Church's Corners. Cong. Ch.                                         30.36
Comstock. "A Friend"                                               138.10
Detroit First Cong. Ch., 139.95; Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
Ch., 24.76; Woodward Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., 20                       184.71
East Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                               2.00
Flint. Cong. Ch.                                                    21.86
Green Oak. John Thompson                                             5.00
Homer. Mrs. C.C. Evarts                                              5.00
Ithaca. Mr. and Mrs. A.H. Norris                                    10.00
Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch.                                          90.25
Manistee. B.M. Cutcheon                                              5.00
Nashville. "A Friend"                                                2.00
Northport. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                                   5.00
Portland. Cong. Ch.                                                 16.00
Romeo. E.B. Dickinson, 10; Watson Loud, 10                          20.00
Saginaw City. Mrs. A.M. Spencer                                      2.00
Union City. "A Friend"                                             100.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.:
   Essexville. W.H.M.S.                                       3.82
   Essexville. Sab. Sch.                                      0.86
                                                                
                                                                     4.68

                             WISCONSIN, $896.75.
Antigo. Cong. Ch.                                                    6.35
Appleton. "A Life Member"                                           10.00
Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                                   20.00
Beloit. Second Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch.                                 11.00
Beloit. E.P. Wheeler, _for Oahe Indian Sch._                        10.00
Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                                  40.00
Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                               20.25
Clintonville. Cong. Ch.                                              6.00
Cooksville. E. Gilley                                                5.00
Franksville. Cong. Ch.                                               4.00
Green Bay. First Presb. Ch.                                         45.10
Hayward. Cong. Ch.                                                  15.10
Kaukauna. Cong. Ch.                                                  8.00
Kenosha. Cong. Ch.                                                  32.05
Kinnic Kinnic. Cong. Ch.                                             3.30
La Crosse. George H. Ray, 25; J.M. Holley, 5                        30.00
Madison. First Cong. Ch., 21.71; Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
Ch., 20                                                             41.71
Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch., 139.16; Plymouth Ch., 30           169.16
Necedah. Cong. Ch.                                                   5.45
New Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                               11.50
Oshkosh. Cong. Ch.                                                  63.50
River Falls. Cong. Ch.                                              41.00
River Falls. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Fort Berthold
Indian M._                                                          35.00
Sheboygan. Frank Stowe and Friends, Box Books, etc.; Sab.
Sch. First Cong. Ch., Box S.S. Papers, _for Sherwood,
Tenn._
Stoughton. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.28
West Superior. Cong. Ch.                                             9.41
Whitewater. Cong. Ch., 84.25, and Sab. Sch., 15.75                 100.00
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Wisconsin, _for Woman's
Work_:
   Appleton. W.H.M.U.                                         1.75
   Arena. W.H.M.U.                                            4.07
   Beloit. First Ch. W.H.M.U.                                18.15
   Bloomington. W.H.M.U.                                      5.30
   Brodhead. W.H.M.U.                                         2.90
    "A Friend"                                             50.00
   Eau Claire. W.H.M.U.                                       8.30
   Janesville. W.H.M.U.                                       3.50
   Madison. W.H.M.U.                                         24.72
   Milton. W.H.M.U.                                           7.40
   Milwaukee. W.H.M.U.                                        3.00
   New Lisbon. W.H.M.U.                                       3.00
   Platteville. W.H.M.U.                                      0.50
   Ripon. W.H.M.U.                                            7.00
   Stoughton. W.H.M.U.                                        1.00
   Wauwatosa. W.H.M.U.                                        4.00
   Whitewater. W.H.M.U.                                       6.00
                                                                
                                                                   150.59


                               IOWA, $526.42.
Amity. Cong. Ch.                                                    17.30
Charles City. First Cong. Ch.                                       40.07
Cherokee. First Cong. Ch.                                           15.82
Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                            9.06
Danville. Lee W. Mix, 3; S.H. Mix, 2                                 5.00
Davenport. Julius A. Reed                                           15.00
Decorah. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                                  7.00
Decorah. Cong. Ch.                                                   6.00
Denmark. T.S. Taylor, 20; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 15                35.00
Dubuque. First Cong. Ch.                                            42.37
Grinnell. Mrs. Geo. Magoun, _for Oahe Indian Sch._                   2.00
Iowa City. Rev. M.N. Miles                                          10.00
Keokuk. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for Woman's Work_                     14.50
Lawlen. Cong. Ch.                                                    4.05
Manchester. Ladies' Miss'y Soc.                                     10.00
McGregor. J.H. Ellsworth                                            10.00
McGregor.                                                         17.00
Nashua. Cong. Ch.                                                   12.37
Postville. Cong. Ch.                                                 8.00
Quasqueton. Cong. Ch.                                                3.21
Red Oak. First Cong. Ch.                                            22.83
Tabor. Cong. Ch.                                                    68.25
Traer. Cong. Ch., 11.06; L.M. Soc. Cong. Ch., 6                     17.06
Waterloo. Cong. Ch.                                                 15.12
Winthrop. Cong. Ch.                                                 50.00
. "Friends." _for Oahe Indian Sch._                                3.10
Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa, _for Woman's Work_:
   Bellevue. L.M.S.                                           4.00
   Cedar Rapids. L.M.S.                                      21.30
   Council Bluffs. L.M.S.                                    10.00
   Le Mars. L.M.S.                                            4.35
   Mason City. L.M.S.                                         4.50
   Onawa. L.M.S.                                              6.00
   Rockford. L.M.S.                                           1.16
   Stuart. L.M.S.                                             5.00
   Sheldon. L.M.S.                                            1.00
   Shenandoah. L.M.S.                                         9.00
                                                                
                                                                    66.31

                             MINNESOTA, $384.63.
Aitken. Cong. Ch.                                                    2.24
Anoka. Cong. Ch.                                                     5.00
Little Falls.                                                        3.10
Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                                   6.50
Minneapolis. Plym. Ch., 11; Vine Ch., 10.75                         21.75
Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                                         88.96
Rochester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      30.61
Rose Creek. "True Blue" Card, by Mrs. Sarah Rounce                   2.70
Saint Paul. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                      22.42
Minn. Woman's Home Missionary Soc., _for Woman's Work_, by
Mrs. Clara N. Cross, Treas.:
   Austin. W.M.S.                                            15.88
   Brainerd. First Ch. S.S.                                   9.50
   Cannon Falls.                                            5.00
   Clear Water. Sab. Sch. and Nellie Baxter, Bessie
Bosworth, Sarah Whiting, on True Blue Cards, 5 each          15.62
   Cottage Grove. W.M.S.                                      8.00
   Glyndon. S.S.                                              1.18
   Marshall. W.M.S.                                           7.50
   Minneapolis. First Ch. W.H.M.S.                           49.00
   Minneapolis. Plymouth W.H.M.S.                            23.00
   Minneapolis. Second Ch. W.M.S.                             7.50
   Minneapolis. Como Av. Ch., "Seekers after Knowledge,"      5.00
   Owatomie. W.H.M.S.                                        13.00
   Plainview. S.S.                                            1.64
   Plainview. W.M.S.                                          5.75
   Rochester. Y.L.M.S.                                       21.67
   Saint Cloud. W.M.S.                                        3.50
   Waseca. W.M.S.                                             2.00
   .                                                      6.61
                                                                
                                                                   201.35


                             MISSOURI, $111.20.
Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                                  11.10
Pierce City. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch.                  5.00
Saint Louis. First Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
Sedalia. Cong. Ch.                                                  45.10


                              KANSAS, $100.74.
Brookville. Rev. S.G. Wright                                         5.00
Council Grove. Cong. Ch.                                            15.00
Dover. Cong. Ch.                                                     1.25
Hiawatha. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                        2.89
Leavenworth. First Cong. Ch.                                        54.35
Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
Valley Falls. Cong. Ch.                                             12.25


                               DAKOTA, $20.91.
Fort Bethold. Mrs. H.R. Floyd, _for Fort B. Indian M._               6.00
Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Sue Fifield,
Treas., _for Woman's Work,_
   Huron. W.M.S.                                              4.00
   Huron. W.M.S.                                              6.50
   Lake Henry. W.M.S.                                         4.41
                                                                
                                                                    14.91

                              NEBRASKA, $53.50.
Camp Creek. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
Chadron. Cong. Ch.                                                   5.00
Dewitt. Cong. Ch.                                                    3.50
Irvington. Cong. Ch.                                                15.00
Omaha. Mrs. Reuben Gaylord, _for Indian M._                         20.00


                               MONTANA, $2.50.
. "A Friend,"                                                      2.50


                              ARKANSAS, $1.05.
Fayetteville. Cong. Ch.                                              1.05


                          WASHINGTON TERR., $25.00.
Fidalgo Island. Pilgrim Ch.                                         10.00
Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                                15.00


                               OREGON, $31.12.
Portland. First Cong. Ch., 30. to const. C.F. HOLCOMB
L.M.; Rev. E. Rogers, 1.12                                          31.12


                             CALIFORNIA, $5.00.
Arcata. .                                                          5.00


                      DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $18,242.14.
Washington. U.S. Government, _for Indian M._                    18,186.74
Washington, Mrs. S.B.A. Robinson, of Cong. Ch., 30, to
const. JAMES FRANCIS ADAMS L.M.; B.N. and E.M. Seymour,
15; Lincoln Memorial Ch., 10.40                                     55.40


                             KENTUCKY, $143.10.
Williamsburg. Tuition.                                             143.10


                           NORTH CAROLINA, $2.90.
McLeansville. Rev. A. Connet                                         0.40
Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                                     1.50
Troy. S.D. Leak                                                      1.00


                          SOUTH CAROLINA, $331.00.
Greenwood. Tuition                                                 331.00


                            TENNESSEE, $3,507.93.
Memphis. Slater Fund                                             1,500.00
Nashville. Slater Fund                                           1,500.00
Nashville. Tuition, 300.90; Rent, 18.35                            319.25
Nashville. Mrs. H.H. Wright, _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._            1.50
Pleasant Hill. Tuition, 135.20; School Fund, 47.50                 182.70
Robbins. Tuition                                                     4.50


                              GEORGIA, $529.04.
Atlanta. Teachers and Students, Atlanta U., 20; Children's
Miss'y Soc., by Mrs. E. Kent, 5, _for Indian Sch._                  25.00
Atlanta. First Cong. Ch., Six Birthday Offerings                     1.04
Macon. Slater Fund                                                 500.00
Marietta. Ch. and Sab. Sch, 1.50 each                                3.00

                             ALABAMA, $1,423.55.
Talladega. Slater Fund                                           1,400.00
Tallagega. Tuition                                                  22.55


                           MISSISSIPPI, $3,000.00.
Tougaloo. State Appropriation                                      500.00
Tougaloo. Slater Fund                                            1,500.00


                            LOUISIANA, $1,000.00.
New Orleans. Slater Fund                                         1,000.00


                               TEXAS, $900.00.
Austin. Slater Fund                                                900.00


                             INCOMES, $1,691.03.
Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                                       1,570.03
C.F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                                   50.00
General Endowment Fund                                              50.00
Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                                      0.77
Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                                   7.98
Luke Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._                               0.68
Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._                               1.50
Theo. Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._                                 0.18
Theo. Endowment Fund, _for Fisk U._                                  5.18
Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                                4.71


                               CANADA, $5.00.
Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                            5.00


                                CHINA, $5.00.
Tientsin. Rev. M.L. Stimson                                          5.00
                                                                 ========


Donations                                                       30,846.46
Estates                                                          9,107.82
Incomes                                                          1,691.03
Tuitions                                                         1,484.75
Rents                                                               18.35
U.S. Government for Indians                                     18,186.74
Slater Fund                                                      8,300.00
                                                                       
   Total for September                                          69,635.15
   Total from Oct. 1 to Sept. 30                               320,952.42
                                                               ==========


                       FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.
Subscriptions for September                                         35.77
Previously acknowledged                                            897.61
                                                                       
   Total                                                           933.38
                                                                 ========



                       H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                          56 Reade St., N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1888 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.