Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Josephine Paolucci
and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team.






THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

FEBRUARY, 1890.
VOL. XLIV. NO. 2.


CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.
OUR MISSIONS AND MISSIONARIES
REV. FRANK E. JENKINS
SOUTHERN NOTES
PARAGRAPHS
A BEAUTIFUL GIFT--THE SOUTHERN SITUATION
REV. W.W. PATTON, D.D.--REVIVAL AT STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY
LIST OF OUR FIELD WORKERS
ADDRESS OF RT. REV. H.B. WHIPPLE
LETTER FROM MISS COLLINS
GRAND VIEW, TENN.
BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
PARAGRAPHS
THE WAY ONE MISSION BAND RAISED ITS MONEY
WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS
RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

PETER McCARTEE.
CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


_For Three Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY,
SAMUEL HOLMES,
SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
CHARLES L. MEAD,
ELBERT B. MONROE.


_For Two Years._

J.E. RANKIN,
WM. H. WARD,
J.W. COOPER,
JOHN H. WASHBURN,
EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


_For One Year._

LYMAN ABBOTT,
CHAS. A. HULL,
CLINTON B. FISK,
ADDISON P. FOSTER
ALBERT J. LYMAN.


_District Secretaries._

Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._
Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago._
REV. C.W. HIATT, _64 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time
constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XLIV. FEBRUARY, 1890. NO. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR MISSIONS AND MISSIONARIES.


It is our custom to publish in the second issue of the Magazine for each
year a catalogue of the churches, institutions and schools into which we
place the offerings devoted by those who send them, to the great work of
the American Missionary Association.

If our readers will look carefully at this, and preserve it for future
reference, they will come into sympathy more easily and truly with those
who have gone from our Christian homes and churches in the name of
Christ and for his sake.

These pages of names and places represent many things:

_First._--_The work._ Our missionaries are among four races, the white,
the black, the red and the yellow. These are children of a common
Father; they are under the dominion of a common sinfulness; they are the
possible heirs of a common Saviour. We go to them with the same gospel,
which is able to save them to the same fellowship of faith and love on
earth and to the same heaven.

_Secondly._--_The missionaries and the characteristics of their work._
There are represented in this list, teachers of theology, teachers of
language, of history, of philosophy and of science. There are teachers
of "common branches" and "higher branches." There are teachers of
industries for men and women, house-makers and home-makers. There are
preachers to organized churches and preachers at large whose work is to
gather churches. They are all alike missionaries.

Notice, also, what a large proportion of our missionary work is being
done by Christian women. Well did Secretary Hiatt say, "The history of
this Association is a grand and splendid eulogy of woman." "Our sisters
who went South while the sky was yet heavy with the clouds of war from
the homes of refinement and culture and religion," are many of them
remaining until now, and they are continually re-enforced from our best
institutions of learning in the East and in the West. There is a common
fidelity on the shores of the Gulf, in the mountains of the South and
among the tribes of the plains. These men and women in our churches and
schools who have given themselves in consecration and sacrifice to this
service are leading those who have been crushed by oppressions and
wrongs of men, and who have been degraded in ignorance and in sin, to
rise into a new life, and into new habits of thought and feeling.

They are working to rescue millions from the woful inheritances of the
pitiless centuries. They are teaching those who are to be the teachers
of their people. They are preparing those who shall lead their own
peoples. It is not a work of a score of years, nor of half a century. It
is a part of the work of Christianity, whatever time it may take, and we
ask those who pray "_Thy kingdom come_" to remember these missionary
teachers and preachers before God that they may be of good courage,
faithful and patient in their ministering.

_Thirdly._--_These pages represent also the faith and sacrifices of
Christians by which this service of Jesus Christ goes on._ Brethren and
sisters, you who contribute to this work, read in these names assurances
to gladden your hearts and cheer your faith. See what solid regiments of
the Master's army are in the land where slavery has perished, but where
the problems which follow it are larger than ever before. Look up the
locations of these missionaries on the map, and see where they are, in
the valleys and on the mountains of the South, in plains of the far
West, and on the shores of the Pacific sea. They report cheering
tidings. Their schools are overflowing. Converts are being added to
their churches. Our institutions are in harmony and zealous emulation.
The year has opened auspiciously, "And the best of all is, God is with
us."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rev. Frank E. Jenkins, who succeeded the Rev. C.J. Ryder as a Field
Superintendent, and who has served the Association since that time with
an untiring devotion and with signal ability, has at his own urgent
request been transferred from this general work to a specific part of
the field.

He has accepted the pastorate of the Congregational Church of New
Decatur, Ala., with which we are in co-operation. Our consent to this
change would have been the more reluctant but for the fact that we are
in heartiest sympathy with the missionary purposes contemplated in this
exchange of service.

We congratulate the New Decatur church upon its entrance into its
tasteful edifice--recently dedicated,--with a pastor whom we relinquish
from the relationships of Field Superintendent only upon his own
repeated convictions of duty, and in view of his preference for this
particular work.

SOUTHERN NOTES.

BY SECRETARY A.F. BEARD.


The "sleeper" had been transformed into a parlor car, which was used
that day chiefly by the colored porter and myself. The "paper-boy" came
through and offered me a New York _Illustrated Weekly_, adorned on the
first page with the portrait of Jefferson Davis, for whom the South was
then mourning with great abundance of white and black cotton cloth.

After I had declined with thanks to invest in this picture, I turned to
the colored porter who was travelling in the white man's car in apparent
"social equality" and casually remarked, "Your people should feel very
grateful to Jefferson Davis for what he did for you. You ought to have
that picture." With a surprise that he could not conceal, he intimated
that he did not understand me. He "didn't care for it," and "didn't know
what Jeff Davis had done for his people."

Time being at some discount, I undertook to tell him that "Jefferson
Davis did more than any other person to take the South out of the Union.
He was chief among the secessionists. Then, as President, he made so
many mistakes, he did more than any other man to prevent the success of
the Confederacy. He did more to bring about the freedom of the slave
than any other man. Since the emancipation of your race came on as a
consequence of secession, why should you not be grateful to Jefferson
Davis and cherish his memory?"

The black man by this time had gathered himself up for his reply to my
Q.E.D. Not knowing what my sympathies might be, he replied in a slow and
careful way, "Well, sir, I can't see it as you do. The way it looks to
me is this, you know. In these days there are a good many people who
don't believe in God--not much--but I reckon it was God who set my
people free. You see, he didn't want that condition of things any
longer. It was God who did it, sir, that's what I think, and I don't
believe it was Jeff Davis. That's my view."

I did not argue the question further. When one gets down solid upon the
decrees, then I stop. But as the car rolled along with the speed usual
on Southern railways, I pondered the text, "The wrath of man shall
praise Him, and the remainder thereof shall he restrain."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was a colored porter, and I may have transgressed the laws of "social
equality" in asking him aught other than to make up the berth, and to
call me early. With the judgment resting upon Geo. W. Cable--who is
never to be forgotten or forgiven because he had conference with some
colored people in Nashville, and did not insult them--one should be very
careful of his social equality. Nevertheless, I ventured to talk with
this colored porter. I asked him what he knew about his race, and what
he thought of his people and their prospects.

He said, "I was raised in North Carolina, never had much chance myself,
had only a country school to go to--kept by a colored man--not very good
teacher--pretty good--better than none. But there's good many good
schools now, and good many smart colored people by this time, sir.
There's a good many risin' all the time. Old Fred. Douglass is a right
smart man, you know; but then he sort o' left his race when he married a
white woman. We don't think so much of him as a leader as we used to."

The car rolled on. It was two hours late at my station. The bus man who
stood in the stage door and collected the fares was conversational. He
was unaware that by my ride and conversation in the car, I had forfeited
my "social equality" with him. Hence he did not ostracise me; but
smiling, said, "Train very late to-day, sir." "Isn't it usually as late
as this?" I asked. "Invariably, sir, except when it's later."

       *       *       *       *       *

PARAGRAPHS.


Dr. Rankin, the newly-elected President of Howard University, writes:

"Everything at the University begins very promisingly. We had a crowded
preaching service on Sunday night, and are observing the week of prayer
at 12:30 noon. The meetings are full and impressive."

"If a donor should give a great material gift to the University, I am
sure I ought to write you. But the great Giver is giving us the choicest
of spiritual gifts. Eight of the students, one of them a senior, this
noon expressed a desire for prayers. We continue the daily meeting at
noon."

       *       *       *       *       *

The immigration into the United States is steadily declining, as appears
by the figures reported in the papers, while the blending of the
foreigners here is steadily and rapidly going forward, rendering them
speedily one people. On the other hand, the colored population in the
Southern States is steadily augmenting, while the alienation between the
black and white races in the South is becoming more pronounced. The
Southern problem is the more difficult of solution.

       *       *       *       *       *

A clergyman in a Southern town who is connected with families of great
influence, and who ministers to a large white church, is accustomed to
preach every afternoon in a colored church under the care of this
Association. He usually repeats to the colored church the sermon
preached in the forenoon to his own people, and finds that those who
hear it in the afternoon appreciate it fully. The two remarkable facts
in this incident are that the gentleman should consent to do this
gratuitous labor for the colored church, and that the colored church
should understand and appreciate the sermon prepared for the cultured
white congregation.

       *       *       *       *       *

A BEAUTIFUL GIFT.


Mr. Silas M. Rideout, of Cumberland, Maine, has presented to the
American Missionary Association, through the Boston office, a most
beautiful box for keepsakes. It is about 6 inches in width, 9 in length
and 4 in depth, made of inlaid woods of different colors very tastefully
arranged, "American Missionary" being set in the cover. The inside is
lined with plush. On a card in the box the following was written by a
friend: "This box was presented to the American Missionary Association
by a good man living in a small town in Maine, who, like that good
fisherman of whom we have heard, gives such as he had. This dear brother
of _four-score_ and _two years_, made this box and presented it to the
American Missionary Association, with its contents $10.25, which was
contributed by such of his friends as desired to have a look at the
skill of their aged brother in his work of love for the cause of
Christ." It was intended by our venerable friend that this box should
draw other contributions and finally be sold, the proceeds to be devoted
to the work of the American Missionary Association in which Mr. Rideout
has been so deeply interested for many years. A gentleman in Boston
offers $12 for the box. Will not some one make a better offer, and in
this way recognize the remarkable skill of this aged friend in his
effort to increase the income of the Association to help the needy
millions among whom our missionaries labor?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTHERN SITUATION.

SOME SUGGESTIVE FACTS.


_First Fact._ The condition of the colored man In the South is becoming
more pitiable and precarious. Mr. Grady, in his last speech, announced
the unalterable purpose of the Southern whites never to submit to Negro
rule, and we read not long since of a "quiet election" held in a
Southern city, because the colored people, duly warned, kept away from
the polls. We know something, also, of the struggles of that people
against almost insuperable difficulties in trying to obtain food, homes
and education. In addition to all this, the public press keeps us
informed with sad frequency of the repeated murders inflicted upon the
defenceless colored people.

_Second Fact._ We learn with gratification that Southern people of high
standing denounce these outrages. Governor Richardson, of South
Carolina, assured a colored delegation that called upon him, that he had
offered a reward for the apprehension of the Barnwell murderers, and
pledged his sacred word that nothing would be undone on his part to
bring the lynchers to condign punishment. Senator Wade Hampton is said
to have endorsed the sentiments of the Governor, and leading Southern
papers have censured in unmeasured terms this outrage.

But as yet these murderers have not been arrested, and we presume that
no one expects they will be. The murderers of Mr. Clayton, of Arkansas,
who presumed to run as an independent candidate for Congress, were
denounced by the authorities of the State, and rewards were offered for
their apprehension. But, though many months have elapsed, they have not
been arrested, and no one, North or South, imagines that they will be
punished. Kind words from Southern officials will not solve the great
problem.

_Third Fact._ The colored people bear up well under all these trying
circumstances. We should suppose they would be utterly discouraged, for
they see little prospect of securing their rights as men and citizens,
and even life and property are not safe. They are allured to a change of
location by flaming handbills, making tempting but deceptive offers of
better wages and better homes. They are hunted down and massacred, and
yet their wrongs are unredressed.

But in spite of all this, they struggle on, constantly gaining property
and homes, some of them acquiring wealth. If they are deceived on
reaching some new Eldorado, losing their all in making the change, they
do not give up, but strike in again. If they are not safe in some rural
districts, they go to the cities. But best of all, their educated men
are showing great wisdom and moderation, as witness the calm and
dispassionate action of the Convention of the most intelligent and
influential colored men in Charleston, S.C., after the Barnwell
massacre. They passed resolutions of dignified condemnation of the
wrong, yet urged their people to remain quiet, and let the proper
authorities vindicate the law. The forbearance of that meeting has won
the commendations of leading white men in the South.

And here let us say, that the white people of the South make no greater
mistake, than when they imagine that it is a dangerous thing to educate
the colored people. On the contrary, we believe that the facts make it
manifest that it is by these educated men that their race will be guided
wisely and safely through this great crisis, and that if a war of races
is to be avoided, these educated colored men will be a grand factor in
averting it.

_Fourth Fact._ It is conceded by all right-thinking people, that the
education of the colored race is the only true solution of the Southern
problem. This has been declared in Presidential messages, in the
utterances of such candid men as Dr. Curry, Dr. Haygood and Colonel
Keating, by writers in all the Northern religious papers, and is, we
believe, the accepted and settled opinion of Christian people at the
North. Everybody admits, also, that there is a crisis coming, and that
what is done for Negro education must be done quickly. The North has a
duty in this matter, and admits it. Our constituents have a special duty
in the case, and they feel it. They have done nobly in the past, and
have assumed great responsibilities which cannot now be neglected or
deferred. But here is the strangest of all the facts in this series:
With the urgency before them, _our constituents do not make a
corresponding increase in their donations_.

We feel impelled to urge this upon the attention of pastors, churches
and individuals. Brethren and friends, do not delay as in the case of
slavery, till the conflict comes! Do not expect that everybody else is
doing what is needed. The responsibility is personal and pressing, and
each individual and church can meet it only by making larger gifts--not
from an impulse, but from a deliberate purpose formed under a sense of
obligation to the Negro, the Nation and to Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. W.W. PATTON, D.D., LL.D.


The sudden and unexpected death of Dr. Patton takes away a man who has
made a shining mark in the various relations of pastor, secretary,
editor and president of a university. All these responsible positions he
has filled with great fidelity and success. It becomes us to speak
especially of his relations to this Association, which have been
intimate and special. He was one of the few men present at the formation
of the American Missionary Association in Albany in 1846, encountering
the obloquy and ostracism which was then attached to those who favored
the new movement. In 1868 he became the Western Corresponding Secretary
of the Association in Chicago, and held this position for about two
years. In 1877 he accepted the Presidency of Howard University in
Washington, D.C., the theological department of which is under the care
of the Association, and in which Dr. Patton was a teacher. Thus from the
founding of the Association till the time of his death, Dr. Patton had
been connected with it, sometimes officially, and always with deep
sympathy and earnest co-operation.

He was in usual health, with his wonted vigor of body and mind, till
within a few hours of his death, and on the day on which that occurred,
his Presidency of Howard University expired by the terms of his
resignation. He seemed to be fitted for further usefulness, and had
looked forward with the expectation of using his pen and voice in the
interests of the Master whom he had so faithfully served, but the scene
of his active enjoyment and services was by that Master transferred to
the higher realm.

       *       *       *       *       *

REVIVAL AT STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.


President Hitchcock writes from Straight University: "Our meetings
during the 'week of prayer,' took on the character of revival meetings,
and I have never before seen the school so stirred. Every girl boarding
in Stone Hall is professedly converted, and there are not more than
eight or ten boys who are not in the same good way, and every one of
these is interested and has asked for prayers. Rejoice with us and pray
for us."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIELD.

1889-1890.


The following list presents the names and post-office addresses of those
who are employed in the Churches, Institutions and Schools aided by the
American Missionary Association.


THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *

WASHINGTON, D.C.

THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Rev. J.E. Rankin, D.D., LL.D., Washington, D.C.
 "  J.G. Craighead, D.D.,       "   "
 "  A.W. Pitzer, D.D.,          "   "
 "  S.M. Newman, D.D.,          "   "
 "  John G. Butler, D.D.,       "   "
 "  G.W. Moore,                 "   "


WASHINGTON, (LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH).

_Pastor and Missionary,_
Rev. G.W. Moore, Washington, D.C.
Mrs. G.W. Moore,     "   "


WASHINGTON, (PLYMOUTH CHURCH).

_Minister_,
Rev. S.N. Brown, Washington, D.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

VIRGINIA.


HAMPTON.

_Minister_,
Rev. H.B. Frissell, Hampton, Va.


DANVILLE.

_Teacher_,
Mr. James R. Barrett, Danville, Va.

       *       *       *       *       *

NORTH CAROLINA.


WILMINGTON.

_Minister_,
Rev. Geo. S. Rollins, Monson, Mass.

GREGORY INSTITUTE. (613 Nun Street).
_Principal._--Geo. A. Woodard, Weymouth, Mass.
Miss F.E. Breckenridge, Ware, Mass.
 "  Mina L. Lewis, Columbus, Ohio.
 "  Alice J. Patch, Galesburg, Ill.
 "  Flora J. Mallory, Franklin, N.Y.
 "  Katherine M. Jacobs, South Hadley Falls, Mass.
 "  Minnie T. Strout, Salem, Mass.
 "  Helen M. Hanson, Somerville, Mass.
Mrs. Ellen Lewis, Columbus, Ohio.


BEAUFORT.

_Minister_,
Rev. Michael E. Jerkins, Beaufort, N.C.


WASHBURN SEMINARY.

_Principal._--Miss M.E. Wilcox, Madison, Ohio.
Miss H.J. Allyn, Lorain, Ohio.
 "  Cornelia P. Lewis, St. Paul, Minn.
 "  Miriam P. Harvey, Aurora, Ill.


RALEIGH.

_Minister_,
Rev. A.W. Curtis, Crete, Neb.

_Special Missionary_,
Miss A.W. Farrington, Portland, Me.


OAKS, CEDAR CLIFF AND MELVILLE.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. A.W. Curtis, Crete, Neb.
Miss E.W. Douglas, Decorah, Iowa.


McLEANSVILLE AND CHAPEL HILL.

_Minister and Teachers_,
Rev. Alfred Connet, Solsberry, Ind.
Miss Nettie Connet,    "   "
Mr. O. Connet,         "   "


STRIEBY AND SALEM.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. Z. Simmons, Strieby, N.C.
Mrs. Elinor Walden,   "  "


NALLS.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. M.L. Baldwin, Nalls, N.C.


HILLSBORO.

_Teachers_,
Miss Myrie Connet, McLeansvilie, N.C.
 "  Addie Connet,       "   "


DUDLEY.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. Jno. W. Freeman, Newark, N.J.


TROY.

_Minister_,
Rev. A.W. Curtis. Crete, Neb.

_Teachers_,
Miss Bessie Bechan, Fergus, Ont.
 "  Florence Watt, Ware, Mass.


DRY CREEK.

_Teacher_,
Miss Kate Powell, Dry Creek, N.C.


ALL HEALING SPRINGS.

_Teachers_,
_Principal._--Miss E.C. Prudden, Blowing Rock, N.C.
Miss Alice E. Peck, Alexandria, N.Y.
 "  Jennie Rawls, All Healing, N.C.
 "  Mary Lee,       "   "
 "  Agnes Davis,    "   "
Mrs. Lee,           "   "


BLOWING ROCK.

_Teachers_,
_Principal._--Miss E.C. Prudden, Blowing Rock, N.C.
Miss Abbie L. Perkins, Monticello, Minn.
 "  Mary E. Kelley, Wheaton, Ill.
 "  Anna L. Wilson, Blowing Rock, N.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTH CAROLINA.


CHARLESTON.

_Minister_,
Rev. Geo. C. Rowe, Charleston, S.C.


AVERY INSTITUTE. (57 Bull Street).

_Principal._--Morrison A. Holmes, Lee, Mass.
Miss A. Merriam, Westboro, Mass.
 "  Emma Allen, Merrick, Mass.
Mr. E.A. Lawrence, Charleston, S.C.
Miss Grace Dow, Charlotte, Mich.
Miss May Holmes, Lee, Mass.
 "  Mary L. Deas, Charleston, S.C.
Mrs. M.A. Holmes, Lee, Mass.


GREENWOOD.

BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.
Rev. J.E.B. Jewett, Pepperell, Mass.
Mrs. J.E.B. Jewett,      "   "
 "  M.M. Pond,           "   "
Miss C.M. Day, Spencerport, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGIA.


_Minister_,
Rev. C.W. Francis, Atlanta, Ga.


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

_President._--Rev. Horace Bumstead, D.D., Atlanta, Ga.
Rev. Cyrus W. Francis, A.M., Atlanta, Ga.
 "  Myron W. Adams,           "  "
 "  John H. Hincks, A.B.,     "  "
Mr. Clarence E. Tucker, Fitchburg, Mass.
 "  Edgar H. Webster, Boston, Mass.
 "  John W. Young, Atlanta, Ga.
 "  Elijah H. Holmes,   "  "
 "  Walter D. Smith,    "  "
D.R. Lewis,             "  "
Miss Emily H. Abbot,    "  "
Mrs. Lucy E. Case, Military, Mass.
 "  Hattie N. Chase, West Randolph, Vt.
Miss Susan A. Cooley, Bavaria, Kan.
 "  Jennie Dow, Atlanta, Ga.
 "  Lydia M. Hardy,   "  "
 "  Carrie E. Jones,  "  "
 "  Gwendoline Lyman, "  "
 "  Rebecca Massey, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Ella W. Moore, Chicago, Ill.
 "  Mary A. Richardson, Atlanta, Ga.
 "  Mary E. Sands, Saco, Me.
 "  Idella M. Swift, Atlanta, Ga.
 "  Olive A. Thompson, Durham, N.H.
 "  M. Agnes Tuck, Exeter, N.H.
Mrs. E.L.S. Vincent, Atlanta, Ga.
Miss Emma C. Ware, Norfolk, Mass.


ATLANTA, (FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH).

_Minister_,
Rev. Samuel P. Smith, Halifax, England.


_Special Missionary_,
Miss Lizzie Stevenson, Bellefontaine, O.


MACON.

_Minister_,
Rev. John R. McLean, Macon, Ga.


BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL. (806 Pine Street).

_Principal._--Mrs. L.A. Shaw, Oswego, N.Y.
Miss E.L. Patten, Somers, Conn.
 "  A.J. Coleman, Cannonsburg, Pa.
 "  E.B. Scobie, Peninsula, Ohio.
 "  Myrtie Harlow, Bangor, Me.
 "  S.F. Clark, Medina, Ohio.
 "  Bertha N. Anthony, Rochester, N.Y.
 "  J.F. Maynard, Keene, N.H.
 "  Anna L. Bishop,   "  "
 "  Altha M. Benton, Rochester, N.Y.
Mrs. F.E. Green,         "  "
Mr. E.E. McKibban, Macon, Ga.


SAVANNAH.

_Minister_,
[1]Rev. L.B. Maxwell, Savannah, Ga.

[Footnote 1: This church has assumed self-support.]


BEACH INSTITUTE. (30 Harris Street).
_Principal._--Adele A. Holmes, Lee, Mass.
Miss Rose M. Willey, Maplewood, N.H.
 "  Hattie J. Brown, So. Sudbury, Mass.
 "  C.M. Dox, Kalamazoo, Mich.
 "  H.I. Martin, Toledo, Ohio.
 "  Ruth E. Stinson, Woolwich, Me.
 "  Julia Fitch, Aurora, Ill.
 "  Julia C. Andrews, Milltown, N.B.


THOMASVILLE.

NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
_Principal._--Mrs. W.L. Gordon, Richmond, Mich.
Miss J.A. Goodwin, Mason, N.H.
 "  Alice E. Jewell, Olivet, Mich.
 "  E.M. Landfear, New Haven, Conn.
 "  R.W. Hulsizer, Sidney, N.J.
 "  Clara Dole, Oberlin, Ohio.
Miss Anna M. Poppino, New Wilmington, Pa.
 "  A.D. Gerrish, Warren, Mass.
Mrs. E.M. Holton, Upper Alton, Ill.


McINTOSH.

_Minister_,
Rev. F.R. Sims, McIntosh, Ga.


DORCHESTER ACADEMY.

_Principal._--Payson E. Little, Columbia, Conn.
Miss Lizzie M. Kuhl, Lawrenceville, Pa.
 "  Lizzie Thompson, Chicago, Ill.
 "  Ella C. Abbott, Winchester, Mass.
Mrs. Payson E. Little, Columbia, Conn.
Miss M.L. Santley, Wellington, Ohio.


CYPRESS SLASH.

_Minister and Teachers._
Rev. James S. Walker, Cypress Slash, Ga.
Mrs. James S. Walker,      "   "   "


MILLER'S STATION.

_Minister_,
Rev. Wilson Callen, Savannah, Ga.


ATHENS.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. Geo. V. Clark, Atlanta, Ga.
Mr. Lewis S. Clark, Athens, Ga.


MARSHALLVILLE.

_Teachers_,
Mrs. A.W. Richardson, Marshallville, Ga.
Mr. Edw. Richardson,        "   "


WOODVILLE.

_Minister and Teacher,_
Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke, Savannah, Ga.
Mr. J. Lloyd,  "  "


MARIETTA.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. -----  -----


CUTHBERT.

_Teacher_,
Mr. F.H. Henderson, Cuthbert, Ga.


ALBANY.

_Teacher_,
Mr. W.C. Greene. Albany, Ga.


BAINBRIDGE.

_Teacher_,
Mr. A.W. Hall, Bainbridge, Ga.


RUTLAND, ANDERSONVILLE AND BYRON.

_Minister_,
Rev. Charles F. Sargent, Macon, Ga.


MILFORD.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.A. Jones, Talladega, Ala.

       *       *       *       *       *

FLORIDA.


FAIRBANKS.

_Teachers_,
Miss E.M. Caughey, N. Kingsville, Ohio.
 "  Helen Barton, Terre Haute, Ind.


ORANGE PARK.

_Minister_,
Rev. W.A. Benedict, Orange Park, Fla.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALABAMA.


_Minister_,
Rev. G.W. Andrews. D.D., Talladega, Ala.


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

_President._--Rev. H.S. DeForest, D.D., Talladega, Ala.
Rev. G.W. Andrews, D.D.,         "   "
Mr. H.W. Marsh, A.B., Easton, Pa.
 "  Fred'k Reed, A.M., I.L.B., Boston, Mass.
 "  John Orr, Clinton, Mass.
 "  E.A. Bishop, Talladega, Ala.
 "  E.C. Silsby,    "  "
Miss May L. Phillips, Cannonsburg, Pa.
 "  E.J. Peck, Bristol, Conn.
 "  J.A. Ainsworth, Newton Highlands, Mass.
 "  Carrie E. Wheeler, Union City, Pa.
 "  Carrie E. Parkhurst, Manchester, N.H.
 "  Carrie B. Chamberlain, Allegheny City, Pa.
 "  Harriet J. McElree,       "  Pa.
 "  Jessie O. Hart, W. Cornwall, Conn.
 "  Sara J. Elder, Melrose, Mass.
Mrs. H.W. Marsh, Easton, Pa.
Miss Alice F. Topping, Olivet, Mich.
Mrs. H.S. DeForest, Talladega, Ala.
 "  G.W. Andrews,  "  "


MOBILE.

_Minister_,
Rev. F.G. Ragland, _Mobile, Ala._


EMERSON INSTITUTE.

_Principal._--Charles M. Stevens, Clearwater, Minn.
Miss Alice M. Patten, Topham, Me.
 "  H.C. Whitsey, Dover, Ohio.
 "  A.Z. Woodruff, Oberlin, Ohio.
Mrs. H.C. Hecock, Elyria, Ohio.
Miss Mary R. Whitcomb, Redfield, Dak.
 "  Anna Richard, Bellevue, Mich.
 "  L.A. Pingree, Denmark, Me.
 "  Nellie Murray, Union City, Pa.


MONTGOMERY.

_Minister_,
Rev. R.C. Bedford, Watertown, Wis.


ATHENS.

_Minister_,
Rev. H.S. Williams, Athens, Ala.


TRINITY SCHOOL.

_Principal._--Miss M.F. Wells, Ann Arbor, Mich.
Miss Kate E. Sherwood, St. Joseph, Mich.
 "  Alice M. Whitsey, Dover, Ohio.
 "  Louise Merrick, Canton, Pa.
 " Mary E. Perkins, Norwich, Conn.


MARION.

_Minister_,
Rev. W.I. Larkin, Devonshire, England.


NORMAL SCHOOL,

_Principal._--Walter H. Perry, New Britain, Conn.
Miss Emma F. King, Oak Park, Ill.
 "  Mary Hoyt,        "  "
Mrs. W.H. Perry, New Britain, Conn.
Miss O.E. Angell, Greenville, R.I.
 "  Louise Holman, Lincoln, Neb.


SELMA.

_Minister_,
Rev. E.J. Penney, Selma, Ala.


BURRELL SCHOOL.

_Principal._--Amos W. Farnham. Hannibal, N.Y.
Miss Alice E. Jewell, Olivet, Mich.
 "  C.H. Loomis, Denver, Col.
 "  Mary D. Hyde, Zumbrota, Minn.
 "  Anna D. Harrison, Selma, Ala.
 "  Mary W. Smith,        "  "
 "  Mary A. Dillard,      "  "
Mrs. C.A. Fitch, Hannibal, N.Y.
Miss M.K. Lunt, New Gloucester, Me.


KYMULGA.

_Minister._
Rev. A. Simmons, Talladega, Ala.


LAWSONVILLE AND COVE.

_Minister and Teacher._
Rev. E.E. Sims, Talladega, Ala.
Mr. Washington Hamilton,   "  "


JENIFER AND IRONATON.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.B. Grant, Talladega, Ala.


SHELBY IRON WORKS.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.R. Sims, Talladega, Ala.


CHILDERSBURG.

_Minister_,
----  ----


ANNISTON.

_Minister_,
Rev. H.W. Conley, Talladega, Ala.

_Teachers_,
Miss Mary E. McLane, New Haven, Conn.
 "  Isabel Kimball, Wentworth, Iowa.


BIRMINGHAM.

_Minister_,
Rev. Spencer Snell, Birmingham, Ala.

_Missionary_,
Miss S.S. Evans, Fryeburg, Maine.


NEW DECATUR.

PLYMOUTH CHURCH.

_Minister_,
Rev. F.E. Jenkins, South Coventry, Conn.


FLORENCE.

_Minister and Teachers_,
Rev. Thos. J. Austin, Jackson, Tenn.
Mrs. Katie L. Austin,     "  "


FORT PAYNE.

_Minister und Teacher_,
Rev. Geo. S. Smith, Raleigh, N.C.
Mr. A.L. De Mond, Fort Payne, Ala.


COTTON VALLEY.

_Teachers_,
Miss Lilla V. Davis, Boston, Mass.
 "  Alice A. Torbert, Tuskegee, Ala.


TALLASSEE.

_Teachers_,
Miss Emma C. Stevens, Tuskegee, Ala.
Mrs. Missouri C. Blanko,     "  "


SOCIETY HILL.

_Teacher_,
Mrs. J.C. Tyson, Society Hill, Ala.


FRANKFORT, (P.O. ROCK CREEK).

_Teacher_,
Miss A.W. Barnes, Evans Mills, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

TENNESSEE.


NASHVILLE.

_Minister_,
Rev. Henry S. Bennett, D.D., Nashville, Tenn.


FISK UNIVERSITY.

_President._--Rev. E.M. Cravath, D.D., Nashville, Tenn.
Rev. A.K. Spence, A.M.,       "   "
 "  H.S. Bennett, D.D.,       "   "
 "  F.A. Chase, A.M.,         "   "
Prof. H.C. Morgan, A.M.,      "   "
 "  H.H. Wright, A.M., Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  E.C. Stickel,        "  "
Mr. Price Jackson, State College, Pa.
Miss A.T. Ballantine, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Fanny Andrews, Milltown, N.B.
 "  Anna M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
Miss Mary Fuller Penfieid, Rockford, Ill.
 "  Charlotte Vanderveen, Montague, Mich.
 "  Myrta L. Preston, Grinnell, Iowa.
 "  Miriam E. Carey, Huntsburg, O.
 "  Ida M. Tindale, Pontiac, Ill.
Mrs. L.R. Greene, North Amherst, Mass.
Miss J.A. Robinson, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Gertrude M. Hale, Winchendon, Mass.
 "  L.A. Parmelee, Toledo, Ohio.
 "  M.A. Kinney, Whitewater, Wis.
 "  Frances Yeomans, Danville, Ill.
Mrs. W.D. McFarland, Winsted, Conn.
Mr. M.H. Stevens, Nashville, Tenn.
Miss S.M. Wells, Middletown, N.Y.


NASHVILLE (HOWARD CHURCH.)

_Minister_,
Rev. R.B. Johns, Reading, Pa.


NASHVILLE (THIRD CHURCH.)

_Minister_,
Rev. R.B. Johns, Reading, Pa.


GOODLETTSVILLE.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.D. Miller, Nashville, Tenn.


SPRINGFIELD.

_Teacher_,
Miss Justine H. Brown, Springfield, Tenn.


MEMPHIS.

_Minister_,
[1]Rev. B.A. Imes, Oberlin, Ohio.

[Footnote 1: This church has assumed self-support.]


LEMOYNE INSTITUTE, (294 Orleans St).

_Principal._--Andrew J. Steele, Whitewater, Wis.
Miss E.A. Barnes, Tallmadge, Ohio.
 "  Emma C. Williams, Glenwood, Iowa.
 "  Susie Walker, South Weymouth, Mass.
 "  C.R. Goldsmith, Chester, N.H.
 "  Emma Goldsmith,     "  "
 "  Mattie A. Henderson, Memphis, Tenn.
 "  Zulee Felton,       "  "
 "  Frances M. Carrier, Beloit, Wis.
Miss F.A. McCullough, Memphis, Tenn.
Mrs. M.L. Jenkins, Marion, Kan.
Mr. Thos. P. Rawlings, Memphis, Tenn.
 "  B.F. Woodson,      "  "


JONESBORO.

_Minister_,
Rev. Samuel Rose, Poquonock, Conn.

_Teachers_,
Miss Anna R. Miner, Lyme, Conn.
 "  Belle R. Parmenter, Rockford, Iowa.
Mrs. Grace M. Rose, Poquonock, Conn.


KNOXVILLE.

_Minister_,
Rev. Eugene A. Johnson, Knoxville, Tenn.


CHATTANOOGA.

_Minister_,
Rev. Jos. E. Smith, Chattanooga, Tenn.


TENNESSEE MOUNTAIN WORK.

_General Missionary_,
Rev. G. Stanley Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


GRAND VIEW.

_Minister and Instructor in Biblical Department_,
Rev. A.J. Chittenden, Wheaton, Ill.

_Teachers_,
_Principal._--R.E. Dickson, Poquonock, Conn.
Miss Lillie E. Dougherty, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Josephine Kirkby, Chicago, Ill.
 "  Martha H.N. Gorbold, Venice, Ohio.


PLEASANT HILL.

_Minister_,
Rev. W.H. Thrall, Derby, Conn.


PLEASANT HILL ACADEMY.

_Principal._--Rev. W.H. Thrall, Derby, Conn.
Miss Ninette Hayes, Portsmouth, N.H.
 "  Mary E. Wylie, Brooklyn, N.Y.
 "  Lizzie C. Hayes, Portsmouth, N.H.


_General Minister_,
Rev. B. Dodge, Centre Lebanon, Me.


POMONA.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. W.H. Thrall, Derby, Conn.
Mrs. Alice Graves, Pomona, Tenn.


CROSSVILLE AND NORTHVILLE.

_Minister_,
Rev. F.M. Cooley, Crossville, Tenn.

_Teachers_,
Mr. W.F. Cameron, Montevideo, Minn.
Mrs. Eva L. Barren, Crossville, Tenn.


ATHENS, MT. VERDE AND KNOXVILLE JUNCTION.

_Minister_,
Rev. E.N. Ruddock, Benson, Minn.

_Teacher at Mt. Verde_,
Miss Sarah E. Ober, Beverly, Mass.


DEER LODGE, OAK GROVE, PILOT MOUNTAIN AND SLOWERS.

_Minister_,
Rev. George Lusty, Oberlin, Ohio.

_Teacher at Deer Lodge_,
Miss Ina A. Chadbourne, Deer Lodge, Tenn.


GLEN MARY, HELENWOOD, ROBBINS AND RUGBY ROAD.

_Minister_,
Rev. E.A. Bridger, Granby, Mo.

_Teacher at Robbins._
Miss Kate B. Clarke, Robbins, Tenn.


OAKDALE.

_Teacher_,
Miss Belle Hodge, Deer Lodge, Tenn.


RODDY AND LORAINE.

_Minister_,
Rev. A.J. Chittenden, Wheaton, Ill.


SHERWOOD.

_Minister_,
Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop, New London, Wis.

_Teachers_,
Mr. Geo. O. Hannum, Sherwood, Tenn.
Miss Clara E. Morse, Piper City, Ill.
Mrs. Geo. O. Hannum, Sherwood, Tenn.


JELLICO.

_Minister and Missionary_,
Rev. A.A. Myers, Jellico, Tenn.
Mrs. A.A. Myers,       "  "

_Teachers_,
Mr. E. Frank Dizney, Jellico, Tenn.
Miss Amelia Ferris, Oneida, Ill.


PINE MOUNTAIN.

_Minister_,
Rev. A.A. Myers, Jellico, Tenn.

_Teachers_,
Miss Emily M. Peck, Mansfield, Ohio.
 "  Lucy P. Bement, Bement, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

KENTUCKY.


LEXINGTON.

CHANDLER NORMAL SCHOOL.

_Principal._--Frederick Foster, Castine, Me.
Miss E.M. Hitchcock, Lewis, N.Y.
 "  Mary Knox, Springfield, Mass.
 "  Flora Clough, Meriden, N.H.
 "  Kate Clough,       "  "
 "  Harriet E. Conklin, Tuscarora, N.Y.


DANIEL HAND SCHOOL.

Mrs. Agnes H. Mooney, Marlboro, Mass.
Miss Lena V. Lovell, Cortland, N.Y.
Mrs. Frederick Foster, Castine, Me.


LOUISVILLE.

_Minister_,
Rev. G.M. McClellan, Louisville, Ky.

_Special Missionary_,
Mrs. Geo. M. McClellan, Louisville, Ky.


KENTUCKY MOUNTAIN WORK.

_General Missionary_,
Rev. A.A. Myers, Jellico, Tenn.


WILLIAMSBURG, S. WILLIAMSBURG AND PLEASANT VIEW.

_Minister_,
Rev. William M. Gould, Brooklyn, N.Y.


WILLIAMSBURG ACADEMY.

Principal.--Rev. L.E. Tapper, Williamsburg, Ky.
Miss Mary A. Bye, Lake City, Minn.
Mrs. L.E. Tupper, Williamsburg, Ky.
Miss M. Amelia Packard, Brooklyn, N.Y.
 "  Maria M. Lickorish, North Ridgeville, Ohio.
 "  Edith A. Bingham, Mount Morris, N.Y.
Mrs. Harriet Bye, Lake City, Minn.
Mr. Chas. Farnsworth, Lockport, N.Y.


ROCKHOLD.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. L.E. Tupper, Post Mills, Vt.
Miss M.A. Lyman, Huntington, Mass.


CORBIN AND WOODBINE.

_Minister_,
Mr. Chas. Farnsworth, Lockport, N.Y.


DOWLAIS AND SAXTON.

_Minister_,
Rev. A.A. Myers, Jellico, Tenn.


ORLANDO.

_Teacher_,
Miss Flora M. Cone, Masonville, N.Y.


CLOVER BOTTOM, GRAY HAWK AND COMBS.

_Minister_,
Rev. Mason Jones, Berea, Ky.

       *       *       *       *       *

KANSAS.


TOPEKA.

_Minister_,
Rev. B.F. Foster, Topeka, Kan.


LAWRENCE.

_Minister_,
Rev. Andrew E. Jackson, Topeka, Kan.

       *       *       *       *       *

ARKANSAS.


LITTLE ROCK.

_Minister and Teacher._
Rev. Y.B. Sims, Talladega, Ala.
Mr. W.E. Youngblood,   "   "


FAYETTEVILLE.

_Minister and Teacher_,
---- ----

       *       *       *       *       *

MISSISSIPPI.


TOUGALOO.

_Minister_,
Rev. Frank G. Woodworth, Wolcott, Conn.


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

_President._--Rev. Frank G. Woodworth, A.M., Wolcott, Conn.
Mr. A.S. Hill, A.M., Graytown, Ohio.
 "  Wm. D. Hitchcock, Jackson, Mich.
 "  H.P. Kennedy,       "
 "  J.C. Klein, Stockbridge, Mich.
 "  H.M. Sessions, Blandford, Mass.
Miss A.L. Steele, New Hartford, Conn.
 "  Alice Flagg, Jeffersonville, Vt.
 "  Mary E. Flagg, Minneapolis, Minn.
 "  Sarah Humphrey, East Saginaw, Mich.
 "  Clara E. Walker, Lorain, Ohio.
 "  Mary Van Auken, Alpena, Mich.
 "  Edith Hall, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Mary G. Kennedy, St. Paul, Minn.
 "  Elizabeth Parsons, Mt. Morris, N.Y.
 "  S.L. Emerson, Hallowell, Me.


MERIDIAN.

_Minister_,
---- ----

_Teachers_,
Mrs. H.I. Miller, E. Corinth, Vt.
Miss K.T. Plant, Minneapolis, Minn.
 "  Bertha E. Lovewell, Topeka, Kan.


NEW RUHAMAH, PLEASANT RIDGE AND SALEM.

_Minister_,
Rev. Eli Tapley, Columbus, Miss.


GREENVILLE.

_Minister_,
---- ----


JACKSON.

_Minister_,
Rev. C.L. Harris, Jackson, Miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOUISIANA.


NEW ORLEANS.

_Minister_,
Rev. C.H. Crawford, Glenwood, Iowa.


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, (490 Canal St.)

_President._--Rev. R.C. Hitchcock, Thompsonville, Conn.
Rev. C.H. Crawford, Glenwood, Iowa.
Mr. A.L. McClelland, A.B., Brandon, Wis.
 "  E.J. Pond, New Orleans, La.
Mr. E.C. Rose, New Orleans, La.
Miss Anna Condict, Adrian, Mich.
 "  Mary J. Oertel, Prairie Du Sac, Wis.
Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock, Thompsonville, Conn.
Miss Louise Denton, New York City, N.Y.
 "  Lorena Lyon, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Caledonia Philips, Cannonsburg, Pa.
 "  A.H. Levering, Philadelphia, Pa.
Mrs. E.J. Pond, New Orleans, La.
Miss Jennie Fyfe, Lansing, Mich.
 "  Sarah A. Coffin, Beloit, Wis.
 "  Sibyl M. Noble, Norwichtown, Conn.


NEW ORLEANS (CENTRAL CHURCH.)

_Minister_,
Rev. Geo. W. Henderson, North Craftsbury, Vt.


NEW ORLEANS (SPAIN STREET CHURCH.)

_Minister_,
Rev. C.H. Claiborne, New Orleans, La.


NEW ORLEANS (MORRIS BROWN CHURCH.)

_Minister_,
Rev. I.H. Hall, New Orleans, La.


NEW IBERIA.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.B. Williams, New Iberia, La.


FAUSSE POINT AND BELLE PLACE.

_Minister_,
Rev. Wm. Butler, New Iberia, La.


CHACAHOULA.

_Minister_,
Rev. I.H. Hall, New Orleans, La.


HAMMOND AND ROSELAND.

_Minister_,
Rev. C.S. Shattuck, Amite, La.

       *       *       *       *       *

TEXAS.


AUSTIN.

_Minister_,
Rev. William M. Brown, Blue Rapids, Kan.


TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

_President._--Rev. William M. Brown, A.B., Blue Rapids, Kan.
Mr. Chas. H. Smith, B.S., New Haven, N.Y.
Miss Fanny Webster, Sheboygan, Mich.
 "  Adelia Hunt, Webster City, Iowa.
 "  Florence Sperry, Rock Creek, Ohio.
Mrs. F.M. Smith, New Haven, N.Y.
Miss Carrie W. Lewis, Wheaton, Ill.
 "  Edith Thatcher, Chatham Center, Ohio.
 "  P.B. Parsons, Marcellus, N.Y.
 "  R.M. Kinney, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  H.E. Leach, Norwich, Conn.
 "  M.J. Adams, Columbus, Wis.


HELENA AND GOLIAD.

_Minister_,
Rev. Mitchell Thompson, Helena, Tex.

_Teacher at Goliad_,
Mrs. J.R.S. Hallowell, Goliad, Texas.


CORPUS CHRISTI.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.W. Strong, Talladega, Ala.


PARIS.

_Minister_,
Rev. J.D. Pettigrew, Paris, Tex.


DODD AND BOIS D'ARC.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. Mark Carlisle, Talladega Ala.


DALLAS.

_Minister and Teachers_,
Rev. R.J. Holloway, Dallas, Tex.
Mrs. R.J. Holloway,  "  "

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIAN MISSIONS.


SANTEE AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.

_Superintendent and Minister_,
Rev. A.L. Riggs, D.D., Santee Agency, Nebraska.

_Treasurer_,
Mr. Joseph H. Steer, Santee Agency, Nebraska.

_Teachers_,
Mr. J.A. Chadbourne, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Miss Harriet B. Ilsley, Newark, N.J.
 "  Edith Leonard, Rochester, Mass.
 "  Mary B. Benedict, North Walton, N.Y.
 "  Henrietta B. Williams, Paddy's Run, Ohio.
 "  Addie A. Rideout, Hudson, Ohio.

_Native Teacher_,
Miss Eugenia La Moure, Brown Earth, South Dakota.

_Matrons._
Miss L.H. Douglass, (Dakota Home), New Haven, Conn.
Miss Harriet A. Brown, (Bird's Nest), Rocky Point, N.Y.
Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees, (Boys' Cottage), Rocky Hill, N.J.
Miss E. Jean Kennedy, (Perkins Hall), Montrose, Iowa.
Mrs. E.E. Scotford, Santee Agency, (Whitney Hall), Nebraska.
Miss Nettie Calhoun, (Dining Hall), Kenton, Ohio.

_Missionaries_,
Mrs. A.L. Riggs, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
 "  J.A. Chadbourne,       "   "   "
 "  J.H. Steer,            "   "   "
 "  A.H. Stone,            "   "   "
 "  C.R. Lawson,           "   "   "
 "  I.P. Wold,             "   "   "

_Industrial Department_,
Joseph H. Steer, Blacksmithing, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
A.H. Stone, Farming,             "  "  "
Edgar H. Scotford, Carpentry,    "  "  "
Iver P. Wold, Shoemaking,        "  "  "

_Superintendent Printing Office._
Chas. R. Lawson, Santee Agency, Nebraska.


BAZILLE CREEK.

_Native Pastors and Helpers_,
Rev, Artemas Ehnamani, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Mr. Eli Abraham, "  "  "


PONCA AGENCY.

_Minister and Teacher_,
Rev. J.E. Smith, De Smet, Dakota.
Mrs. J.E. Smith,      "   "


CHEYENNE RIVER AGENCY.

Rev. T.L. Riggs, _General Missionary._


CENTRAL STATION, OAHE, SOUTH DAKOTA.

Rev. T.L. Riggs, Oahe, South Dakota.
Mrs. T.L. Riggs,      "  "  "

_Minister_,
Rev. Eli Spotted Bear, Oahe, So. Dakota.


INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

_Principal._--Elias Jacobson, Oahe, South Dakota.
Miss Julia E. Pratt, Essex, Conn.
 "  Lena Lindemann, Oahe, South Dakota.
 "  M.A. Wright, Oberlin, Ohio.
 "  Goldie Slutz, Cleveland, Ohio.
 "  Flora E. Farnum, Pierre, South Dakota.


BAD RIVER.

Rev. James Garvie, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Mrs. James Garvie,        "   "   "


[1]FORT PIERRE BOTTOM.

Mr. Wm. Lee, Cheyenne River Agency.
Mrs. Wm. Lee,       "   "   "

[Footnote 1: Supported by the Indians themselves.]


[2]CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 1.

Mr. James Brown, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Mrs. James Brown,       "   "   "

[Footnote 2: Supported by Native Missionary Society.]


CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 3.

Mrs. Elizabeth Winyan, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Miss Katie Howard, Cheyenne River Agency.


[1]CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 4.

Rev. Edwin Phelps, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. Edwin Phelps,         "   "   "

[Footnote 1: Supported by the Society for Propagating the Gospel, Boston,
Mass.]


CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 5, (Sankey Station).

Mr. Clarence Ward, Cheyenne River Agency.
Mrs. Clarence Ward,      "  "  "


CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 7.

Mr. Joseph Bird, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. Joseph Bird,       "   "   "


MOREAU RIVER.

Mr. John Bluecloud, Brown Earth, South Dakota.
Mrs. John Bluecloud,     "   "   "

       *       *       *       *       *

STANDING ROCK AGENCY.


CENTRAL STATION.

Rev. George W. Reed, Springfield, Mass.
Mrs. George W. Reed,    "   "
 "  S.W. Devoll, M.D., Brookline, Mass.
Miss Ellen Kitto, Santee Agency, Nebraska.


GRAND RIVER NO. 1.

Miss Mary C. Collins, Keokuk, Iowa.
 "  Josephine E. Barnaby, New Haven, Conn.
Mr. Elias Gilbert, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. Elias Gilbert,      "  "  "


GRAND RIVER NO. 2.

Mr. Adams Wakanna, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. Adams Wakanna,    "  "  "


UPPER VILLAGE.

Mr. James Oyemaza, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Mrs. Martha Oyemaza,    "   "   "


ROSEBUD RESERVATION, SOUTH DAKOTA.

ROSEBUD AGENCY.

Rev. James F. Cross, Rosebud Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. James F. Cross,    "  "  "
Miss Jennie W. Cox, Santee Agency, Nebraska.


BURRELL STATION, (Keya Paha).

Mr. Francis Frazier, Santee Agency, Nebraska.
Mrs. Francis Frazier,      "  "  "


PARK STREET CHURCH STATION, (White River).

Mr. Louis De Coteau, Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
Mrs. Louis De Coteau,   "  "  "
Miss Rosalie De Coteau, "  "  "


NORTHFIELD STATION, (Black Pipe Creek).

Mr. Eli Waktegli, Oahe, South Dakota.
Mrs. Eli Waktegli,    "   "   "

       *       *       *       *       *

FORT BERTHOLD AGENCY, NORTH DAKOTA.

_Superintendent_,
Rev. C.L. Hall, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.

_Teachers_,
Miss Grace L. Williams, Minneapolis, Minn.
 "  Orie V. Armstrong, Bathgate, North Dakota,
 "  Roanna F. Challis, Freeborn, Minn.
Mrs. C.L. Hall, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.
Mr. Frank E. Tobie, Windsor, Wis.


MOODY STATION NO. 1, (" Elbow Woods.")

Mr. George K. Bassett, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.


MOODY STATION NO. 2, ("Independence.")

Mr. George K. Bassett, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.


REE SETTLEMENT.

Rev. C.L. Hall, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.


FORT STEVENSON.

Rev. C.L. Hall, Fort Berthold, North Dakota.


S'KOKOMISH AGENCY, W.T.

_Missionary_,
Rev. Myron Eells, S'kokomish, W.T.

       *       *       *       *       *

SANTA FÉ, NEW MEXICO.


RAMONA SCHOOL.

_Teachers_,
_Principal._--Elmore Chase, Jacksonville, Ill.
Mrs. M.H. Chase,   "  "
Miss Daisy Lane, Santa Fé, New Mexico.
 "  Ida J. Platt,       "   "

       *       *       *       *       *

CHINESE MISSIONS.

_Superintendent_,
Rev. Wm. C. Pond, D.D., San Francisco, Cal.


FRESNO.

_Teachers_,
Miss Jessie S. Worley, Fresno, Cal.
Loo Quong,  "  "


LOS ANGELES.

_Teachers_,
Mrs. C.A. Sheldon, Los Angeles, Cal.
Miss Jennie M. Sheldon,    "   "


OAKLAND.

_Teachers_,
Miss Lilian F. Lamont, San Francisco, Cal.
Yong Jin, Oakland, Cal.


OROVILLE.

_Teacher_,
Miss Zilla Deuel, Oroville, Cal.


PETALUMA.

_Teachers_,
Mrs. M.H. Colby, Petaluma, Cal.
Hong Sing,           "  "


RIVERSIDE.

_Teacher_,
Mrs. James G. Kyle, Riverside, Cal.


SAN DIEGO.

_Teachers_,
Miss M.M. Elliott, San Diego, Cal.
Chin Toy,             "    "


SAN FRANCISCO, (CENTRAL).

_Teachers_,
Miss Effie D. Worley, San Francisco, Cal.
Mrs. M.A. Green,         "   "   "
Miss Rosa E. Lamont,     "   "   "
 "  Violet W. Lamont,    "   "   "
Mrs. A.T. Ruthrauff,    "   "   "
Jee Gam,                 "   "   "


SAN FRANCISCO, (BARNES).

_Teachers_,
Mrs. H.W. Lamont, San Francisco, Cal.
Wong Gam,           "   "   "


SAN FRANCISCO, (WEST).

_Teachers_,
Miss F.N. Worley, San Francisco, Cal.
Chin G. Gang,           "   "


SANTA BARBARA.

_Teacher_,
Miss C.K. Barker, Santa Barbara, Cal.


SANTA CRUZ.

_Teachers_,
Miss Mary L. Perkins, Santa Cruz, Cal.
Pon Fang,              "   "


STOCKTON.

_Teacher_,
Mrs. M.H. Langdon, Stockton, Cal.


VENTURA.

_Teacher_,
Miss M.L. Peck, Ventura, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDENDA.


ATLANTA, GA.

STORRS SCHOOL (104 Houston St.)
(To be opened February 1st).
_Principal._--Miss Ella E. Roper, Worcester, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

TALLADEGA, ALA.

OUTLYING MISSION SCHOOLS.

McCANNVILLE, CLINTON CHAPEL,
DRY CREEK SETTLEMENT,
KNOXVILLE SETTLEMENT,
NEEDMORE CHAPEL,
MOUNT CLEVELAND,
JENKINS SETTLEMENT,
ROCKY MOUNT,
THORN HILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIAN.

_Address at the Annual Meeting in Chicago_,

BY RT. REV. H.B. WHIPPLE.


I accepted the kind invitation of my good brother, Rev. Dr. Strieby, to
address you, because I do believe that if the hedges which have been
builded in the garden of the Lord are ever taken away, it will be by
hearty, believing work for our Saviour. The history of the North
American Indians is a sad story of wrongs. You may begin far back in the
days of our Puritan fathers, when Christian men marched to the music of
a fife and drum, with the head of King Philip on a pole, and then after
prayer, decided that the sins of the father ought to be visited on the
children, and therefore sold his son as a slave to Bermuda; and you may
follow down to where the saintly Worcester, a Congregational missionary,
was tried, sentenced, and went to the Penitentiary in Georgia for
teaching Indians to read; and so on to where a Moravian church of
Christian Indians were cruelly tortured and murdered; and so on to the
last of our Indian wars, and it is a dark story of robbery and
wrongs--we have spent five hundred millions on Indian wars, and have
killed ten of our own people to every one killed of the Indians. Thank
God that by the efforts of Christian men, the heart of the Nation has
been touched, and to-day willing hands and hearts are laboring for their
Christian civilization.

When I went to my diocese thirty years ago, there were over twenty
thousand Indians in Minnesota. They had sunk to a depth of degradation
their heathen fathers had not known. Friends told me it was hopeless,
that they were a perishing race. I said if they are perishing, the more
reason to make haste to give to them the gospel. The picture was dark,
but not darker than that drawn by the pen of divine Inspiration in the
first chapter of Romans. I carried it where I have learned to take all
which troubles me, and at my blessed Saviour's feet I promised I would
never turn my back on the Indian whom God had placed at my door, and I
have tried to keep the vow.

I can tell you the story of Indian missions by relating one incident.
Some years ago, Rev. Lord Charles Hervey went with me to the Indian
country. We had delightful services. After the Holy Communion we were
sitting on the green-sward near a house. The head chief said, "Your
friend came from across the great water; does he know the Indian's
history?" I said "No." He said "I will tell him."

"Before the white man came, the forests and prairies were full of game,
the rivers and lakes were full of fish, the wild rice was Manidou gift
to the red man. Would you like to see one of these Indians?" There
stepped out on the porch an Indian man and woman dressed in furs,
ornamented with porcupine quills. "There," said the chief, "my people
were like those before the white man came."

"Shall I tell you what the white man did for us? He came and told us we
had no fire horses, no fire canoes, no houses. He said if we would sell
him our land, he would make us like white men. Shall I tell you what he
did? No, you had better see it." The door opened, and out stepped a
poor, degraded looking Indian, his face besmeared with mud, his blanket
in rags, no leggins, and by his side a poor, wretched looking woman in a
torn calico dress. The chief raised his hands and said, "Manido Manido,
is this an Indian?" The man bowed his head. "How came this?" The Indian
held up a black bottle and said, "This was the white man's gift." Some
of us bowed our heads in shame.

Said the chief, "If this were all, I would not have told you. Long years
ago a pale-faced man came to our country. He spoke kindly, and seemed to
want to help us, but our hearts were hard. We hated the white man and
would not listen. Every summer when the sun was so high, he came. We
always looked to see his tall form coming through the forest. One year I
said to my fellows, 'what does this man come for? He does not trade with
us, he never asks anything of us. Perhaps the Great Spirit sent him.' We
stopped to listen. Some of us have that story in our hearts. Shall I
tell you what it has done for us?" The door opened and out stepped a
young man--a clergyman--in a black frock coat, and by his side a woman
neatly dressed in a black alpaca dress. Said the chief, "There is only
one religion in the world which can lift a man out of the mire and tell
him to call God 'Father,' and that is the religion of Jesus Christ."

We have had many deferred hopes, and sometimes it has been dark as
midnight. After nearly three years of hard work, I had both of my Indian
missions destroyed, church and mission house burned, and our western
border for three hundred miles desolated by an Indian massacre, which
destroyed the fairest portion of our State, and left eight hundred of
our citizens sleeping in nameless graves. It was needed to teach us that
nations as well as individuals reap exactly what they sow. We began
again. Here and there some Indian would listen, and the gospel was the
same to him as to us. One day an Indian came to our missionary and said,
"I know this religion is true. The men who have walked in this new trail
are better and happier. But I have always been a warrior, and my hands
are full of blood. Could I be a Christian?" The missionary repeated the
story of God's love. To test the man he said, "May I cut your hair?" The
Indian wears his scalp lock for his enemy--when it is cut it is a sign
he will never go on the war-path again. The man said, "Yes, you may cut
it; I shall throw my old life away." It was cut. He started for home and
met some wild Indians who shouted with laughter, and with taunts said:
"Yesterday you were a warrior, to-day you are a squaw." It stung the man
to madness, and he rushed to his home and threw himself on the floor and
burst into tears. His wife was a Christian, and came and put her arms
about his neck and said: "Yesterday there was not a man in the world
who dared call you a coward. Can't you be as brave for Him who died for
you as you were to kill the Sioux?" He sprang to his feet and said, "I
can and I will." I have known many brave, fearless servants of Christ,
but I never knew one braver than this chief who is now in Paradise.

I wish I could take you to a Christian Indian's home. You might see
nothing but a plain log house, and you might wonder why the tears came
in my eyes as he said to me, "That is my daughter's room; the boys sleep
up stairs; this is for me and my wife." They are tears of joy, for I
knew them when they herded as swine, in a wigwam. It is the religion of
Christ which has brought respect for womanhood.

I want to take you far away in the forest to Red Lake. The head chief,
Mah-dwah-go-no-wind, was a remarkable man as a wild man, true, honest
and brave. He came and asked me to give him a missionary. I loved him
and we were warm friends. I said "I cannot give you a missionary for the
American Missionary Association has a missionary now in that field." The
chief came again and again to see me. He said: "I want your religion. If
you refuse I will ask the Roman Catholics." I wrote Rev. Dr. Strieby,
and told him the situation. I said "The field is in my diocese. I have
the right to send a missionary there, but ask your consent because I
will never be a party to present Christian divisions to heathen men."
After due deliberation, the Association consented. I am happy to tell
you that that old chief and nearly all the adults of his band are
faithful communicants. At my last visit, the chief came to me and said,
"My Father, since you were here, my old wife with whom I have lived
fifty years, has gone to sleep in the grave. I shall go to lie by her
side. I have heard that white Christians bless the place where they
sleep as belonging to God. Will you bless the place where my wife sleeps
and ask God to care for it until he calls his children out of the
grave?" We formed a procession of the Indians, the clergy and the old
chief and myself, and marched around the place singing in Ojibway,
"Jesus lover of my soul"; then I read appropriate scripture, made an
address and offered prayer, and asked blessing on this "acre of God."
After the service the chief said: "I thank you for telling me I have a
Saviour. I thank you for blessing the place where my wife sleeps. I have
your face on my heart. Good bye."

I could keep you longer than I ought telling you of the lights and
shadows of missionary life. The North American Indian is the noblest
type of a wild man on the earth. He recognizes a Great Spirit, he loves
his home, he is passionately devoted to his people, and believes in a
future life. The Ojibway language is a marvel. The verb has inflections
by thousands. If an Indian says "I love" and stops, you can tell by the
inflection of the verb whether he loves an animate or inanimate object,
a man or a woman. The nicest shade of meaning in St. Paul's Epistles
could be conveyed in Ojibway, and I have heard a missionary say, "A
classic Greek temple standing in the forest would not be more marvelous
than this wonderful language."

The Indians are heathen folk and will often come to the Christian life
fettered by old heathen ideas, and some may stumble and fall; they did
in St. Paul's time; but I can say that some of the noblest instances of
the power of religion I have ever known have been among these poor red
men. I can recall death-beds where an Indian looked up in my face and
said, "The Great Spirit has called me to go on the last journey. I am
not afraid to go, for Jesus is going with me, and I shall not be
lonesome on the road."

I am happy to tell you that the clouds are breaking. Thousands of this
poor race are rejoicing in the light of the Gospel. The heart of the
nation has been touched, and thousands are laboring for their salvation.
The Indians are not decreasing. It is due to the absence of internecine
wars, to their protection from dangerous contagious diseases, to better
medical care and a wiser administration. In the future, Indians must
have citizenship, but not until they are prepared for this precious
boon. The ballot cannot redeem humanity. I was asked by President
Cleveland what I thought of making the Indian a voter. I said, "It has
been tried." Under an old territorial law, any Indian who wore the
civilized dress could vote. I have heard of an election where a tribe of
Indians were put through a hickory shirt and pair of pants, and we know
how that election went. The Indian must have the protection of law. In
his wild state he has the "lex talionis." He becomes a Christian. A
drunken wild man kills his cow or insults his wife. He could punish the
brute, but we have taught him that he must not revenge his wrongs, and
so the Christian Indian is pitiably helpless. I can take you to an
Indian village where property and life are safe, where childhood,
womanhood, and old age are cared for, and it is due to the Gospel of
Christ.

While missionary work must be carried on in the native tongue, the
schools ought to teach the English language--if schools are conducted
only in the heathen tongue, you not only have no Christian ideas, but
when the child has learned to read, he has no books. He should be taught
in a language which opens to him the literature, the science and the
Christian teaching of the Christian world. The Gospel of Jesus Christ
will do for the Indian what it has done for others through all the
ages--give him home, manhood and freedom.

Lastly--we are living in eventful times. One hundred years ago the
people who spoke the English tongue were less numerous than some of the
Latin races of Europe. To-day one hundred and fifty millions of people
speak the English language. When we remember how God made the Greek
tongue the language of the world to prepare for the first preaching of
the Gospel of His Son, may we not believe he designs to use our English
tongue to prepare for the second coming of our Lord?

Brethren, we hear a great deal about Indian problems, Negro problems,
and problems which hinder all work for God and man. When General Sherman
and other officers of the army were sent out to investigate that awful
massacre in Colorado, they wrote in their report: "The Indian problem,
like all other human problems, can be solved by one sentence in an old
book--'Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM MISS COLLINS.


I went to Oahe to take two girls to school, and was gone eleven days. I
travelled nearly three hundred miles, driving my ponies myself, and last
Sabbath held the services for Spotted Bear in the morning, as Mr. Riggs
was absent; taught a class in the afternoon, and returned to Cheyenne
agency on Monday, to find that the Indian man who went with me had
returned home. I visited the Government school there, and witnessed
Major McChesney issue the annuities to the Indians; found a party of
Indians coming this way as far as the Itazipco camp on the Moreau; came
with them so far--about forty-five miles from here--and from there
Bessie, Jumbo (my ponies) and I came on alone. I drove the forty-five
miles in one day, arriving here at dark.

At Cheyenne a number of fine-looking, well-dressed young Indian men came
up to me and addressed me in English. I did not recognize some of them,
and they told me they went to school to me in '75, '76 and '77. I
remember them as dirty little long-haired, blanket Indians. It made my
heart strong to take these manly young men by the hand and to hear them
say, "You were my first teacher."

One night, when I was coming home, we got into camp, and the Indian tent
had on one side a man and his wife, his son and daughter, and his baby
twins. On the other side of the fire, another man, wife and child, four
dogs, two puppies, and back of the fire a man and his wife and two young
men and myself. When supper was ready, the dogs were put outside, the
children hushed, and the head man said, "Winona pray." They were all
strangers to me but two of them, so you may know I was surprised. I
prayed, and when I finished, all said, "Ho, ho, ho," that is, all the
men. I was again surprised at the universal consent or endorsement of
the petition. I had some rich experiences, many hardships new to me, but
I sowed seed which I doubt not will spring up. A half-breed Indian, Joe
Hodgkiss, and his wife, were very kind to me.

When I got in sight of the house here, men stood all along the road
waiting to shake hands with me. I should not have undertaken the trip,
but the girls were about fifteen years old, and if they were not in
school this winter they never would be. I could not see the good
material in them wasted. Mr. Reed could not go, and he did not want
Elias to leave his school to go. So I hired a team and went. I am glad
I did. God meant me to get into the homes and hearts of those strangers,
and I had no fear but that he planned it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAND VIEW, TENN.


A teacher writes: "Doubtless you have learned how full our school is. We
all feel that we _must_ do something in some way to have more buildings.
Several were obliged to go away last week, being unable to secure
boarding-places. The dormitory is more than full. There are sixteen boys
in four small rooms; three boys occupy one end of the old store house
near the railroad. This warm weather is certainly favorable for them.
Twenty new pupils came one day. Others are expected to-morrow. Where
shall we put them? Nine in the main room are now without seats; chairs
were placed in the aisle. In the primary room it is just as full,
forty-two being crowded into space intended for thirty-two."

Another: "We are blessed with a deep religious awakening, which has
reached many of the students."

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


In reading our list of Missionaries and Mission Stations, ladies will
recognize many familiar names of those in whom they have become
particularly interested through contributions to the work.

Maine ladies will find their four teachers for whose support they have
become responsible.

Vermont ladies will look at the McIntosh School with a sense of
proprietorship, and rejoice in its enlargement.

Massachusetts and Rhode Island may find their four teachers sustained by
the Woman's Home Missionary Association, and many Massachusetts ladies
who have been especially interested in the school at Tougaloo may
rejoice to be connected with such an institution.

Connecticut ladies have done much for their school at Thomasville, Ga.,
although not as largely through their State Union. This school was begun
through the liberality of a Connecticut lady, and for its continuance
and development this Association depends upon the Bureau of Woman's
Work. Contributions from all sources are solicited.

The New York Union abides by its principles to increase its contribution
each year, and in addition to the support of three missionaries, pledges
six hundred dollars to the general work.

The Ohio Union comes forward also with an appropriation to the general
work, additional to the support of four missionaries.

The Illinois Union continues its support to two missionaries, and hopes
for a third during the year.

If the ladies of Michigan will look at the Athens, Ala., Trinity School
in our list, they will see their own State represented there, an
incentive, we trust, to special effort toward the sum recommended by the
officers of their Union.

The ladies of Minnesota have the opportunity to aid the school at
Jonesboro, Tennessee, and if they carry out the recommendation of their
Minnesota Missionary Society, they will this year sustain in full the
two lady teachers.

The other Missionary Unions represented in our list have shown especial
interest, and nearly all have made such pledge of help as will soon
secure them a special representative in the field.

A Children's Missionary is sustained by ladies and children, and special
work is also assigned to Christian Endeavor Societies.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it will be seen that the long list of Ladies' Societies shown each
month as co-operating with us, is not merely in name. We really have
their help, and a careful reading of our list of missionaries will make
clear that we not only need their help, but can give them much more to
do.

A lady recently brought to us five hundred dollars as the result of her
personal effort, and when we expressed to her our thanks she exclaimed,
"Don't say a word; it is _my_ work as well as yours." Let us be workers
together.

In sending your money to your State officers, do not fail to designate
it as for the _American Missionary Association_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Way One Mission Band in Iowa raised its money--"Our society was
organized in 1888, and the first year we sent twenty dollars for Beach
Institute. We have about twenty members, from five to thirteen years of
age. We meet once a month through the summer, but close for the winter.
Last summer I gave to all over ten years of age a nickel, and those
under ten a penny to see how much they could gain. These are a few of
the reports. One little boy with his nickel bought a sitting of eggs
from which he raised eleven chickens, which he sold for two dollars and
twenty cents. Another raised nine chickens which he sold for two
dollars. Another bought a little turkey, which he sold at Thanksgiving
for a dollar and ten cents. Another with a penny bought a squash vine,
from which he sold five large squashes for fifty-five cents. Another
bought a row of potatoes for which he received fifty cents, and so the
pennies multiplied. I gave mite-boxes to all in the spring, and so at
the end of the year we are able again to send you the neat little sum of
twenty-five dollars."

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.
Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.B. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Osgood, 14 First Ave., Montpelier.
Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASSACHUSETTS AND RHODE ISLAND.

[1]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
Treasurer--Miss Ella A. Leland, 32 Congregational House, Boston.

[Footnote 1: For the purpose of exact information, we note that while
the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R.I., it
has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Francis B. Cooley, Hartford.
Secretary--Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St, Cleveland.
Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
Treasurer--Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Box 932, Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.B. Safford, Elkhart.
Secretary--W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
Treasurer--Mrs. C. Evans, Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, 409 Orchard St, Chicago.
Secretary--C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St. Chicago.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Lansing.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
Secretary--Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.C. Keeler, Beloit.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, Box 464, Minneapolis.
Secretary--Miss Gertude A. Keith, 1350, Nicollet Ave., Minneapolis.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
Secretary--Mrs. T.M. Jeffris, Huron.
Treasurer--Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 1216 H. St., Lincoln.
Secretary--Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 No. Broad St., Fremont.
Treasurer--Mrs. D.E. Perry, Crete.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, 3006 Pine St., St. Louis.
Secretary--Mrs. E.P. Bronson, 3100 Chestnut St., St. Louis.
Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett, White Water, Colorado.
Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
  Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.L. Whipple, Cheyenne, Wyoming.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Elijah Cash, 937 Temple St., Los Angeles.
Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Box 426, Pasadena.
Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st. St., Oakland.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1339 Harrison St., Oakland.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. R.D. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.F. Whiting, Tougaloo.
Secretary--Miss Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo.
Treasurer--Miss S.L. Emerson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2612 Fifth Ave., Birmingham.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.J. Ponney, Selma.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. S.P. Gale, Jacksonville.
Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.
President--Miss M.F. Wells, Athens, Ala.
Secretary--Miss A.M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss E. Plimpton, Chapel Hill.
Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
Treasurer--Miss Lovey Mayo, Raleigh.


We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1889.


THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People_,

FROM

Mr. DANIEL HAND, GUILFORD, CONN.

Income for October, 1889, ...$960.00
                              ======

       *       *       *       *       *

   CURRENT RECEIPTS.

   MAINE, $722.09.

   Auburn. Sam'l J.M. Perkins ...10.00

   Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...29.00

   Bath. Mrs. Anna Covel ...1.00

   Belfast. First Cong. Ch. ...29.55

   Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 17.25; Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
   Ch., 15 ...32.25

   Brownville. Mrs. A.H. Merrill ...100.00

   Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch., to const. CHARLES W. MACE, WARREN L.
   HUNT and GEORGE C. GRAHAM L.M's ...125.78

   Cumberland Mills. Y.L. Mission Band, by Mrs. E.M. Cousins, _for
   Freight_, _to Selma, Ala._ ...2.00

   Falmouth. Ruben Merrill ...10.00

   Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...5.10

   Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard ...1.00

   Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. (16 of which _for Cal. Chinese M._)
   ...40.26

   Harrison. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Limerick. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...8.00

   Minot Center. Miss Lizzie E. Washburn's S.S. Class, _for Mountain
   Work_ ...10.00

   Newcastle. Cong. Ch., _for Chinese M._ ...12.00

   New Gloucester. Cong. Ch. ...51.50

   North Bridgton. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   North Buxton. Cong. Ch. ...5.20

   Norway. Mrs. M.K. Frost ...1.00

   Rockland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...5.00

   South Berwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. FRANK BEAVEN, CALVIN
   MORRISON and MOSES SMITH L.M's ...100.00

   South Paris. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

   Vassalboro. Sab. Sch. of Riverside Cong. Ch. ...1.00

   York. First Cong. Ch. ...16.50

   ----. "Kennebunkport, Maine" ...5.00

   ----. "Friend in Maine," _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...10.00

   Woman's Aid to American Miss'y Ass'n, by Mrs. C.A. Woodbury:

   Portland. Ladies of Second Parish Ch, _for Acres Memorial Room_,
   _Selma, Ala._ ...70.45


   NEW HAMPSHIRE, $264.44.

   Brookline. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

   Concord. South Cong. Ch. 53.94 to const. GEORGE H. WHITMAN L.M.;
   "Friend" 5. ...58.94

   Hampstead. Cong. Ch. to const. DEA. CHARLES W. PRESSEY L.M. ...43.50

   Hanover. Mrs. Susan J. Kellogg ...10.00

   Hudson. E.A. Warner, _for Student Aid_, _Wilmington, N.C._ ...10.00

   Keene. Primary Dep't Second. Cong. Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._
   ...5.00

   Kensington. Cong. Ch. And Soc. ...5.00

   Lyme. Cong. Ch., to const. DEA. L.D. WARREN L.M. ...31.10

   Manchester. Mrs. David Cross, _for Indian M._ ...10.00

   Merrimack. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...9.50

   Mount Vernon. Lucia E. Trevitti's S.S. Class, Christmas gift ...5.40

   Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...10.00

   Newmarket. Thomas H. Wiswall ...10.00

   Northampton. E. Gove ...10.00

   Pittsfield. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

   South Newmarket. Miss H.L. Fitts, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...25.00

   West Rindge. Geo. G. Williams, _for Mountain Work_ ...11.00


   VERMONT, $389.96.

   Barton Landing. Childrens' Miss'y Soc., by Kate B. Joslyn, Treas.,
   _for Indian M._ ...10.00

   Bellows Falls. First Cong. Ch., to const. JAMES BLANCHARD, JOHN B.
   MORSE and E.B. SEARLE L.M's ...95.12

   Brownington. "A Widow" ...13.00

   Burlington. College St. Cong. Ch. ...90.51

   Cabot. Mrs. Sarah S. Russell, 2.50; Mrs. L. McAlister, 50c. ...3.00

   Chester. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh,
   Ga._

   Danville. Cong. Ch. 21, and Sab. Sch. 11, to const. REV. WM. H.
   STUART L.M. ...32.00

   East Hardwick, Mrs. J.R. Delano, _for Christmas_, _McIntosh, Ga._
   ...5.00

   Fairlee. "A Friend." ...1.00

   Holland. Cong. Ch. ...8.35

   Newbury. Mrs. Edward P. Keyes ...10.00

   Norwich. Mrs. H. Burton ...2.00

   Saxtons River. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...25.00

   Shoreham. Nellie A. Tottingham ...3.13

   Wallingford. ----, _for Christmas Dinner_, _McIntosh, Ga._ ...1.65

   Waterbury. Rev. and Mrs. L.H. Elliot ...8.00

   West Barnet. Mission Band (eight little girls), by Margaret 8. Bole,
   _for Indian M._ ...5.00

   West Brattleboro. Benev. Soc. Cong. Ch. by Clara M. Stedman, _for
   Freight to McIntosh, Ga._ ...2.00

   Westminster West. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. bal. to const. WILLIAM E.
   HITCHCOCK L.M. ...21.15

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt., by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks,
   Treas., _for McIntosh, Ga._:

   Barnet. Voluntary Off. Soc. ...9.67

   Brattleboro. Sab. Sch. (special) ...10.00

   McIndoes Falls. Sab. Sch. ...8.08

   Montpelier. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

   Newport. Ladies ...21.30

   ------ 54.05


   MASSACHUSETTS, $15,186.89.

   Abington. First Cong. Ch. ...43.75

   Amherst. Second Cong. Ch. ...8.75

   Andover. "A Friend," _for Girls' Dormitory_, _Macon, Ga._ ...1,384.98

   Andover. West Cong. Ch., 50; M.E. Manning, 10 ...60.00

   Andover. Juv. Miss'y Soc. of West Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
   ...25.00

   Ashfield. "A Friend." ...1.80

   Attleboro. Second Cong. Ch. ...89.87

   Auburndale. Cong. Ch. ...352.62

   Bedford. Church of Christ ...10.00

   Beverly. Dane St. Cong. Ch., _for Missionary Teacher_ ...102.02

   Boston. Mount Vernon Cong. Ch. ...544.99

   Mount Vernon Ch., Edward A. Strong ...25.00

   Shawmut Cong. Ch. ...237.06

   Miss Cornelia Warren, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...100.00

   "M.L.E." ...10.00

   Mrs. J.B. Potter, _for Student Aid_, _Wilmington, N.C._ ...8.00

   Dorchester. Village Ch. ...31.06

   Harvard Cong. Ch. ...20.00

   Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. ...163.32

   Eliot Cong. Ch. ...61.74

   Highland Branch Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._ ...4.85

   ------ 1206.02

   Braintree. First Cong. Ch. ...23.75

   Brighton. Ladies, Bbl. of C., etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

   Brimfield. Ladies' Union of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. Of C., etc., 2
   _for Freight_, _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...2.00

   Brimfield. Ladles' Home Miss'y Soc. First Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for
   Tougaloo U._

   Campello. "A Friend," _for Mountain Work_ ...50.00

   Chelsea. Third Cong. Ch. ...41.19

   Cambridgeport. Dea. R.L. SNOW, for L.M. ...30.00

   Cambridgeport. "Helping Circle of King's Daughters," Pilgrim Cong.
   Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...50.00

   Cambridgeport. Sab. Sch. of Prospect St. Cong. Ch, _for S.S.,
   Talladega, Ala._ ...19.50

   Cambridgeport. Mrs. Anna E. Douglass, _for Freight to Pleasant Hill,
   Tenn._ ...1.50

   Centreville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...5.00

   Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. ...39.10

   Chicopee. Mrs. Mosman's Class, 9; Miss Woodworth's Class, 3.38, Sab.
   Sch. of Third Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...12.38

   Dalton. Mrs. Louise F. Crane, 100; Miss Clara L. Crane, 100; W.M.
   Crane, 100 ...300.00

   Deerfield. A.C. Williams ...3.00

   Douglass. Mrs. James Wells, 5, and Mrs. Wells' S.S. Class, 5, _for
   Student Aid, Tougaloo U._ ...10.00

   Dracut. Cong. Ch. ...15.00

   East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch. ...10.88

   East Cambridge. Miss M.F. Aiken ...5.00

   Easthampton. Payson Cong. Ch. (6 of which _for Indian M._) ...235.50

   Easthampton. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Teacher, Indian M._
   ...50.00

   Edgartown. Cong. Ch. ...11.08

   Erving. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...3.00

   Essex. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...36.00

   Everett. Cong. Ch., ad'l ...0.50

   Falmouth. Cong. Ch. ...20.00

   Fall River. Central Cong. Ch. (70 of which from Y.P.S. of C.K., _for
   Indian Sch'p_) ...321 40

   Fitchburg. Cal. Cong. Ch. ...17.00

   Franklin. First Cong. Ch. ...26.00

   Georgetown. Peabody Memorial Ch., (30 of which from Sab. Sch. to
   const. ELLA W. MACE L.M.) ...102.00

   Globe Village. Free Evan. Soc. (30 of which to const. FREDERICK G.
   BLANCHARD L.M.) ...53.05

   Gloucester. Lanesville Cong. Ch. ...12.25

   Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...75.00

   Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch. ...27.46

   Hardwick. Cal. Cong. Ch. ...4.85

   Haverhill. C. Coffin. ...0.50

   Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...25.00

   Holbrook. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...12.00

   Holbrook, Mrs. J.V. Thayer, _for Freight to Dakota_ ...0.70

   Holliston. "Bible Christians," ...50.00

   Holliston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 15; "Friends," 6. _for Student
   Aid, Fisk U._ ...21.00

   Holyoke. Mrs. Mary E. Rust ...1.00

   Hopkinton. First Cong. Ch. ...69.56

   Hopkinton. Mrs. Wing's S.S. Class, _for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._
   ...12.00

   Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. ...17.00

   Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...31.00

   Lakeville. Miss Betsey Kinsley ...4.50

   Lee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...25.00

   Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. _for new building, Williamsburg, Ky._
   ...64.70

   Lincoln. Sab. Sen. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._
   ...20.00

   Littleton. Cong. Ch. ...13.78

   Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch. to const. F.W. ELY. L.M; John St. Cong.
   Ch., 32.39; Miss S.R. Harlow, 1 ...83.39

   Lynn. First Cong. Ch. ...11.53

   Malden. First Cong. Ch. ...33.00

   Marlboro. Union. Cong. Ch., to const. ELMER D. HOWE L.M., _for Indian
   Sch'p._ ...75.00

   Medway. Village Ch. ...50.00

   Medway. E.F. Richardson, Bbl. of C., etc, _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...

   Melrose, Frontier Aid Soc;. _for Straight U._ ...10.00

   Melrose. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...2.75

   Methuen. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...14.69

   Milford. "King's Daughters," by Mrs. Webster Woodbury, for furnishing
   two rooms _Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...50.00

   Milford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...43.30

   Mill River. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...21.00

   Monson. Mrs. John Packard ...1.00

   Montague. First Cong. Ch. ...15.50

   Newburyport. Prospect St. Ch., 45.86; Whitefield Cong. Ch., 20.01
   ...65.87

   Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. ...50.00

   Newton Highlands. Miss E.H. Craft ...1.00

   North Adams. Cong. Ch. ...150.69

   North Amherst. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._ ...22.44

   Northampton. "B" ...3.00

   North Attleboro. Frank H. Bennett, _for Mountain Work._ ...5.00

   Northbridge. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...18.01

   North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS. J.E.
   PORTER and JOHN S. COOKE L.M's ...65.07

   Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch., 9.78; Mrs. E.B. Wheaton, 30, to const. SILAS
   H. COBB L.M. ...39.78

   North Weymouth. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...10.00

   North Weymouth. Miss Edith M. Bates ...2.00

   Oxford. Cong. Ch. ...20.00

   Peabody. Sab. Sch. South Cong. Ch., _for Teacher, Indian M._ ...50.00

   Peabody. Prof. J.K. Cole. Books etc., _for Lathrop Library, Sherwood,
   Tenn._ ...

   Peru. Rev. S.W. Powell ...5.00

   Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch., 65; South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 40.97
   ...105.97

   Pittsfield. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...30.00

   Quincy Point. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. ...0.60

   Reading. Cong. Ch. ...18.00

   Rockdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...4.25

   Salem. Sab. Sch. of Tab. Ch., _for Student Aid, Tillotson Inst._
   ...25.00

   Salem. Mrs. Lucy E. Friend, Box Books, _for Lathrop Library,
   Sherwood, Tenn._ ...

   Southampton. Cong. Ch. ...1.10

   Southboro. Pilgrim. Ch. ...33.88

   South Dennis. Cong. Ch. ...3.14

   South Weymouth. Cong. Ch. (20., of wh. from Primary Dept. of Sab.
   Sch. _for Student Aid, Macon, Ga._) ...43.00

   Springfield. Miss N. Burnham, _for Mountain Work_ ...20.00

   Stockbridge. Cong. Ch. ...60.50

   Stoneham. Cong. Ch. ...33.00

   Sudbury. Cong. Ch. ...34.82

   Sunderland. Ladies' Sew. Soc. Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo U._ ...

   Ware. First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...18.00

   West Barnstable. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Westboro. "Friend," _for Indian M._ ...1.00

   West Boxford. Cong. Ch. ...7.00

   West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...7.33

   West Brookfield. Miss Emily S. Woods and her Sab. Sch. Class, _for
   Mountain Work_ ...10.00

   West Dennis. Mrs. S.S. Crowell ...1.50

   Westfield. Primary Class Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Straight U._ ...15.00

   Westfield. Mrs. C.W. Fowler. Box S.S. Material and Books; 3.75 _for
   Freight,_ etc. _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...3.75

   West Gardner. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc. _for Indian Sch'p_ ...35 00

   West Medford. Cong. Ch. ...11.04

   West Medway. Third Cong. Ch., to const. MISS EMMA C. PARTRIDGE L.M.
   ...30.00

   West Somerville. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

   Williamstown. First Cong. Ch. ...33.46

   Winchester. Ladies' Western Miss'y Soc., adl. _for Girls' Dormitory,
   Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...10.00

   Woburn. First cong. Ch. ..326.36

   Wollaston. "A Friend." ...1.00

   Worcester. Miss Sarah E. Wheeler ...5.00

   Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. ...50.00

   Hampden County Benevolent Society, by Charles Marsh, Treasurer:

   Chicopee, Third ...8.03
   Holyoke, First ...20.52
   Westfield, Second ...56.99
   West Springfield, Mittineag. ...3.67
   " " Park St. ...39.11
   " " Park St. Sab. Sch. _for ed. of a young Indian_ ...21.65

   ------ 149 37

   Woman's Home Missionary Association,
   _for Salaries of Teachers_ ...880.00

   ------$8,263.92

   ESTATES.

   West Roxbury. Estate of E.W. Tolman, by Rev. N.G. Clark. Ex.
   ...172.97

   Worcester. Estate of Dwight Reed, by E. J. Whittemore. Adm'r
   ...6,750.00

   ------$15,186.89

   CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

   Cumberland Mills, Me. Young Ladies' Mission Band, Bbl. _for Selma,
   Ala._

   West Falmouth, Me. Rev. Wm. H. Haskell, Bbl., _for Troy, N.C._

   Auburndale, Mass. Miss Alice Williston, Bbl, _for Greenwood, S.C._

   Ashfield, Mass. Cong. Ch. by Mrs. Daniel Williams, Bbl., _for
   McLeansville, N.C._

   Marshfield, Mass. Rev. E. Alden, 2 Bbls., val. 57.25 _for
   Williamsburg, Ky._

   West Roxbury, Mass. Y.P.S.C.E. of So. Evan. Ch., 2 Bbls., _for Chapel
   Hill, N.C._

   Worchester, Mass. Miss S.E. Wheeler, Bbl. _Wilmington, N.C._


   RHODE ISLAND, $372.74.

   Central Falls. Cong. Ch. ...47.72

   East Providence. S. Belden ...50.00

   East Providence. Newman Cong. Ch., to const. DEA. WILLIAM W. ELLIS
   L.M. ...30.00

   Kingston. Cong. Ch. ...41.74

   Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. ...144.28

   Providence. Union Cong. Ch., 12; North Cong. Ch., 11; Free Cong. Ch.,
   5, _for new building, Williamsburg, Ky._ ...28.00

   Tiverton. Cong. Ch.. 21; Church Supply, 10; _for new building,
   Williamsburg, Ky._ ...31.00


   CONNECTICUT, $8,266.04

   Abington. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

   Berlin. Second Cong. Ch. ...44.80

   Bethel. Young Ladies' Mission Circle of Cong. Ch., 30: _for Pleasant
   Hill, Tenn._ and 30 _for Talladega C._ ...60.00

   Black Rock. Cong. Ch. ...27.00

   Bloomfield. Cong. Ch ...4.50

   Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch., 37.76; Y.P.S.C.E, of South Cong. Ch.,
   5 ...42.76

   Bristol. J.J. Jennings' S.S. Class, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._
   ...10.00

   Burlington. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

   Canton Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc ...10.00

   Central Village. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

   Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...40.38

   Collinsville. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...31.00

   Danbury. First Cong. Ch., 101.32; Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 27
   ...128.32

   Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...20.28

   Deep River. Cong. Ch., to const. FREDERIC C. PRATT L.M. ...35.00

   Eastford. Cong. Ch. ...14.56

   Enfield. "Friends In First Cong. Ch," _for Indian M., Native Pastor_
   ...150.00

   Greeneville. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. REV. THOMAS SIMMS L.M.
   ...10.00

   Griswold. First Cong. Ch. ...30.00

   Gullford. "A Memorial Offering." ...200.00

   Haddam. Cong. Ch. ...9.75

   Hagganum. Cong. Ch., 29; Mrs. Susan Gladwin, 5 ...34.00

   Hartford. Mrs. Mary C. Bemis ...20.00

   Hartford. Warburton Chapel Sab. Sch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn.
   Girls' Indl. Hall._ ...17.75

   Huntington. Cong, Ch. ...11.00

   Kensington. Mary Frost, deceased, by Mrs. E.S. Tulbs ...3.00

   Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._ ...50.00

   Madison. Cong. Ch. ...5.80

   Manchester. First Cong, Ch. ...91.20

   Meriden. Sab. Sen. of First Cong. Ch. ...15.00

   Meriden. Robert P. Rand ...3.50

   Middlefield. Cong Ch. to const. JAMES LYMAN and ALBERT R. TUCKER
   L.M's ...64.64

   Middletown. First Cong. Ch. ...112.55

   Milford. First Cong. Ch. ...150.00

   Milford. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch. ...10.87

   Mount Carmel. Mrs. J.M. Swift ...10.00

   New Britain. South Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN B, SMITH, F.A. GIDDINGS,
   G.E. ROOT and MARTIN S. WIARD L.M's ...290.80

   New Canaan. Cong. Ch. ...24.21

   New Haven. College St. Cong. Ch. ...54.50

   New Haven. Sab. Sch. of Center CH., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._
   ...25.00

   New Haven. H.C. Rowe, _for Ballard Normal Sch._ ...10.00

   New London. Trust Estate of Harry P. Haven (70. of which _for Indian
   Sch'p_) ...370.00

   New London. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch. 70. Mrs. L.E. Learned and
   Daughters 17.50, _for Indian Sch'ps_ ...87.50

   New London. "A Friend" _for Chinese M._ ...0.50

   New Milford. First Cong. Ch., 80.16; "Friends" 10 ...90.16

   Newington. Cong. Ch. ...24.36

   New Preston. Mrs. Betsy Averill. _for Mountain Work_ ...10.00

   Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...15.27

   Norwalk. First Cong. Ch. ...63.09

   Norwich. Buckingham Sab. Sch. ...25.00

   Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch. ...40.64

   Plainville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Oaks N.C._ ...20.00

   Pomfret. "Friends" ...0.50

   Poquonock. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch, _for Mountain Work_ ...15.00

   Prospect. B.B. Brown ...20.00

   Putnam. Second Cong. Ch ...20.99

   Roxbury. Mrs. D.H. Beardsley ...4.50

   Roxbury. Mrs. J.S. Beardsley, Pkg. patchwork, _for Sherwood,
   Tenn._...

   Sharon. John H. Cleaveland ...5.00

   Simsbury. James Reid ...1.50

   Stamford. Y.P.S.C.E., by Grace S. Bean ...1.80

   South Manchester. First Cong. Ch., ad'l. ...5.00

   South Norwalk. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. MRS. SUSAN M. HALL. MISS
   MAY Q. SMITH and MRS. MARY GRAVES L.M's. ...95.00

   Somers. Cong. Ch. ...7.50

   Somers. "Henrietta and Harriet." Memorial Offering, Carpet and Bbl.
   of Goods, 2.45 _for Freight, for Beach Inst._ ...2.45

   Southbury. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

   South Killingly. Cong. Ch. ...8.50

   South Wethersfield. Sab. Sch Class. by Bertha H. Griswold, _for
   Woman's Work._ ...2.00

   Talcottville. Cong. Ch. ...60.00

   Thomaston. Cong. Ch. ...11.23

   Thomaston. Ladies Benev. Soc. by Mrs. G.A. Lemmon, Sec., _for Conn.
   Ind'l Sch., Ga_ ...30.00

   Thompson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...3.75

   Thompson. Ladies, by Miss Julia Shaw, ad'l, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
   Ga._ ...0.25

   Torrington. "Helpmeet Circle of King's Daughters," _for Grand View,
   Tenn._ ...10.00

   Waterbury. Mrs. G.C. Hill, Pkg. Patchwork, _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...

   West Hartford. First Church of Christ, ...102.96

   West Hartford. Mrs. E.W. Morris, _for Mountain Work_ ...10.00

   Westbrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...25.60

   Williamsville. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

   Windsor. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. 30 _for Tougaloo U._ and 20
   _for Grand View, Tenn._ ...50.00

   Winsted. Mrs. M.A. Mitchell _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ ...25.00

   Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. ...56.60

   ----. "A Friend," ...500.00

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Connecticut, by Mrs. Wilder Smith,
   Sec., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ Suffield. Aux ...5.00 ...5.00
   ------$3,768 04

   ESTATES.

   Norwich. Estate of Hezekiah F. Rudd, by John M. Johnson, Executor
   ...3,500.00

   Thompson. Estate of Levi B. Mowry, by R.E. Holmes, Trustee
   ...1,000.00

   ------$8,266.04


   NEW YORK, $962.94.

   Albany. First Cong. Ch., 51; Miss E.L. Hill, 1 ...52.00

   Albany. Mrs. M.H. Williams, Pkg. Kindergarten material, and Pkg.
   Patchwork, _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...

   Alfred Center. Mrs. Ida F. Kenyon ...5.00

   Binghamton. First Cong. Ch. ...100.56

   Binghamton. Girls' Mission Band of Cong. Ch., "Faithful Workers," by
   Cornelia Sturtevant, _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...15.00

   Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 75.; "A Friend," to const. HON. THOMAS B.
   REED L.M. 30, ...105.00

   Brooklyn, Julius Davenport, _for Atlanta U._ ...100.00

   Brooklyn. Miss Prentice's Class, Sab. Sch. Ch. of the Pilgrims, _for
   Indian Sch'p_ ...70.00

   Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Santee Indian M._ ...37.50

   Brooklyn. Mrs. Rev. Geo. Hollis, _for Mountain Work_ ...5.00

   Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., Communion Set ...

   Buffalo, First Cong. Ch. ...100.00

   Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_ ...25.75

   Chateaugay. Joseph Shaw ...4.50

   Cortland. Cong. Ch. to const. MRS. JANE R. SAMSON L.M. ...30.00

   Fairport. Primary Classes Cong. Sab. Sch., by Miss S.E. Dowd, _for
   Dakota Home_ ...40.00

   Fairport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...18.58

   Franklin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...1.00

   Fulton. "A Friend" ...1.00

   Greene. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...3.10

   Honeoye. Sab Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...7.00

   Jamestown. First Cong. Ch. ...48.00

   LeRoy. Mrs. D.A. Phillips, 10; Mrs. Alex. McEwen, 10; "A Friend," 1
   ...21.00

   Lysander. Cong. Ch. ...7.15

   Millers Place. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

   New York. Frank C. Overton, 10; A. Wetherin. 10, _for Student Aid,
   Lincoln N. Inst., Marion, Ala._ ...20.00

   New York. Albert T. Hall, Trunk of Books ...

   Oneonta. Mrs. L.J. Safford ...2.00

   Phoenix. Primary Class, Cong. S.S., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._
   ...1.30

   Portchester. Milo Mead ...5.00

   Rochester. Geo. Thayer, 25; Geo. W. Thayer, 10; Mrs. E.M. Rider, 4.50
   ...39.50

   Sag Harbor. Charles N. Brown, to const. WILLIAM H. YOUNGS L.M.
   ...30.00

   Sing Sing. Mrs. C.E. Judd, to const. REV. LELAND E. TUPPER L.M.
   ...30.00

   Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
   _for Woman's Work_: Aquebogue. Ladies Aux. ...15.00 Rochester.
   Ladies' Aux. South Ch. ...5.00 ------ 20.00


   NEW JERSEY, $2.11.

   Bound Brook. Cong. Ch. ...2.11


   PENNSYLVANIA, $107.60.

   Elvilla. Thomas McCleery ...10.00

   Germantown. Freedman's Concert, by Mission Guild of First Cong. Ch.
   ...14.60

   North East. Miss C.A. Talcott. ...1.00

   Philadelphia. Miss S. Longstreth, _for Mountain Work_ ...50.00

   Philadelphia. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._
   ...30.00

   Shire Oaks. Jane Wilson ...2.00


   OHIO, $442.69.

   Akron. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...50.00

   Akron. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Ballard Normal
   Sch._ ...50.00

   Alexis. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

   Andover. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

   Ashtabula. First Cong. Ch. ...17.25

   Belpre. Cong. Ch. ...13.00

   Berlin Heights. Cong. Ch. ...7.70

   Cleveland. Young People of C., by Miss E.A. Johnson, _for Mountain
   Work_ ...4.50

   Claridon. Cong. Ch. ...22.46

   Cincinnati. Walnut Hills Cong. Ch. 76.52; Lawrence St. Welsh Cong.
   Ch., 20 ...96.52

   Columbus, C.E. Dunham, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...4.00

   Lindenville. Mrs. Lydia C. Beares ...5.00

   Lorain. Cong. Ch., 38.18; Y.P.S.C.E, 10. ...48.18

   Medina. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Box Bedding, 1.05 _for Freight, for
   Ballard Normal Sch._ ...1.05

   Mesopotamia. Ladies' Benev. Society of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
   Freight, for Tougaloo U._ ...2.00

   Oberlin. Dudley Allen, M.D., 30 to const. PROF. JOHN F. PECK L.M.;
   Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 10.91 ...40.91

   Pittsfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work_ ...3.62

   Rochester. Cong. Ch. ...1.15

   Radnor. Edward D. Jones ...5.00

   Tallmadge. Ladies' H.M. Soc., _for Woman's Work_ ...20.00

   Unionville. Cong. Ch. ...4.80

   Wellington. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
   ...5.00

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Ohio by Mrs. M.C. Morrison, _for an
   Organ for Miss Collins' Indian Work_ ...30.55


   INDIANA, $1.00.

   Brazil. Mrs. C. Clark ...1.00

   Indianapolis. "Friend," Box Sewing Sch. Material, _for Sherwood,
   Tenn._ ...


   ILLINOIS, $6,478.57

   Amboy. Mrs. Andrews, Patchwork and Bibles, _for Mobile, Ala._ ...

   Big Rock. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

   Chicago. "R.A.W." 500; New England Cong. Ch. 107.46; South Cong. Ch.,
   65.55; Rev. Henry Willard, 25; First Cong. Ch., 186.72; South Park
   Cong. Ch., 18.36 ...903.09

   Chicago. "Friends in First Cong. Ch.," _for Teacher, Indian M._
   ...25.00

   Chicago. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., by Mrs. E.P. Goodwin, _for Fort
   Berthold Indian M._ ...20.00

   Chicago. Prof. A.M. Bacon, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._ ...5.00

   Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Sab. Sch. and "Friends," Box of C., etc.,
   _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...

   Delavan. R. Houghton ...15.00

   Downer's Grove. Cong. Ch. ...13.09

   Galesburg. Mrs. S.P.M. Avery ...15.00

   Galva. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...7.55

   Geneseo. Mrs. E.L. Atkinson ...5.00

   Granville. Stephan Harrison ...10.00

   Jacksonville. Cong. Ch. ...49.66

   Marshall. Rev. Dana Sherrill ...5.90

   Morrison. Ellen S. Brown ...1.00

   Oak Park. Cong Ch. ...224.15

   Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch. ...11.30

   Princeton. First Cong. Ch., 13.50; Mrs. P.B. Corss, 10 ...23.50

   Rockford. First Cong. Ch. ...76.00

   Saint Charles. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

   Toulon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 Boxes Clothing, Books, etc., _for
   Sherwood, Tenn._

   Waverly. Cong. Ch. ...23.67

   Wheaton. College Cong. Ch. ...27.46

   Woodstock. O. Hobart ...2.00

   York Center. Mission Sab. Sch. ...3.20

   ------$1,478.57


   ESTATE.

   LaSalle. Estate of Mrs. Sarah Lathrop, Hon. J.H. Miller, Ex.
   ...5,000.00

   ------$6,478.57


   MICHIGAN, $359.02.

   Adrian. First Cong. Ch. ...17.67

   Ann Arbor. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Athens,
   Ala._

   Battle Creek. "A Friend," ...0.50

   Bay City. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...9.42

   Benzonia. Amasa Waters ...14.00

   Calumet. Helping Hand Soc., by Annie Grierson, _for Marie Adlof Fund_
   ...20.00

   Detroit. First Cong. Ch. ...68.17

   Dexter. Dennis Warner ...20.00

   Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   East Saginaw. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
   ...12.50

   East Saginaw. Dea. N.H. Culver ...1.00

   Grand Rapids. Mrs. S.A.B. Carrier ...1.00

   Greenville. Cong. Ch. ...50.00

   Lansing. Plymouth Ch. ...27.00

   LeRoy. Cong. Ch. ...4.25

   Olivet. Cong. Ch. ...75.97

   South Haven. Cong. Ch. ...3.10

   Tecumseh. James Vincent ...10.00

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan. by Mrs. E.F. Grabill,
   Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

   Bay City. Mrs. M.M. Andrews, _for Trinity Sch._ ...1.50

   Benton Harbor. W.H.M.S., _for Trinity Sch._ ...5.00

   Cheboygan. Sab. Sch. _for Freedman and Mountain Work_ ...1.50

   Detroit. Mount Hope Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work_ ...2.59

   Highland Station. W.M.S., _for Trinity Sch._ ...3.85

   ------ 14.44


   WISCONSIN, $150.44.

   Appleton. Mrs. J.T. Reeve ...5.00

   Berlin. Mission Band, "Young Conquerors," by Rev. A.B. Penniman, _for
   Librarian of Fisk U._ ...3.86

   Beloit. Second Cong. Ch. ...32.13

   Beloit. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C. etc., _for Sherwood,
   Tenn._ ...

   Bristol and Paris. Woman's Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C. etc., _for Sherwood,
   Tenn._ ...

   Delavan. C.T. Smith ...44.00

   Fox Lake. Cong. Ch. ...5.30

   Lake Geneva. MILO BARNARD to const. himself L.M. ...30.00

   Menomonie. First Cong. Ch. ...16.03

   Menomonie. Mrs. V.A. Knapp. Bbl. of C. etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._
   ...

   Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch. ...14.12

   Sturgeon Bay. "Friends," Box of C. etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._ ...


   IOWA, $441.35.

   Ames. First Cong. Ch. ...15.05

   Chester Center. Cong. Ch. ...12.85

   Cresco. Willard Converse ...5.00

   Denmark. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...15.00

   Doon. Mr. and Mrs. A.G. Mather ...15.00

   Dubuque. Cong. Ch., 12; Sab. Sch. of Immanuel Cong. Ch., 5. ...17.00

   Eldora. Cong. Ch. (1.38 of which from Sab. Sch.), _for Atlanta U._
   ...109.75

   Goldfield. Chas. Philbrook ...2.00

   Grinnell. Cong. Ch. ...9.15

   Independence. New England Cong. Ch. ...6.50

   Magnolia. Cong. Ch. 9.46, and Sab. Sch. 10 ...19.46

   Maquoketa. Y.P.S.C.E., Box of C., _for Tougaloo U._ ...

   McGregor. Cong. Ch. (5. of which _for Fisk U._) ...50.70

   Newton. Children's Mission Band of Wittenberg Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
   Savannah, Ga._ ...25.00

   Newton. Cong. Ch. ...15.92

   Shenandoah. Cong. Ch. 20.85, and Sab. Sch. 1.68 ...22.53

   Sioux City. First Cong. Ch. ...37.62

   Spencer. First Cong. Sab. Cong. S.S. 5.; Birthday Missionary Box of
   First Cong. S.S. 5. ...10.00

   Tipton. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._
   ...5.00

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa, _for Woman's Work_:

   Cedar Falls. L.M.S. ...2.90

   Dubuque. L.M.S. ...10.67

   Fairfield. W.M.S. ...5.00

   Grinnell. W.H.M.U. ...13.16

   Hampton. L.M.S. ...5.00

   Magnolia. L.M.S. ...2.50

   Mason. L.M.S. ...6.50

   Sheldon. L.M.S. ...2.00

   ------ 47.82


   MINNESOTA. $296.52.

   Anoka. Cong. Ch. ...2.40

   Crookston. Cong. Ch. ...3.45

   Elk River. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

   Granite Falls. Cong. Ch. ...8.60

   Mankato. Cong. Ch. ...14.40

   Mapleton. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

   Minneapolis. First Cong. Ch. 36.50; Silver Lake Cong. Ch. 13; Union
   Cong. Ch. 6.10; Pilgrim Cong. Ch. 10; Como Av. Cong. Ch. 5.21;
   Plymouth Ch., "Life Member" 5 ...75.81

   Northfield. First Cong. Ch. ...37.55

   Plainview. Miss M.R. Carpenter. Box Books and Papers _for Jonesboro,
   Tenn._

   Saint Paul. Pacific Cong. Ch. 10; Plymouth Cong. Ch. 9.32 ...19.32

   Sterling. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

   Wadena. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

   Waseca. Cong. Ch. 7.82; Rev. J.E. Smith 5 ...12.82

   Waterville. Cong. Ch. ...4.13

   Woman's Home Missionary Society of Minnesota, by Mrs. M.W. Skinner,
   Treas. _for Woman's Work_:

   Austin ...9.68

   Duluth, Pilgrim Ch., _for Meridian, Miss._ ...20.00

   Janesville. S.S. ...0.88

   Minneapolis. Park Av. ...17.00

   Minneapolis. Plymouth ...25.75

   Minneapolis. Plymouth Y.L. ...10.23

   Saint Paul. Atlantic, _for Santee Agency_ ...5.00

   West Dora ...0.50

   Winona. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for Santee Agency_ ...3.00

   Saint Cloud ...10.00

   ------ 102.04


   MISSOURI. $56.70.

   Ironton. J. Markham ...2.50

   Laclede. Clara A. Seward, _for Woman's Work_ ...2.00

   Neosho. Cong. Ch. ...4.65

   Saint Joseph. Tabernacle Cong. Ch. ...47.55


   ARKANSAS. $2.22.

   Little Rock. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim Cong. Ch. ...2.22


   KANSAS. $64.02.

   Atchison. First Cong. Ch. ...3.27

   Highland. Mrs. Daniel Kloss, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...5.00

   Leavenworth. First Cong. Ch. ...52.52

   Onaga. Cong. Ch. ...3.23


   NORTH DAKOTA, $12.14.

   Jamestown. Mrs. M.S. Wells ...3.00

   Fargo. First Cong. Ch., adl ...9.14


   SOUTH DAKOTA, $24.63.

   Chamberlain. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Erwin. Cong. Ch. ...2.13

   South Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. S.E. Fifield,
   Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

   Armour. W.M.S. ...2.00

   Chamberlain. W.M.S. ...2.00

   Lake Preston. W.M.S. ...3.50

   Sioux Falls. W.M.S. ...5.00

   ------ 12.50


   NEBRASKA, $79.35.

   Ashland. Cong. Ch. ...3.50

   Clarke. Cong. Ch. ...7.00

   Fairmont. Cong. Ch. ...7.35

   Lewiston. J.B. White ...30.00

   Omaha. W.H. Holcomb, Sen. ...2.00

   Rising City. First Cong. Ch. ...29.50


   COLORADO, $81.00.

   Denver. First Cong. Ch. ...81.00


   OREGON, $35.00.

   Forest Grove. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

   Portland. First Cong. Ch. ...20.00

   Portland. Miss Libbie D. Kelsey, _for Student Aid, Sherwood, Tenn._
   ...5.00


   WASHINGTON, $1.05.

   Anacortes. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., ad'l. ...1.05


   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $179.33.

   Washington. Mount Pleasant Cong. Ch. to const. BENJAMIN HOWARD DAVIS
   L.M., 49.33; "Anonymous," 30 ...79.33

   Washington. "A friend," through Rev. W.W. Patton, D.D, _for Theo.
   Dep't, Howard U._ ...100.00


   NORTH CAROLINA, $10.62.

   Chapel Hill. Mrs. C.E. Jones ...4.00

   Dry Creek. Cong. Ch. ...0.06

   Nalls. Cong. Ch. ...0.45

   Troy. Cong. Ch. ...0.30

   Wilmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...4.81

   Wilmington. Prof. G.A. Woodard ...1.00


   GEORGIA, $5.00

   Milford. Rev. J.A. Jones ...5.00


   FLORIDA, $7.28.

   Daytona. Cong. Ch. ...7.28


   ALABAMA, $16.26.

   Talladega. Rev. H.S. DeForest, _for Talladega C._ ...16.26

   Marion. Two valuable Bbls. Clothing and Christmas Toys, _for Lincoln
   N. Inst._


   TEXAS, $3.40.

   Dallas. Cong. Ch. ...3.40


   TENNESSEE, $73.98.

   Chattanooga. First Cong. Ch. ...10.46

   Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch. Thanksgiving Coll. ...5.50

   Jonesboro. Cong. Ch. 16.33, and Sab. Sch. 4.19 ...20.52

   Nashville. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

   Nashville. Prof. F.A. Chase, _for Scientific Dep't, Fisk U._ ...12.50


   MISSISSIPPI.

   Meridian. Mr. Parish, Ton of Coal.


   ENGLAND, $10.00.

   Chigwell. Miss S.L. Ropes ...10.00


   BULGARIA, $6.00.

   Samokov. Rev. J.F. Clark ...6.00

   ======

   Donations ...$18,689.41

   Estates ...16,422.97

   ------

   $35,112.38


   INCOME, $340.00.

   Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._ ...190.00

   C F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._ ...50.00

   General Endowment Fund, _for Freedmen_ ...50.00

   Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...50.00

   ------ 340.00


   TUITION, $4,061.15.

   Lexington, Ky. Tuition ...207.35

   Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition ...2.00

   Memphis, Tenn. Tuition ...563.65

   Nashville, Tenn. Tuition ...595.60

   Pine Mountain, Tenn. Tuition ...47.18

   Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Public Sch. Fund ...30.00

   Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition ...7.50

   Sherwood. Tenn. Tuition ...35.00

   Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition ...6.50

   Troy, N.C. Tuition ...9.00

   Wilmington, N.C. Tuition ...190.12

   Charleston, S.C. Tuition ...240.50

   Greenwood, S.C. Tuition ...38.10

   Macon, Ga. Tuition ...407.60

   McIntosh, Ga. Tuition ...34.37

   Savannah, Ga. Tuition ...256.05

   Thomasville, Ga. Tuition ...82.10

   Athens, Ala. Tuition ...84.25

   Marion, Ala. Tuition ...45.25

   Mobile, Ala. Tuition ...264.35

   Selma, Ala. Tuition ...94.80

   Meridian, Miss. Tuition ...79.15

   Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition ...184.50

   New Orleans, La. Tuition ...895.75

   Austin, Texas. Tuition ...151.48

   ------ 4,061.15

   United States Government for the Education of Indians ...702.00

   ------

   Total for December ...$40,215.53

   ======


   SUMMARY.

   Donations ...$53,151.97

   Estates ...29,420.27

   ------

   $82,572.24

   Income ...3,376.15

   Tuition ...8,783.84

   United States Government for the Education of Indians ...5,069.18

   ------

   Total from Oct. 1 to Dec. 31 ...$99,801.41

   ======


   FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

   Subscriptions for December ...$139.09

   Previously acknowledged ...67.76

   ------

   Total ...$206.85

======

  H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer,
  56 Reade N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 44, NO. 02, FEBRUARY, 1890 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.