Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Josephine
Paolucci and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

MAY, 1890 VOL. XLIV. NO. 5.




CONTENTS


  EDITORIAL.

  BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

  TEACHERS' HOME AND GIRLS' DORMITORY, MACON, GA.

  REMOVAL--FINANCIAL

  OUR MISSION IN ALASKA

  SOUTHERN NOTES

  FACTS ABOUT BALLARD SCHOOL

  BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL AND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, MACON, GA.

  INTERIOR OF INDUSTRIAL BUILDING

  CHRISTIAN NEGRO LEADERS

  CONFERENCE OF EDUCATORS

  A PRIZE POEM


  THE SOUTH.

  NOTES IN THE SADDLE

  THEN AND NOW

  CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION

  "SIX DAYS SHALT THOU LABOR"

  ENCOURAGED AND THANKFUL

  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY

  DEATH OF ELI TAPLEY


  THE INDIANS.

  A JANUARY TRIP


  THE CHINESE.

  OUR CHINESE WORK


  BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  NOTICE OF MEETING OF STATE UNIONS

  LETTER FROM A SOUTHERN LADY

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


  RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




_American Missionary Association_.

PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents_.

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y. Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill. Rev. ALEX.
McKENZIE, D.D., Mass. Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass. Rev. HENRY HOPKINS,
D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries_.

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D.,
_Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary_.

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer_.

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

PETER McCARTEE. CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman. ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


_For Three Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, ELBERT
B. MONROE,


_For Two Years._

J.E. RANKIN, WM. H. WARD, J.W. COOPER, JOHN H. WASHBURN, EDMUND L.
CHAMPLIN,


_For One Year._

LYMAN ABBOTT, CHAS. A. HULL, CLINTON B. FISK, ADDISON P. FOSTER, ALBERT
J. LYMAN.


_District Secretaries._

Rev. C.J. RYDER, 21 _Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._ Rev. J.E. ROY. D.D.,
151 _Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._ Rev. C.W. HIATT, 64 _Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland. Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

[Illustration: BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA]

[Illustration: TEACHERS' HOME AND GIRLS' DORMITORY, BALLARD SCHOOL,
MACON, GA]




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XLIV. MAY, 1890. No. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association

       *       *       *       *       *

REMOVAL.


The Rooms of the American Missionary Association are now in the Bible
House, New York City. Correspondents will please address us accordingly.

Visitors will find our Rooms on the sixth floor of the Bible House,
corner Ninth Street and Fourth Avenue; entrance by elevator on Ninth
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCIAL.


The first six months of our fiscal year have passed. The receipts for
this period are from collections $101,509.44; from estates, $101,179.63;
from income, $4,262.91; from tuition, $22,729,32; and from the United
States Government for Indian Schools, $8,946.07. Total, $238,627.37.

The meaning of these figures is clear. We rejoice in the enlarging
beneficence of the living and of the dead, who live unto God. The
tremendous pressure of our providential work is nearer to being felt and
met by the American people than ever before. What the Association has
done hitherto is no measure of what it has constantly been called to do
and is now called to do. It can now meet a few more of the immediate
demands urged upon it from its vast and necessitous field. As between
faith and fear, we do not hesitate to take the way of faith. We thank
God and take courage. Hitherto the Lord hath helped us; He will bless
us.

To our living friends we must say: Our work, like all living things,
either grows or decays. Those who have been called hence, within these
six months, have left us, by their legacies, their bidding to go
forward with a growing work. Except by your support, this growth will
mean swift, subsequent decay. Our largest work is in a field teeming
with great dangers and yet with great possibilities of success. The
success depends upon prompt, vigorous and permanent increase. It is
yours to empower us to meet in some good degree the call of the hour and
of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR MISSION IN ALASKA.


We have undertaken to establish a mission school among the Arctic Eskimo
Indians of Alaska. The location is to be at Point Prince of Wales at
Behrings Strait, the westernmost point of the mainland of America and
nearest to Asia. Its distance from the North Pole has not yet been
ascertained. The inhabitants are described by Capt. Charles H. Stockton,
of the United States Navy, as "the boldest and most aggressive people of
all the Arctic coast. They are such a turbulent crowd that the whalers
are afraid to visit them and consequently give them a wide berth. It is
both the worst people and the most prosperous settlement in that region.
They ought to have a mission station."

Dr. Sheldon Jackson, the Secretary of the Territorial Board of
Education, says: "On account of the character of the people, I think it
would not be safe to send a woman there, at least the first year. I
favor the sending of two men at first. If difficulties arise, they will
be a mutual strength, and if the teacher gets sick, there will be some
one to attend him. From the time that the revenue cutter passes south in
August and the whalers in September, these men will be shut up with the
natives and thrown upon their own resources and God's protection until
the following June or July. I would advise that the missionaries be
large men physically, as size impresses the natives favorably, and there
may be times when they will need to remove a turbulent man from their
room by physical force."

We have sent out our call for the missionaries. It is obvious that none
need nor will apply who are not Christian heroes, and who have not in
themselves the stuff of which martyrs are made. But this mission will
not be alone. In that region, but at vast distances apart, will soon be
established Presbyterian, Episcopal, Swedish and Moravian missions.

The Government will refund the $3,000 necessary for the erection of the
building, and one church in Connecticut has provided a little over
$2,000 to defray current expenses for the first year. This sum will
scarcely be adequate for this year, and that generous church, as well as
others, must be relied upon to meet future expenses. We believe the hero
missionaries will be found, and that a generous support will be given to
an enterprise at once so bold, so needed and so promising.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN NOTES.

BY SECRETARY A.F. BEARD.


In the relationship of the races we are accustomed to speak of the
"color prejudice." We know very well that there is a most assertive
prejudice against colored people. Rev. Dr. Wright, in his admirable
address at Chicago, said, "The cause is this: All free-born people in
every age and clime have a contempt for slaves. The sole reason of the
persistence of the caste feeling is that the black man belongs to a race
which has been enslaved." The inference is, "therefore your character is
a servile character."

The common judgment has been that the prejudice is against color. A
little observation, however, will show that Southern people have no
prejudice against color as such. Color ceases to be repugnant when it
ceases to be unfamiliar.

I have been led to conclude that a great part of what is called the
color prejudice, may be charged up to the fact of feature. The features,
in the people of every race, are offensive when they are coarse and
carnal. For example, among a class of the Irish peasantry long ignorance
and lowdown life have given to the children an heredity of ingrained
coarseness. It is visible in a certain stamp of the features. Education
and elevation will gradually reduce the animalism of the face. With good
breeding, in generations the lips grow thinner; the face takes on
character and even changes in shape.

The Negro condition at present is one of immaturity. The Uncle Rastus
side of Negro character and life may be seen every day in the Southern
Negro. The immaturity of the race and its revelation and expression in
feature and in character, repel more than color does. The antipathy
against color in the South is reduced to its very lowest terms, as facts
prove.

The way to destroy the prejudice which exists both by association with
the ideas of bondage and by features which are not refined, is a common
one. Education is the only way. I have been surprised to see how rapidly
education, especially religious education and the refining influence of
good associations, are eliminating both the idea that color is a badge
of a servile mind, and the inherited coarseness of features. The
educated children of educated parents are in many instances already
showing in their faces the mettle of their pasture. There is a
perceptible growth away from immaturity and coarseness of feature, along
with the growth away from immaturity of mind.

Twenty-five years, indeed, is a short time for a study of this sort. It
is hardly to be counted in the history of a race. A century is but a
unit in the problem of a people's history. We have no right to form our
judgments yet, as to the place the Negro people may take. What three or
four centuries may do for the race is to be settled too remotely for us
to testify.

A distinguished educator lately said that he had been disappointed in
the intellectual ability and resources of the Negro. The race had not
shown itself to be hopeful. I reply, if in twenty-five years we have the
few remarkable instances of advancement and attainment which appear,
together with a very large general uplift in education and character,
may not these facts be the prophecies and pledges of a future that shall
not be inferior.

Even now the difference between the uneducated and the educated black
man is very striking. The crudeness and the unrefinement in feature are
not necessary accompaniments of color. Thick lips do not inherently
belong with a dark skin. Coarseness of feature belongs to white people,
long degraded, as well, and is to be eliminated in them also by the
evolution which takes place in schools and churches.

Here is a race from original heathenism which has come through two
hundred years of the darkness of slavery, set free in exceedingly
unhelpful conditions, and shut in for the most part to association with
illiteracy, bad manners, bad morals and bad habits. Only exceptionally
can colored people come near enough to those who are high and good to
get much good by seeing what goodness is and how it lives.

Yet, notwithstanding this, history reveals nothing more wonderful than
what we see in those who have come from homes which are not homes and
from previous degrading influences, as they pass through a term of years
in our schools.

When the generations to come from these shall have had for a century the
impartial blessings of an intelligent and pure Christianity, the
question as to the Negro's place among the races will be nearer
solution.

       *       *       *       *       *

FACTS ABOUT BALLARD SCHOOL

    We present to our readers four pictures giving different views of
    the Ballard Normal School at Macon, Ga., and add here a
    description copied from the _Ballard Record:_


Ballard Normal School has this year entered upon the fruition of many
earnest hopes and desires, in the opening of the boarding department, in
connection with the day school. We have now a large family of boarding
pupils living in the beautiful new dormitory, erected last summer
through the interest of Mr. Ballard, who gave us our commodious school
building one year ago. As memory goes back to the "early days," from
1865 to 1868, when this school was in its infancy, and was taught in
various barns, dwelling houses and churches, and as we recall the loss
by fire of three buildings in 1876, and the subsequent use of the church
and our present carpenter shop for school-rooms, we dwell with gratitude
upon the ministrations of friends in past years, and especially upon
that visit of Mr. Ballard, which resulted in these handsome buildings.
It was thought that our new brick school-house, with seven school-rooms,
one recitation-room, and office, would furnish accommodations to all
pupils for several years to come. But already, just one year from its
dedication, it is found necessary to open an additional school-room in
an adjacent building. The enrollment for this year is five hundred and
eighty-four. An unusual number of young men and women from neighboring
counties, are availing themselves of the opportunities here offered to
acquire an education.

[Illustration: BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL AND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, MACON,
GA]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF BALLARD INDUSTRIAL BUILDING, MACON, GA.]

We have large classes in sewing and carpentry, and small classes in
printing and wood-carving. Classes in cooking will be organized as soon
as the industrial kitchen is fitted up.

Several students are working and earning their entire board and tuition.
Many more are earning half of their board by working for the
institution, and paying the remainder, four dollars per month, from
money earned last summer. We are obliged to refuse many applicants, who
would be glad to work for half of their board. Any of our friends
desiring a "good investment" of benevolence can be supplied with
particulars by applying to us.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIAN NEGRO LEADERS.


We conscientiously believe that educated _Christian_ Negroes are to be
the safe and trusted leaders of their people in the crisis which is
coming in the South. Their wisdom and Christian character will
counterbalance the rash and reckless impulses of others of their race,
and instead, therefore, of its being unwise to educate the Negro, as
some Southern white people believe, the Christian education of these
colored people will be the sheet anchor of safety to both whites and
blacks in the South. As a specimen of the counsel given by the
influential Christian Negro, we clip the following from the _Christian
Recorder_ of Philadelphia, the organ of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church:

    While we believe in all men being courageous, we encourage none to
    be rash. We are at the mercy of a powerful class. It is always
    best to remember this and apply the ounce of preventive to save
    the fifteen ounces of cure. Our brethren must be very careful in
    respect to the position taken on all subjects. Take no position
    from which you are likely to be forced to your disadvantage. In
    all writing and speaking forget not that discretion is the bitter
    part of valor.

We append, as germane to the subject, the following piece of sensible
advice given by Rev. J.C. Price of Salisbury, N.C., to his brethren:

    I have no faith in the doctrine of assimilation. The blacks may
    say their color is against them. If that could only be changed,
    all would be well. I believe that color has nothing to do with the
    question. Black is a favorite color. A black horse we all admire.
    A black silk dress is a gem. A black broadcloth suit is a daisy.
    Black only loses its prestige, its dignity, when applied to a
    human being. It is not because of his color, but because of his
    condition, that the black man is in disfavor. Whenever a black
    face appears, it suggests a poverty-stricken, ignorant race.
    Change your conditions; exchange immorality for morality,
    ignorance for intelligence, poverty for prosperity, and the
    prejudice against our race will disappear like the morning dewdrop
    before the rising sun.

The _Southern Congregationalist_ gives the following hopeful statement:

    One of the most distinguished representatives of our Baptist
    brethren, whose name is a household word in that communion
    throughout the South, expressed a common view among us when he
    said in our office not long since:

    "We once thought that Negroes were incapable of education, but we
    have found ourselves mistaken, and now favor the education of the
    race, trusting that with better edification better ideas will
    come."

       *       *       *       *       *

CONFERENCE OF EDUCATORS.

BY REV. GEO. W. MOORE.


The first Conference of Educators of Colored Youth, which met in
Washington, D.C., March 25-27, was a large and interesting meeting, and
the results were very gratifying. Representative instructors were
gathered from various parts of the country--chiefly from the Southern
States--at the invitation of the College Alumni of Howard University, to
review the educational progress of the past twenty-five years; to
compare views of the status and needs of the work, and to consider plans
for the future. It was felt that there were certain questions and
special needs arising out of the condition of the colored people in this
country, which required earnest consideration, the solution of which
rests largely with the Negro himself. The presence of so many colored
men and women who had graduated from the institutions of learning they
now seek to foster, including Presidents of colleges and normal schools
and principals and teachers of public schools, professors of Greek,
Latin, mathematics and theology, physicians, lawyers and ministers, was
an object-lesson of the educational progress of the race.

Able papers were read on practical subjects of all phases of educational
work. Industrial work, normal training and higher education, were
fruitful topics of discussion. While each had its advocates, it was the
consensus of opinion that each of these departments has its place, and
that all were needed in the education of our colored youth. Judge
Tourgee addressed the Conference on National Aid to Education; and Hon.
W.T. Harris, the Commissioner of Education, advocated the higher
education of the Negro. National Aid to Education was strongly advocated
by the Conference, and is emphasized in their address to the country.
That address commends itself to the thoughtful consideration of the
friends of education. The report closes with the following appeal in
behalf of the institutions that have been established in the South: "A
crying need at the present hour is the making permanent of the larger
and more central institutions of learning for colored youth in the
South, through permanent endowments, by private contributions. Many of
them have struggled along for a quarter of a century, doing much good,
it is true, but greatly hindered in their progress because of the
uncertainty of their financial support. We appeal to the wealthy and
philanthropic everywhere to contribute of their means to such
endowments."

Four college Presidents were in attendance, and took part in the
Conference--Rev. Dr. Simmons, of Kentucky State University; Rev. Dr.
Brackett, of Storer College, Harper's Ferry; Rev. Dr. Bumstead, of
Atlanta University and Rev. Dr. Rankin of Howard University. Prof. J.M.
Gregory of Howard University was elected President, and Prof. S.G.
Atkins of Salisbury, N.C., Secretary of the Conference. The next meeting
will be held at Atlanta, Ga., January 1, 1891.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PRIZE POEM.


A publishing house in North Carolina offered "a handsome prize for the
best poem, not less than sixteen nor more than twenty-four lines, on any
North Carolina subject." Twenty or more poems were received, and
submitted to a committee who did not know the names of the writers; on
comparison with the numbers it was found that the poem to which the
prize was awarded was written by Mrs. A.W. Curtis, of Raleigh, N.C., a
missionary of this Association. We print the poem not only for its
merit, but as an honor conferred upon one of our valued workers among
the colored people of the South.


NORTH CAROLINA.

BY MRS. A.W. CURTIS.

    Thou sittest like a queen with coronal
  Of dazzling beauty on thy sunny brow;
  The glorious mountains for thy lofty throne,
  The grand old Ocean lying at thy feet;
  Thy jewels are the healing springs, that lie
  Like gleaming pearls upon thy bounteous breast.
  From far and near, earth's weary pilgrims come,--
  A long procession, sad, and heavy-eyed,--
  To win anew the priceless boon of health,
  From thy Bethesda, angel-stirred and blest.
  Deep in the bosom of thy mighty hills,
  Dame Nature brews the elixir of life,
  And pours it lavishly through riven rocks,
  In basins carved by no weak, human hand;
  And here and there, deep down the woodland glens
  She sets her moss-rimmed chalices, where those
  Who quaff with fevered lips the cooling draught,
  Find health and vigor stealing through their veins.
  O, queenly State! lift up thy fair, proud head,
  The while thy sons and daughters honor thee,
  And shine a pure white star, whose light shall be
  Undimmed, through all the ages yet to come!

       *       *       *       *       *

We are very happy to acknowledge the gift of one hundred copies of the
"People's Commentary on the Gospel according to St. Luke," by Edwin W.
Rice, D.D., from the American Sunday-school Union, at Philadelphia,
Penn. These books will be sent to our schools in the South, where they
will be of great benefit to the teachers in the Sunday-schools, and to
the graduates as they go forth to fresh experiences in the country
summer schools.

A man told one of our Indian pupils, that he was not like other men,
that he helped others and went to church, etc., and as she told the
story she said, "Yet he is a Republican and sinner, I think."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY C.J. RYDER.


A little girl in the Sunday-school at Quincy, Mass., when asked what a
missionary was, replied: "A missionary is a man who comes around to get
our money." That expresses with a good degree of accuracy the object of
the missionary's trip through New England, and it is wonderful what
large sums of money come from these generous churches in response to the
appeals of our different Societies.

It was pleasant to turn aside for a few weeks and mount again into the
saddle, and visit the field into which these contributions go, and where
so many earnest and godly missionaries are putting in their life work.
There were evidences of progress in these mission stations on every
side.

Lincoln Memorial Church at Washington have greatly improved their house
of worship, expending upon it $1,500, collecting through their own
membership almost this entire sum. Industrial classes are held regularly
in the same building, taught by the pastor's wife. A kindergarten, in
which a large number of little children are regularly taught, is also a
department of this missionary work. I noticed among the other children a
bright little French boy in this kindergarten school.

While waiting for a train in the depot at Washington, I noticed an old
colored man very busy reading a book. Looking over his shoulder, I found
that he was studying Barnes' Notes on Matthew! No white man was better
employed than this. And this incident is typical of the desire of the
colored people to learn, especially that which throws light upon God's
word.

Excitement ran high in Florida over the murder of United States Marshal
Saunders. A Southern man on the street, not knowing that any Northern
man was present, remarked to a friend as follows: "I would not give $250
to any man to shoot a United States Marshal, but I would give $500 to
help defend any man that shot him." The colored people were agitated
over this murder, for it hinted at the possibility of general outrage
and murder, in which they would be sufferers. I heard in a colored
church in St. Augustine the following prayer: "O Lord! overcome those
who oppress us, not by sword and bayonet and blood, but by the power of
the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ." When the spirit that that prayer
breathes becomes the spirit of the whole people of the South, black and
white, the present desperate condition of things will come to an end.

The Girl's Industrial School at Thomasville, Ga., is crowded with
pupils. The dormitory accommodations provide room for only forty pupils,
and forty-two are already there. One feature of the work in this school
is especially worthy of mention; and that is, the thorough study of the
Bible. This is systematic and comprehensive. It does not consist in
learning and repeating, in a parrot-like way, different dates and names.
It is analytical, both in history and biography. It also includes
careful study of Biblical geography. I am sure those in the North who
visit this school will be especially gratified by the success in this
department of the school work.

While looking for a friend in Tallahassee, Fla., I visited his office
two or three times. The office-boy finally informed me that he had "gone
to Liberia." I asked him whether Liberia was a country or a town, and he
replied: "Why, boss! it's de place dey reads books." He meant the
library. I related this experience to the barber at the hotel, and he
turned to the porter and said, "You make just such mistakes, porter."
The porter replied, "Yes, I knows I makes _sentimental_ mistakes." He
supposed a sentimental mistake was one that was made in a sentence. Big
words never stumble them. And yet, little by little they are gaining in
the use of language, and naturally they are orators.

It gives a Protestant Christian a strange feeling when he observes the
Christian bearing of the Roman Catholics toward the colored people in
the South, and the unchristian bearing of many Protestant denominations
toward them. Dropping into the Cathedral at St. Augustine, I saw
graceful white ladies kneeling side by side with black women, and
worshiping together. At Pensacola I went into a Catholic church, and
there in a crowded audience were colored and white people sitting in
adjoining pews with perfect freedom. I went from here into a Methodist
church, and there was not a single colored person present. It would not
be strange if the Roman church gathered into its fold a large part of
the Negroes of the South. Whatever may be the superstition and errors of
their church, they do recognize in every human being a child of God, and
offer to all freedom in Christian service.

       *       *       *       *       *

THEN AND NOW.

BY MISS L.A. PARMELEE.


THEN.

Nearly twenty years ago a little company of Christians at Byron, Ga.,
decided to form a Congregational Church. Their place of worship was a
bush arbor or "bush harbor" as it was usually called. Feeling the need
of more frequent ministrations than the pastor of Macon could furnish,
they asked to have one of their own number licensed as a leader. A
Council of churches was called at Andersonville, and the candidate
presented himself for examination.

He was a working man in middle life; his personal appearance bespoke him
better fitted for the blacksmith's forge than the pulpit. His literary
qualifications reached their limit when he could slowly read from his
pocket Testament that "God so loved the world," and "Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners." In theology, he was prepared to
discuss, with race shrewdness and quaint corn-field illustrations, the
doctrines of election and future punishment. His Congregationalism
comprised three points,--"To live by the Bible, to have only one wife,
and to not drink whiskey"--good points for that time, and popularly
supposed to represent the new denomination.

His spirit was excellent, as, with genuine humility, he expressed his
wish to serve the church only until it could command the ministrations
of some one of better education and more general fitness for the
position. His personal experience of religion was satisfactory, as were
also the testimonials to his character, and so the Council licensed him
to preach, Pastor Rogers, of Macon, giving him an earnest charge to be
faithful in the service of Christ.


NOW.

The circumstance had faded from my mind, but suddenly was remembered two
days ago, when sitting in the congregation that had gathered in the
chapel of Livingstone Hall, Fisk University, to listen to the
examination of ten young men who presented themselves to the Central
South Association for license to preach. These candidates were
physically and mentally alert, active, strong. With a single exception
they were under thirty years of age.

Besides the ordinary helps of Concordance and Bible Dictionary, more
than half of these young men in studying the Scriptures, can pick up
from their study tables, Testaments in German, French, Latin and Greek,
to gather the light these translations may throw upon any passage.

Their theology was clear, and showed acquaintance with the best thought
upon the whole range of subjects. Their Congregationalism embraced two
points, independence and fellowship. The right of private judgment based
upon intelligent study of the Word of God, apparently covered the ground
of their church polity. They hold modern ideas regarding Christian work
along the lines of missions, temperance, Sabbath-schools, White Cross
Leagues, Christian Endeavor Societies, Y.M.C.A. and similar
organizations. All have had experience in some of these branches of
work. The Association licensed nine of them for one year, and ordained
the tenth to the regular work of a minister of the Gospel. Full of hope,
courage and zeal, they give promise of usefulness.

The day of the corn-field and blacksmith preachers, is past. Some of
them were good men. They have been exceedingly useful in holding the
people together in church organizations and maintaining the forms of
worship, even where gross errors were allowed. The present generation
_must_ have and can have intelligent preaching from the lips of men
above reproach.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.

BY REV. B.A. IMES.


Another "best of all meetings" has occurred. The Union Church at Fisk
University, Nashville, Tenn., together with the combined population of
that interesting institution, was "our host," and was most cordial in
the entertainment of guests, from April 3d to 7th. Jonesboro, Knoxville,
Chattanooga, Sherwood, Memphis and Nashville, Tenn., with Louisville,
Ky., Sand Mountain, Florence and Athens, Ala., and Little Rock, Ark.,
were represented by from one to three delegates each, including pastors,
except in cases of Louisville and Sand Mountain.

Rev. Samuel Rose of Jonesboro, gave the opening discourse--"If ye love
me, keep my commandments." Friday morning devotional meeting found a
good number of one accord in one place, asking for the renewed anointing
of the Holy Spirit. The business session began with Brother Yancy B.
Sims, of Little Rock, as Moderator, Rev. S. Rose, Recording Secretary.
After roll-call, the narrative of the state of religion in the churches
showed not any flattering condition of prosperity, but in general a
state of hopefulness. Some of the churches are evidently becoming
established, while pastors, laboring amid all the trials incident to the
common poverty, the want of general culture, and of experience in self
government, have occasion to walk by faith oftener than by sight. "_To
patience, experience_," is a phrase we are studying in the original.

"Christian Benevolences and their Administration," was the title of a
paper presented by B.A. Imes of Memphis. The general discussion was
animated. It was agreed we should understand that contributions to the
cause of religion are not gifts. When we offer to the Lord we only pay
what we owe. Religion has too long been made to go a begging.

Prof. H.S. Bennett spoke on "Ministerial Support."

On Friday night, members of the Association found themselves
"complimented" with tickets, and crowded in the chapel of Livingstone
Hall, where Prof. Spence and the Mozart Society, of Fisk, treated us to
an excellent rendering of Haydn's great oratorio, "The Creation." Many
came over from the city, whites from "best families," all crowding
in--listening, wondering, enjoying! How the music of those well-tuned
instruments and voices caught us up and carried us away! Color-line
melted and faded out! How we wished the politicians all might have been
brought under that magic spell of solos and choruses! Next morning yet
they were ringing in our heads, and stirring our hearts with the praises
of God.

Saturday A.M. was largely spent in the able and effective presentation
of the topic, "The Holy Spirit, His Personality and Work," by Rev. R.B.
Johns, of Nashville. We agreed to carry the discussion further on our
knees before God. Saturday P.M. nine young men were examined for
licensure to preach. With few exceptions, their intelligent answers and
general clearness of thought were creditable indeed. These young men
belong to different college classes. They have taken instruction in
theology with Prof. Bennett, at times crowded in between regular work in
their classes. With these was Brother J.D. Pettigrew, a former Fisk
student, who returned recently from Paris, Texas, to be ordained. His
examination was conducted with something of scrutiny, and it was
apparent that a clear head, studious mind and consecrated heart afford
reason to expect for him a useful career. He seems devoted and
teachable.

Sunday at eleven A.M. Prof. Bennett gave the sermon from "I magnify mine
office." Then followed the solemn act of ordination. Rev. Jos. E. Smith,
H.S. Williams, Prof. Bennett, and B.A. Imes, the latter offering the
prayer, laid their hands on the kneeling brother's head and "set him
apart for the ministry." All present seemed impressed with the solemn
ceremony. The afternoon brought us to the Lord's table. Five young
people were taken into the church.

At night a service of song led by Prof. Spence and his "sweet singers,"
together with addresses by Rev. George Smith, President Cravath, Rev.
Eugene A. Johnson and B.A. Imes closed the delightful day and another
meeting of the Central South.

Florence, Ala., is to be the next meeting place.

Rev. J.H. Frazee of Knoxville Pilgrim Church was received "by letter"
into the Central South Association. Also Rev. Lot Lake of the Welsh
Church, and Rev. F.E. Jenkins of New Decatur. The latter reported his
church as expecting to join in the near future. The Plymouth Church
Knoxville, was received in response to its application, by letter; the
two delegates appointed, business men, were hindered from coming.
However we have these tokens of the blessed Gospel spirit uniting these
churches in fraternal union, we hope in spirit as well as name, and
casting out from the Lord's people the demon of color-caste.

Not the least interesting feature of our gathering was the presence of
the many bright and promising young people at Fisk University. And we
renewed our appeal for a Theological Seminary, which is greatly needed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SIX DAYS SHALT THOU LABOR."


A superintendent in our Mountain Work writes:

I left home on horseback last Wednesday, after dinner, rode twenty-one
miles to Crossville, stopping on the way to contract for some lumber,
arriving in Crossville in time for an eight o'clock supper; spent an
hour after breakfast with brother Cameron, rode twenty-seven miles to
Deer Lodge, half the way in a hard rain, getting pretty wet. The
monotony of the trip was broken, Thursday, by picking my way through the
brush rather than following the road. For ten miles before reaching Deer
Lodge, I followed closely the track of the storm, the week before. Trees
were torn up, houses and barns unroofed, the fragments, in some cases,
being strung along the way for rods.

There were new roofs and one or two new houses along the road. The men
had been so busy fixing shelter for themselves and their neighbors that
they had done nothing toward cutting trees out of the way. I got through
in time to dry out a little, take supper with brother Lusty and attend
the Christian Endeavor meeting with him. Twenty were present; they have
now twenty-six active members. Next morning, I examined the buildings,
found the church building injured but little, it having moved only two
or three inches on its foundation. But the school-house was the next
thing to an utter wreck. It will have to be rebuilt. After dinner I rode
fourteen miles to Wartburg, making twenty-eight miles, Friday.

Saturday morning, I rode twenty miles before dinner to Harriman, made
several calls, led the Sunday-school teachers' meeting at night, and a
business meeting afterwards. I had charge of the Sunday-school the next
morning, heard a sermon by a Methodist brother in the afternoon, after
which I completed the organization of our "Pilgrim Congregational Church
of Harriman." We organized with fifteen members. At night I led a praise
service, the room being packed full. Monday morning, I was in the saddle
again, calling at the new town of Cardiff, and getting home, after
riding twenty-two miles, in time for a late dinner. This kind of work
does not give me much time to enjoy (?) blue Monday!

       *       *       *       *       *

ENCOURAGED AND THANKFUL.

(From a Lady Teacher in the Mountains.)


We have been greatly encouraged in our work. A marked earnestness has
been expressed by our scholars. The industrial building has afforded
work for a number. Our boys enjoy their work much and are so thankful
they "can git to go to school." Many of the older scholars who enter our
school have never had any advantages, or, as they express it "pow'ful
bad chance of gittin book-larnin."

They are willing to take their places with the small children. It is
really pitiful to see the embarrassment of a young man of nearly thirty
years, when he cannot read a single sentence in the Second Reader. Two
years ago, a young man entered my department who had not attended school
in fourteen years. He actually knew nothing; one week he did nothing but
listen. He was ashamed; he thought he could not stand it. He was a
Christian young man, and asked God to help him. His progress has been a
wonder. To-day, he stands at the head of his grade and conducts one of
our out-station Sunday-schools every Sabbath. He has an excellent
influence among his people, seeing their needs, and his great desire is
to carry the blessed news of the gospel among his own people. The
possibilities of our girls and boys God only knows.

During our vacation a number of our scholars went home. One girl visited
her home, a distance of about fifteen miles. Her brother, a rough
mountain boy, came for her with his "wag." She was a happy girl, for her
love for her mother is great. She did not return, and we thought she had
left us. To-day she appeared, bounding in and crying for joy. 'I just
struck out and walked, and I'm nigh plumb giv out.' The change in these
girls is often very encouraging. We feel greatly our cramped room, but
we have strong faith in God, and look for more room, better buildings
and greater success in our work.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.


Tougaloo University, established in 1869, located at Tougaloo, Miss., on
the Illinois Central Railroad, is one of the chartered schools of the
American Missionary Association. Its enrollment is now over four
hundred, with seventeen teachers. Accessible from all parts of
Mississippi and adjacent States, no school of the American Missionary
Association is better located for effective work among the Negroes. In
the four nearest counties, the colored population which was, in 1880, a
little over 87,000, is now probably more than 100,000, none of it more
than thirty-five miles from Tougaloo. Within a radius of seventy-five
miles there are not far from 450,000 Negroes. By the last census,
Mississippi's colored population was 650,291. The lowest estimate of the
present number is 800,000. At least seventy per cent. of this population
is illiterate. Tougaloo is thus in the very midst of America's Africa.
Just at hand, also, is the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, into which Negroes
are pouring from other States. Here they are gaining homes and
establishing communities. Their numbers are expected continually to
increase. It will probably be as prosperous and influential a Negro
section as any in the land. Tougaloo is the nearest school of high grade
to this Delta region. From lower Arkansas, central and upper Louisiana,
Tougaloo is drawing increasing numbers of pupils each year. With such a
location the only limit to the growth of Tougaloo in numbers and
influence will be that set by the means which Christian beneficence
provides for its support. Tougaloo aims to give a thoroughly practical
education to colored youth of both sexes. A colored minister well
expressed it when he said: "It is the aim of the teachers of Tougaloo to
enable the Negro to have the grace of God in his heart, knowledge in his
head, and money in his pocket."

Is there not in this work a rare opportunity for an investment that will
return an ever increasing rate of interest? Enlightened patriotism,
philanthropy, Christianity, all urge the prompt and generous support of
such a work as this.--_Tougaloo University Reporter._

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. Eli Tapley, pastor of four of our churches in Mississippi, died
March 2, in Lowndes County. He was born in the same County and State in
1839. When he was eight years old, his parents moved to Alabama. At
seventeen years of age he was converted, and immediately entered with
zeal upon the active duties of a Christian life. Uniting with the
Methodist church, he was soon appointed class leader and Sunday-school
teacher. Afterwards as exhorter and licensed minister he labored without
salary, as he had opportunity, both among white and colored people. In
1869, he removed to Lowndes County, Miss., united with the
Congregational Church there and was ordained to preach, and for many
years he continued his work under the Christian Commission for Free
Missions, of Wheaton, Ill. He was often the subject of great
persecution, because he labored among the colored people and refused to
take any part in the Civil War. In 1881, he began labors under the
American Missionary Association, which he continued until his death,
filling the pastorates of Salem, Piney Grove, New Ruhamah and Pleasant
Ridge Churches in Mississippi. He was an earnest and true man. One of
his latest rapturous exclamations, with face beaming with smiles as if
in full view of the Celestial City, was, "Heaven through Christ."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *

A JANUARY TRIP.

BY REV. JAMES F. CROSS.

_Missionary among the Indians in Dakota._


On the 8th of January, I started from home at the Agency to visit
Northfield and Park Street Church Stations. A snow, heavy for this
region, had fallen, and I thought a sled would run easier than a buggy,
so I made a sled. I had counted on the road being broken, as fifty
wagons had gone over it only a day or two before. Here was my first
difficulty. Only a few hours before I started a heavy wind arose and
filled up every track. So for every step of the thirty miles I had to
break a new road. Most of the way it was knee deep, and in some places
it was entirely impassable and it was necessary to go half a mile or
even a mile to cross a ravine forty feet wide. In one place where the
road seemed plain, the snow was particularly deep. The crust was just
thick enough to hold a horse until he began to pull. Then down he would
go. Finally one horse could not reach the ground and rolled over on his
side, and left me not yet halfway up the hill. I unhitched the horses,
tramped the snow down so they could stand, drove them out and around
perhaps forty rods, and then took in the situation. There was the sled
half way up the hill. To pull it up was impossible; to turn it round the
same, to back it down by hand the same. The only thing left was to haul
it down. Here is where a picket line is the best kind of a missionary.
It will often help a man out of a hard place, or unto a hard place, as
in this case. Making a turn of a rope around the sled and hitching the
team on forty feet down the hill we were soon on solid ground. After
eleven hours of hard work I reached Black Pipe Creek, where our
Northfield Station is situated. In ordinary weather the trip would take
five or six hours and not worry a team. But the longest road generally
leads to a warm house and the coldest drive is forgotten when your team
is in a warm stable and the prospects are good for a hot supper.

Spotted Bear, who is the native teacher and preacher at Northfield
Station, has gone to work with earnestness and enthusiasm. Here is a
large community, perhaps fifty houses, heathen to the core. Reuben Quick
Bear, a Carlisle student, lives here. Beyond him few know anything of
Christianity. Spotted Bear has an evening school of twenty or more young
men. He teaches Dakota, and as much English as he can. A few can read.
These he puts into a Bible class. The New Testament is the text book. On
Sunday he holds two or three services, and the house is always full. A
larger room is needed at once. To build this will be my first spring
work. The value of just such work as this cannot be overestimated.
Spotted Bear himself got his education in just such a school. As soon as
Mrs. Ellen Spotted Bear had given me a supper, cooked as carefully and
nicely as any woman could, and served on neat dishes, figured, and with
plated knives, forks and spoons, Spotted Bear asks me for the _Iapi
Oaye_--the news and religious paper published in Dakota. He opens the
paper and he and his wife read it. One item of news is the change of
Government in Brazil. He asks me just where Brazil is; why they change
the Government. He reads of the fire in Boston and Lynn. He inquires
where Lynn is. Being a Congregationalist he knows Boston as a Jew knows
Jerusalem and a Mohammedan knows Mecca. Then he reads the church and
Y.M.C.A. news.

Here is a man, who by his life is denying what nine out of every ten men
in the United States are saying: "It is no use to work among the adult
Indians." He was twenty-five and over before he commenced study of any
kind. He is now a citizen, Republican, Prohibitionist, church officer,
teacher, preacher, all of which require a fair amount of intelligence
and information.

His work, too, is invaluable if the aim is to change the Indian to an
American citizen. In this village this one room only is the opening to
civilization. Some of the young men are tired of Indian ways. They think
the dance is something that ought to be thrown away. These young men now
have a place to spend their evenings, beyond the dance house. These
houses and native helpers break down more superstition and Indian life
than any other influence on the reservation. In the matter of dress it
is the same. Here is an Indian woman who is not ashamed to wear a dress
like a white woman. The teachers in the day schools complain that they
cannot get the girls to wear the civilized dress when they leave school.
And Indian dresses mean Indian dirt and carelessness. One Indian woman
advocating "dress reform" by example, will do more than any teacher on
the reservation.

From Black Pipe I go to Park Street Church Station. Here I have a road
of twenty-five miles and not a mile of snow. Instead of a four hour
drive I have ten hours of dragging along. But the end comes at last.

At Park Street Station considerable progress is made. The school
attendance is more regular. The children are cleaner; they wash their
faces and comb their hair more frequently. They take more interest in
study. The older ones, too, are picking up reading. In two houses I
found children teaching their parents to read.

The Christians here are holding on and others are coming to their side.
Some have reached the second stage of Christian life. The first is
leaving their heathen ways and accepting Christianity. The second is
giving testimony in public. Wherever you go young Christians give the
same testimony. In Jerry McAuley's mission in New York, testimony like
this was given: "Boys, ye knowed me. I used to drink and fight and beat
my wife and spend all my wages for liquor. It ain't so now; I've got
Jesus, we're pals now. D'ye see this coat? I bought it--it's new. I
didn't buy it at Uncle's. There's my wife, she smiles, now we're happy,
this is the right way." Two young men gave testimony like this: "My
friends, you all know me. I used to dance and paint. I am a Dakota. I
have thrown these things away. I have my hair cut, I don't paint. I have
given the dance up. I believe in God, I believe in Jesus my Saviour, I
want you to know God and Jesus, I want you to be his children. It is
hard for me to talk to you; but I know this is the right way; it is
God's way."

The school-room is open every evening in the week. A substitute is
offered for the dance and heathen amusements. If the work is slow it is
sure. When a young man gives up the dance, paint, long hair, right at
his home, it costs something, and because it costs something he puts
some value upon it.

After spending ten days at Park Street, I started back in the deep snow
and coldest weather of winter. In one place I spent almost seven hours
going thirteen miles. And right in sight of home about ten o'clock at
night I ran into an enormous drift. The horses sank almost out of
sight, and then I had to work. But after an hour of tramping snow and
pulling out with a rope I was on the road again and soon at home. Such
is missionary work at this season of the year.

_From the Word-Carrier._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR CHINESE WORK.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY J.E. ROY.


I have visited a dozen of our sixteen missions on this coast. I have
seen them in their night schools, in their Sunday-schools and on their
anniversary occasions. I have taught in some of the classes; I have
spoken, through an interpreter, to many of them, I am only confirmed in
the admiration in which we have always held the administration of our
Superintendent, Rev. W.C. Pond, D.D., who adds this abounding service to
that of a city church in San Francisco, the Bethany. As he was upon his
annual tour of inspection in Southern California, I met him at San
Diego, the anniversary of whose mission at that time in the Tabernacle
of the First Church I have already reported in the MISSIONARY. On that
tour, he held four or five anniversaries, dedicating a new chapel at
Riverside, setting in order the things that were wanting and doing the
cognate work which only his practised eye saw needing to be done.
Everywhere, confided in by the churches and looked up to affectionately
by the Chinese, his coming is always anticipated with pleasure.

I am delighted with the way in which our pastors and churches where
these missions are located are taking them under their own watch-care.
It is not simply to entrust the work to the California Chinese Mission
and to the American Missionary Association to which it is an auxiliary,
but it is to take the Chinese Sunday-schools into their own
Sunday-school rooms, to furnish teachers for the same, along with the
lady missionaries and native helpers, to receive the converted ones into
church membership, and to recognize the local work as their own. These
Christians seem to realize that whatever views may be held as to the
political economy of exclusion, the duty is clear as to the
evangelization of these whom God has brought to their doors. And this is
not only for the sake of these, but for the sake also of China, to which
land so many of them are now returning.

I am satisfied with the soundness of the work accomplished by this
process in Christianizing these who had known the true God. I heard one
man denying all such result and appealing to Dr. Pond. His answer was
that if it were not so, the fault was in the character of the Christ
himself, so profoundly persuaded was he that some of these had taken on
his spirit and character. One of the most intellectual of these men was
one whom Dr. Pond characterized to me as "a saintly person." The number
of seven hundred and fifty hopefully transferred from Confucius to
Christ in these missions, is a most gratifying result. The work of the
Baptists, the Presbyterians and the Methodists, is also of the same
encouragement.

I am profoundly grateful to God for the women who have addicted
themselves to this most self-denying of work for the Master's sake. As
always in such cases, they are most happy in their work. They see such
progress, such result in character, that they rejoice in their privilege
of service. One of these pastors declared to me that for a long time he
had counted these women as his "evidences of Christianity."

The missionary zeal of these young brethren is most gratifying. Besides
the furnishing of $860 toward the mission of the American Board at Hong
Kong, under Rev. Mr. Hagar, they have started their own missionary
society here to operate in a self-supporting way in China under the
advice and assistance of Mr. Hagar. To this end they have sent the
brother Joe Jet over with $1,400 in hand to start the work. He is to be
one of a committee of three over there to direct the same. They have
also in hand enough to bring that sum up to $2,000. They are to build a
chapel, to open free schools and start out evangelists. They will send
out a missionary physician, educated after the American way, to
accompany the preacher, and two wealthy Chinamen there furnish the means
to support the doctor and supply the medicine.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE OF MEETING OF STATE UNIONS.


An all-day meeting of the Woman's State Home Missionary Organizations
will be held in the Congregational Church at Saratoga, Tuesday, June 3.
The morning session will open at 9:45. This session is for State
officers only. It will be devoted to the transaction of business and the
discussion of methods of work. The committee appointed at the meeting
last June to consider the question of a National Advisory Committee will
present their report and the subject will be fully discussed.

A cordial invitation is extended to all women interested in Homeland
Work to attend the afternoon session, which will open at two o'clock.
Papers upon subjects of vital importance to the work will be presented
by women from different States. The session will close with a
consecration service. It is hoped to make this meeting helpful and
inspiring, as all the others have been.

       *       *       *       *       *

A YOUNG COLORED GIRL sought admission into one of our boarding schools,
bringing commendations as to her character. She was received, and an
appropriation was made from the Hand Fund to assist her in her effort
to secure an education. The letter below will explain itself. It gives
an insight of the kindliness of many noble people South toward the
Negro. It also reveals an attitude of mind toward our work in the South
which quite disproves the idea that good people of the South are not in
sympathy with our work. The cases are exceptional where the schools and
the churches of the American Missionary Association have not won both
confidence and gratitude from the intelligent and good among the white
people. This letter is but one expression among many, of the good will
that comes to us as unsolicited testimony to our work. The position and
character of the lady who sent the letter to one of our teachers makes
this graphic and pleasing testimony more valuable.

DEAR MADAME:--I have seen several letters from your pupil A---- B----,
in which she speaks in the highest terms of you, of your generous
kindness and uniform courtesy to her. I am glad A---- has met with such
a wise lady, for she is in every way deserving of your good will. She
lived with me for seven years, and I never saw any person more
competent, more honest and upright. In all that time I never found fault
with any work she did for me, and she was as neat in her dress as she
was morally particular. Her family is in every way respected here by
white as well as black, and A---- has always been a favorite with all
classes of people. I am a Southern woman, and before the war my father
was a planter who owned six hundred slaves and enormous tracts of land.
I merely mention this to explain to you what follows. None of us have
ever had any prejudice against colored people, and we try to help them
with purse and pen, and have always met with gratitude and respect in
return. Of course these people are all freed now, but my sister and I
still own a great deal of real estate, and upon it will be found many
families of colored people who were our slaves. You will see from this
insight into my affairs that I am glad to know of the success of colored
people, and I wish it was so they could all go to school and be
educated, for as a rule, where they _have been_ educated, they have done
well. Wishing you great success, and with personal regards and thanks
for your kindness to A----.

Very truly yours, A.C.H.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.
Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.B. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Osgood, 14 First Ave., Montpelier.
Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASSACHUSETTS AND RHODE ISLAND.

[1]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
Treasurer--Miss Ella A. Leland, 33 Congregational House, Boston.

[Footnote 1: For the purpose of exact information, we note that while
the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R.I., it
has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Francis B. Cooley, Hartford.
Secretary--Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
Secretary--Mrs. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Cobb, 59 Bible House, New York City.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
Treasurer--Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Box 932, Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.B. Safford, Elkhart.
Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
Treasurer--Mrs. C. Evans, Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, 409 Orchard St. Chicago.
Secretary--Mrs. C.E. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Lansing.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
Presidents--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
Secretary--Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.C. Keeler, Beloit.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, Box 464, Minneapolis.
Secretary--Miss Gertude A. Keith, 1350, Nicollet Ave., Minneapolis.
Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
Secretary--Mrs. T.M. Jeffris, Huron.
Treasurer--Miss A.A. Noble, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 1216 H. St., Lincoln.
Secretary--Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 No. Broad St., Fremont.
Treasurer--Mrs. D.E. Perry, Crete.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, 3006 Pine St., St. Louis.
Secretary--Mrs. E.P. Bronson, 3100 Chestnut St. St. Louis.
Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett, White Water, Colorado.
Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
  Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.L. Whipple, Cheyenne, Wyoming.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. W.E. Dawson, Seattle.
Secretary--Mrs. N.F. Cobleigh, Walla Walla.
Treasurer--Mrs. W.R. Abrams, Ellensburg.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Elijah Cash, 937 Temple St., Los Angeles.
Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Box 426, Pasadena.
Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st. St., Oakland.
Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1339 Harrison St., Oakland.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
Presidents--Mrs. A.F. Whiting, Tougaloo.
Secretary--Miss Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo.
Treasurer--Miss S.L. Emerson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2612 Fifth Ave., Birmingham.
Treasurer--Mrs. E.J. Penney, Selma.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. E.M. Cravath, Nashville, Tenn.
Secretary--Miss A.M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss E. Plimpton, Chapel Hill.
Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
Treasurer--Miss Lovey Mayo, Raleigh.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. S.C. Acheson, 149 W. Woodard St., Denison.
Secretary--Mrs. Mary A. McCoy, 122 No. Barwood St., Dallas.
Treasurer--Mrs. C.I. Scofield, Dallas.

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us._

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1890.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People._

FROM

Mr. DANIEL HAND, GUILFORD, CONN.

Income for March, 1890 ...$1,500.00

Income previously acknowledged ...5,989.80

Total ...$7,489.85

       *       *       *       *       *

CURRENT RECEIPTS.

    MAINE, $411.49.

    Alfred, Cong. Ch. ...$2.30

    Auburn. High St. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Woman's Work_ ...25.00

    Auburn. Sixth St. Cong. Ch. Box of C, etc., 1.85, _for Freight,
    for Lexington, Ky._ ...1.85

    Augusta. Sab. Sch. Classes, _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._ ...13.00

    Bangor. First Cong. Ch. And Soc. ...40.00

    Bangor. Mrs. Merill and Friends, Hammond St. Cong. Ch., Christmas
    Bbl. _for Fairbanks, Fla._

    Bluehill. By Miss C.J. Lord, _for Selma, Ala._ ...2.00

    Calais. First Cong. Soc. ...38.00

    Cumberland Mills. Primary Dept. Warren Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
    M._ ...3.75

    Dennysville. Peter E. Voce, Box of new goods, 5, _for Freight_
    ...5.00

    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch. ...3.58

    Falmouth. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Troy, N.C._

    Farmington. New Old South Ch. ...$38.00

    Gorham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 15 _for Burrell Sch. Selma, Ala._,
    3.04 _for Mountain Work_ ...18.04

    Gorham. By Rev. Geo. Reynolds, 3. _for Selma, Ala._ ...3.00

    Gorham. B. of C. _for Selma, Ala._

    Hampden. Cong. Ch. ...3.72

    Hapswell Center. B. of C., _for Selma, Ala._

    New Gloucester. Weekly Papers, _for Selma, Ala._

    Portland. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 187; "A Friend," 10; George
    H. Plummer, 3 ...200.00

    Portland. Fourth Cong. Ch. (7.50 of which from Y.P.S.C.E.)
    ...12.50

    Woodfords. By Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, _for Selma, Ala._ ...1.75


    NEW HAMPSHIRE, $546.56.

    Amherst. "L.F.B." (20 of which _for Storrs Sch. Atlanta, Ga.)
    ...$170.00

    Brentwood. Cong. Ch. ...5.23

    Concord. First Cong. Ch. to const W.F. MASON, GEORGE L. HOOPER and
    A.H. KNIGHT L.M's. ...106.34

    Dover. Southern and Western Aid Soc. of First Parish, _for
    Sherwood, Tenn._ ...25.00

    Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 12.16; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
    Student Aid, Wilmington, N.C._, 10 ...22.16

    East Fremont. Cong. Sab. Sch. ...0.99

    Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...7.05

    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch., 6.28; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 10 ...16.28

    Keene. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. to const. ELISHA AYER, LOREN
    W. TOWNE, CHAS. E. WARD and MRS. MARY RIPLEY L.M's. ...120.00

    Manchester. Ladies of Franklin St. Cong, Ch. Bbl. of C., _for
    Greenwood, S.C._

    Mason. Cong. Ch. ...3.85

    Mason. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of C., 1.50 for Freight _for
    Thomasville, Ga._ ...1.50

    Milford. By Miss F.L. Thomas, _for Stoors Sch. Atlanta, Ga._
    ...0.25

    Nashua. Pilgrim Cong, Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...30.00

    Nashua. Miss Carlton's Class First Cong, S.S., _for Rosebud Indian
    M._ ...5.00

    Nashua. "Friends," Bbl. of C., 1.50 for Freight, _for Greenwood,
    S.C._ ...1.50

    New Ipswich. A.N. Townsend ...1.50

    Piermont. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., to const. DEA. JOHN D. MARTIN
    L.M. ..30.00


    VERMONT, $4,362.32.

    Barnet. Cong. Ch., _Williamsbury Academy, Ky._ ...7.00

    Berlin. First. Cong. Ch. ...21.72

    Brownington. S.S. Tinkham ...5.00

    Burlington. "Memoriam J.W.C." to const. GEORGE T. RICHARDSON L.M.
    ...30.00

    Burlington. Two Classes Sab. Sch. of College St. Ch., _for Rosebud
    Indian M._ ...12.53

    Burlington. First Cong. Ch. Benev. Soc. Bbl. and Box of C., 2.48
    _for Freight, for McIntosh, Ga._ ...2.48

    Cambridge. Madison Safford ...10.00

    Chester. Mrs. J.N. Moore, 20; J.L. Fisher 10, Cong. Ch., 5.68
    ...35.68

    Cornwall. Mrs. Franklin Hooker, B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

    Essex Junction. Cong, Ch., B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

    Granby. Infant Class, _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...0.87

    Greensboro. Cong. Ch. ...14.69

    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...4.06

    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. ...14.25

    Morgan. Miss Lucy Little ...0.50

    Newfane. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

    Newfane. Miss A.C. Merrifield, _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...1.50

    North Bennington. Cong. Ch. ...13.28

    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (30 of which from a "Friend" to
    const DEA. GEORGE H. BAILEY L.M.) ...50.85

    Orwell. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

    Pawlet. "A Friend" _for Indian M._ ...5.00

    Pescham. Cong. Ch. ...37.00

    Peru. Dea. Edmond Batchelder ...3.00

    Poultney. Alice Field, _for Organ, for Fairbanks, Fla._ ...3.00

    Rutland. W.H.M. Soc. and Circle of "King's Daughters," B. of C.,
    _for McIntosh, Ga._

    Saint Albans. F.S. Stranahan's S.S. Class, _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._ ...25.00

    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...10.00

    Shoreham. Ladies of Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

    South Newbury. Mrs. M. Brock, Mrs. S. Brock and Mrs. L. Hale,
    Sewing Material, _for Meridian, Miss_

    Springfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._ ...25.00

    Strafford. Cong. Ch. and Y.P.S.C.E. (5 of which _for McIntosh,
    Ga._) ...25.00

    Townshend. Cong. Ch. ...12.16

    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch. ...12.50

    West Westminster. Mrs. H. Goodhue, B. of C. _for McIntosh, Ga._

    Weybridge. "Coral Workers," _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...10.00

    Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt., by Mrs. William P.
    Fairbanks, Treasurer, _for McIntosh, Ga._:

    Berlin. Ladies ...11.25

    Calais. L.A.B. and A.H.H. ...2.00

    Castleton. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

    Essex Junction. Ladies ...7.00

    Granby. "A Friend" ...1.00

    Lower Waterford. Mrs. A.R. Ross ...2.00

    North Thetford. Miss Susan Dearborn ...1.00

    Wells River, W.H.M.S. ...13

    --------

    42.25

    --------

    $467 32


    ESTATES.

    Newport. Estate of Mrs. Olive M. Robinson, by C.G. Goodrich, Ex.
    ...75.00

    Saint Johnsbury. Estate of Mary S. Durkee, by Daniel Carpenter,
    Ex. ...3,820.00

    --------

    $4,362.32


    MASSACHUSETTS, $21,540.38.

    Amherst. Ladies of First Ch., Bbl of C., _for Fisk U._

    Andover. Mrs. Phebe A. Chandler, _for Chandler Normal Sch.
    Building, Lexington, Ky._ ...1,881.24

    Andover. C.E. Goodell ...25.00

    Andover. Y.P.S.C.E. of South Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
    ...15.00

    Andover. Miss Susie Smith, 25; Miss Clara Boynton, 5, _for Organ,
    for Fairbanks, Fla._ ...30.00

    Andover. Mission Soc., Bbl. of C., _for Jellico, Tenn._

    Ashfield. Mrs. Daniel Williams, _for Freight to McLeansville,
    N.C._ ...1.16

    Atlantic. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. ...6.75

    Auburndale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...103.51

    Auburndale. Ladies' Benev. Circle, Bbl. of C., _for Austin, Texas_

    Bedford. cong. Ch. ...10.00

    Berlin. First Cong. Ch. ...11.00

    Boston. "A Friend" _for Student Aid Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._ ...27.00

    HON. Rufus L. Frost, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...18.00

    Wm. Q. Wales ...10.00

    Rev. R.B. Howard ...2.00

    Roxbury. Mrs. W.R. Nichols, _for Student Aid, Washburn Sem.
    Beaufort, N.C._ ...2.00

    --------

    59.00

    Braintree. South Cong. Ch. ...17.00

    Brimfield. Rev. M.S. Richardson, 20; Second Cong. Ch., 8.44
    ...28.44

    Brockton. First Cong. Ch., 14; Sec. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsbury
    Academy, Ky._ ...15.00

    Brookfield. Coll. _for Williamsbury Academy, Ky._ ...14.59

    Cambridge. Shepard Memorial Ch. ...301.24

    Campello. Mrs. Allen Leach ...0.50

    Charlestown. Sewing Circle of Winthrop Ch. _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    ...20.00

    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

    Clinton. Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...$15.00

    Dalton. Cong. Ch. ...79.50

    Dalton. Ladies' Sew. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C., val.
    (including freight) 98.10, _for McIntosh, Ga._

    East Billerica. Mrs. A.R. Richardson ...5.00

    East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch. ...9.80

    East Charlemont. Cong. Ch. ...15.42

    Easthampton. Sabbath-School of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._
    ...25.00

    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. ...76.84

    Enfield. Cong. Ch. ...50.00

    Enfield. Rev. Robert M. Woods and sister, _for Student Aid,
    Tillotson C. & N. Inst._ ...30.00

    Fall River. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._
    ...17.50

    Fitchburg. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of Rollstone Ch., Box of C. val.
    30, _for Straight U._

    Foxboro. Orthodox Cong. Ch. ...20.63

    Framingham. Miss Mary L. Brown, _for Indian M._ ...5.00

    Gardner. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss H.R. Heywood, Sec., _for Williamsburg
    Academy, Ky._ ...100.00

    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch., ad'l. ...0.25

    Hadley. First Cong. Soc. ...12.14

    Harwich. Miss S.G. Brooks, _for Girl's Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    ...25.00

    Hatfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Tillotson C. & N. Inst._ ...3.15

    Holliston. "Bible Christians" ...100.00

    Holyoke. "Friend," _for Indian M._ ...1.00

    Housatonic. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student Aid, Avery Inst._ ...5.75

    Ipswich, First Ch. and Soc. _for Ramona Sch., Santa Fe, N.M._
    ...24.95

    Lowell. Miss Ward's S.S. Class, for Student Aid, Avery Inst.
    ...7.59

    Lowell Mary K. Fletcher, 2; "A Member of A.M.A." 1. ...3.00

    Linden. Mrs. S.A. Dowse, _for Atlanta U._ ...20.00

    Malden. First Cong. Ch. ...101.00

    Malden. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._ ...25.00

    Maplewood. "Penny Band," _for Lexington, Ky._ ...0.50

    Marshfield. Family of Rev. B. Alden, Bbl. _for Pine Mountain_, and
    Bbl. _for Rockhold, Ky._

    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., 39.10; First Cong. Ch., M. Garfield, 5
    ...44.10

    Newton. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._ ...35.95

    Newton. Mutual Bible Class in Eliot Sab. Sch., by Elizabeth Spear,
    Sec., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...20.00

    Newton Center. "Extra Cent a Day" Band, of Cong. Ch., _for
    Mountain Work_ ...25.00

    Newton Center. Mrs. Luther Paul and "Other friends" _for Indian
    Sch'p._ ...14.05

    North Amherst. Mrs. G.E. Fisher, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
    ...15.00

    Northampton. Ladies of First Ch., Box of C., Val. 110, _for
    Washburne Sem., Beaufort, N.C._

    Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., for Moody Station, Fort Berthold
    Indian M., North Dak. ...66.96

    Northfield. Miss Annie M. Wells ...5.00

    North Weymouth. Y.P.S.C.E. of Pilgrim Ch., _for Jellico. Tenn._
    ...12.00

    North Wilmington. "A Friend," _for Straight U._ ...1.00

    Oakham. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

    Peabody. South Cong. Ch. ...288.00

    Pepperell. Ladies' Circle of Second Ch., B. of C., 2 for Freight,
    _for Thomasville, Ga._ ...2.00

    Pittsfield. Mrs. Mary E. Sears, _for Ind. M._ ...10.00

    Quincy. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_
    ...10.00

    Reading. Cong. Ch. ...18.00

    Rutland. Cong. Ch. ...6.30

    Somerville. Franklin St. Orthodox Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid.
    Indian Sch., Santee Agency, Neb._ ...40.00

    Somerville. Y.P.S.C.E. of Prospect Hill Ch., _for Straight U._
    ...$5.00

    South Deerfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Washburne
    Sem., Beaufort, N.C._ ...8.00

    South Framingham. Y.P.S.C.E., Grace Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._
    ...52.50

    South Framingham. Sab. Sch. Grace Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_
    ...14.00

    South Framingham. Mrs. A.M. Amsden, 5; G.M. Amsden, 5 ...10.00

    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. ...21.00

    South Hadley Falls. John Gaylord ...15.00

    Springfield. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Washburne Sem.,
    Beaufort, N.C._ ...10.00

    Spencer. "A Friend," _for Jellico, Tenn._ ...20.00

    Taunton. Sab. Sch. of Winslow Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...25.00

    Wakefield. Cong. Ch., 17.50; Cong. Sab. Sch., 19.83; Cong. S.S.
    Primary Dept., 10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...47.33

    Walpole. Sab. Sch. Orthodox Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_
    ...13.93

    Ware. Miss Hitchcocks' Class East Cong. S.S., _for Indian M._
    ...50.00

    Ware. Wm. S. Hyde, 10; Mrs. H.N. Hyde, 5: Miss S.R. Sage, 5; E.H.
    Baker, 5; G.E. Tucker, 5; F.R. Clark, 3 ...33.00

    Warren. Cong. Ch. ...115.00

    Warren. Cong. Ch. _for Straight U._, and to const. PRESIDENT R.C.
    HITCHCOCK L.M. ...30.00

    Warren. Mrs. Joseph Ramsdell, 5 _for Chinese and 5 for Indian M._
    ...10.00

    Waverly. Mrs. Daniel Butler, _for Mountain Work_ ...10.00

    Wendell. Mrs. E.H. Evans ...5.00

    West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...9.00

    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch., (5 of which from Mrs. R.R. Montague)
    ...19.00

    West Hawley. Rev. A.B. Peffers ...3.00

    West Newberry. "A Friend" In First Ch., _for Academy, Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._ ...30.00

    Weymouth. First Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. F.H. PALMER and B.F.
    RICHARDS L.M.'s ...60.15

    Whitinsville. Edward Whitin, 100; Wm. H. Whitin, 50; Arthur F.
    Whitin, 20 ...170.00

    Whitinsville. Ladies' Benev. Soc. by Lila S. Whitin, Box of C.,
    Val. 120, _for Indian M., Ponca Agency, Neb._

    Whitman. First Cong. Ch. ...25.81

    Williamstown. Sab. Sch. First Cong., adl. _for Rosebud Indian M._
    ...0.50

    Winchendon. Y.P.S.C.E., by J.W. Beaman, bal. to const W.W. SMITH
    L.M. ...4.00

    Wollaston. Cong. Ch. ...22.42

    Worcester. Union Cong. Ch., 180.73; "A Friend" to const. MISS MARY
    JANE RUSSELL L.M., 30; Mrs. Ellen B. McClenning 1 ...211.73

    Worcester. Piedmont Cong. Ch., (84.65 of which _for Williamsburg
    Academy, Ky._) ...134.65

    Worcester. Logan, Swift and Bingham Envelope Co., 2 Cases
    Envelopes, _for Fisk U._

    ---- "E.W.W." ...100.00

    Yarmouthport. Ladies' Sew. Circle, _Freight to Raleigh, N.C._
    ...2.00

    Hampden Benevolent Association, by Charles Marsh, Treasurer:

    Chicopee. First ...9.81

    Holyoke. Second ...50.00

    Ludlow ...13.87

    Westfield. First ...65.30

    " " _for Grand View, Tenn._ ...75.00

    " " _for Sch'p Hampton N. and A. Inst._ ...70.00

    " " _for Jewett Mem. Hall_ ...25.00

    W. Springfield. Mittineague. ...3.32

    " Park St. Y.P.S.C.E. ...17.00 Ira Merril ...2.00

    -------- 331.30

    Woman's Home Missionary Association, Ella A. Leland, Treasurer,
    _for Woman's Work:

    _For Salary of Teachers_ ...440.00

    _For Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._ ...40.00

    Newton. Mr. Cobb's S.S. Class _for Sch'p, Indian Sch., Santee
    Agency, Neb._ ...6.25

    -------- $486.25

    --------

    $6,040 38


    ESTATES.

    Greenfield. Estate of Ex-Gov. William B. Washburn, by W.N.
    Washburn and F.G. Fessenden, Ex's, Additional ...10,000.00

    Holliston. Estate of Dea. George Batchelder, by J.M. Batchelder,
    for Ex's ...1,000.00

    Swampscott. Estate of Miss Lucy A. Hopkins, by Miss Lucretia A.
    Hopkins, Executrix ...1,000.00

    Woburn. Estate of Miss Ruth M. Leathe, by S.H. Leathe and Wm. W.
    Hill, Ex's ...3,500.00

    --------

    $21,540.38


    CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC. RECEIVED AT THE BOSTON OFFICE.

    Andover, Mass. Sab. Sch. West Cong. Ch., Box _for Gregory Inst.,
    Wilmington, N.C._

    Ashfield, Mass. Cong. Ch., Bbl. Val. 25, _for McLeansville, N.C._

    Georgetown, Mass. Peabody Memorial Ch., Box, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

    Newton, Mass. Mrs. M.T. Vincent. Eliot Ch., Books and Magazines,
    _for Library, Williamsburg, Ky._

    Somerville, Mass. Y.P. Miss'y Circle of Day St. Church. Box, Val.
    52, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._


    RHODE ISLAND, $249.54.

    Barrington. Cong. Ch., (5 of which from "Little Parsonage
    Builders,") _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...100.00

    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch., 109.02; Free Evan. Cong. Ch., 25
    ...134.02

    Providence. Y.P.S.C.E. of North Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._
    ...6.02

    Riverpoint, Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong, Ch., _for Indian M._ ...5.00

    Westerly. Mrs. Mary T. Babcock, _for Mountain Work_ ...4.50


    CONNECTICUT, $3,904.99.

    Andover. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

    Branford. First Cong. Ch, to const. EDWARD D. SHELDON L.M.
    ...36.50

    Bristol. E. Ingraham & Co., 6 Clocks, Bristol Mission Circle, Box
    Sundries, _for Talladega C._

    Bridgeport. Y.P.S.C.E. Park St. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._ ...22.75

    Collinsville. Chas. Blair, 30; H.S. Collins, 10, _for Theo, Dept.,
    Talladega C._ ...40.00

    Columbia. "Friends," _for Freight to McIntosh, Ga._ ...1.00

    Darien. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Miss Ellen M. Nash, _for
    Thomasville, Ga._ ...10.00

    Deep River. Mazie Bidwell, Pkg. Papers, _for Jonesboro. Tenn._

    Durham. "A Friend."...100.00

    East Canaan. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 8; Members of Mrs. C.S.
    Adams' Class, 2; _for Thomasville, Ga._ ...10.00

    East Hampton. Mrs. Samuel Skinner, _for Student Aid, Talladega,
    C._ ...5.00

    East Woodstock. Ladles of Cong. Ch. by Mrs. Geo. T. Bixby, _for
    Thomasville, Ga._

    Enfield. First Cong. Ch., and to const. ALBERT ABBE, J.N. ALLEN,
    HOMER W. PATTEN, T.I. PEASE, F.A. KING, MRS. HENRY C. WOODWARD and
    MISS EMMA L. PARSONS L.M.'s ...50.00

    Farmington. "Friend," _for Indian M._ ...20.00

    Franklin, Cong. Ch. ...6 32

    Glastonbury. D.W. Williams, _for Indian M._ ...150.00

    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch. ...142.32

    Hartford. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch. 10; Mrs. Edward Perkins,
    10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...20.00

    Hebron. Cong. Ch. ...15.65

    Ivoryton. "Friend," _for Rosebud Ind. M._ ...100.00

    Meriden. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss Mary J. Benham, _for Mountain Work_
    ...25.00

    Middletown. South Cong. Ch. ...41.68

    Middletown. Lucius R. Hazen ...4.75

    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch., (70 of which _for Indian M._ and 100 _for
    Tougaloo U_) ...240.00

    New Britain. Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_
    ...36.00

    New Hartford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...39.00

    New Haven. "Golden Links." Dwight Place Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._ ...18.00

    New Haven. Ladies of Dwight Place Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._

    New Haven. "Friend" in United Ch., _for Indian M._ ...2.00

    New Haven. United Ch., adl. ...0.75

    Newington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...34.28

    New London. Wing Sing, _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...1.00

    North Branford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._ ...20.00

    Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._ ... 16.61

    North Haven. Cong. Ch. ...60.00

    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. ...1,804.18

    Norwich Town. "The Other Girls," by Fannie I. Williams, Sec., _for
    Conn. Indl. Sch., Ga._ ...25.00

    Oxford. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C., 6 _for Freight, for
    Marion, Ala._ ...6.00

    Plainville. "A Friend."...50.00

    Saybrook. Mrs. Lucy B. Ward, 25; Old Saybrook Cong. Ch and Soc.,
    24.19...49.19

    Simsbury. Y.P.S.C.E., of Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._ ...15.25

    South Canaan. Cong. Ch. ...5.77

    Southport. "A Friend."...25.00

    Stafford Springs. Cong. Ch. ...28.49

    Suffield. Mrs. G.H. Fuller, Box of C., _for Thomasville. Ga._

    Terryville. Y.P.S.C.E. by Miss S. Lucy Arms, Treas., _for Student
    Aid, Indian Sch. Santee Agency, Neb._ ...35.00

    Thomaston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Sch'p, Indian Sch., Santee
    Agency. Neb._ ...35.00

    Torrington. Helpmeet Circle of King's Daughters, Third Cong. Ch.,
    Bbl. of C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._

    Washington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Indian Sch.,
    Santee Agency, Neb._ ...25.00

    Waterbury. Mission Circle, Second Cong. Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._
    ...70.00

    West Cornwall. Second Cong. Ch. ...39.00

    Westford. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

    West Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...13.00

    Wethersfield. Miss J.C. Francis' S.S. Class, _for Rosebud Indian
    M._, and to const. ARTHUR W. HOWARD L.M. ...30.00

    ----. "A Friend in Connecticut," _for Dining Hall, Indian Sch.
    Santee Agency, Neb._ ...100.00

    ----. ----, _for Hope Indian Station_ ...75.00

    Woman's Home Mission'y Union of Conn., by Mrs. D. Wilder Smith,
    Sec.

    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ ...35.00

    New Haven. College St. Ch., Mrs. Cowles, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
    Ga._ ...35.00

    -------

    70.00

    -------

    $3,804.99


    ESTATE.

    Darien. Estate of Rev. Ezra D. Kinney, by J.C. Kinney, Executor
    ...100.00

    --------

    $3,904.99


    NEW YORK, $858.98.

    Binghamton, Mrs. J.L. Mersereau, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
    ...$50.00

    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._ ...37.50

    Brooklyn. Grand St Order of King's Daughters, Box of Books, _for
    Troy, N.C._

    Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._

    Buffalo. First Cong. Ch., ..100.00

    Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...12.80

    Churchville. W.H.M. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...50.00

    Ellington. Mrs. Anson Crosby ...1.00

    Elmira. Mrs. Olivia L. Langdon ...100.00

    Gloversville. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

    Homer. Cong. Ch. ...20.29

    Honeoye. Cong. Ch. ...31.50

    Lima. Mrs. Louis D. Warner ...2.00

    Lisle. Mrs. M.D. Osborn ... 15.00

    Munnsville. Mission Circle, _for Student Aid, Tillotson C. and N.
    Inst._ ...10.00

    New Lebanon. Ellen C. Kendall ...4.00

    New York. Wyckoff, Seaman & Benedict, _for Type Writer, Fisk U._
    ...45.00

    New York. A.D. Sturges _for Mobile, Ala._ ...5.00

    New York. J.F. Land, M.D. ...5.00

    New York. Mrs. John Lindley, Box of Books, etc., 2.05 _for
    Freight, for Tougaloo, Miss._ ...2.05

    New York. Cong. Sab. Sch., Christmas Box, _for Williamsburg, Ky._

    Norwich. First Cong. Ch. ...39.85

    Rochester. "King's Daughters," Bbl. of C., _for Macon, Ga._

    Sherburne. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. ...33.32

    Wellsville. Cong. Ch. ...25.96

    West Bloomfield. M.J. Peck, _for Jonesboro, Tenn._ ...10.00

    West Brook. Plymouth Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...7.00

    Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
    _for Woman's Work_:

    Albany. Ladies' Aux. First Ch. ...20.00

    Brooklyn. Ladies' Benev. Soc of Clinton Av. Cong. Ch. ...100.00

    Brooklyn. The Lily Circle, Park Ch., _for Indian M., Santee
    Agency, Neb._ ...40.00

    Fairport. Ladies' Aux. ...27.61

    Lockport. Ladies' Aux., _for Sch'p, Talladega C._ ...20.00

    New York. Broadway Tab. Ch. ...20.00

    Rome. Ladies' Aux. Welsh Ch. ...20.00

    --------

    247.61


    NEW JERSEY, $120.00.

    Closter. First Cong. Ch. ...7.00

    Elizabeth. "King's Daughters." 2; "King's Sons," 2, _for Student
    Aid, Washburn Sem. Beaufort, N.C._ ...4.00

    Hackensack. "King's Daughters." _for Student Aid, Washburn Sem.
    Beaufort, N. C._ ...4.00

    Jersey City. "King's Daughters," by Miss A.M. Boyd, _for Student
    Aid, Washburn Sem., Beaufort. N.C._ ...4.00

    Montclair. Mrs. G.H. Mills ...1.00

    Montclair. Woman's Home Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
    Goods, _for Cypress Slash, Ga._

    Newark. C.S. Haines ...50.00

    Newark. Rev. J.W. Whiton, _for Prize, Talladega C._ ...5.00

    Perth Amboy P. Kimball, 5 for 97th Christmas; 10 for 97th New
    Years; 10 for 98th Birthday, March 5 1890 ...25.00

    Princeton. Mrs. A.B. Woodford, _for Student Aid, Fink U._ ...15.00

    Trenton. Geo. S. Grosvenor ...5.00


    PENNSYLVANIA, $6.50.

    East Springfield. Mrs. C.J. Coles ...$4.50

    Philadelphia. Miss C.C. Hogan, _for Student Aid, Washburn Sem.,
    Beaufort, N.C._ ...2.00


    OHIO, $831.52.

    Ashland. Mrs. F.G. Stauffer ...2.00

    Austinburg. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

    Brookfield. Welsh Cong. Ch. ...11.10

    Chardon. Cong. Ch. ...5.64

    Chatham Center. Cong. Ch., to const. WILLIAM E. RICE L.M. ...45.20

    Chester Cross Roads. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    Clarksfield. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

    Cincinnati. Columbia Cong. Ch. ...24.00

    Cleveland. Mrs. C.W. Hiatt, to const. ANNE A. JOHNSON L.M., 30;
    Woodland Ave. Presb. Ch. 20 ...50.00

    Cleveland. "Whatsoever Band of King's Daughters," by Miss E.A.
    Johnson, Teacher, _for Mountain Work_ ...3.00

    Columbia. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian Student Aid_ ...25.00

    Defiance. Dr and Mrs. Scott and "Friend" 20; U.P.S.C.E., 5, _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...25.00

    Elyria. E.W. Metcalf ...300.00

    Hudson. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    Ironton. Cong. Ch. ...18.00

    Madison. Central Cong. Ch. ...32.75

    Mansfield. Miss S.M. Sturgis, _for Student Aide, Fisk U._ ...3.00

    Marietta. First Cong. Ch. ...70.40

    North Ridgeville. Miss M. Lickorish, _for Williamsburg Academy,
    Ky._ ...1.00

    Oberlin. First Ch. ...50.40

    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch., 13.45; Sab Sch. First Cong. Ch., 11
    ...24.45

    South Salem. D.S. Pricer ...5.00

    Wadsworth. M. Jennie Hard ...1.00

    West Andover. Cong. Ch. ...12.00

    Rootstown. Cong. Ch. ...22.08

    Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union. by Mrs. F.L. Fairchild,
    Treasurer, _for Woman's Work_:

    Burton. L.S. ...5.00

    Cincinnati. W.H.M.U., Central Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    Columbus. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Mrs. Otto
    Arnold, Treas. _for Sch'p Fisk U_ and to const. Mrs. MIRA E.
    PARSONS L.M. ...50.00

    Springfield. W.H.M.S. First Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    West Williamsfield. "Willing Workers" ...5.50

    --------

    70.50


    INDIANA, $10.00.

    New Corydon. Geo. Stolz ...10.00


    ILLINOIS, $566.63.

    Aurora. Mrs. M.D. Greenfield, _for Ramona Sch., Santa Fe_, and to
    const. MISS HATTIE A. STEVENS L.M. ...30.00

    Aurora. Mrs. John McMacken, 5; Miss J.F. Harvey, 2, _for Student
    Aid, Washburn, Sem., Beaufort, N.C._ ...7.00

    Bunker Hill. E.W. Hayes ..19.96

    Castleton. Mrs. J.H. Holgate, _for Willmington, N.C._ ...30.00

    Chebansee. Cong. Ch. ...7.60

    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 92.59; Plymouth Cong. Ch. 36.45;
    W.H.M.U. of South Cong. Ch., 5 ...184.04

    Chicago. Mrs. Lyman Baird, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...80.00

    Chicago. The Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Leavitt St. Cong. Ch., _for
    Sch'p Endowment Fund, Fisk U._ ...7.43

    Chillicothe. R.W. Gilliam ...10.00

    Concord. James Joy Thorndike ...0.50

    Englewood. Cong. Ch. ...$31.55

    Galesburg. First Church of Christ ...47.95

    Havana. Mrs. H.F. Jencks, Bbl. Sundries, _for Talladega C._

    Morris. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

    Morgan Park. Y.P.S.C.E., 4; Mrs. M. Thomson, 2; James A. Harvey,
    2; Agnes Harvey, 2; Mrs. Baldwin, 2; _for Student Aid, Washburn
    Sem., Beaufort, N.C._ ...12.00

    Paxton. George L. Shaw ...5.00

    Peoria. Mrs. John L. Griswold, _for Sch'p Endowment Fund, Fisk U._
    ...100.00

    Sterling. Mrs. William McKinney ...10.00

    Tamarack. Miss Jane Stewart, 2; U.P. Prayer Meeting Soc., 2; Mrs.
    A. Ferguson, 2; Mrs. John Gray, 1, _for Student Aid, Washburn Sem,
    Beaufort, N.C._ ...7.00

    Woman's home Missionary Union or Illinois, by Mrs. C.E. Maltby,
    Treasurer, _for Woman's Work:_

    Chebansee. ...1.00

    Chebansee. Y.P.S.C.E. ...1.00

    Kewanee. ...10.00

    Mendon. ...4.00

    Moline. ...1.00

    Oak Park. ...14.75

    Rantoul. _For Fisk U._ ...5.00

    Roscoe. ...0.50

    Sheffield. ...14.00

    Wataga. ...0.25

    --------

    51.60


    MICHIGAN, $304.03

    Allegan. N.B. West, to const. DEA HERMON BASSETT L.M. ...30.00

    Almira. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch. ...56.75

    Calumet. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C., _for Athens, Ala._

    Detroit. First Cong. Sab. Sch ...25.78

    East Saginaw. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
    ...12.50

    Flint. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. ...1.76

    Laingsburg. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

    New Baltimore. Cong. Ch. ...8.20

    Pleasanton. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

    Port Sanilac. "A Member Cong. Ch." ...0.50

    Richmond. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._
    ...2.54

    Sault St. Marie. Dr. H.R. Floyd, _for Fort Berthold Indian M.,
    North Dak._ ...10.00

    --------

    $154.03


    ESTATE.

    Leslie. Estate of Lucy Childs, _for ed. of Indian Youth, Hampton
    N. & A. Inst._ ...150.00

    --------

    $304.03


    WISCONSIN, $147.65.

    Elkhorn. Box of Literature, _for Marion, Ala._

    Fulton. Cong. Ch. ...12.00

    Ironton. O.C. Blanchard ...5.00

    Kenosha. Rev. Thomas Gillespie ...20.00

    Lake Geneva. Y.P. Miss'y Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...30.00

    Madison. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. _for Atlanta, Ga._ ...25.00

    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch. ...6.30

    Ripon. Mrs. C.T. Tracy ...5.00

    Union Grove. Cong. Ch. ...14.35

    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor ...5.00

    Whitewater. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for Austin,
    Texas_

    Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work:_

    Baraboo. W.M.S. ...2.00

    Janesville. W.M.S. ...3.00

    Menasha. Primary Dept. S.S. Birthday money ...3.00

    Milwaukee. W.M.S. Pilgrim Ch. ...15.00

    Ripon. Mrs. C.T. Tracy ...2.00

    --------

    25.00


    IOWA, $178.29.

    Afton. H.W. Perrigo ...$20.00

    Bradford. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._ ...5.45

    Cedar Falls. "King's Sons," _for Talladega C._ ...1.00

    Chester Center. Cong. Ch. ...11.84

    Clear Lake. Lakeside Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    Clinton. Sab. Sch, of Cong. Ch. ...12.00

    Danville. Lee W. Mix ...5.00

    Grinnell. Cong. Ch., adl. ...2.00

    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

    McGregor. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

    Manchester. Cong Ch. ...25.00

    Oskaloosa. S.R. Pettitt ...3.00

    Tipton. William Coutts ...5.00

    Vancleve. Logon Cong. Ch. ...2.50

    Washburn. H. Nelson, 9; J. Brown, 3; Washburn Sab. Sch. 3; D.W.
    Tagget, S. Doxy, J. Bestch, J.M. Keller, Mrs. T. Foulk and Mrs. W.
    Foulk, 1 each, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg Academy, Ky._
    ...21.00

    Wacoma. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._ ...1.43

    Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work:,_

    Chester Center ...14 35

    Fairfield. W.M.S. ...3.93

    Genoa Bluffs. W.M.U. ...2.69

    Le Mars. ...3.55

    Miles. L.M.S. ...13.00

    Rockford. L.M.S. ...0.50

    Rock Rapids. W.M.S. ...6.50

    Toledo. Y.P.S.C.E. ...0.55

    --------

    45.07


    MINNESOTA, $310.14.

    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch., 9.17; C.E., 5.71; Sab. Sch., 1.17 ...16.05

    Lake City. Miss Sarah Manning, 5; Mrs. J. Manning, 4, _for
    Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...9.00

    Minneapolis. Bethel Mission Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._
    ...50.00

    Minneapolis. "A Friend In Vine Ch.", 15; Vine Cong Ch. and Soc.,
    14.50; Miss Linda Jenne, 2. ...31.50

    Paynesville. Cong. Ch. ...3.27

    Rochester. Cong. Ch. ...50.14

    Saint Paul. Miss C.P. Lewis, _for Student Aid, Washburne Sem.,
    Beaufort, N.C._ ...2.00

    Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary Society, by Mrs. M.W. Skinner,
    Treasurer.

    Austin. ...3.25

    Duluth. Pilgrim. ...5.00

    Elk River. ...3.65

    Excelsior. ...2.71

    Minneapolis. Lyndale, Cheerful Workers. ...1.25

    Minneapolis. Park Ave. Mission Band. ...10.00

    Minneapolis. Plymouth, to const. MRS. A.E. KINGMAN and MRS. ROSE
    O. BRISTOL L.M's. ...61.00

    Minneapolis. Plymouth, Y.L.S. ...18.19

    Minneapolis. Park Av. ...12.00

    New Richland. ...0.50

    Owatonna. ...12.00

    Rochester. Whatsoever Soc. ....7.00

    Saint Anthony. Park. ...5.00

    Wabasha. ...2.75

    Waseca. ...2.88

    West Dora. ...1.00

    --------

    148.08


    MISSOURI, $9.00.

    Brookville. Park Cong. Ch. ...5.00

    Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mo., by Mrs. A.E. Cook,
    Treasurer:

    Meadville. L.M.S. of Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Indian Sch., Dak._ 4.00
    ...4.00


    NEBRASKA, $18.93

    Blair. First Cong. Ch. ...$4.44

    Long Pine. Cong. Ch., 3.28; Y.P.S.C.E., 1.42 ...4.70

    Omaha. Park Place Cong. Ch. ...5.34

    Waverly. Cong. Ch. ...4.45


    NORTH DAKOTA, $4.05.

    Sanborn. Cong. Ch. ...4.05


    SOUTH DAKOTA, $54.90.

    Alexandria. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Indian Sch. Dak._
    ...2.15

    Drakola. Mrs. P.M. Weeks ...20.00

    Huron. Ladies' Aid Soc., 6; Rev. J. Kimball, 2; Mrs. Fred Wilcox,
    2. _for Student Aid, Wasburne Sem., Beaufort, N.C._ ...10.00

    Pierre. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch. ...2.75

    Rosebud Agency. Rev. J.F. Cross ...15.00

    South Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss A.A. Noble,
    Treasurer. Sioux Falls 5.00 ...5.00


    COLORADO, $30.19.

    North Denver. Mrs. S.L. Norcross ...5.00

    Greeley. Cong. Ch. ...25.19


    OREGON, $15.00

    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch. ...15.00


    CALIFORNIA, $1,025.60

    Berkeley. Mrs. L.P. Huggins ...10.00

    Ventura. Cong. Ch. ...15.60

    -------- $25.60


    ESTATE.

    San Bernadino. Estate of M.H. Crafts, H.C. Rolfe, Adm'r.
    ...1,000.00

    --------

    $1,025.60


    WASHINGTON, $15.00.

    S'kokomish. Cong. Ch. ...15.00


    DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $5.00

    Washington. First Cong. Ch. ...5.00


    KENTUCKY, $14.16

    Berea. "Ch. at Berea." ...14.16


    TENNESSEE, $52.00

    Jellico. By Mrs. A.A. Myers. 2 Boxes and 1 Bbl. of C. and Papers
    from unknown sources ...

    Nashville. Fisk U., _for Fisk U._ ...50.00

    Pleasant Hill. Cong. Ch. ...2.00


    GEORGIA, $1.33.

    Thomasville. Mrs. Graves, Pkg. of Books and Papers

    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 47c.; Rev. J.H. H. Sengstacke, 53c.; Mrs.
    Sengstacke, Mission Band, 33c. ...1.33


    ALABAMA, $25.00

    Mobile. Woman's Miss'y Union, by Mrs. T.G. Ragland, _for Indian
    M._ ...5.00

    Selma, Cong. Ch., 7.25 and Sab. Sch., 2.75, _for Talladega C._
    ...10.00

    Shelby. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._ ...10.00


    TEXAS, $68.00.

    Dallas. Cong. Ch. ...68.00


    TURKEY, $10.00.

    Van. Dr. G.C. Reynolds. ...10.00


    CHINA, $10.00.

    Fen-cho-Fu, Shansi. Rev. J.B. Thomson, 5; Rev. M.L. Stimson, 5
    ...10.00


    JAPAN, $9.00.

    Osaka. Miss Anna Vetter, _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky. ...$9.00


    EAST AFRICA, $20.50

    Kambini. Rev. and Mrs. B.F. Ousley, 10 _for Theo. Dept._, 10.50
    for _Alumni Endowment Fund, Fisk U._ ...20.50

    --------

    Donations ...$15,091.68 Estates ...20,645.00

    --------

    $35,786.68

    INCOME, $574.60

    Avery fund, _for Mendi M._ ...444.60

    Belden Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...30.00

    C.F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._ ...50.00

    General Endowment Fund, _for Freedmen_ ...50.00

    -------- 574.60

    TUITION, $4,981.95.

    Lexington, Ky. Tuition ...221.90

    Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition ...42.00

    Rockhold, Ky. Tuition ...20.26

    Troy, N.C. Tuition ...27.25

    Wilmington, N.C. Tuition ...199.35

    Charleston, S.C. Tuition ...257.49

    Greenwood, S.C. Tuition ...119.50

    Crossville, Tenn. Tuition ...42.50

    Jellico, Tenn. Tuition ...47.25

    Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition ...7.50

    Jonesboro, Tenn. County Fund ...50.00

    Memphis, Tenn. Tuition ...521.50

    Nashville, Tenn. Tuition ...814.32

    Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition ...20.35

    Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch. Tuition ...171.73

    Cyprus Slash, Ga. County Fund ...86.00

    Macon, Ga. Tuition ...378.45

    McIntosh, Ga. Tuition ...68.98

    Savannah, Ga. Tuition ...202.00

    Thomasville, Ga. Tuition ...64.00

    Anniston, Ala. Tuition ...58.50

    Athens, Ala. Tuition ...83.65

    Marion, Ala. Tuition ...61.55

    Mobile, Ala. Tuition ...222.30

    Selma, Ala. Tuition ...81.90

    Talladega, Ala. Tuition ...178.80

    Talladega, Ala. Tuition ...4.05

    New Orleans, La. Tuition ...481.00

    Meridian, Miss. Tuition ...100.25

    Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition ...189.00

    Austin, Texas. Tuition ...158.62

    -------- 4,981.95

    United States Government for the Education of Indians ...896.40

    --------

    Total for March ...$42,189.68

    ========

    SUMMARY.

    Donations ...101,509.44

    Estates ...101,179.63

    --------

    $202,689.07

    Income ...4,262.91

    Tuition ...22,729.32

    United States Government for the Education of Indian ...8,946.07

    --------

    Total from Oct. 1 to March 31 ...$238,627.37

    ======


    FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for March ...$60.26

    Previously acknowledged ...477.12

    --------

    Total ...$537.38

    ========

  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Bible House, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Advertisements.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER."

[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH PRICE 10 CENTS

For beauty of polish, saving of labor, freeness from dust, Durability
and cheapness, truly unrivalled in any country.

Caution.--Beware of worthless imitations under other names, Put up in
similar shape and color intended to deceive. Each Package of the genuine
bears our Trade Mark. Take no other.

MORSE BROS. Proprietors, Boston Ma.]

SOLD BY MERCHANTS IN CIVILIZED COUNTRIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DR. WARNER'S CAMELS HAIR HEALTH UNDERWEAR

FOR MEN WOMEN AND CHILDREN.]

A new Fabric for Underwear superior to Silk or Wool. A protection
against Colds.

Sold by leading Merchants. Catalogues sent on application.

WARNER BROS. 859 Broadway, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDELIBLE

[Illustration]

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

"Don't on any account omit to mark plainly all your sheets, pillow
cases, napkins and towels. Mark all of your own personal wardrobe which
has to be washed. If this were invariably done, a great deal of property
would be saved to owners, and a great deal of would be spared those who
'sort out' clean pieces."

KATE UPSON CLARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

$60 SALARY. $40 EXPENSES IN ADVANCE allowed each month. Steady
employment at home or traveling. No soliciting. Duties delivering and
making collections. No Postal Cards. Address with stamp, HAFER & CO.,
Piqna, O.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

MENEELY & COMPANY,

WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS,

For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes and Peals. For more than half a
century noted for superiority over all others.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BURTON HOUSE,

PRIVATE BOARDING.

Summit St, Crescent City, FLA

Open all the Year. Charges Moderate.

D.W. BURTON. _Prop._

       *       *       *       *       *

JOSEPH GILLOTT'S STEEL PENS

_GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION 1978._

Nos. 303-404-170-604.

THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 44, NO. 05, MAY, 1890 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.