Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Ralph
Janke and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.






The American Missionary

JANUARY, 1890.

VOL. XLIV. NO. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  NEW YEAR'S GREETINGS

  "NOW, CONCERNING THE COLLECTION"--THE CORINTHIAN CHURCH

  AFRICA--ITS SHADOW AND SUNSHINE

  CONVENTIONS OF COLORED PEOPLE--SCHOOL ECHOES

  ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT EATON

THE SOUTH.

  FIELD NOTES, BY REV. F.E. JENKINS

  REVIVAL AT WASHINGTON, D.C.

  A GLAD THANKSGIVING

  STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS

  TILLOTSON INSTITUTE


THE INDIANS.

  MISSIONARY LIFE AMONG THE DAKOTA INDIANS

  NEW CHURCH AT FORT YATES, DAKOTA


THE CHINESE.

  CHINA FOR CHRIST


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  MASS MEETING OF THE WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNIONS

  WORDS FROM OUR ANNUAL MEETING

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOLLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

    S.B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    CHARLES L. MEAD,
    ELBERT B. MONROE.

  _For Two Years._
    J.E. RANKIN,
    WM. H. WARD,
    J.W. COOPER,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For One Year._
    LYMAN ABBOTT,
    CHAS. A. HULL,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    ALBERT J. LYMAN.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago._
  Rev. C.W. HIATT, _64 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions. Field Superintendent._

  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.
  Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time
constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time in which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. XLIV. JANUARY, 1890. NO. 1.

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YEAR'S GREETINGS.

The New Year opens upon this Association auspiciously. The setting sun
of our old year went down in a bright sky. Revivals of religion and an
increased membership was the joyful record of our churches; by the
generous aid of the Daniel Hand Fund, our schools showed a greatly
enlarged attendance, and the faithful work of the teachers brought forth
most satisfactory results; the threatened debt that darkened several
months of the year was happily averted by good showing on the right side
of the ledger.

It is from this bright setting sun of the last year that we turn with
faith and hope to the opening of the new year. We believe, the work is
the Lord's and that he will provide. But our faith alone will not save
us. It is our duty to inform and arouse our constituents as to the needs
and urgency of our work. We will specify in a few particulars:

1. As to funds. Our last year's favorable showing was due in large part
to legacies. These are variable, and we must rely on the gifts of
_living donors_. Unless, therefore, the churches and individuals make
larger contributions than last year, we have no assurance of an escape
from debt, even if the work be maintained merely as at present. We wish
most earnestly to press this fact upon the friends of the Association.

2. But this is not all. Growth is imperative. The people at the North
are alarmed by the disturbed condition of the South, and are awakening
afresh, as they were at the close of the war, to a sense of
responsibility to the colored people. The aroused feeling at that time
took a practical turn, and money, men and women were sent without stint
to enlighten and elevate. Shall it be so now, or will mere sympathy or
useless regret suffice? No! Something, the _right thing_, can be done.
Fair-minded men, both North and South, realize that all schemes
involving fraud, violence, disfranchisement or deportation, are
impracticable, but all are agreed as to the value of Christian
enlightenment, enabling the Negro to earn property and to become an
intelligent and virtuous citizen. This is the line on which the
Association has perseveringly toiled since it opened its first school at
Fortress Monroe in 1861, and it is not too much to say that nothing more
effective has been done in all these years. Can anything of a better
sort be done in the future? Amid all the jarring discords at the South,
the people there, both white and black, welcome the efforts of the
Association. They feel that we are not disturbers, that we have a single
honest aim, and are working at the only true solution of the great
problem. We ask the people of the North, therefore, to come to the
rescue once more by practical, self-denying liberality.

3. But this is not all. A work so vital to the interests of the nation
and of the cause of Christ needs to be uplifted by the prayers of God's
people. Deliverance cannot come from political parties, governmental
authority or theories of industrial reform. The power of God must be in
it. We therefore respectfully but earnestly ask our brethren in the
ministry to remember this work in their prayers in the great
congregation, and we ask our fellow Christians to remember it in the
prayer-meeting, at the family altar and in the closet.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now, concerning the collection." These are not the words of a begging
agent, but of Paul the Apostle, and they come from his pen just after he
had closed that wonderful fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians on the
glorious resurrection and the victory over death and the grave. These
words are fit, therefore, in any assembly and at the close of any
discourse however exalted. Brethren remember the "collection."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Corinthian church seems, like some churches in recent times, to have
been remiss in sending on the "collections," and hence we find Paul, a
year later, to be "After Money Again." He writes so nobly, so kindly,
that we are tempted to quote a few sentences:

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that though he was rich,
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
rich. And herein I give my advice: for this is expedient for you who
have begun before not only to do but also to be forward a year ago. Now
therefore perform the doing of it. As it is written, He that had
gathered much had nothing over; and he that gathered little had no
lack."

       *       *       *       *       *

The National Council has appointed Committees to take into consideration
the consolidation of the missionary magazines and the re-adjustment of
the work of the several Congregational missionary societies. We are
happy to furnish these committees with all the facts in our possession
on these subjects, and this Association will, in accordance with its
fundamental theory, cheerfully acquiesce in what shall be found to be
the deliberate and ultimate decision of the churches. In the meantime,
it may not be out of place for us to say that missionary periodicals and
missionary societies are growths and not manufactured articles, and that
plans for modification should be very carefully considered. We venture,
therefore, to suggest that counsel be taken of the Town Clerk of
Ephesus, "to do nothing rashly."

       *       *       *       *       *

AFRICA.--ITS SHADOW AND SUNSHINE.

The shadow is still broad and dense, well nigh covering the continent.
The heroic Stanley has found that shadow as dark as when he first
traveled beneath it. The malarial climate and the bitter hostility of
the natives are there yet. The accursed slave trade is as extensive as
ever, embittering the lives of its victims, instigating wars among the
tribes and obstructing agriculture, commerce and civilization. The
failures to suppress it are discouraging. Sir Samuel Baker's
well-equipped military force, Col. Gordon's intrepid courage, and Emin
Pacha's brave endurance have all succumbed before it. Its flow, pushed
back for a time, now returns with its old-time flood. Then, too, the
Mahdi uprising, seemingly suppressed, still lives and is likely to hold
the Soudan if not to harass Egypt. When Emin Pacha, under the protection
of the heroic Stanley, abandoned his little sovereignty, it was a
farewell, humanly speaking, to a speedy establishment of missions in
that territory.

But there is a bright lining around all this darkness. For one thing the
eyes of the civilized world are turned toward Africa with increasing
intensity. The rainbow fringe of missions around the coasts is still
sustained by the gifts and prayers of Christians, and by the blessing of
God. The multiplied efforts of the European States to colonize the dark
continent are facts full of encouragement. The motive may be selfish;
the method sometimes unwise and cruel, and the conflict of contending
interests may be hindrances, but the results will be good. All these
movements aim at commerce, and commerce can only flourish on the ruins
of the slave-trade, and among peaceful tribes with growing industries,
intelligence and civilization. The Congo Free State, with its railroad
in construction, its steamboats on the rivers and its civilized
settlements, is a bright omen of the future.

Surely God's people should pray for Africa, moved by pity and by hope.
Christians in America can do more than pray--they can help to answer
their own prayers. They can raise up the sons and daughters of Africa,
trained in our schools, to go forth as missionaries and colonists to the
land of their fathers. The experiment has been tried with success.
Missionaries of African descent can endure the climate better, and can
more readily reach the people than those of the white race. There is a
call in these facts for the means to give special instruction in
Biblical truth to those who can thus be prepared for this great mission
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONVENTIONS OF COLORED PEOPLE.

The proposed National Conventions of colored people to be held in
Chicago and Washington are significant facts. They indicate that the
colored people are suffering wrongs, and that they feel a call to seek
redress. Their right to hold such conventions is unquestioned; the
wisdom of holding them will be vindicated, we hope, by their just and
reasonable utterances and plans. Intemperate language and rash and
impracticable measures will not help, and we have so much confidence in
the discretion of our colored friends that we believe none such will be
said or proposed.

Our colored brethren must not forget that much is being done for them
and that they are doing much for themselves. It would be unwise to
overlook this in any attempt to reach something less tangible.

Their appeal to the justice of the Nation, to the Constitution and the
laws can be made invincible, but it will be well to keep in touch with
the sympathy of the North and with the conscience of the South, for in
spite of all the wrongs inflicted on the colored people in the South, we
believe there is a large and growing number of Southern people who look
upon this whole question conscientiously, and although perplexed desire
that the right shall be done.

For the colored people themselves, while conventions are good, yet the
accumulation of property, growth in intelligence, and character are
better.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCHOOL ECHOES.

A boy in one of the arithmetic classes was given an example which began
with the statement, that a man deposited a certain sum of money in a
bank. He was asked if he knew what a bank was. He replied; "Yes, it is a
place where you dig coal."

"What is the shape of the earth?"

"The earth is square. Pap says so, and he says the Book says so too. He
says if there warn't four corners, how could the four angels stand on
'em."

"I hear you'uns have taken your children out of school. What did you do
that for?"

"I'll tell ye. I yaint goin' to send my child to any such fool-teacher
as that ar. Why, he tole 'em that the world was roun', an' any fool
knows better."

A Methodist minister in North Carolina, preaching from the passage about
standing at the corners of the streets to pray, told his people that if
they wanted to see a "first class hypocrite," see anybody who would
stand up to pray. The _standing up_ was what he thought Jesus reproved.

A man in the South writes to us as follows, making an unusual inquiry:

"I write you this to ask you do you take married ladies in your school,
and if so I want to send my wife at once. Please send me the terms of
the school and what she will need. My wife wants an education and my
desire is to give it to her. You will greatly oblige me to answer this
on return mail."

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT EATON,

AT THE ANNUAL MEETING IN CHICAGO.


God, who writes his thoughts in the development of a nation, not less
than in the grouping of constellations or in the drama of the physical
world, has spoken in the birth and history of our land with startling
distinctness. In every people we may see an ideal of God embodied,
however imperfectly realized by human achievement. Happy is that people
who can see God's ideal for them, and those statesmen who have it in
their hearts to lead the people along the line of God's thought. To get
at something of God's thought for us, we must go back even into those
dark Teutonic forests into which the Roman world peered with so much
fear and awe, and out of which came those freemen who knew how to leap
upon that Roman world in its pride and its weakness and re-assert human
liberty.

Those old ancestors of ours knew what freedom was; but as they came
against that Roman world, they themselves were in part conquered by it,
and they lost something of that freedom. But God set apart one corner of
the European world for them, and called over the English Channel in the
fifth century those forefathers of ours, there to watch for a century
and a half that tremendous conflict in which the very plow-share of the
Teutons went through the roots of the Roman life in Britain and left
nothing but Teutonic fields remaining. And then God brought into this
Britain, thus set apart, the gospel of Christ, and our forefathers
became Christians--not Christians such as there were in other parts of
Europe, but having that free and independent Christian life that shone
forth in men like Wyckliffe, denying the power of the keys to Rome
except where Rome spoke with Christ's voice, and in men like Latimer,
before whom the proud Henry trembled.

All over England were sown these seeds of a free Christian faith; so
that when Luther came, it was in England as in our country when the
forest fires have ceased, and suddenly there spring up from the sod a
new forest because the seeds lie in the prairie from age to age. So in
our English soil there were those seeds of Christian freedom that sprung
forth and gave us a free and Protestant England. And then, in the
reaction, when Mary was on the throne, and the fire at Smithfield was
kindled, the Christian men of England went to Geneva and there met John
Calvin, whose system of Christian thought set the soul of man forth, in
his awful agony of sin, and in God's redemption for him--set him forth
independent of kings and rulers, and in whose sight a king was but God's
vassal. When Englishmen had to come in contact with John Calvin, the
iron of his free spirit became steel, and then Puritanism was born, and
at that time God raised the curtain that hung over a whole hemisphere,
and gave that hemisphere to these free Teutonic English people. We know
how they conquered the country for this free spirit, and how the
Revolutionary War came on, and Samuel Adams, awakening to the sound of
those cannon at Concord on that spring morning, said, in spite of all
the forebodings of a long and deadly struggle, "How glorious is this
morning," because he foresaw what God could work here in a free
Christian land. And so on that following Fourth of July those men
assembled in Philadelphia and put forth the Declaration of Independence.
There is no better commentary on it than Lincoln's words when he said,
in those dark days just before the war: "In their enlightened view
nothing stamped with the divine image and likeness was sent into the
world to be trodden on or degraded or imbruted by its fellows."

They set up a beacon for their children and their children's children.
Wise statesmen as they were, they knew the tendency of prosperity to
breed tyrants, and so they established these great self-evident truths,
that when at some remote time some man, or faction, or interest should
arise, and say that none but rich men, or none but white men, or none
but Anglo-Saxon white men were entitled to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness, their children's children should look back to the
Declaration of Independence, and should take heart to begin again the
battles their forefathers fought, that thus truth and liberty and
righteousness and justice and all the Christian virtues might not be
lost in the land; and none might dare limit and circumscribe the
principles on which the temple of liberty was being built. Thus, by
these centuries of growth and life God said to our people, "I have given
you this key to your history, the union of liberty and an enlightened
faith--faith and freedom. Be true to these. This do and thou shalt
live." It seems plain enough. And yet, in this garden of liberty there
were sown tares. In the bosom of this free land the deadly foe of
freedom, slavery, was here. In slavery was the evident and necessary foe
of all that God had foreplanned for our Nation, because slavery denies
the rights of men. Men tried to deal with this problem; they tried to
circumscribe it; they said it was a local question, and Webster stood in
the Senate and boasted that he had never spoken of slavery on that
floor. How the way of liberty was choked, how the tree of liberty
withered! And then God spoke in the earthquake, and the fire, the war
came on, and the slave was set free; and it seemed as if again we had
come into sight of God's plan for the race, that liberty and Christian
faith should be the watchword of our national life.

Now again, at last, it seems as if that which we are accomplishing and
that which God has spoken in all these ages is again jeopardized, and as
if this human right shall be denied in the South. Men doubt whether
there is in the Negro more than the capacity of a subordinate race, and
say that to educate him is to lift him out of his sphere. Brethren and
friends, there is manhood in the Negro race. There was humanity in those
slaves who toiled their way over mountains and through swamps before the
war, with their eyes focussed upon the North star of freedom. And there
was humanity in those mothers who clasped their babes to their breast
and fled before the bloodhounds that they might escape the enslavers of
men. There was manhood in those one hundred and seventy-eight thousand
Negro soldiers who seized their muskets and went to the front and fought
for us, and with us, in those dark days of 1864, when the draft was
failing and when volunteering had failed, that there might be soldiers
to stand in the front and to dig in the trenches, and of whom eighty
thousand gave their lives for us. There was manhood in those cabins in
which all over the South, our fleeing soldiers, escaping from prison,
never failed to find support, help, and guidance. Oh! how disastrous a
business it is that that manhood, which all those years of slavery could
not extinguish, should now be extinguished by the priests of a proud,
arrogant, and selfish aristocracy.

But, my friends, as we felt in those days, and feel to-night, there is
still no help for us but in the Christian solution of this problem and
in the Christian destiny God has given to us. Liberty and faith, the two
elements, must be conjoined. For us to deny the rights of the Negro now
is to say that God did not make man in his image. It is to say that
liberty is not a sacred right, but a selfish acquisition; that
government does not exist to establish rights, but to protect
privileges, and that mankind are not brothers, but foes. It is to turn
the shadow upon the dial of human progress backward toward the ages of
oppression and chaos.

And just there is the problem that confronts us, South and North
together. What shall be done in this dire extremity? I remember years
ago hearing of a fire in Charleston in which that beautiful spire of St.
Michael's took fire and some one had to be found to go up beyond the
reach of the hose to put out the flame kindling and flickering there. No
one was found until a Negro stepped forth and climbed that tower, taking
his life in his hands, and put out that flame. And when he came down
again, one man said, "Name your reward," and he replied, "Let me but be
counted a man." And that we have got to do, or God will shake down our
civilization and our Nation as he shook down that spire of St. Michael's
in the earthquake three years ago. It is certain to come unless we
follow the line of God's appointing that this must be a free Nation,
absolutely free, free everywhere. As yet, emancipation is but an outward
and formal thing. What we wait for now, is the emancipation of a true
and an elevated will in the South, and Christian citizenship. Into that,
this Association pours its strength, its money, and its life. It took
half a million lives to emancipate the slaves outwardly, and it may yet
take hundreds and thousands of lives--our lives--our children's
lives--poured in upon this problem, that so we may lift the Negro to
that point where he feels himself, and where we feel him to be, a
man--taught to labor, protected in the enjoyment of the fruits of his
labor, without which the strongest arm grows palsied, trained in a
strong, self-reliant Christian manhood, holding the reins firmly on the
neck of all passion--a man. And that we will do; and the very greatness
of the problem, I believe, is our redemption. It was the greatness of
the crisis that thrilled the Nation's heart when the war burst upon us.
It is the very greatness of our present problem that calls in trumpet
tones to men and women and children all over the land; "Come and help
solve this problem for Christ."

A few weeks ago, in one of the beautiful towns of Northern Illinois, a
young man, the only son of his father and mother, hearing at Sabbath
evening the alarm of fire, sprung forth and took his place upon the
burning building and there did the work of a fireman. In the attempt to
put out the fire he was hurled headlong and in one moment his life had
gone hence. A few weeks afterward, as a friend was talking with his
mother about it, she said, "Our son was always so swift to heed any call
of need or duty, it seems to me as if he heard suddenly some call from
God from some farther clime and sprung forth and was gone from our
sight." Blessed, heroic faith! But, brethren and friends, fathers and
mothers, we need that same faith for our living sons and living
daughters, to send them forth into this work of God. When the Christ
child was on the back of the giant Christophorus crossing the stream,
how heavy he grew as the giant plunged his way through the waters. God
weighs heavily upon this Nation this greatest of all national problems,
what to do with these despised ones. But bear the burden we must, and
bear it through we must to the farther shore of a Christian solution, or
we and it will go down the flood together. There is no help for us
except in this solution which makes brothers of these men.

I see a possible issue in this large Christian faith of our land; and I
see the time coming when the black and the white shall dwell together in
a mutual helpfulness, with a more complete national feeling, a deeper
dependence upon him from whom alone comes strength, less display of
material resources, but more faith in God. That time must come. And then
I see the army enlisting for the conquest of that dark continent of
Africa, shrouded in gloom, so long robbed of her children, but now at
last finding that, like Joseph, they were taken from her that they might
come back to save life. So our Nation shall be not a mirage awakening
the hopes and aspirations of mankind but to mock them, and leaving the
sands of human experience still more arid and barren; but it shall be a
mountain of God, its base resting on the eternal foundations of law and
liberty; its summit drawing down from the willing heavens the streams of
prosperity which shall enrich all the lands of the earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTH

FIELD NOTES.

BY REV. FRANK E. JENKINS.


I reached Little Rock, Arkansas, late one Saturday night and on Sunday
morning found my way to our church service. Arriving a few minutes late,
I found the service already begun. It was a fine looking audience and as
quiet and orderly as any New England congregation. The service was well
arranged and conducted in a very happy manner. The sermon was
thoughtful, earnest and inspiring. The pastor, Rev. Yancy B. Sims, is a
graduate of Talladega College and an honor to his Alma Mater. On Monday
I visited, with the pastor, several of the homes of the people. What a
contrast between these refined homes and the hut of the slave quarters
of twenty-five years ago! The ladies of this church had just finished a
silk block for a quilt which a home mission church in Washington
Territory is making from blocks made in each State in the Union, with
the hope of selling it to increase its fund for building a house of
worship. It was a beautiful block of rich material and the most delicate
workmanship. The faces of these ladies showed great delight in the
thought that they were helping others who needed help.

"Do the colored people vote here without opposition?" I asked of an
intelligent colored man. "Oh, yes!" he replied. "And are the votes
always counted?" "Yes, _except in a pinch!_" was the answer. This is
much better than in most places which I am called upon to visit.

From Little Rock I went to Paris, Texas. This growing city has a
population of about twelve thousand, five thousand of whom are colored.
Our pastor here is a graduate of Fisk University, as also is his wife.
The need of our church work in this city and in the State is two-fold,
direct and indirect. Our Congregational churches are quite as useful for
toning up other churches and their ministry as in the direct work done
by them.

Dodds, Roxton and Dallas in Northern Texas were next visited, and in
each a small church is established and doing a good work.

At Austin, I found our Tillotson Institute rapidly filling with
students--bright and earnest. A girls' hall is greatly needed here at
once. This institution with its unlimited opportunities in the great
State of Texas ought not to be cramped in any way, but to be given
every facility. Who will give it at once what it so urgently needs? I
found several intelligent people here greatly desiring a Congregational
church in the city--the school-church being too far away to reach the
mass of the people. Said an educated colored man to me: "Our most
intelligent people cannot endure the ignorant worship of these old
churches much longer. We want Congregationalism, but if we can't have
that, we must look elsewhere. We must have something to hold our
educated young people from falling into infidelity." And so they must,
for that is a coming danger.

At Helena, I found a most interesting state of things. Our church is in
a country place called "The Colony." The church and the colony began
their existence together, and a more prosperous community of colored
people it would be hard to find. They own several thousand acres of
land, and are in every way ahead of their white neighbors. The school
house of the latter was a poor tumble-down affair and the children were
untidy, while the school house of the former was a neat, painted and
well-kept building, crowded in school hours with bright, enthusiastic
children--clean and polite. The teacher was from Talladega College and
has taught here for five years. His school is pronounced the best in the
region for white or colored. The pastor of this church has charge also
of the Congregational Church at Goliad.

Corpus Christi is a curious town on the Gulf of Mexico. It has about
6,000 people--Americans, Mexicans, Negroes, Italians, Greeks and
Chinese. The Negroes here hold an unusual position, being regarded as in
every way superior to the Mexicans and Italians. Our pastor here is
popular with all classes and has been chosen an alderman of the city,
and is treated with as much consideration as any other of the City
Council.

Our church is one of the oldest Congregational churches in the South,
and has had a very interesting history. With the exception of the Roman
Catholic church it has the best house of worship in the city. On Sunday
afternoon, Rev. Mr. Strong, the Congregational pastor, and myself
attended service at the Roman Catholic church. We went into the body of
the church and took a first class seat, and the fact that one was
colored did not even draw attention to us. It was taken as a matter of
course. The colored people of Texas are taxed for $20,000,000 of
property. In the cities they make up about one-third of the population.
An enlargement of our church work in this State is greatly needed.

Straight University in New Orleans, La., is an inspiring place. I found
the buildings packed full--seats full, chairs in the aisles, in the
corners and on the teachers' platforms--all full. About one hundred and
fifty applicants had already been sent away for want of room, and they
were still coming, as many as ten often being refused in a single day.
They were here not only from the States, but also from Mexico, the West
Indies and Central America. I saw here some remarkable work in moulding
done by a student in the fifth grade, who had never been trained, but
who seems to be impelled by real genius. Straight University has a
unique position and opportunity. Its influence is now great; it is
destined to be boundless.

From the Chicago meeting I made this trip. The meeting was inspiring,
but what I saw in the field, of character-building and the uplifting and
refining of a race, was more than inspiring--it was thrilling.

At Dodds and Roxton a few hymn books are needed. A dozen or two Gospel
Hymns or other singing books for each church would do great good. Papers
for the children are also needed. They should be sent to Rev. Mark
Carlisle, Dodds, Texas.

Papers for the children could be well used at Paris, Texas, Rev. J.D.
Pettigrew; Dallas, Texas, Rev. Mr. Holloway; Helena and Goliad, Texas,
Rev. M. Thompson; Corpus Christi, Texas, Rev. J.W. Strong.

       *       *       *       *       *

REVIVAL AT WASHINGTON, D.C.

BY REV. GEO. W. MOORE.


There have been over forty conversions reported and thirty have been
added to our church on profession of faith. There is a revival now in
progress at the Freedmen's Hospital as a direct outgrowth of our
meetings. Several of the young people of our church, including some of
the converts, were instrumental in leading a number to the Saviour. I am
planning to assist them in dealing with inquirers there, to-night. There
have been revival services in three other churches. The meetings held in
our place were indeed a season of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord.

Our chapel was crowded on Thanksgiving morning; the sermon was preached
by Rev. Dr. Grimke, pastor of the Fifteenth Street Presbyterian Church,
followed by an address by myself. The pastors of the Berean Baptist
Church, Methodist Church and the Lutheran Mission were on the platform,
the Plymouth Church holding a service of their own. In the evening we
held a Thanksgiving praise service, in which about one hundred persons,
including thirty-five of the converts, gave short thanksgiving
testimonies.

Last Sabbath I baptized fourteen by immersion and received twenty-seven
into the church on profession of faith, and three since, making a total
of thirty. Rev. Eugene May of Osage, Iowa, one of the delegates I met at
the World's Sunday-school Convention this summer in London, gave us a
powerful sermon on the characters of "Dives and Lazarus Contrasted." In
the evening I preached a sermon to the church on "The Christian Armor"
and we had the Lord's Supper. Last night, after addressing the young
Christians on "The Way to God," as illustrated by the worthies of
Hebrews eleventh, we had them testify on how they came to Christ, the
one thing they did and what they got. The answers were all intelligent
and to the point. _Decision_ was what they did, and _Christ_ was what
they got, were the answers put in various forms. At the close of the
meeting I asked a gentleman, a member of another church, the Berean
Baptist, who always attends our special services, to say a few words. He
testified to the help and inspiration he had received from the meetings;
that he had never listened to clearer testimonies of conversion than
those given by the converts, and that they were doubly blessed in having
"_our pastor_," "yes," he said, "I will say our pastor, for he is pastor
to this whole community and city, lead you to Christ, and train you for
service." His remarks were warm and sympathetic, but too personal for me
to report more than the above, which is but the key-note of the kindly
feeling that many of the best Christian people of other churches have
toward us, as they have seen our little church come up from almost
nothing to its present position of service in this community. It has
been the Lord's doings and it is wondrous in our eyes. We have already
begun the work of training these young disciples for service, while we
have our nets still spread to catch sinners for Christ. Our motto for
the year is: To win souls for Christ and to train them for His service.

       *       *       *       *       *

A GLAD THANKSGIVING.

BY MISS MARY A. BYE, WILLIAMSBURG, KY.


If any one had been the least bit homesick or unhappy from any cause on
Thanksgiving day, it would have done him good to spend the day at
Williamsburg Academy. Our boys and girls were so happy all the day that
no one could feel tired or sad. After breakfast the boys thought it
hardly fair for them to have all the holiday while the girls had to
work, so they borrowed aprons and helped the girls. Dishwashing,
sweeping and all the various branches of housework were done in a very
short time, and everybody was as merry as could be. The boys declared
that they were glad to have learned something which they did not know
before, about the work the girls had to do. Our very tallest boy, over
six feet in height, was instructed in the mysteries of scouring knives.
He said he had no idea how knives were cleaned, and thought his
Thanksgiving lesson worth learning.

After the housework was done the boys gathered a great quantity of
holly, and our pretty new dining-room was profusely decorated. All the
family then attended the Thanksgiving services in the Christian Church;
that is all except the "Mother," who must needs watch the dinner in
process of preparation. We had a real Thanksgiving feast, in all except
that our turkey was fried chicken.

Mr. Tupper contributed oranges, which were quite a treat. One of the
girls came to mother very much excited, eyes wide open and hands up,
exclaiming "O, Mrs. Bye, what are them big yeller things in the dining
room?" When told that they were oranges, she said, "Law! I never seed
none before." There were others who had never tasted them, and they
watched closely to see how the teachers managed them, before they
ventured to eat theirs. Two of the teachers had written Thanksgiving
verses on cards tied with ribbon, and placed at each plate. After dinner
we moved our chairs back and read our verses, after which we sang
"Praise God from whom all blessings flow," and I think it is rarely sung
more heartily. Then again the boys donned the aprons and cleared the
tables and washed the dishes, while the teachers watched the fun and
laughed until we were tired. While the molasses was boiling, the
scholars played games in the sitting-rooms. Then came the "candy-pull,"
and very _sweetly_ closed the day's festivities.

I am sure we went to prayer meeting in the evening with very thankful
hearts. Some of the scholars said it was the happiest day they had ever
known.

It is a constant wonder to me to see the improvement in our girls, and
their interest in their work. They are so eager to learn to do things
well that I cannot think of my work as one of sacrifice, as some work
may be, for the joy of it overcomes all such thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.

REV. C.H. CRAWFORD.


Much interest is manifest in our meetings for prayer, a number of
students having expressed a desire to become Christians. I have
organized a class for the instruction of Christian workers. It is
composed of both teachers and students, and numbers about twenty-five.

A young man came to my study to be shown how to become a Christian.
After instructing him and showing him the promises, there still seemed
to be something in the way. Questioning him, I found that he was
expecting some wonderful experience. He had specially in mind the
remarkable conversion of a certain young man of his acquaintance. He was
hoping for the same. I said to him, "Now you want to know that you are a
Christian. Which would you rather have for evidence, an experience such
as that young man had, or God's word for it?" After waiting a moment to
take in my meaning he replied, "God's word." "Do you believe on Jesus
Christ?" "Yes." "Well, here you have God's word, John, 3:36, 'He that
believeth on the Son hath eternal life.' Will you take God's word?"
After a moment's deliberation came the answer, "Yes, I will." Then we
knelt down and prayed. This, I trust, was a soul born into the kingdom.

One of our theological students reports the following admonition from an
ignorant preacher much older than himself: "You go to school and get
education. In five or ten years the people will not listen to such
preachers as I am."


TILLOTSON INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

Our school is opening very auspiciously. Never before have so large a
number been here at the beginning of the term. And the requests for the
privilege of coming are numerous, so that if all come who are asking to
do so, we shall be over-full. We are greatly pleased with the spirit
with which the new year's work is taken up. There are more each year who
come prepared to enter the higher grades, which shows that the common
schools of Texas are improving.

The Christian Endeavor Societies, of both the young men and the young
women, have elected their officers and are ready to begin work again,
and the Temperance Society will do the same, this week.

One of the students who has been with us from the beginning of our
school, has left us this year and gone to Oberlin, where he has entered
the Sophomore class. We miss him much, but bid him "God Speed," for the
need of workers is great, and we are hoping much from him in the way of
work among his own people.

R.M.K.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIANS.

MISSIONARY LIFE AMONG THE DAKOTA INDIANS.

BY MRS. J.F. CROSS.


It is hard to get the most interesting experiences of a missionary's
life, because they belong to the daily routine and so are often
unmentioned. But here is a description of life and travel among the
Indians, by the wife of a missionary just going to the Dakotas:

The land of the Dakotas--what a distance! How long the miles seemed from
my home! How frightful the land seemed to me, from the tales of
blizzards and cyclones! How strange to go to live among the Sioux
Indians, known to me principally for the Minnesota, Fort Fetterman and
Custer massacres; to be a friend to Sitting Bull, Brave Bull, Gall,
Grass, Swift Bear, Red Cloud and many others with names no less
picturesque! With such impressions I left my home to accompany my
husband to his home and work at Rosebud Agency, South Dakota.

I was soon relieved of the idea of the distance, for only a few hours
took us across Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin and Minnesota to the
border of Dakota. Here we left the railroad to attend the general
conference of the Dakota Mission at Flandreau. How quickly all the
impressions of years can be changed, when the impressions are wrong and
we see the true state of affairs. In this case, seeing hundreds of
bronzed faces, lighted up with joy, as they sung "I hear Thy welcome
voice" in their own tongue, there was enough to change all my former
opinions of Indians in general and of the Dakota Indians in particular.
It was like coming into a new world. That is, it was finding those whom
I thought belonged to another, lower, baser life, living the same life
with myself; rejoicing in that which is my greatest joy--childhood with
God the Father. And after meeting Ehnamani, Grey Cloud, John Wakeman,
Spotted Bear, and many others; after hearing them discuss living
topics--living topics to them because they belong to the change from
heathen to Christian life; after hearing them pray--though I could not
understand a word, yet from their earnestness I could understand the
spirit of their prayer; after all this, I could scarcely believe that
these men had ever been Indians in paint, feathers, dances and on the
war path. Thus I spent my first four days among Indians. And even if
preaching, prayers, discussions were in an unknown tongue, I perhaps,
understood as much as I would at many a Presbytery or Conference
meeting. And I got as much good from the Dakota sermon as I have from
many an English sermon.

Not the least pleasing of my new impressions were those made by the
missionaries present. Rev. John P. Williamson, of Yankton Agency; Rev.
A.L. Riggs, D.D., of Santee Mission and Normal School; Rev. T.L. Riggs
of Oahe, or rather the apostle to the Tetons, were the life of the
meetings whether in English or Dakota. They came from and returned to
the work to which their lives are given. I did not meet these men with
the greetings of a certain minister there, who asked, "How many years
have you been in the Indian work." "About twenty," was the reply. Then
the minister said: "Well, you have been in the work so long that you
would not be much good anywhere else." My impression was that such men
would be now, as they always have been, successful in any field of
labor. But I must leave Flandreau with its citizen Indians, ready to
vote for prohibition in the Constitution of South Dakota, for this is
not our field of labor.

The next scene is one which I shall long remember--our reception at a
mission home. Other homes may be happy and other people may welcome me
to their homes; but few--none that I have met--can welcome one so
cordially as Mrs. Riggs welcomed us to her home at Oahe. This is a
long-to-be-remembered experience. And after spending a week at Oahe,
meeting the teachers and pupils of the school, and the citizen Indians
there we started for our own home and work, Park Street Church Station.
This place has been the home of my husband for a year.

Crossing the Missouri is one of the first of our experiences. The team
and wagon are loaded on the boat, the men row a few rods, then the boat
stops. "Bar," remarks Mr. Cross, "got to tow;" when, horrors! "Is this a
missionary I see?" Mr. Cross is in the water, sometimes to his knees,
sometimes to his waist. Thus they tow the boat a half mile. From the way
they hold their breath the water must be cold. Well, it is October 10,
in blizzard-swept Dakota. But after two hours of work we are safely
landed on the west side of the river and soon we are toiling slowly out
of the _breaks_ of the river. After a ride of a few hours we come to a
creek with no water but plenty of wood. Here dinner is announced. This
is camping in earnest. This is not play. Camping in the East is
generally within sound of the cackle of the hen and the low of the cow.
But here you must live off of the land or out of your mess-chest. We
combine the two. Many hotels and families could learn a good lesson from
an experienced traveler and camper. In less than thirty minutes from the
time we stop, horses are unharnessed, fire built, prairie chicken
dressed and cooked, coffee made, table spread, blessing asked and we
busy with the tender and juicy chicken. This is the same order at each
meal.

At night we sleep on the earth and under the sky, with but little
between us and either sky or earth. This is a new and somewhat larger
bedroom than I have been used to. But with no house within twenty miles
we are unmolested. What a place! I listen. "All the air a solemn
stillness holds." I look. "So lonesome it is that God himself scarce
seems to be there." But the clear air and quiet night soon lull me into
unbroken slumber. Thus we travel until we reach Park St. Church Station,
where we find our comfortable log house of one room ready to receive us.
Though we reach the house at eleven o'clock at night, a full half dozen
come to greet us, saying, "Catka, winyau waste luha, lila caute ma
waste." "Left Hand, (Mr. Cross) you have a good woman, so I am happy."
Sunday comes; at eleven o'clock we go to the neat little room, chapel
and schoolroom. Here fifty men and women with children of all ages,
listen with eagerness and attention to Mr. Cross as he tells them of the
wise men who came to seek Jesus. Some of the faces are dirty, and so is
much of the clothing. But all listen as if they perhaps might see this
same Jesus. This is Dakota, our field, our people to save.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW CHURCH AT FORT YATES, NORTH DAKOTA.

REV. T.L. RIGGS.


On Sunday, the 8th, we took steps here in the organization of a new
church. By invitation, two of our Oahe Church, Solomon Bear Ear and
David Lee, were present from the Cheyenne River Agency, and it was
judged wise to organize. The Apostles' Creed and a short Covenant were
offered as Articles of Faith and the pledge. The nine members of our
Oahe church whose homes are at Grand River and Fort Yates will become
members here on dismission at Oahe, and the native workers and other
missionaries will also transfer their connection, so that if all do so,
the new church will have a membership of eighteen or twenty.

In connection with these services the new chapel was dedicated to the
Master's service by public expression; it has already been so
consecrated. I doubt not, in the heart of the giver of the funds, as
well as by the prayers of all who have been interested in it. Is is a
bright, pleasant room within, and has a snug appearance from without. I
think Mr. Reed has made a very creditable success in this his first
building.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

CHINA FOR CHRIST.

BY REV. WM. C. POND, D.D.


It is quite possible (though I do not distinctly remember about it,)
that our readers have seen this caption at the head of my articles more
than once already. Be that as it may, I am sure that such persons as
read this Magazine cannot be weary of it. It is the motto of our
corporation adopted twelve or thirteen years ago. It then looked rather
magniloquent for a work so humble as ours; but there was promise in it,
and prophecy, and nothing less would satisfy either our Chinese brethren
or myself. This promise and prophecy begin to be fulfilled. We hoped
then, and now we are gladdened by oft-recurring confirmations of our
hope, that we were laboring not only for these sojourners in our own
land, but for a mighty multitude to be reached by their testimony, and
to be leavened by the influence of their example.

This will be illustrated for our readers by the following extract from
an address delivered by one of our brethren at the last anniversary of
our mission at Santa Cruz. His English will require a little
straightening, but for the most part, I will give it just as spoken:

_Dear Friends_: I am glad to see you all here this evening; and that you
have an interest in the Chinese work. I will tell you a few words about
myself, what experience I had in my native land. I left California to go
to China, July 15, 1887, and after thirty-one days, reached my home. I
found a piece of red paper on the wall above my cooking place, with the
name of the stove-god written on it. We call it "Doy Shin;" "Doy" means
"Stove," "Shin" means "god." Every family worships the stove-god at the
cooking place. The first of every month they burn some punk, and twice
every month make a fresh cup of tea, which is left standing on the
stove. I found that several thousands of punk had been burned during my
absence, and the ends of the sticks were left in the bowls. I felt very
sorry for it; so I tore up the paper and break the punk-sticks in pieces
and burn them up. My wife felt very indignant, and was afraid the
stove-god might be angry and make me sick, and punish me. I say:
"Nothing to be afraid of. But I am only afraid that the true God in
heaven will punish me if I do not tear up the paper and burn up the
punk-sticks." I say: "I must entirely abandon this superstition and must
give this testimony for Christ. For he is the only God that can preserve
my life, and the only one that can take it away."

In the mean time, a Chinese preacher who was supported by the Methodist
Mission was very sick. His children were very small and his wife cannot
walk. There was nobody to go after a doctor for him. So he sent for me
to call doctor and get medicine. He and myself were the only Christians
inside the walls of the city. Outside in the villages were a few
Christians, but fifteen or twenty miles away. My wife advised me not to
go to his house lest I get sick also, for my health was not very good. I
say to her, that only he and I are Christians in this place. I _have_ to
go to his house. I rather die than not go. In about twenty days he die.
We sent for the Christian friends, from different parts--some thirty to
fifty miles away--some nearer. So we bury him the Christian way. The men
carry the coffin. They charge four dollars to bury him, because he is
Christian. The others they charge only two dollars. We also hire music
for the funeral--different from the heathen funeral. Several hundred
people were standing on the way, watching us pass by. Some say: "How
funny the burying of the Yason dog,"--_i.e._, the Jesus boy.

After the funeral I was very sick, and my whole body trembling with
cold. Many blankets put upon me, but cannot make me warm. My wife begin
to cry. My cousins and all said it was because I went to the dead man's
house and catch the sickness. Some of them said it was because I tore up
the paper and burned the punk-sticks of the stove-god. But my wife,
sitting on the bed-side crying, suggested the medicine which I brought
from California; the name--sulphate of quinine. So she ask me to take
that; but I say: I never have been this way before, and never use that
medicine for this kind of sickness. But she ask me to try; so I take a
very little with a little water. Not more than three minutes my whole
body stop shaking, and I felt a great relief. I thank God for his help,
and soon I got all well.

Another Chinese preacher came from Canton to my district to take the
dead preacher's place; also, to live in his house. Next day, he and his
wife and boy all taken very sick. They grow worse and worse, every day
appointed to death. I felt very much dismayed because many people say,
"The Death Spirit make them very sick because they will not worship
him." But I pray to God to make him well. I say:--"Oh Lord, if you let
this family die also, all the people in this place will not like to hear
thy Gospel, and I also may be tempted by the superstition. I ask thee,
oh God, let thy mercy be upon them and not let this family going to die;
so let all this people of darkness see thy power, and thy glorious light
appear to their sight." I believe that God answered this prayer, for
they grew better and better every day, though they were so sick they
expected to die.

I will tell you of another trial which I encountered. I live inside the
wall, and all the people inside are divided into six societies. I belong
to No. 4. Once in three years we have what we call _festival_. So a man
who had charge asked me to sign my name to give twenty-five cents to buy
some pork and other things for offerings to the idols. The temples have
some property, but they use the temple money for other expenses. I
refuse to subscribe. So he advised me and said: "While you are in the
foreign country, imitate foreign customs, but now you are in China, you
have to obey Chinese customs." They try to compel me to give. I stand up
and say: "If these six societies could not have this festival to the
idols because I refuse, do the people depend on me? If so, then all the
people are without hope, and may despair of the blessing of the idols.
Is that what you believe? Because you worship the idols you give
offerings to them, and expect blessing from them. I do not worship the
idol, and he would not give me the blessing. I do not wish for the
idol's blessing. It is not because I am stingy that I will not give to
the offering of the idol, but because it is against the true God in
heaven, whom I trust, and whose blessing I do greatly desire." So they
could not compel me to give, and they let me alone, but they felt very
much indignation and were hostile to me. A Christian in China has
sometimes a very hard time. "But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ." Yet more and more are believing the Gospel of
Christ every year in China.

A year has passed since, this brother returned to America; but is there
any hazard in affirming that those towns-people of his in China have
thought more or less, even to this day, of the stand he took and the God
in Christ to whom he testified?

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


MASS MEETING OF THE WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNIONS.


The first meeting of the Woman's Home Missionary Unions in connection
with the American Missionary Association was a genuine success. The
programme was put in the hands of Mrs. E.S. Williams of Minnesota by
vote of the ladies at Saratoga in June last, and the interested group
who filled the large and pleasant Sunday-school rooms of the New England
Church in Chicago, October 29th, rejoiced in their new and forward
movement for home and native land. Mrs. Lane of Michigan gave Mrs.
Williams genial help in presiding. Mrs. Palmer of Massachusetts led in
prayer. Mrs. Burke Leavitt, President of the Illinois Union, gave to the
ladies a felicitous welcome to the city and to the sympathy of the
workers of the great state of Illinois. Mrs. E.W. Blatchford greeted the
women in behalf of the New England Church and of their co-workers in the
W.B.M.I. If only all good women saw and felt, as this wise sister did,
that all Christ's work is one, and that all work for him outside of our
own home and church is mission service, their appeals to their sisters
would have more irresistible force, and the Saviour's prayer be nearer
answered, "That they all may be one." Miss Emerson, of the American
Missionary Association, spoke with her usual straightforward
effectiveness of the joy of the Association in their share of the work
of the Unions.

These greetings were followed by the roll-call of State Unions, with
brief responses. Mrs. Williams represented Minnesota; Mrs. Palmer,
Massachusetts and Rhode Island. She also read a letter from Miss
Nathalie Lord of Boston. Mrs. Grabill responded for Michigan, Mrs.
Cowles for Ohio, Mrs. Morgan for New York, Mrs. Miner for Wisconsin,
Mrs. Bronson for Missouri, Mrs. Taintor for Illinois, Mrs. Douglass for
Iowa, Mrs. Leavitt for Nebraska, and Miss Emerson for Mississippi,
Tennessee, Arkansas and North Carolina. A telegram was received from
Mrs. Gale of the Florida Union, letters from Mrs. Swift of Vermont and
Mrs. Andrews of Alabama, and a warm message from Louisiana came just too
late for public hearing. Greetings also came from Northern and Southern
California, Oregon and Colorado.

After prayer by Mrs. Douglass, of Iowa, Miss Hand gave a brief, but very
effective address on "What the New West needs from our Women--prayer,
consecrated effort, contributions."

In the afternoon, Mrs. Lane gave a complete summary of "Foreign Missions
at Home. What have we done? What have we left undone? What ought we to
do now?" No brief mention can give any adequate idea of the amount of
information which was crowded into this address, or the earnestness of
its presentation.

Mrs. Regal, of Oberlin, presented the report of the Bohemian Bible
Readers' Home, in Cleveland.

Mrs. E.M. Williams answered effectively the question, "How can we induce
women of wealth to give to Home Missions?" She thought lack of
information was the cause of most of the indifference from which the
work suffers, and recommended individual effort as likeliest to be
successful.

Mrs. Bailey, of Ogden, Utah, gave a stirring address on the "Need of
Pure Homes and True Churches in the West."

Elizabeth Winyan, a Christian Indian woman of the Dakotas, next
addressed the meeting in her native language, Rev. Mr. Riggs acting as
her interpreter. Elizabeth's manner is very calm and dignified, and her
gestures are graceful and forcible. Her language is eloquent even though
trammeled by the necessity of having an interpreter. When she "shakes
hands with us in her heart," we know she means it, and when she has
"said enough," we know she is done.

A Free Parliament for the discussion of practical questions was
conducted by Mrs. Regal, of Ohio. The subjects of Missionary Literature,
Life-Membership, Dangers threatening the Unions, Holding meetings in
connection with or separate from local and State Conferences, and
National Organization, were discussed, a large number of ladies
participating freely.

Mrs. Goodell, of St. Louis, conducted a "Sweet Hour of Prayer," which
closed the day's sessions, and the earnest group dissolved only to swell
the throngs at the best meeting the American Missionary Association ever
held.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORDS FROM OUR ANNUAL MEETING,

OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO WOMEN.


Twenty-six Woman's State Organizations now co-operate with us in our
missionary work. Each year shows the increasing importance and
helpfulness of the Woman's Bureau. From it go counsel, help and
inspiration to the lady teachers in the field, and missionary news and
helpful suggestions to the ladies of the State Associations. Through it
pass the sympathy and the help of the earnest workers in the older
churches to the earnest workers in our mission churches and schools. The
people for whom we labor can not be saved either for this world or the
next unless the women who make the homes are lifted out of coarseness
and vice, and taught true womanhood and womanly duties and arts. The
Woman's Bureau is a most potent factor in the work of bringing the
gospel to the rescue of womanhood in our mission fields.--_Annual Report
of Executive Committee._

       *       *       *       *       *

Our laborers are faced by all the serious problems of the foreign
land--problems unrelieved by a single romantic charm. When we send our
missionaries to Africa they go to labor among the Africans; and when we
send them down South they go to teach "niggers." I believe that the
American Missionary Association, in its calm and unimpassioned history,
is one grand and splendid eulogy of woman. Our sisters went South while
the sky was yet heavy with the clouds of war; they went to the rude
dwellings where those people sat in stupor and in darkness after the
first thrill of the new found liberty; they went from homes of
refinement and culture and wealth and religion; they bore to this
darkness light, to this dullness life; they carried down there in their
white hands the great tree of Calvary, the cross of Christ, and planted
it in the land of the magnolia and the palm. I say that the history of
this Association is a grand and glowing eulogy of woman because these
were willing to be called "teachers of niggers" for their love of
humanity.--_Rev. C.W. Hiatt._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is one of the most astonishing signs of the times that really into
the feeble hand of womanhood is given the key of the situation. They
respect these educated girls, they reverence them and give them a place
of dignity in their hearts. That makes it possible for these women to do
a large and splendid work in the South.

Once let these girls that come under the influence of our Christian
Northern women who go there as teachers, and the graduates of these
various colleges and schools that we have planted, and are about to
plant in the South; once let common womanhood in the South that has been
so much under the heel of this oppression; once let girlhood feel the
power that has come to girlhood, that to them as young women in the
cradle of these hills, under this fair sky, is given the power to turn
over in not less than thirty or forty years this whole country for God
and humanity, for enlightenment and for Christian peace; once let that
idea get into the minds of those girls, and we have not the same problem
that we have to-day.--_Rev. D.M. Fisk._

       *       *       *       *       *

There were deeds of valor by mountain heroines that shine as brightly as
those of a Molly Stark or Barbara Frietchie. Mrs. Edwards, of Campbell
County, marched 150 miles in inclement weather, over the mountains, to
carry information to Union troops. Immediately upon arriving at home,
having received some valuable information, she pushed her way through
the rain, on horseback, alone, and saved the Union General Spears from
capture. Again and again this same woman took perilous journeys to carry
information to Union officers. Nor was she the only heroine among the
mountain women. During the siege of Knoxville, General Grant desired to
send an important message to General Burnside. "So overrun was the
territory between Chattanooga and Knoxville by Confederate troops that
it could only be delivered, if at all, with great difficulty and hazard.
At length Miss Mary Love, of Kingston, Tenn., agreed to take the message
through the Confederate lines." She got as far as Louisville, Tenn., but
could get no farther. There she found but one person who was willing to
run the risk of taking the message through the lines, and he was a boy
only thirteen years of age, John T. Brown. He carried the dispatch
safely through the lines and delivered it to General Burnside.

Let us build school-houses and churches, where their better cabins have
risen from the ashes of the past. Let us invade their coves and press up
their mountain sides with an army of Christian teachers and preachers,
until the gray old forests that echoed with the shout of these loyal
Highlanders shall again echo with the sound of church bell and school
bell, and they who took from us the larger sacrifice of war, shall find
that we are ready to share with them the blessed fruits of
peace.--_Secretary C.J. Ryder._

       *       *       *       *       *

There is, furthermore, a peaceful Christian invasion of this land. We
scarcely realize how much these gospel songs mean to those Southern
people, and how they listen with eagerness at once to the sweetness of
the tune and to the gospel that is within it. It is an entering wedge to
a new life there. A dear girl of my acquaintance taught from thirty to
fifty of these women; they listened eagerly, and the tears rolled down
their cheeks, and they said to her, "Oh, come and tell us more about
Jesus, for we want to be different kind of women, different kind of
mothers."

There was one girl who came out to one of our commencements and went
back with the arrow in her heart, saying, "I would give all the world if
I had it, if I could write a piece, and git up thar and read it like
them." She went home determined she would go to college. She was a large
girl, fifteen years old, yet did not know a single letter. She walked
fifty miles nearly, and came and said to the college president, that she
wanted to work for her board, so that she could enter the school. What
could she do? He found that really she was incapacitated for doing
anything; but she said; "I can hoe corn like a nigger." Finally she was
set at some sort of work, and that girl, after three or four years, went
out as a school teacher into a district where young men dared not go,
where her eyes were blistered with the sights she saw--men shot down
before her face and eyes by the whiskey distillers--and she was asked to
organize a Sunday-school there. When any one starts a Sunday-school he
is expected to preach, and so that girl had to become a preacher, and
to-day she is preaching the gospel of God and spreading the work there.
And yet she came from one of the very humblest classes.--_Rev. D.M.
Fisk._

       *       *       *       *       *

There is another influence of which I would speak, the influence of the
home. Here in our happy homes we know but very little of what that means
to the Indian. An Indian has no home, in our sense of the word. There is
at Santee Agency a piece of limestone, perhaps three feet wide by five
feet long, which was the hearthstone of our Dakota mission home. It was
taken a few years ago by my brother, from Minnesota, where it had served
the purpose of a hearthstone in one of the original buildings of the
mission. He took it to Santee Agency, and every time I go to Santee, I
go out and look at that stone. There is the hole in the stone into which
we poured milk to feed the cat, and on another corner is the place where
we used to crack nuts. That stands for our boyhood home. The Indian has
nothing of the kind. The Dakota Indian lives in a region, not in a
place. The Christian home coming into the midst of a village carries
there an ideal of which the Indian knows nothing, and he is taught by
the power of example day after day. The Christian woman in that home
keeps her house clean, keeps her children clean, and stands here as a
persistent example of the power of the gospel of soap.--_Rev. T.L.
Riggs._

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlyle tells the story of a woman in the North of Scotland in the old
days before charity was organized, who wanted help. She was poor and
sick, and they said to her, "You may look out for yourself." Finally
she was taken sick with typhus fever, and died, and because they didn't
take very good care of her in the place where she was sick, she killed
seventeen others with her poison. Carlyle says: "You said she was not
your sister and she said, 'I am, and I will prove it;' and she did,
though it cost seventeen good lives to prove it." There will be a typhus
fever in this land infinitely worse than any pestilence that kills the
body unless this deadly germ be killed by putting education where there
is ignorance, and putting honor and truth where there is degradation
to-day. "Look out for No. 1?" Aye, it is our business to look out for
ourselves. May God Almighty help us that we fail not to attend to it.
There is just one way to save ourselves. We learned that long ago at the
feet of Him who said: "He that loseth his life shall save it." That is
the only way. It is just as true for a nation as for an
individual.--_President George A. Gates._

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.

  Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.E. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Osgood, 14 First Ave., Montpelier.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASSACHUSETTS AND RHODE ISLAND.

[1]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
  Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Ella A. Leland, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Francis B. Cooley, Hartford.
  Secretary--Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Aye., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Cobb, 59 Bible House, New York City.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, 95 Monroe Ave., Columbus.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C.B. Safford, Elkhart.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Moseman, Fort Wayne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. Evans, Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. B.F. Leavitt, 409 Orchard St, Chicago.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
  Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Lansing.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.C. Keeler, Beloit.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, Box 464, Minneapolis.
  Secretary--Miss Gertrude A. Keith, 1350, Nicollet Ave., Minneapolis
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. T.M. Jeffris, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 3316 H. St., Lincoln.
  Secretary--Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 No. Broad St, Fremont.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.E. Perry, Crete.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, 3006 Pine St., St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.P. Bronson, 3100 Chestnut St., St. Louis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett, White Water, Colorado.
  Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
    Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.T. Goodell, 24th and Eddy Sts., Cheyenne, Wyoming.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.


WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Elijah Cash, 927 Temple St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Box 426, Pasadena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
  Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st. St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R.D. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.F. Whiting, Tougaloo.
  Secretary--Miss Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Miss S.L. Emerson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
  Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2612 Fifth Ave., Birmingham.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. Baker, Selma.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.

  President--Miss M.F. Wells, Athens, Tenn.
  Secretary--Miss A.M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss E. Plimpton, Chapel Hill.
  Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
  Treasurer--Miss Lovey Mayo, Raleigh.


[Footnote 1: For the purpose of exact information, we note that while the
W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R.I., it has
certain auxiliaries elsewhere.

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.]


RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1889.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People._

FROM

Mr. DANIEL HAND, GUILFORD, CONN.


Income for October, 1889                                   $960.00

                                                           =======

CURRENT RECEIPTS.

MAINE, $235.81.

Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           50.00

Bath. Sab. Sch. of Central Ch.                               15.00


Bluehill, Mrs. Anna D. Hinekley's S.S.
  Class, on "True Blue Card."                                 5.00

Brewer. M. Hardy, ad'l to const. MRS.
  MARGARET FRASER AND MRS. JENNIE
  GETCHELL L.M.'s                                            50.00

Castine. Ladies of Cong. Sew. Circle,
  Bbl. of C., _for Lexington, Ky._

Cumberland. Silas M. Rideout                                 10.25

Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                                         50.00

Norridgewock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             39.00

Sherman Mills. Washburn Memorial Ch.                          5.00

Topsham. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.; By Mrs.
  M.E. Flye, _for Freight_, 2 50; Miss Nellie
  Alexander, _for Student Aid_, 1; By Bessie
  Grover, 6 cents, _for Selma, Ala._                          3.56

Woolwich. Cong. Ch.                                           8.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $225.60.

Concord, "A Friend," 20; Jos. T. Sleeper's
  S.S. Class, So. Cong. Ch., 10, _for
  Gregory Institute_, _Wilmington, N.C._                     30.00

Hillsboro Bridge. "King's Daughters."
  Bbl. Clothing and House Supplies, _for
  Macon, Ga._

Hindsdale. Cong. Ch.                                          7.75

Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to
  const. CHARLES JOSEPH ADAMS L.M.                           59.37

Nashua. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                                            50.00

Nashua. Y.P.S.C.E, of Pilgrim Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p_                                         35.00

Pembroke. Mrs. Mary Thompson, 10;
  Mrs. S. Fellows, 10; Miss Sarah Fellows,
  10, _for Gregory Institute_, _Wilmington, N.C._            30.00

Peterboro. M.A. and M.D. Whitney                              5.00

Warner. Cong. Ch.                                             8.48


VERMONT, $320.79.

Brattleboro. Center Cong. Ch.                                15.00

Fairlee. Mrs L.D. Spear                                       1.00

Montpelier. Miss L.S. Taplin, _for Charts_,
  _Meridian, Miss._                                           5.00

Saint Albans. Cong. Ch.                                     117.62

Saint Johnsbury. South Cong. Soc.                            50.05

Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.
  _for Indian M._                                            25.00

Swanton. Cong. Ch.                                           12.00

Townshend. Miss Eliza M. Burnap, to
  const. ERNEST A. PRENTISS L.M.                             40.00

Wallingford. "A Friend,"
  _for Santee Indian Sch._                                    1.00

Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of
  C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt.,
  by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Barton. Mrs. O.D. Owen.
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                          5.00

    Castleton. W.H.M.S.,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                          3.03

    Dorset. W.H.M.S.,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                          5.00

    Dorset. W.H.M.S.,
      _for Marshallville, Ga._                    20.00

    Granby. L.E. and L.B. Rice,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                          1.00

    Royalton. Sarah Skinner, Mem. Soc.,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                         20.00

                                                -------      54.03


MASSACHUSETTS. $8,698.46.

Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch.                      13.70

Amherst. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Indian M._                         26.60

Andover. Mrs. Phebe A. Chandler, _for
  Chandler Normal Shcool Building_,
  _Lexington, Ky._                                        2,653.47

Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch.                                  18.63

Athol Center. William A. Eaton and
  Emily Eaton                                                 2.00

Barre. L.H.M. Soc., _Freight to Tougaloo,
  Miss._                                                      3.00

Berkley. First Cong. Ch., ad'l                                1.63

Boston. C.A. Hopkins, _for Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._                               250.00

    Woman's Home Miss'y Soc., _for Student Aid_,
      _Fisk U._                                    8.00

    Mrs. Emily P. Eayre                            5.00

    "A Friend."                                    4.00

  South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch.                 39.20

                                                 -------     306.20

Boxboro. Cong. Ch.                                           13.00

Bridgewater. Central Square Ch. and Soc.                     25.00

Brockton. Mrs. J.R. Perkins                                   5.00

Cambridge. North Ave. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                                            18.44

Cambridgeport. Mrs. Anna K. Douglass,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                 10.00

Campello. South Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV. N.B. THOMPSON L.M.                                   100.00

Chester. Second Cong. Ch.                                     4.85

Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00

Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch.                                   25.00

Danvers. Maple St. Cong. Ch., to const.
  PERCY W. DAMON, HARLAN P. BRADSTREET,
  MRS. ELLEN M. EATON, MRS.
  ANGELINE G. HULL AND MRS. PHEBE M.
  PATCH L.M.'S                                              151.69

Dedham. First Cong. Ch.                                      96.28

Dover. Second Cong. Ch.                                       4.45

Easthampton. First Cong. Ch.                                 75.76

Fall River. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong.
  Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_                                    35.00

Framingham. "Friends," _for Indian M._                      100.00

Franklin. First Cong. Ch.                                    11.00

Gardner. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., by Mrs.
  Helen M. Rolfe, _for Tougaloo U._                          50.00

Gardner. W.W. Tandy, _for Freight_,
  _to Jellico, Tenn._                                         1.00

Gilbertville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._                               50.00

Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.00

Granville. Mr. and Mrs. C. Holcomb                           10.00

Hanson. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tougaloo U._                                           9.00

Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 54.57

Holliston. "Bible Christians."                              100.00

Hopkinton. "King's Daughters," _for Freight_,
  _to Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   2.00

Ipswich. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of First Parish
  (2 of which _for Freight_)                                  7.00

Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. ad'l                                 3.00

Lee. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75, to const.
  MORRISON A. HOLMES and MISS HATTIE L. MARTIN L.M.'s;
  Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 100                         175.00

Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        15.00

Mansfield. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                   6.87

Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch.                                 141.69

Merrimac. John K. Sargent                                     1.00

Millbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          96.01

Milton. "A Friend."                                           6.43

Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case of Paper,
  _for Talladega C._

Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case of Paper,
  _for Fisk U._

Monson. Miss Hattle R. Pease, 3 Carpets,
  4 Rugs, 4 Hassocks and Bbl. of C.,
  _for Beach Institute_, _Savannah, Ga._

Newburyport. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        40.00

North Acton. "Mrs. S.D.M."                                   10.00

Northampton. A.L. Williston                                 300.00

Northampton. Miss Judith B. Kingsley
  and Sister, _for Indian M._                                10.00

Orange. Wm. A. Bliss                                         30.15

Oxford. Primary Dept. Cong. Sab. Sch.                        12.00

Oxford. Woman's Miss'y Soc., by Miss L.D.
  Stockwell, Treas., _for Tougaloo U._                        6.00

Pepperell. Cong. Ch.                                          8.43

Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._                               14.87

Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., 192.65;
  Mattie Wilson, on True Blue Card, 5                       197.65

Somerville. Sab. Sch. of Franklin St. Orthodox Ch.,
  _for Indian M._, _Santee Agency, Neb._                     40.00

Somerville. Mrs. James H. Rose                                1.00

South Framingham. Grace Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Atlanta U._                            17.80

South Framingham. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Indian Sch'p._            17.50

Southampton. Cong. Ch., 38.57; "The Cheerful Givers,"
  by Miss Grace A. Sheldon, Treas., 10                       48.57

South Weymouth. Union Cong. Sab. Sch,
  _for Gregory Inst._, _Wilmington, N.C._                    75.00

Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
  SAMUEL V. COLE, MRS. ANNIE T. COLE,
  MISS MABEL W. SMITH, MRS. MARGARET
  F. NICKERSON and MISS PARTHIA H.
  CROCKER L.M.'s          174.58

Templeton. Trin. Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work_               5.53

Wakefield. Y.P.S.C.E., ad'l, _for Mountain Work_              0.50

Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                     13.09

Ware. Sab. Sch. East Cong. Ch., _for Home_,
  _Santee Agency, Neb._ 25; H.B. Anderson's
  S.S. Class, _for Indian Sch'p_,
  17.50; Miss Sprague's Class, East Cong. S.S.,
  _for Indian M._, 6                                         48.50

Warren. Ladies' H.M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                                        87.50

Wellesley Hills. "Q."                                       380.00

Westboro. Cong. Ch.                                         105.76

Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen Ass'n, _for Freight_,
  _to Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   3.00

West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      20.18

West Newton. Second Cong. Ch.                               286.66

Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          1,402.81

Worcester. Central Cong, Ch., 142.02;
  Plymouth Ch., 53.16                                       195.18

Worcester. Central Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
  Student Aid_, _Marion, Ala._                                8.00

----. "A Massachusetts Friend,"
  _for Native Indian Missionary_                             50.00

Hampden Benevolent Association,
  by Charles Marsh, Treasurer:

    Chicopee. Second                              41.40

    Ludlow. Central                               19.24

    Monson                                        30.56

    Palmer. First                                 17.70

    Springfield. First                            18.00

    Springfield. Olivet S.S.                      22.14

    West Springfield.
      Mittineague                                  5.29

                                                 ------     154.33

                                                         ---------

                                                         $8,223.36

ESTATE.

Fitchburg. Estate of Aaron Eaton,
  by E.B. Rockwood, Trustee                                 475.10

                                                         ---------

                                                         $8,698.46


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Wells, Maine. Second Cong. Ch., Package Books, _for New Decatur, Ala._

Boston. Ladies of Homeland Circle, Park St. Ch., Bbl., _for Straight U._

Cambridgeport, Mass. King's Daughters, by Mrs. Anna E. Douglas, Bbl.,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Charlton, Mass. Ladies' Benev. Soc., of Cong. Ch., Package.

Dorchester, Mass. Harvard Cong. Ch., Bbl., _for Selma, Ala._

Ipswich, Mass. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl., Val. 30

Westboro, Mass. Ladies' Freedmen's Ass'n, 2 Bbls., Val. 60,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Westboro, Mass. Mrs. Fanny C. Hastings, Bbl.


RHODE ISLAND, $180.00

Barrington. Cong. Ch.                                        80.00

Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.                            100.00


CONNECTICUT, $2,072.11.

Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch.                                 78.89

Bristol. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.                              3.42

Buckingham. Ladies' Sewing and Mission Circle,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                10.00

Collinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             45.00

East Canaan. Cong. Ch.                                        6.10

Farmington. Cong. Ch., 2.33 and Sab. Sch., 52.67             55.00

Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 69.66

Glastonbury. On True Blue Card, by Miss Louise Williams,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                                     5.00

Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  LEVI W. THRALL L.M.                                        30.00

Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00

Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch.                                54.05

Ivoryton. "Thank Offering from A.H.S."
  _for Mountain Work_                                        20.00

Lakeville. Mrs. Burrall's S.S. Class,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                 5.00

Lisbon. Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                6.00

Manchester Center. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                22.00

Meriden. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._                               50.00

New Britain. "Friend," _for Williamsburg, Ky._                9.00

New Haven. Boys' Prayer Meeting, Humphrey St. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p._                                        45.00

Newington. Cong. Ch.                                         29.95

Newington. Jedediah Deming,
  _for Tougaloo U._                                          10.00

North Stonington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                     10.00

Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Atlanta U._                                           50.00

Redding. "A Friend,"                                          5.00

Southport. Miss Georgie A. Bulkley, _for
  Girls' Hall_, _Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ 25.; Miss
  Eliza A. Bulkley, _for Student Aid, _Talladega C._
  25.; "A Friend," 20                                        70.00

Southport, "A Friend," 30., "Friend," 25                     55.00

Stamford. First Cong. Ch., "A Friend,"                        1.00

Suffield. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                                    25.00

Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                         26.20

Thompson. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                                23.00

Thompson. Cong. Ch.                                          12.70

Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                            38.09

Wallingford. Miss M.F. Hall, _for Indian M._                  3.00

Washington. F.A. Frisbie                                      1.00

Waterbury. "Sunshine Circle," _for Beach
  Inst._, _Savannah, Ga._                                     5.00

Waterbury. "Friend."                                          5.00

Wast Hartford. "Friend," _for Indian Sch'p._                 70.00

Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Sab Sch.                            6.43

Winsted. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                                     1.48

----. "Friends in Connecticut,"
  _for Native Indian Missionary_                             90.00

----. ---- for Hope Station, _Indian M._                    150.00

----. "A Connecticut Friend," _for Well_,
  _Fort Berthold, Dak._                                      50.00

Connecticut Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Huntington. Ladies of Home
      Missionary Union, Cong.
      Ch., _for Mountain Work_                     5.00

    C.W.H.M.U., _for Conn.
      Ind'l Sch., Ga._                            12.50

                                                 ------      17.50

ESTATE.

North Haven. Estate of Mrs. Thalia M.
  Painter, by Rev. W.T. Reynolds, Executor                  800.00

                                                         ---------

                                                         $2,072.11



NEW YORK, $2,150.93.

Adams Basin. Mrs. Harriet Clark                              10.00

Adams Basin. Miss Ella H. Clark,
  _for Student Aid_, _Chandler Normal Sch._                   3.00

Brooklyn. "A Friend," 1000; Plymouth
  Ch., ad'l, 106.; "Two Friends," Lewis
  Ave. Cong Ch., 15.; Woman's Miss'y
  Soc., Lewis Ave. Cong. Ch., 10.;
  "Friend," 4.25                                          1,135.25

Brooklyn. "King's Daughter's," by Miss
  Amelia H. Benjamin, _for Mountain Work_                   500.00

Brooklyn, Park Ave. Ch., 9.; Miss M. Morrison, 4,
  _for Student Aid_, _Williamsburg, Ky._;
  "A Friend," _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 50c.                  13.50

Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                                  5.00

Buffalo. Chas. E. Potter,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                                     5.00

Canaan Four Corners. Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Indian M._                                            10.00

Churchville. Sab. Sch. and Mission Band
  of Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Student Aid_,
  _Macon, Ga._

Danby. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                12.87

Deansville. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student Aid_,
  _Avery Inst._                                              10.00

Fredonia. Presb. Ch., 5.70; Mary F. Lord, 5                  10.70

Fredonia. "Friends," _for Student Aid_,
  _Williamsburg, Ky._                                         5.00

Gaines. Cong. Ch., 17.41 and Sab. Sch., 5.66                 23.07

Lewis. Home Miss'y Soc. of First Cong.
  Ch., _for Chandler Normal Sch._,
  _Lexington, Ky._                                            5.00

Lima. Miss Clara M. Janes                                     2.00

Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                     11.22

New York. Sab. Sch. of First Reformed
  Episcopal Church, _for Indian M._, 100;
  Bethany Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_, _Fort
  Berthold, Dak._, 40; Miss Ellen Collins, _for
  Indian M._, 30                                            170.00

New York. Tremont Cong. Ch., 50.00;
  Mrs. C.W. Wicker, to const. MISS ADA
  B. CALLENDER L.M., 30.00;                                  80.00

Northville. S.S. Class of six boys by Miss
  Nannie Benjamin, 9;--Box Clothing,
  etc., _for Williamsburg, Ky._                               9.00

Orient. "Missionary Circle," to const.
  DEA. D.L. BEEBE L.M.                                       30.00

Perry Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             32.87

Poughkeepsie. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p._                                        20.00

Sing Sing. Mrs. Harriet M. Cole, to const.
  REV. SPENCER SNELL L.M.                                    30.00

Spencerport. A. Webster                                       5.00

Syracuse. "King's Daughters," Carpet,
  _for Room_, _Macon, Ga._

Windham. Mrs. G.W. Bullard                                   1.50

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Homer. "Band of Hope"                          5.00

    Homer. Ladies' Aux.                            1.00

    Syracuse. Ladies Soc. Geddes Cong. Ch.         5.00

                                                -------      11.00


NEW JERSEY, $417.50.

Bernardsville. Miss Marion L. Roberts,
  Box of Books, _for Williamsburg, Ky._

East Orange. Trinity Cong. Ch. to const.
  THOMAS S. CRANE, OGDEN H. BOWERS
  and ROBERT D. WEEKS L.M.'s 117.21;
  Grove St. Cong. Ch., 29.04                                146.25

Jersey City. "Christian Endeavor Soc."
  Bbl. Clothing and House Supplies,
  _for Macon, Ga._

Montclair. Sab. Sch. Class, _for Student
  Aid_, _Talladega, Ala._                                     5.00

Morristown. Mrs. F.W. Owen, _for Native
  Indian Missionary_                                        150.00

Trenton. Mrs. E.B. Fuller                                     5.00

Westfield. Cong. Ch.                                         86.25

Westfield. Mission Band, _for Indian M._
  _Santee Agency, Neb._                                      25.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $134.00.

Guy's Mills. Ladies' H.M. Soc. of Cong.
  Ch., 10; Mrs. F. Maria Guy, 2                              12.00

Le Raysville. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00

Providence. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   2.00

Scranton. F.E. Nettleton                                     15.00

West Alexander. Mrs. Jane C. Davidson                       100.00


OHIO, $416.97.

Chatham Center. Chatham Mission Band, 10;
  Christian Endeavor Soc., 5; Mrs. W. Dyer, 1,
  _for Reading Room_, _Tillotson Inst._                      16.00

Cleveland. Jennings Ave. Cong Ch.                            25.00

Conneaut. Mrs. Jane Wright,
  _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._                                5.00

Dover. Cong. Ch.                                              1.50

Farmdale. Isaac Newton, _for Williamsburg, Ky._               5.00

Hampden. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00

Harbor. Cong. Ch.                                             5.17

Medina. "Friends"                                           164.00

Mount Vernon. Mr. Murphy, _for Student Aid_,
  _Fisk U._                                                   1.00

North Kingsville. "Friends," by Miss E.S. Cummings,
  _for Student Aid_, _Emerson Inst._                          9.00

North Ridgeville. Cong. Ch.                                   8.05

North Ridgeville. Rev. J.P. Riedinger,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._                                     3.00

Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 22.50; Second
  Cong. Ch. 22.50, for 100 Hymn Books,
  _for Church_, _Austin, Texas_                              45.00

Oberlin. Mrs. Geo. Clark, 10; Mrs. L.G.B. Hills, 10          20.00

Olmstead. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                       2.00

Perrysburg. Rev. J.K. Deering                                 2.00

Ruggles. Cong. Ch.                                           20.00

Sheffield. M. Kinney, _for Austin, Texas_                     0.25

Wauseon. Ladies' H.M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl. C. and House Supplies, _for Macon, Ga._               25.50

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Treasurer,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    North Bloomfield. "Kings Daughters" of
      Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_,
      _Atlanta U._                                 6.00

    Washington. Womans' Miss'y Soc. of
      Washington St. Ch.                           8.00

    West Williamsfield. "Willing Workers,"
      _for Mountain Work_                          5.00

    W.H.M.U. of Ohio,
      _for an Organ for Miss Collins_             35.50

                                                 ------      54.50


ILLINOIS, $609.14.

Danville. Mrs. Anna W. Snow                                   5.00


Dover. Cong. Ch.                                             10.00

Concord. Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._

Chandlerville. Cong. Ch.                                     17.02

Chicago. Randolph St. Mission and "Friends,"
  _for Indian M._, 100; "Friends"
  in First Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._, 75                    175.00

Chicago. Leavitt St. Cong. Ch,; 33.24;
  First Cong. Ch., 15.22. _for Sch'p Endowment_,
  _Fisk U._                                                  48.46

Earlville. "J.A.D."                                          25.00

Elmwood. Cong. Ch.                                           27.00

Evanston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                             62.23

Hinsdale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Sch'p Endowment_, _Fisk U._                           25.00

Hyde Park. J.A. Cole's S.S. Class, 6;
  Anna C. Arms' S.S. Class, 1.50, _for Student Aid_,
  _Marion, Ala._                                              7.50

Marseilles.----_for Reading Room_,
  _Tillotson Inst._                                           8.00

Peoria. Box of C., _for Mobile, Ala._

Princeton. Rev. F. Bascom, _for Freight to
  Talladega, Ala._                                            2.74

Princeton. Rev. F. Bascom, D.D., Bbl. of Books,
  2 _for Freight_, _for Tillotson Inst._                      2.00

Ridgeland. Cong Ch.                                          45.76

Sterling. First Cong. Ch.                                    43.00

Waverly. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                              20.80

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Treas.,
  _for Womans' Work_:

    Amboy                                         24.63

    Elgin                                         10.00

    Ill. W.H.M.U.                                 50.00

                                                 ------      84.63


MICHIGAN, $305.44.

Armada. Cong. Ch. 31.13, and Sab. Sch, 3.06                  37.19

Adrian. A.J. Hood, _for Tougaloo U._                         10.00

Bay City. Cong. Ch.                                          16.31

Benton Harbor. Cong. Ch.                                      8.63

Chelsea. Cong. Ch.                                           19.00

Galesburg. Cong. Ch.                                          9.06

Grass Lake. Cong. Ch.                                        13.54

Hudson. First Cong. Ch.                                      14.37

Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch.                                   52.09

Milford. William A. Arms, to const.
  HENRIETTA M. ARMS L.M.                                     30.00

Union City. Cong. Ch.                                        77.75

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan,
  by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Flint. Y.P.M.S.                                5.00

    Grand Blanc. W.M.S.                            2.50

    Portland. W.H.M.S.                            10.00

                                                 ------      17.50


WISCONSIN, $331.80.

Bristol and Paris. Y.P.S.C.E.                                 3.60

Clintonville. Cong. Soc.                                      6.41

Eau Claire. "Cheerful Givers Mission Band,"
  First Cong. Ch.                                             7.50

Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                           6.62

Janesville. Mrs. Little, _for Tillotson Inst._                1.00

Lake Geneva. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._        30.00

Leeds. Cong. Ch.                                             14.00

Menasha. E.D. Smith, 150; Cong. Ch., 17.84                  167.84

Stoughton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                             1.09

West Salem. Mrs. Sarah Hayes                                  2.50

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Baraboo. W.H.M.S.                              2.00

    Bloomington. W.H.M.S.                          2.00

    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                           18.16

    Columbus. Sab. Sch.                            5.00

    Darlington. W.H.M.S.                           1.50

    Duluth, (Minn.) Mrs. Dewey                     1.00

    Eau Claire. Y.L.M.S.                          15.00

    Green Bay. Y.P.S.C.E.                          3.50

    Green Bay. Children's Missionary Soc.          0.46

    Lancaster. W.H.M.S.                           10.00

    Madison. Primary Sab. Sch.                    10.00

    Milwaukee. Grand Ave., W.H.M.S.               20.00

    Old Johnstown. S.S.                            1.62

    Potosi. Mrs. M.W. Corey                        1.00

                                                 ------      91.24


IOWA, $186.21.

Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                    16.07

Charles City. Mrs. Nobles' S.S. Class,
  _for Beach Inst._                                           14.39

Clay. Cong. Ch. 6, and Sab. Sch. 2.94                          8.94

Fairfield. William J. Seelye                                  25.00

Farragut. Cong. Ch.                                           20.75

Montour. Cong. Ch.                                            37.71

Postville. Cong. Ch.                                          20.86

Pleasant Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                    2.00

Washburn. Presb. Ch., _for Williamsburg, Ky._                  8.00

Waterloo. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work,_ 22.49;
  Rev. M.K. Cross, 10                                         32.49


MINNESOTA, $261.34.

Alexandria. Cong. Ch.                                         5.81

Belgrade. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00

Duluth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                    90.50

Fergus Falls. Cong. Ch.                                       5.70

Litchfield. Four Ladies, _for Student Aid_,
  _Meridian, Miss._                                          20.50

Minneapolis. Park Ave. Cong. Ch., 16;
  Vine Cong. Ch., 5.10                                       21.10

Minneapolis. "Cheerful Workers,"
  Bundle Basted Work., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Morris. Cong. Ch.                                             9.14

New Ulm. Cong. Ch.                                           10.00

Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Talladega C._              52.82

Saint Cloud. Cong. Ch.                                        6.45

Saint Paul. Mrs. C.C. Johnson's S.S. Class,
  _for Student Aid_, _Talladega C._                           2.25

Sauk Center. Cong. Ch.                                        5.57

Spring Valley. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00

Stillwater. Grace Cong. Ch.                                   2.50

Waterville. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Box Papers,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._


MISSOURI, $70.00.

Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                                 70.00


KANSAS, $28.80.

Highland. Miss Annie Kloss, _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._     10.00

Kiowa. Rev. J.L. Halliday                                    11.00

Partridge. Harvest Home Festival. Cong. Sab. Sch.             6.80

Topeka. First Cong. Ch., ad'l                                 1.00


NORTH DAKOTA, $39.77.

Dwight. Cong. Ch.                                             6.10

Fargo. First Cong. Ch., in part                              12.92

Jamestown. Cong. Ch.                                          8.25

Valley City. Cong. Ch.                                        5.25

Wahpeton. Cong. Ch.                                           7.25


SOUTH DAKOTA, $33.58.

Rapid City. Cong. Ch., to const.
  MRS. ALICE GOSSAGE L.M.                                    30.20

South Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Treas.:

    Yankton. W.M.S.                                3.38       3.38


NEBRASKA, $47.37.

New Castle. Cong. Ch.                                         1.87

Nebraska Woman's Home Missionary Union
  by Mrs. D.B. Ferry, Treas.:

    State Union                                   43.00

    Dover                                          2.50

                                                -------      45.50


COLORADO, $37.25.

Colorado Springs. First Cong. Ch.                            34.75

Denver. T.S. Spylen, _for Student Aid_,
  _Tillotson Inst._                                           2.50


IDAHO, $3.00.

Boise City. H.B. Ellinwood                                    3.00


WASHINGTON, $10.00.

Anacortes. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                 10.00


CALIFORNIA, $5.00.

Murphys. Mrs. C.K. Sanger, _for Mountain Work_                5.00


MARYLAND, $15.00.

Baltimore. Mrs. A.B. Woodford, _for Student Aid_,
  _Fisk U._                                                  15.00


KENTUCKY, $5.00.

Lexington. "Friends," 3.50; Miss Etta Hitchcock, 75c;
  Miss Mary Knox, 75c, by Prof. Foster                        5.00


NORTH CAROLINA. $28.44.

Asheville. F.W. Van Wagener, _for Student Aid_,
  _Talladega C._                                             26.50

Dry Creek. Cong. Ch.                                          0.50

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                              1.44


GEORGIA, $1.00.

Woodville. Rev. J.H.H. Sengetacke                             1.00


TEXAS, $5.00.

Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00


CANADA, $5.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                     5.00


SANDWICH ISLANDS, $5,005.00.

"Sandwich Islands, A Friend."                             5,000.00

Sandwich Islands, Mrs. Atherton                               5.00

                                                        ==========

Donations                                               $20,600.26

Estates                                                   1,275.10

                                                        ----------

                                                        $21,875.36


INCOME, $3,036.15.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                       702.40

Brown Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._              21.00

DeForest Fund, _for President's Chair_,
  _Talladega C._                                 503.75

General Endowment Fund, _for Freedmen_            30.00

Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._            150.00

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                  137.50

Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._             25.00

Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._               712.50

H.W. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._       30.00

Le Moyne Fund, _for Le Moyne Sch._               257.50

Luke Memorial Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._      10.00

Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._            11.25

Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                   50.00

Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._               75.00

Stone Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._              25.00

Talladega Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._          25.00

Theological Fund, _for Fisk U._                    7.50

Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                125.00

Tuthill King Fund, _for Atlanta. U._             125.00

Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._             12.75

                                               --------    3036.15


TUITION, $4,256.68.

Lexington, Ky. Tuition                           195.75

Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                         45.25

Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition                          4.52

Troy, N.C. Tuition                                 7.25

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition                         239.25

Charleston, S.C. Tuition                         238.12

Greenwood, S.C. Tuition                           13.60

Jellico, Tenn. Tuition                           101.50

Jonesboro, Tenn. County Fund                      34.00

Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                           1.00

Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                           540.75

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                         751.69

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                       5.50

Sherwood. Tenn. Tuition                           63.00

Savannah, Ga. Tuition                            239.25

Macon, Ga. Tuition                               375.72

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                          65.25

Athens, Ala. Tuition                              89.25

Marion, Ala. Tuition                              38.75

Mobile, Ala. Tuition                             199.85

Selma, Ala. Tuition                               93.90

Meridian, Miss, Tuition                           65.00

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                          304.00

New Orleans, La. Tuition                         382.00

Austin, Texas. Tuition                           173.53

                                               --------   4,256.68

United States Government for the Education of Indians     3,349.20

                                                        ----------

Total for November                                      $32,517.39

                                                        ==========


SUMMARY.

Donations                                               $34,462.56

Estates                                                  12,997.30

                                                        ----------

                                                        $47,459.86

Income                                                    3,036.15

Tuition                                                   4,722.69

United States Government for the Education of Indians     4,367.18

                                                        ----------

Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30                            $59,585.88

                                                        ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for November                                 $35.90

Previously acknowledged                                     31.86

                                                           ------

Total                                                      $67.16

                                                           ======

H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
56 Reade N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 44, NO. 01, JANUARY, 1890 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.