Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Norma
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





The American Missionary

February, 1891.

Vol. XLV. No. 2.



CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  Our List of Field Workers--Financial
  Theological Instruction--Indian Conference
  The Indian Problem
  Educators' Convention--Open Path for Talent
  Irresponsible Institutions--Notes from New England
  Calls for Books
  LIST OF OUR FIELD WORKERS

THE SOUTH.

  School and Church Items--Tougaloo University
  Congregational Churches in Charleston

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  Our Hospital
  Woman's State Organizations

Letters to the Treasurer

RECEIPTS




NEW YORK:  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
           Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.



Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.
Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.


       *       *       *       *       *


_AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION_

PRESIDENT, Rev. Wm. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  LYMAN ABBOTT,
  CHAS. A. HULL,
  CHARLES MARSH,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,


  _For Two Years._

  S.D. HALLIDAY,
  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELBERT B. MONROE,


  _For One Year._

  JAMES G. JOHNSON,
  WM. H. WARD,
  J.W. COOPER,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._
  Rev. C.W. HIATT, _Cong'l Rooms, Y.M.C.A. Building, Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._



COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.



DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or Congregational
Rooms, Y.M.C.A. Building, Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars
constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.



FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.
VOL. XLV.  FEBRUARY, 1891.  No. 2.
American Missionary Association.



_OUR LIST OF FIELD WORKERS._

We present herewith our usual February list of missionaries, in church
and school, through the field of the Association. In this list many
thousands of our readers will recognize familiar names, some through
personal associations and others through their long-time acquaintance
with the work of the Association. It is no unimportant feature of the
great principle of co-operation on which our work is founded that we can
reckon upon a large force of long-tried and experienced workers in the
field. The Association has a wealth of wisdom in planning and carrying
on its work, by its ability to call into requisition the knowledge and
efforts of those who have spent many years in the South, and are
intimately acquainted with the needs, difficulties and advantages of the
work. Many individualistic schemes have failed at this point; but the
Association has developed a force that can be relied upon for the
intelligent investigation of new openings, the prudent planning of work
and its wise and steady support and development. At the same time,
associated with our older workers, we have the younger missionaries and
teachers with their fresh enthusiasm and fervent zeal, giving new
impulse of activity all along the line. This long list of names
represents years of self-denying attention and steady effort; it speaks
of large progress in the past and is the presage of still greater
progress in the future, for the list grows year by year. Our resources
and forces were never before so large as during the past year, and we
are encouraged to hope that they will be increased during the year to
come.

       *       *       *       *       *


_FINANCIAL._

Our current receipts for December were nearly $52,000, an increase of
$11,000 over those of December, 1889. For the first quarter of our
present fiscal year the current receipts amount to $106,000, as against
$100,000 for the corresponding period of last year. We thankfully
appreciate every enlargement of our resources, and shall continue to use
our best endeavors to keep the work within the means provided for it.
How difficult this is can be understood only by those who are in
constant receipt of numerous exigent calls for work in the great
populations among which our service lies. As a matter of record,
notwithstanding the utmost care on our part, while our receipts for this
quarter have gained $6,000 over those of last year, our expenses have
increased $12,000. We are profoundly grateful for the increasing public
interest and Christian co-operation in the work of the American
Missionary Association, and hope that the gifts of the churches will
continue to be accompanied by their counsels and their prayers.

       *       *       *       *       *


_THEOLOGICAL INSTRUCTION._

The association is undertaking to supply the serious need, met all along
its lines of missionary service, of a more intelligent and consecrated
ministry. For the use of our Biblical Training School for the ministry,
at Fisk University, we are engaged in the erection of the building; and
the work has been taken hold of by the Fisk University Singers, who are
meeting with cheering encouragement in the churches. It is our hope
that, within the coming year, an adequate structure may be provided for
this important work.

The theological department at Howard University has received a valuable
accession to its faculty in the person of Prof. Ewell. This work will
now be re-classified and developed, and will offer unexcelled advantages
for practical training in preparation for the gospel ministry.

       *       *       *       *       *


_CONFERENCE WITH INDIAN COMMISSIONERS._

The Annual Conference of the Board of Indian Commissioners with the
representatives of the various religious bodies having charge of Indian
Missions was held in the parlors of the Riggs House, January 8th. The
presence of Senator Dawes, Representative Cutcheon, and other
distinguished persons, gave weight to the deliberations, and special
interest was added to the meeting by the troubles now prevailing in the
Dakotas among the Sioux Indians. Commissioner Morgan, Captain Pratt of
the Carlisle School, General Armstrong of Hampton, and the Secretaries
of the Missionary Societies presented an array of facts and of recent
information that gave a more favorable aspect to the situation than is
generally entertained. The disturbance among the Indians is confined to
at most 5,000 among the 250,000, and strong hopes are entertained that
serious bloodshed may be avoided. And yet, so great is the uncertainty
hanging over this matter, that before these lines reach our readers, the
daily press may give sad news of battle and disaster.

The discussions of the Conference were ended with a series of
resolutions, the purport of which may thus be summed up: The Dakota
trouble is confined to a small number of Indians, and is due to the
inevitable opposition of the chiefs and anti-progressive elements among
the masses of the Indians. The removal of experienced Indian Agents for
political reasons was deprecated, and the importance of permanence in
the lines of policy pursued in the educational and Christianizing
influences was emphasized. Larger appropriations by the Government to
establish an adequate system of common-school education, until every
Indian child is enabled to attend school, compulsory education and the
continued support to contract schools, and additional facilities for
securing lands in severalty to the Indians, were endorsed.

The decision which it was understood the Government had made, not to
transfer the care of the Indians to the War Department, was warmly
approbated.

       *       *       *       *       *


_THE INDIAN PROBLEM._

    The present difficulties among the Indians in the Dakotas will
    probably lead to a re-consideration of the whole system by which
    the Government and the nation deals with these people. As a
    contribution to that discussion, we present in condensed form some
    suggestions recently published in a Boston paper, from our esteemed
    friend, S.B. Capen, Esq., whose intelligent interest in the Indian
    entitles his opinion to thoughtful consideration:

While public attention is everywhere called to this matter, it is time
to agitate for a radical change in the whole administration of the
Indian service. We believe that this should be disconnected entirely
from the Department of the Interior, and be made a _separate
department_. This whole Indian question is so important and so complex
that it ought not to be simply an annex to a department which has under
its control land, patents, etc. It should stand by itself; there should
no longer be a divided responsibility, which is always productive of
evil. We are finding the necessity in our cities of making
responsibility more direct and personal. The time, we believe, has fully
come to reorganize the Indian service on this basis. Our criticism is
not against any individual, but against a system which is the growth of
many years.

We would suggest the following;

1. Have the Commissioner of Indian Affairs responsible only to the
President and to the public. What he does, or may do, shall not be
controlled by the Department of the Interior.

2. Ask Congress to provide such legislation that no agents or teachers
shall ever be removed without proper cause.

3. All inspectors and special agents shall be under the absolute control
of the Commissioner.

4. There shall be a division of the Indian reservation into school
districts, with an assistant superintendent for each. It shall be their
duty to visit the schools constantly, and keep themselves in full
sympathy and touch with the work. This is the method in the States--an
official responsible for a field which he can properly cover.

       *       *       *       *       *


_EDUCATORS' CONVENTION._

The recent Educators' Convention of Atlanta was a large and significant
gathering. Such consultations of teachers carry a wide and beneficial
influence. We learn that the papers and addresses were of a high
character, and that the discussions were carried on with great interest,
and we have no doubt that the educational work throughout the South will
feel the upward impulse of this Convention.

We quote the following paragraph from the excellent report in the
_Congregationalist_:

    The importance of the work of the Convention may be indicated by
    the topics discussed: Education in Rural Districts, Relative
    Mortality of the Colored Race, Hygiene, Industrial Training, Better
    Teaching in the Elementary Grades, A Scientific Course in the
    College Curriculum, Compulsory Education, What Can the Negro Do?
    What the Ministry is Doing to Elevate the Freedmen. A résumé was
    given of the educational work of the different denominations,
    mainly by the secretaries of their educational societies. The
    reports of the colored Methodist churches were especially
    interesting, as indicating the gratifying extent to which the
    colored people are taking hold of the work of their own education.
    No paper of the Convention, however, was received with such
    spontaneous enthusiasm and applause as the report of Dr. Beard of
    the work of the American Missionary Association. It was the
    eloquence of facts. The proceedings of the Association will
    constitute a large volume, which will soon be published and widely
    circulated.

       *       *       *       *       *


_"AN OPEN PATH FOR TALENT."_

Napoleon said this was the meaning of the French Revolution. He gave
promotion in the army not for what a man's ancestry had been, but for
what the man himself could do. Who else ever had such efficient
subordinates? Opportunities became open generally in France, according
to each one's personal ability. The excesses of the revolutionary period
were transitory. The enlargement of the nation's power, by removing the
fetters of prescription, has been permanent. The recuperative energy
displayed by France in the last twenty years is a marvelous example of
the strength imparted by liberty.

The educational work of the American Missionary Association in the South
makes no revolutionary disturbance. It quietly opens a path for talent
whose existence had been before unnoticed or denied. It has been already
instrumental in bringing forward many men and women to positions of
influence. Beginning with the lowest branches of education, it trained
the first colored teachers for the State school systems. Its schools
for higher education have as yet come far short of supplying the demand
for advanced teachers and for educated ministers and other educated
professional and business men.

We cannot make talent, but opening the door for talent to find
development and activity adds rich gifts to the Nation's life.

       *       *       *       *       *


_IRRESPONSIBLE INSTITUTIONS._

_The Independent_, in its Symposium of December 11th upon Gen. Booth's
Plan, has an article from Charles D. Kellogg, Superintendent of the
Charity Organization Society, in which, referring to a certain
irresponsible piece of charity, he says:

    We do not believe that it is right for any one to ask for the
    support of such an individual enterprise, except from those who
    give it because of personal knowledge and confidence in the
    manager. When the public is appealed to, such contributions take on
    the nature of trust funds, the receipts and disbursements of which
    should be audited and accounted for in the fullest and frankest
    manner. To encourage such private, uncontrolled and unaccounted for
    undertakings, is simply to open the door for any number of
    conscienceless schemers who are quick to impose upon the benevolent
    public.

The same is true of irresponsible educational institutions. All who
receive funds for such charitable purposes, are virtually stewards of
_trust money_ and ought to give an account of the same. All properties
thus developed ought to be put into a shape to be held securely and
perpetuated, and not left to become the personal possession of the
solicitors. Pious zeal and "faith" do not prevent the waste in such a
case. "Wisdom would not put cut and hammer-faced stone for the
foundation of a mountain school house, and costly glass in the windows,"
but "faith" has done this, and keeps on doing similar things.

       *       *       *       *       *


_NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND._

By District Secretary C.J. Ryder, Boston, Mass.


TWO WAYS OF DOING IT.

"So you have come! Well! I don't know but it is just as favorable a time
as any. Still, we are in a very pinched condition. We have a debt that
we have carried for ten years and have scarcely been able to pay the
interest. The parsonage is in a desperate condition, and we are very far
from comfortable in it. Secretary Hood was here two months ago, and he
stirred the people up and took all that ought to be given to any of our
Benevolent Societies. Then, a month ago, Puddefoot was here, and you
know he sweeps in everything that can possibly be reached. I sometimes
think that he awakens too much interest, and that the churches give too
large collections. Our women are all interested in the American Board,
and will not feel like doing much for the American Missionary
Association Still, it is the time for our annual collection, and I
think no harm can come from an address on the A.M.A. work to-morrow. We
are very glad to see you."

_This is one way._

"How do you do, dear old friend? I declare, it seems as if I had known
you a life-time. I am ever so glad you could come and speak to my church
to-morrow. We need stirring up tremendously. Although my people are a
large-hearted, generous people, they are so much absorbed with our own
interests here, that I fear sometimes they do not appreciate the larger
work done through the Benevolent Societies. Secretary Creegan was here a
little while ago and took away a splendid collection, but he left a lot
of ripe grain to be gathered in the harvest of some other society. Then,
dear old Puddefoot came here and rattled the dry bones till he made
living men and women out of some of the skeletons. He took away one of
the largest checks that ever went from our congregation to any
benevolent cause. Secretary Maile presented the work of the College and
Education Society in such a way as to rouse the people to a sense of its
great importance. We are wonderfully glad to see you and you see are all
ready for another ingathering to-morrow. These brethren have left more
than they took away in money, and have enlarged the scope of vision of a
good many people. They see the importance and the growing needs of these
Mission fields, as never before. Put in your best blows to-morrow. Don't
be afraid that you will take anything away that ought to remain in the
community; that isn't possible. God bless you in the splendid work the
A.M.A. is doing!"

Now, brethren, these are two typical ways of meeting the collecting
Secretary when he calls.

_Which is the better way?_

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT THE YOUNG PEOPLE AND CHILDREN ARE DOING THROUGH THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

The readers of this department of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY magazine will
remember that some time ago the Busy Bees in the First Church in Dover,
N.H., contributed money enough to furnish the nucleus of a greatly
needed Reference Library at Gregory Institute, Wilmington, N.C. This was
the beginning of several such movements on the part of the young people
and children. The Y.P.S.C.E. of Dorchester contributed a goodly sum for
the establishment of such a library at Grand View, Tenn. A gift toward
the work in Alaska comes from the Y.P.S.C.E. at Dedham. A good many
Sunday-schools have also contributed both to the general fund and to
special objects. In Gorham, Maine, the children were greatly interested
in the Stereopticon Exhibition, which was conducted by our faithful
missionary, Rev. S.E. Lathrop. Three of them determined to give
something substantial to this work. In order to raise money, they held
a Fair, making with their own hands many of the articles that were for
sale. This resulted in a considerable amount, which was supplemented by
a gift from the Sunday-school to constitute one of these children,
Robert Hinkley, a boy eight years of age, a Life Member of the American
Missionary Association. Is he not the youngest Life Member of our
Association? Cannot we have some letters from our friends giving the
ages of children who are Life Members? If any feel disposed to "beat the
record" by the payment of thirty dollars, they can confer this honor
upon their baby boy or girl. One baby in New England, at least, has
contributed to the work among the millions of neglected children, just
by being born. The father, a pastor of one of our churches, hands into
the treasury each year one dollar for each pound the baby weighs. When
this is known, there will be many of our missionaries who will be
praying for the health and rapid growth of that baby!

In Melrose, also, the "Golden Rule Mission Band" are helping our great
work, and at the same time gaining an intelligent knowledge of this
field. At the beginning of the summer one dollar and twenty-five cents
was distributed among them, each one taking five cents. This was the
seed from which they reaped a harvest of twenty-six dollars. The
following are some of the methods by which they secured this remarkable
result. One little girl bought flower-seeds and raised flowers which she
sold, and made five dollars from her five cents. Another made candy and
sold it. A little boy had a peanut stand, and one little fellow earned
his money by "going without things." Could not older people follow his
example? It suggests Thoreau's epigram, "Your wealth is measured by the
number of things you can go without;" or, better yet, Paul's magnificent
words, "poor, yet making many rich." This little fellow has hit upon the
real principle of success, whether the life is spent in a field of
active missionary work, or in "doing without things" for Christ's sake,
that His name may be proclaimed, and that His kingdom may come.

       *       *       *       *       *


_CALLS FOR BOOKS._

Calls often come to us from the field for hymn books. Churches or
individuals having unused books, enough of the same kind to supply a
small congregation, can get them put where they will do the most good by
sending them to our rooms prepaid.

If any of our pastors have BARNES' NOTES in complete or incomplete sets,
which they may now no longer need, the American Missionary Association
can use them most profitably in supplying their young missionaries. Send
them to us at the Bible House.

       *       *       *       *       *


_THE FIELD._

1890-1891.

The following list presents the names and post-office addresses of those
who are employed in the Churches, Institutions and Schools aided by the
American Missionary Association.


_THE SOUTH._

  Rev. R.C. Hitchcock, Field Superintendent.
  Rev. W.E.C. Wright, Field Superintendent.


_WASHINGTON, D.C._

  THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.
    Rev. J.E. Rankin, D.D., LL.D.,             Washington, D.C.
     "   J.G. Craighead, D.D.,                      "       "
     "   John L. Ewell,                        Millbury, Mass.
     "   John G. Butler, D.D.,                 Washington, D.C.
     "   G.W. Moore,                                "       "
     "   C.H. Small,                                "       "

  WASHINGTON, (LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH), 1701 11th St., N.W.
    _Pastor and Missionary_,
      Rev. G.W. Moore,                         Washington, D.C.
      Mrs. G.W. Moore,                              "       "

  WASHINGTON, (PLYMOUTH CHURCH).
    _Minister_,
      Rev. S.N. Brown,                         Washington, D.C.


_VIRGINIA._

  HAMPTON.
    _Minister_,
     Rev. H.B. Frissell,                       Hampton, Va.


_NORTH CAROLINA._

  WILMINGTON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Wm. J. Skelton,                     Bangor, Me.

  GREGORY INSTITUTE. (613 Nun Street).
    _Principal._--Geo. A. Woodard,             Weymouth, Mass.
    Miss Jennie L. Blowers,                    Westfield, N.Y.
     "   Alice S. Patten,                      Topsham, Maine.
     "   Ida S. Weld,                          Heron Lake, Minn.
     "   Edith Lampman,                        Perrysburgh, Ohio.
     "   Katharine LaGrange,                   Saugerties, N.Y.
     "   Minnie T. Strout,                     Salem, Mass.
     "   Katharine M. Jacobs,                  So. Hadley Falls, Mass.
     "   Leora A. Wiard,                       Crossingville, Penn.
     "   May E. Dickinson,                     Oberlin, Ohio.
    Mrs. Ellen Lewis,                          Columbus, Ohio.

  BEAUFORT.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Michael E. Jerkins,                 Beaufort, N.C.

  WASHBURN SEMINARY.
    _Principal._--Miss M.E. Wilcox,            Madison, Ohio.
    Miss Hattie May Cobb,                      Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   C.P. Lewis,                           St. Paul, Minn.
     "   A.H. Buxton,                          Henshaw, Tenn.
     "   May Louise Alley,                     Dorchester, Mass.

  DUDLEY.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Jno. W. Freeman,                    Newark, N.J.

  RALEIGH.
    _Minister and General Missionary_,
      Rev. A.W. Curtis,                        Crete, Neb.

    _Special Missionary_,
      Miss A.W. Farrington,                    Portland, Me.

  OAKS, CEDAR CLIFF AND MELVILLE.
    _Minister and Missionary_,
      Rev. Anthony Peden,                      Oaks, N.C.
      Miss E.W. Douglass,                      Decorah, Iowa.

    _Teacher at Melville_,
      Mrs. Carrie E. Jones,                    Chapel Hill, N.C.

  McLEANSVILLE AND CHAPEL HILL.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Alfred Connet,                      Solsberry, Ind.

    _Teachers at McLeansville_,
      Miss Nettie Connet,                      Solsberry, Ind.
      Mr. O. Connet,                              "        "

    _Teachers at Chapel Hill_,
      Mr. Fred. S. Hitchcock,                  Bay St. Louis, Miss.
      Mrs. Fred. S. Hitchcock,                  "       "      "

  HILLSBORO.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss Myrie Connet,                       Solsberry, Ind.
       "   Addie Connet,                          "        "

  STRIEBY, SALEM AND HIGH POINT.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Z. Simmons,                         Strieby, N.C.

    _Teacher at Strieby_,
      Mrs. H.R. Walden,                        Strieby, N.C.

    _Teacher at Salem_,
      Mr. Henry R. Walden,                     Strieby, N.C.

  TROY, PEKIN, DRY CREEK AND NALLS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C.C. Collins,                       Newark, N.J.

    _Teachers at Troy_,
      Miss Bessie Bechan,                      Fergus, Ont.
       "   Florence Watt,                      London, England.

    _Teacher at Nalls_,
      Miss Kate Powell,                        Dry Creek, N.C.

  ALL HEALING.
  LINCOLN ACADEMY.
    _Principal._--Miss Lillian S. Cathcart,    Tangarine, Fla.
    Miss Alice E. Peck,                        Batavia, N.Y.
     "   Dora D. French,                       Amherst, Mass.
    Mrs. Electa D. White,                      Pittsfield, Mass.
     "   Hattie Lee,                           All Healing, N.C.

  BLOWING ROCK.
  SKYLAND INSTITUTE.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss N.F. Dennis,                        Salem, Mich.
       "   Annette Jackson,                    Montevideo, Minn.

  SALUDA.
  SALUDA SEMINARY.
    _Principal._--Miss. E.C. Prudden,          Blowing Rock, N.C.
    Mr. Walter P. Rogers,                      Excelsior, Minn.
    Miss Janie Hicks,                          Pacolet, S.C.
     "   Amanda Clark,                         Lenoir, N.C.
     "   Mary Campbell,                        Saluda, N.C.
     "   Quintina Hicks,                       Pacolet, S.C.


_SOUTH CAROLINA._

  CHARLESTON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Geo. C. Rowe,                       Charleston, S.C.

  AVERY INSTITUTE. (57 Bull Street).
    _Principal._--Morrison A. Holmes,          Lee, Mass.
    Miss A. Merriam,                           Westboro, Mass.
     "   Ruth E. Gill,                         N. Monroeville, Ohio.
    Mr. E.A. Lawrence,                         Charleston, S.C.
    Miss Grace E. Metcalf,                     Elyria, Ohio.
     "   C.M. Sweet,                           Florenceville, Ohio.
     "   Mary L. Deas,                         Charleston, S.C.
    Mrs. M.A. Holmes,                          Lee, Mass.

  GREENWOOD.
  BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Rev. J.E.B. Jewett,          Pepperell, Mass.
    Miss Sarah J. Evans,                       Oberlin, Ohio.
    Mrs. J.E.B. Jewett,                        Pepperell, Mass.
     "   M.M. Pond,                                "       "
    Miss Laura Clelland,                       Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   C.M. Day,                             Spencerport, N.Y.
     "   Alice A. Holmes,                      Lansing, Michigan.
     "   Carrie E. Ashley,                     Oberlin, Ohio.


_GEORGIA._

  ATLANTA.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C.W. Francis,                       Atlanta, Ga.

  ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.
    _President._--Rev. Horace Bumstead, D.D.,  Atlanta, Ga.
    Rev. Cyrus W. Francis, A.M.,               Atlanta, Ga.
     "   John H. Hincks,                          "      "
    Mr. Clarence C. Tucker,                       "      "
     "  Edgar H. Webster,                      Boston, Mass.
    Mr.  Walter D. Smith,                      Atlanta, Ga.
     "   Elijah H. Holmes,                          "    "
     "   David R. Lewis,                       Greensboro, Ind.
    Rev. Myron W. Adams,                       Gilsum, N.H.
    Mr.  F. Ford Babcock,                      New Brunswick, N.J.
    Mrs. Lucy E. Case,                         Atlanta, Ga.
    Miss Emma C. Ware,                         Norwich, Conn.
     "   Mary E. Sands,                        Saco, Me.
     "   Susan A. Cooley,                      Bavaria, Kansas.
     "   Ella. W. Moore,                       Chicago, Ill.
    Mrs. Hattie W. Chase,                      West Randolph, Vt.
    Miss Olive A. Thompson,                    Salisbury Pt., Mass.
     "   M. Agnes Tuck,                        Brentwood, N.H.
     "   Emily H. Abbot,                       Wilton, N.H.
     "   Mary A. Richardson,                   Woburn, Mass.
     "   Lydia M. Hardy,                       Peabody, Mass.
     "   Idella M. Swift,                      Boston, Mass.
     "   Mary E. Stanley,                      Wellington, O.
     "   Julia A. Ellis,                       Natick, Mass.
     "   Hattie E. Clifford,                   Monmouth, Me.
     "   Sarah E. Harrington,                  West Newton, Mass.
     "   Belle W. Hume,                        New Haven, Conn.
     "   Bertha Stowell,                       Charlestown, Mass.
     "   Elizabeth Plimpton,                   Walpole, Mass.

  ATLANTA, (FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH).
    _Minister_,
      Rev. S.H. Robinson,                     Greenfield, Mass.

  STORRS SCHOOL, (104 Houston St.)
    _Principal._--Miss Ella E. Roper,          Worcester, Mass.
    Miss Ellen W. Conant,                      Ravenna, Ohio.,
     "   M.A. Lyman,                           Huntington, Mass.
     "   Caroline F. Colburn,                  Portland, Me.
     "   Fanny L. Seward,                      Guilford, Conn.
     "   Minnie I. Pinkerton,                  Tremont, Pa.
     "   Amy P. Rusk,                          Janesburg, N.J.
    Mrs. A.S. Webber,                          Worcester, Mass.

  MACON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. John R. McLean,                     Macon, Ga.

  BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL. (806 Pine Street).
    _Principal._--Mrs. L.A. Shaw,              Oswego, N.Y.
    Miss Carrie S. Shaw,                         "      "
    Miss E.B. Scobie,                          Peninsula, Ohio.
     "   Harrie Edna Brooke,                   Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   Mary E. Woodruff,                     Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   Mary E. Van Deusen,                   Ashby Falls, Mass.
     "   Myrtie Harlow,                        Bangor, Me.
     "   J.F. Maynard,                         Keene, N.H.
     "   S.F. Clark,                           Medina, Ohio.
     "   Luella M. Follansbee,                 Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   H.T. Ford,                            New York, N.Y.
    Mrs. Mary A. Bishop,                       Keene, H.H.
    Mr. John W. Hunler, Jr.,                   Stormstown, Penn.

  SAVANNAH
    _Minister_,
      [1]Rev. L.B. Maxwell,                      Savannah, Ga.

           [Footnote 1: This church has assumed self-support.]

  BEACH INSTITUTE. (30 Harris Street).
    _Principal._--Miss Ida M. Wood,            Marshfield, Wis.
    Miss Jennie Merriman,                      Painesville, Ohio.
     "   H.J. Brown,                           So. Sudbury, Mass.
     "   R.E. Stinson,                         Woolwich, Me.
     "   Hannah N. Johnson,                    Upton, Mass.
     "   Rosa E. Low,                          Framingham, Mass.
     "   Martha B. Whelpley,                   Painesville, Ohio.
     "   Etta M. Eaton,                        Middletown, Conn.
     "   M.L. Jackson,                         Savannah, Ga.
     "   Julia C. Andrews,                     Milltown, N.B.

  THOMASVILLE.
  NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Miss A.A. Holmes,            Lee, Mass.
    Miss C.M. Dox,                             Kalamazoo, Mich.
      "  H.I. Martin,                          Toledo, Ohio.
      "  R.W. Hulsizer,                        Sydney, N.J.
      "  Ada J. Coleman,                       Cannonsburg, Pa.
      "  Clara Dole,                           Oberlin, Ohio.
    Mrs. S.R. McLaren,                         Pawtucket, R.I.

  McINTOSH.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. F.R. Sims,                          McIntosh, Ga.

  DORCHESTER ACADEMY.
    _Principal._--H.W. Marsh,                  Easton, Pa.
    Miss Lizzie H. Kuhl,                       Lawrenceville, Pa.
      "  J. Thompson,                          Chicago, Ill.
      "  Ella C. Abbott,                       Winchester, Mass.
    Mrs. S.A. Stanton,                         ----, England.
      "  H.W. Marsh,                           Eastern, Pa.

  CYPRESS SLASH.
    _Minister and Teachers_,
      Rev. J.A. Jones,                         Talladega, Ala.
      Mrs. J.A. Jones,                              "       "

  MILLER'S STATION.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Wilson Callen,                      Savannah, Ga.

  ATHENS.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. George V. Clark,                     Atlanta, Ga.
      Mr.  Lewis S. Clark,                      Athens, Ga.

  MARSHALLVILLE.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. A.W. Richardson,                    Marshallville, Ga.
      Mr. Edward Richardson,                         "         "

  WOODVILLE.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke,                  Savannah, Ga.
      Mr. J. Loyd,                                 "      "

  MARIETTA AND WALKER'S CROSSING.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Joseph H. Miller,                   Marietta, Ga.

  CUTHBERT.
    _Teachers_,
      Mr. F.H. Henderson,                      Cuthbert, Ga.
      Mrs. F.H. Henderson,                         "      "

  ALBANY.
    _Teacher_,
      Mr. W.C. Greene,                         Albany, Ga.

  BAINBRIDGE.
    _Teacher_,
      Mr. A.W. Hall,                           Bainbridge, Ga.

  RUTLAND, ANDERSONVILLE AND BYRON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Charles F. Sargent,                 Macon, Ga.

  RUTLAND.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. James Walker,                       Cypress Slash, Ga.
      Mrs. James Walker,                          "      "     "

  MILFORD.
    _Minister_,
      ----                                     ----


_FLORIDA._

  FAIRBANKS.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss H.C. Bullard,                       Federal Point, Fla.
       "   Hattie E. Leach,                    Norwich, Conn.

  ORANGE PARK.
    _Minister._
      Rev. W.A. Benedict,                      Newton Centre, Mass.


_ALABAMA._

  _Minister_,
    Rev. G.W. Andrews, D.D.,                   Talladega, Ala.

  TALLADEGA COLLEGE.
    _President_--Rev. H.S. DeForest, D.D.,     Talladega, Ala.
    Rev. G.W. Andrews, D.D.,                       "       "
     "   A.T. Burnell,                         Eureka, Kansas.
    Mr. H.F. Ellinwood,                        Williamstown, Mass.
     "  George Williamson,                     Emma, N.C.
     "  E.A. Bishop,                           Talladega, Ala.
     "  E.C. Silsby,                               "       "
    Miss May L. Phillips,                      Cannonsburg, Pa.
     "   E.J. Peck,                            Bristol, Conn.
     "   J.A. Ainsworth,                       Newton Highlands, Mass.
     "   Carrie E. Wheeler,                    Union City, Pa.
     "   Carrie E. Parkhurst,                  Manchester, N.H.
     "   Carrie B. Chamberlain,                Allegheny City, Pa.
     "   Jessie O. Hart,                       W. Cornwall, Conn.
     "   Sara J. Elder,                        Melrose, Mass.
     "   Susie Sands,                          Grinnell, Iowa.
    Mrs. A.T. Burnell,                         Eureka, Kansas.
    Miss Alice F. Topping,                     Olivet, Mich.
     "   Addie Chalfant,                       Lebanon, S.D.
    Mrs. H.S. DeForest,                        Talladega, Ala.
     "   G.W. Andrews,                             "       "
    [2]Mr. John Orr,                                 "       "

         [Footnote 2: Detailed to superintend construction of buildings.]

  MOBILE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. F.G. Ragland,                       Mobile, Ala.

  EMERSON INSTITUTE.
    _Principal._--Charles M. Stevens,          Clearwater, Minn.
    Miss Katharine S. Dalton,                  Fremont, Ohio.
     "   Stella Pollard,                       Hoboken, N.J.
     "   Annie L. Battis,                      White Plains, N.Y.
    Mrs. Martha G. Parsons,                    Oakland, Cal.
    Miss Emma M. Fletcher,                     Manchester, N.H.
     "   S. Josephine Scott,                   Hamilton, Ohio.
     "   Anna Birchard,                        Bellevue, Mich.
     "   Isadora Caughey,                      North Kingsville, Ohio.

  MONTGOMERY.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. J.S. Jackson,                       Montgomery, Ala.

  ALCO.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. ----                                ----

  ATHENS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. S.H. Williams,                      Athens, Ala.

  TRINITY SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Miss M.F. Wells,             Ann Arbor, Mich.
    Miss Kate E. Sherwood,                     St. Joseph, Mich.
     "   Sadie Snedeker,                       Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   A.M. Whitsey,                         Dover, Ohio.
     "   Lulu Sarah Downs,                     Parker, Minn.
     "   Mary E. Perkins,                      Norwich, Conn.

  MARION.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. W.I. Larkin,                        Devonshire, England.

  NORMAL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Mr. Payson E. Little,        Columbia, Conn.
    Miss E.F. King,                            Oak Park, Ill.
     "   Mary Hoyt,                               "       "
     "   B.R. Parmenter,                       Rockford, Iowa.
     "   Metta E. Snedeker,                    Oberlin, Ohio.
    Mrs. Payson E. Little,                     Columbia, Conn,
    Miss Louise Holman,                        Lincoln, Neb.

  SELMA.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. E.J. Penney,                        Selma, Ala.

  BURRELL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Amos W. Farnham,             Hannibal, N.Y.
    Miss Alice E. Jewell,                      Olivet, Mich,
     "   C.H. Loomis,                          Denver, Col.
    Mr. James A. Brier,                        Selma, Ala.
    Miss M.W. Smith,                              "    "
     "   M.A. Dillard,                            "    "
     "   Julia A. Goodwin,                     Mason, N.H.
    Mrs. C.A. Fitch,                           Hannibal, N.J.

    _Special Missionary_,
      Miss M.K. Lunt,                          New Gloucester, Me.

  KYMULGA.
    _Minister_,
      Mr. A. Simmons,                          Talladega, Ala.

  LAWSONVILLE AND COVE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. E.E. Sims,                          Talladega, Ala.

  JENIFER AND IRONATON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. J.B. Grant,                         Talladega, Ala.

  SHELBY IRON WORKS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. J.R. Sims,                          Talladega, Ala.

  CHILDERSBURG.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. W.P. Hamilton,                      Talladega, Ala.

  ANNISTON.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. James Brown,                        Alco, Ala.

    _Teachers_,
      Miss Mary E. McLane,                     New Haven, Conn.
       "   Sarah A. Dole,                      Oberlin, O.

  FORT PAYNE.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      ----                                     ----
      Mr. A.L. DeMond,                         Fort Payne, Ala.

  BIRMINGHAM.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Spencer Snell,                      Birmingham, Ala.

    _Missionary_,
      Miss S.S. Evans,                         Fryeburg, Maine.

  NEW DECATUR.

  PLYMOUTH CHURCH.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. F.E. Jenkins,                       South Coventry, Conn.

  NAT.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. M.E. Sloan,                         Dundas, Minn.
      Miss Emma G. Sloan,                         "     "

  FLORENCE.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Thos. J. Austin,                    Jackson, Tenn.
      Miss Louise Harris,                      Nashville, Tenn.

  COTTON VALLEY.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss Lilla V. Davis,                     Boston, Mass.
       "   Marion Martin,                      Oberlin, O.

  SOCIETY HILL.
    _Teacher_,
      Mrs. J.C. Tyson,                         Society Hill, Ala.

  FRANKFORT, (P.O. ROOK CREEK).
    _Teacher_,
      Miss A.W. Barnes,                        Evans Mills, N.Y.
      Miss Annie C. Hawley,                    Tuskegee, Ala.


_TENNESSEE._

  NASHVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Henry S. Bennett, D.D.,             Nashville, Tenn.

  FISK UNIVERSITY.
    _President._--Rev. E.M. Cravath, D.D.,     Nashville, Tenn.
    Rev. A.K. Spence, A.M.,                        "        "
     "   H.S. Bennett, D.D.,                       "        "
     "   F.A. Chase, A.M.,                         "        "
    Eugene Harris,                                 "        "
    Prof. H.C. Morgan, A.M.,                       "        "
     "    H.H. Wright, A.M.,                   Oberlin, O.
     "    E.C. Stickel,                            "    "
    Mr. E.E. McKibban,                         Macon, Ga.
     "  M.H. Stevens,                          Nashville, Tenn.
    Miss A.T. Ballantine,                      Oberlin, O.
     "   Emma R. Caughey,                      N. Kingsville, O.
     "   Emma Wolcott,                         Clay, Iowa.
     "   Mary F. Penfield,                     Rockford, Ill.
     "   A. Louise Harwood,                    Buffalo, N.Y.
     "   Katharine Davis,                      Newton Centre, Mass.
     "   Ida M. Tindale,                       Pontiac, Ill.
     "   Helen D. Barton,                      Terre Haute, Ind.
    Mrs. L.R. Greene,                          North Amherst, Mass.
    Miss J.A. Robinson,                        Oberlin, O.
     "   L.A. Parmelee,                        Toledo, Ohio.
     "   M.A. Kinney,                          Whitewater, Wis.
     "   Frances Yeomans,                      Danville, Ill.
    Mrs. W.D. McFarland,                       Winsted, Conn.
    Miss S.M. Wells,                           Middletown, N.Y.
     "   Fannie Andrews,                       Calais, Me.

  NASHVILLE (HOWARD CHURCH).
    Rev. Eugene Harris,                        Nashville, Tenn.

  NASHVILLE (THIRD CHURCH).
    Rev. H.H. Proctor,                         Nashville, Tenn.

  GOODLETTSVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. J.D. Miller,                        Nashville, Tenn.

  SPRINGFIELD.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss Ellen E. Campbell,                  Springfield, Tenn.
       "   Maria A. Armstrong,                     "          "

  MEMPHIS.
    _Minister_,
     [3]Rev. B.A. Imes,                          Oberlin, Ohio.

          [Footnote 3: This church has assumed self-support.]

  LEMOYNE INSTITUTE. (294 Orleans St.)
    _Principal._--Andrew J. Steele,            Whitewater, Wis.
    Miss E.A. Barnes,                          Tallmadge, Ohio.
     "   Emma C. Williams,                     Glenwood, Iowa.
     "   Susie Walker,                         South Weymouth, Mass.
     "   C.S. Goldsmith,                       Chester, N.H.
     "   Emma Goldsmith,                          "      "
     "   Mattie A. Henderson,                  Memphis, Tenn.
     "   Zulee Felton,                            "      "
     "   Frances M. Carrier,                   Beloit, Wis.
     "   Rebecca Green,                        Silver Creek, N.J.
     "   Mattie Nicholson,                     Memphis, Tenn.
     "   Jennie E. Herrington,                    "      "
    Mr. Thomas P. Rawlings,                       "      "
    Mrs. M.L. Jenkins,                         Marion, Kansas.
    Mr. Edward I. Lewis,                       Memphis, Tenn.
    Miss Hattie E. Kline,                      North Amherst, Ohio.

  JONESBORO.
    _Minister_,
      ----                                     ----

    _Teachers_,
      Miss Annie R. Miner,                     Lyme, Conn.
       "   Lilla Belle Moore,                  Rockville, Ind.
       "   F. Mills,                           Terre Haute, Ind.

  KNOXVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Eugene A. Johnson,                  Knoxville, Tenn.

  CHATTANOOGA.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Jos. E. Smith,                      Chattanooga, Tenn.

  TENNESSEE MOUNTAIN WORK.
    _General Missionary_,
      Rev. G. Stanley Pope,                    Harriman, Tenn.

  GRAND VIEW.
    _Minister and Instructor in Biblical Department._
      Rev. Charles H. Abbott,                  Geneva, Ill.

    _Teachers_,
      _Principal._--R.E. Dickson,              Poquonock, Conn.
      Miss Mabel Atkins,                       South Amherst, Mass.
       "   Mabel A. Buttrick,                  Milford, N.H.
       "   Martha H.N. Gorbold,                Venice, Ohio.
      Mrs. C.H. Abbott,                        Geneva, Ill.
      Miss Alice Conklin,                      Tuscarora, N.Y.

  PLEASANT HILL.
    _Minister_,
      Mr. H.L. Ballou,                         Amherst, Mass.

  PLEASANT HILL ACADEMY.
    _Principal._--Mr. H.L. Ballou,             Amherst, Mass.
    Miss Laura M. Miller,                      N. Brookfield, Mass.
     "   Flora Woodbury,                       Richfield, N.Y.
    Mrs. A.E. McClure,                         Bellefontaine, Ohio.

    _General Minister_,
      Rev. B. Dodge,                           Centre Lebanon, Me.

  POMONA.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. F.M. Cooley,                        Crossville, Tenn.
      Mrs. Alice Graves,                       Pomona, Tenn.

  CROSSVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. F.M. Cooley,                        Crossville, Tenn.

    _Teachers_,
      Mr. W.F. Cameron,                        Montevideo, Minn.
      Mrs. W.F. Cameron,                            "        "

  ATHENS AND MT. VERDE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. N. Kingsbury,                       Mattawan, Mich.

    _Teacher at Mt. Verde_,
      Miss Sarah E. Ober,                      Beverly, Mass.

    _Teacher at Athens_,
      Miss E.M. Peck,                          Mansfield, O.

  DEER LODGE, OAK GROVE AND ANNANDALE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. George Lusty,                       Oberlin, O.

    _Teacher at Deer Lodge_,
      Miss Jessie Phelps,                      Deer Lodge, Tenn.

  GLEN MART, HELENWOOD, ROBBINS AND RUGBY.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. G.H. Marsh,                         North Fairfield, Ohio.

  BON AIR.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Edward N. Goff,                     Glen Mary, Tenn.

  BRICEVILLE, COAL CREEK AND PIONEER.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. A. Dahuff,                          Jefferson County, Tenn.

  POLK, MUNROE, BLOUNT AND SEVIER COUNTIES.
    _Pioneer Evangelist._
      Rev. E.W. Hollies,                       Brookville, Kan.

  SANDFORDVILLE.
    _Teacher_,
      Miss Etta Wilson,                        Hammondsport, N.Y.

  HARRIMAN.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. G.S. Pope,                          Grand View, Tenn.

  FENTRESS COUNTY.
    _Pioneer Evangelist._
      Rev. T.A. Kitchen,                       Deer Lodge, Tenn.

  SHERWOOD.
    _Minister._
      Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop,                 New London, Wis.

    _Teachers_,
      Mr. Geo. O. Hannum,                      Sherwood, Tenn.
      Mrs. Clara Morse Perkins,                   "        "
      Mrs. Geo. O. Hannum,                        "        "

  JELLICO AND DOWLAIS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. F.W. Grafton,                       Normal, Ky.

    _Teachers at Jellico_,
      Mr. E. Frank Dizney,                     Jellico, Tenn.
      Miss F.K. Bement,                        Bement, Ohio.

  PINE MOUNTAIN.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C. Farnsworth,                      Lockport, N.Y.

    _Teachers_,
      Miss Ninette Hayes,                      Portsmouth, N.H.
       "   Lucy Bement,                        Bement, Ohio.

  MARSH CREEK, CARPENTER AND BIG CREEK GAP.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C. Farnsworth,                      Lockport, N.Y.

    _Teacher at Big Creek Gap_,
      Miss Flora Cone,                         Masonville, N.Y.

  CUMBERLAND GAP.
    _Minister and Missionary_,
      Rev. A.A. Myers,                         Cumberland Gap, Tenn.
      Mrs. A.A. Myers,                              "      "     "


_KENTUCKY._

  LEXINGTON.
  CHANDLER NORMAL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Frederick Foster,            Castine, Me.
    Miss E.M. Hitchcock,                       Lewis, N.Y.
     "   Mary Knox,                            Springfield, Mass.
     "   Flora Clough,                         Meriden, N.H.
     "   Kate Clough,                             "      "
     "   Mary H. Humphrey,                     South Hadley, Mass.
     "   Anna Lee Allen,                       Oberlin, Ohio,

  PRIMARY SCHOOL.
    Mrs. Agnes H. Mooney,                      Marlboro, Mass.
     "   L. Mary Elliott,                      New Wilmington, Pa.
     "   Mary A. Peffers,                      West Hawley, Mass.
     "   Fred. W. Foster,                      Castine, Me.

  LOUISVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. D.H. Foston,                        Louisville, Ky.

  KENTUCKY MOUNTAIN WORK.
    _General Missionary_,
      Rev. L.E. Tupper,                        Post Mills, Vt.

  WILLIAMSBURG.
    _Minister and Missionary_,
      Rev. L.E. Tupper,                        Post Mills, Vt.
      Mrs. L.E. Tupper,

  WILLIAMSBURG ACADEMY.
    _Principal._--H.E. Sargent,                Preston, Iowa.
    Mrs. H.E. Sargent,                             "   "
    Miss Mary A. Bye,                          Lake City, Minn.
     "   Amelia Ferris,                        Oneida, Ill.
     "   M. Amelia Packard,                    Brooklyn, N.Y.
     "   Maria M. Lickorish,                   North Ridgeville, Ohio.
    Mrs. C. Farnsworth,                        Lockport, N.Y.
    Mr. S. Steele,                             Williamsburg, Ky.

  ROCKHOLD, CORBIN AND WOODBINE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. A.J. Chittenden,                    Wheaton, Ill.

  WHITLEY AND KNOX COUNTIES.
    _Pioneer Evangelist_,
      Rev. Samuel Sutton,                      Williamsburg, Ky.

  CLOVER BOTTOM, GRAY HAWK AND COMBS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Mason Jones,                        Berea, Ky.


_KANSAS._

  TOPEKA.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. B.F. Foster,                        Topeka, Kan.

  LAWRENCE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Andrew E. Jackson,                  Lawrence, Kan.


_ARKANSAS._

  LITTLE ROCK.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Y.B. Sims,                          Talladega, Ala.
      Mr. W.E. Youngblood,                       "       "

  FAYETTEVILLE.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      ----                                     ----


_MISSISSIPPI._

  TOUGALOO.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Frank G. Woodworth,                 Wolcott, Conn.

  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.
    _President._--Rev. Frank G. Woodworth,     Wolcott, Conn.
    Mr. A.S. Hill, A.M.,                       Graytown, Ohio.
     "  William D. Hitchcock,                  Jackson, Mich.
     "  H.P. Kennedy,                             "       "
     "  J.C. Klein,                            Stockbridge, Mich.
     "  H.W. Bishop,                           Agricultural Coll., Md.
    Miss Elizabeth Ainsworth,                  Hyde Park, Mass.
     "   Gertrude Sammons,                     Wattsburgh, Pa.
     "   Winona Dickerman,                     South Norwalk, Conn.
     "   Katharine Dowd,                         "      "       "
     "   Elizabeth Parsons,                    Mt. Morris, N.Y.
     "   Mary P. Roberts,                      Normal, Ill.
     "   Clara E. Walker,                      Lorain, Ohio.
     "   Alice Flagg,                          Jeffersonville, Vt.
     "   Mary Flagg,                                 "          "
     "   Laura Messick,                        Philadelphia, Penn.
    Mrs. H.C. Hecock,                          Pittsfield, Mass.
    Miss S.L. Emerson,                         Hallowell, Me.

  MERIDIAN.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C.L. Harris,                        Meridian, Miss.

    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. H.I. Miller,                        E. Corinth, Vt.
      Miss Alice A. Patch,                     Galesburg, Ill.
       "   Inez B. Packard,                    Enfield, N.H.
       "   Caroline E. Kendall,                Dunstable, Mass.

  JACKSON.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. R.B. Johns,                         Reading, Pa.
      Mrs. R.B. Johns,                            "      "

  GREENVILLE.
    _Minister_,
      ----                                     ----

  NEW RUHAMAH, PLEASANT RIDGE AND SALEM.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Alonzo B. Corliss,                  Old Bridge, N.J.
      Mrs. Alonzo B. Corliss,                   "     "     "


_LOUISIANA._

  _General Missionary_,
    Rev. C.H. Crawford,                        Glenwood, Iowa.

  NEW ORLEANS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. George W. Henderson,                North Craftsburg, Vt.

    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY. (490 Canal St.)
    _President._--Prof. Oscar Atwood,          Jeffersonville, Vt.
    Mr. Elbert C. Little,                      Rocky Hill, Conn.
    Prof. A.L. McClelland,                    Brandon, Wis.
    Mr. E.C. Rose,                             New Orleans, La.
    Miss Anna Condict,                         Adrian, Mich.
     "   Mary J. Oertel,                       Prairie Du Sac, Wis.
     "   Louise Stoddard,                      Wheaton, Ill.
     "   Ella M. Packard,                      Milton, Mass.
     "   Lorena Lyon,                          Oberlin, Ohio.
     "   Margaret S. Hubbell,                  Clinton, N.J.
     "   Mary R. Furness,                      Furnessville, Ind.
     "   Jennie Fyfe,                          Lansing, Mich.
     "   Sibyl M. Noble,                       Norwichtown, Conn.
     "   Sarah A. Coffin,                      Beloit, Wis.

  PREPARATORY SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Miss Louise Denton,          New York, N.Y.
    Miss Ella Sampson,                         Wareham, Mass.
     "   Caledonia Phillips,                   Cannonsburg, Pa.
     "   Annie Levering,                       Philadelphia Pa.

  NEW ORLEANS, (CENTRAL CHURCH).
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Watson Jones,                       New Orleans, La.

  NEW ORLEANS, (SPAIN ST. CHURCH).
    _Minister_,
      Rev. ----                                ----

  NEW ORLEANS, (MORRIS BROWN CHURCH),
    _Minister_,
      Rev. I.H. Hall,                          New Orleans, La.

  NEW IBERIA.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C.H. Claiborne,                     New Orleans, La.

  FAUSSE POINT AND BELLE PLACE.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. William Butler,                     New Iberia, La.

  HAMMOND, ROSELAND AND GARDEN CITY.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. C.S. Shattuck,                      Amite, La.


_TEXAS._

  AUSTIN.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Wm. M. Brown,                       Blue Rapids, Kan.

  TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.
    _President._--Rev. Wm. M. Brown,           Blue Rapids, Kan.
    Mr. George B. Deuel,                       Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
    Miss Fanny Webster,                        Cheboygan, Mich.
     "   E.F. Chesley,                         East Barrington, N.H.
     "   F.A. Sperry,                          Rock Creek, Ohio.
     "   A.M. Sprague,                         Columbus, Ohio.
     "   Edith M. Thatcher,                    Chatham Centre, Ohio.
     "   Carrie M. Lewis,                      Wheaton, Ill.
     "   Phebe B, Parsons,                     Marcellus, N.Y.
    Mrs. Kate Bissell,                         Lebanon, So. Dakota.
     "   E.M. Holton,                          Upper Alton, Ill.
    Miss M.J. Adams,                           Columbus, Wis.

  CORPUS CHRISTI.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. George S. Smith,                    Raleigh, N.C.

  HELENA AND GOLIAD.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. Mitchell Thompson,                  Helena, Tex.

    _Teacher at Goliad_,
      Mrs. J.R.S. Hallowell,                   Goliad, Tex.

  PARIS.
    _Minister_,
      Rev. J.D. Pettigrew,                     Paris, Tex.

  DODD AND BOIS D'ARC.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. Mark Carlisle,                      Talladega, Ala.

  DALLAS.
    _Minister and Teachers_,
      Rev. R.J. Holloway,                      Dallas, Tex.
      Mrs. R.J. Holloway,                         "     "


_INDIAN MISSIONS._

  SANTEE AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

  NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.
    _Superintendent and Minister_,
      Rev. A.L. Riggs, D.D.,                   Santee Agency, Nebraska.

    _Treasurer_,
      Mr. Joseph H. Steer,                     Santee Agency, Nebraska.

    _Teachers_,
      Mr. J.A. Chadbourne,                     Santee Agency, Nebraska.
       "  F.B. Riggs,                            "      "       "
      Miss Edith Leonard,                      Rochester, Mass.
       "   Mary B. Benedict,                   North Walton, N.Y.
       "   Henrietta B. Williams,              Paddy's Run, Ohio.
       "   Addie A. Rideout,                   Hudson, Ohio.

    _Native Teachers_,
      Miss Anna R. Dawson,                     Santee Agency, Nebraska.
       "   Eunice Kitto,                       Fort Berthold, N. Dak.

    _Matrons_,
      Miss L.H. Douglas,                       New Haven, Conn.
        (Dakota Home),
      Miss Harriet A. Brown,                   Rocky Point, N.Y.
        (Birds' Nest),
      Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees,                 Rocky Hill, N.J.
        (Boys' Cottage),
      Miss E. Jean Kennedy,                    Montrose, Iowa.
        (Perkins Hall),
      Mrs. E.E. Scotford,                      Santee Agency, Nebraska.
        (Whitney Hall),
      Miss Nettie Calhoun,                     Kenton, Ohio.
        (Dining Hall),

    _Missionaries_,
      Mrs. J.A. Chadbourne,                    Santee Agency, Nebraska.
       "   J.H. Steer,                           "      "       "
       "   A.H. Stone,                           "      "       "
      Miss W. Williamson (Clerk),                "      "       "

    _Industrial Department_,
      Joseph H. Steer,   Blacksmithing,        Santee Agency, Nebraska.
      A.H. Stone,        Farming,                "      "       "
      Edgar H. Scotford, Carpentry,              "      "       "
      Iver P. Wold,      Shoemaking,             "      "       "
      Charles R. Lawson, Supt. Printing Office.  "      "       "

  BAZILLE CREEK.
    _Native Pastors and Helpers_,
      Rev. Benjamin Zimmerman,                 Santee Agency, Nebraska.
      Mr. Solomon Jones,                         "      "       "

  PONCA AGENCY AND UPPER PONCA.
    _Minister and Teacher_,
      Rev. J.E. Smith,                         De Smet, Dakota.
      Mrs. J.E. Smith,                          "   "     "


_CHEYENNE RIVER AGENCY._

  Rev. T.L. Riggs, _General Missionary_.

  CENTRAL STATION, OAHE, SOUTH DAKOTA.
    Rev. T.L. Riggs,                           Oahe, South Dakota.
    Mrs. T.L. Riggs,                             "     "     "

    _Minister_,
      Rev. Eli Spotted Bear,                   Oahe, South Dakota.

  INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
    _Principal._--Elias Jacobsen,              Oahe, South Dakota.
    Miss F.M. Emmons,                          Danville, N.Y.
     "   D.B. Dodge,                           Brooklyn, N.Y.
     "   E.L. Collins,                         Oahe, South Dakota.
     "   E. Bechan,                            Fergus, Ontario.
     "   Emily Reed,                           Oahe, South Dakota.
     "   L.A. Pingree,                         Denmark, Me.

  BAD RIVER.
    Rev. James Garvie,                         Santee Agency, Nebraska.
    Mrs. James Garvie,                            "      "       "

    [4]FORT PIERRE BOTTOM.
    Mr. Wm. Lee,                               Cheyenne River Agency.
    Mrs. Wm. Lee,                                 "       "      "

         [Footnote 4: Supported by the Indians themselves.]

    [5]CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 1.
    Mr. James Brown,                           Santee Agency, Nebraska.
    Mrs. James Brown,                             "      "       "

         [Footnote 5: Supported by Native Missionary Society.]

  CHEYENNE RIVER NO 3.
    Miss Katie Howard,                         Cheyenne River Agency.

  [6]CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 4.
    Rev. Edwin Phelps,                         Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. Edwin Phelps,                             "       "        "

         [Footnote 6: Supported by the Society for Propagating the Gospel,
         Boston, Mass.]

  CHEYENNE RIVER, NO. 5 (Sankey Station).
    Mr. Clarence Ward,                         Cheyenne River Agency.
    Mrs. Clarence Ward,                           "       "      "

  CHEYENNE RIVER NO. 7.
    Mr. Joseph Bird,                           Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. Joseph Bird,                             "       "        "

  MOREAU RIVER.
    Mr. John Bluecloud,                        Brown Earth, South Dakota.
    Mrs. John Bluecloud,                          "     "         "


_STANDING ROCK AGENCY._

  CENTRAL STATION
    Rev. George W. Reed,                       Springfield, Mass.
    Mrs. George W. Reed,                            "         "
    Miss C.E. Pingree, M.D.,                   Denmark, Me.
    Garfield Driver,                           Cheyenne River Agency, S.D.

  GRAND RIVER NO. 1
    Miss Mary C. Collins,                      Keokuk, Iowa.
    Mr. Albert Frazier,                        Santee Agency, Nebraska.
    Mrs. Albert Frazier,                          "      "        "

  GRAND RIVER NO. 2.
    Mr. Elias Gilbert,                         Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. Elias Gilbert,                            "       "         "

  CANNON BALL RIVER.
    Mr. James Oyemaza,                         Santee Agency, Nebraska.
    Mrs. Martha Oyemaza,                          "      "        "

  MISSOURI RIVER.
    Mr. Owen Lovejoy,                          Flandreau, South Dakota.
    Mrs. Owen Lovejoy,                             "            "


_ROSEBUD RESERVATION, SOUTH DAKOTA._

  ROSEBUD AGENCY.
    Rev. James F. Cross,                       Rosebud Agency, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. James F. Cross,                          "       "        "

  BURRELL STATION, (Keya Paha).
    Mr. Francis Frazier,                       Santee Agency, Nebraska.
    Mrs. Francis Frazier,                         "      "       "

  PARK STREET CHURCH STATION, (White River).
    Mr. Adam Stafford,                         Sisseton Agency, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. Adam Stafford,                            "       "        "


_FORT BERTHOLD, NORTH DAKOTA_

  _Superintendent._
    Rev. C.L. Hall,                            Fort Berthold, North Dakota.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss Lottie McHary,                        Jamestown, N.D.
     "   Lillian Smith,                        St. Paul, Minn,
     "   Roanna F. Challis,                    Freeborn, Minn.
     "   Bertha Gross,                         Yankton, S. Dakota.
    Mrs. C.L. Hall,                            Fort Berthold, North Dakota.
    Mr. Frank E. Tobie,                             "               "
    Mrs. F.E. Tobie,                                "               "

  MOODY STATION, NO. 1, (Independence).
    Mr. George K. Bassett,                     Fort Berthold, North Dakota.
    Mrs. Miriam W. Bassett,                         "               "

  MOODY STATION NO 2, (Elbow Woods).
    Mr. George K. Bassett,                     Fort Berthold, North Dakota.
    Mrs. Miriam W. Bassett,                         "               "

  REE SETTLEMENT.
    Rev. C.L. Hall,                            Fort Berthold, North Dakota.

  FORT STEVENSON.
    Rev. C.L. Hall,                            Fort Berthold, North Dakota.


_WASHINGTON._

    S'KOKOMISH AGENCY.
    _Missionary_,
      Rev. Myron Eells,                        S'kokomish, W.T.


_ALASKA._

  CAPE PRINCE OF WALES.
    Mr. H.R. Thornton,                         Hampden Sidney, Va.
     "  W.T. Lopp,                             Valley City, Ind.


_CHINESE MISSIONS._

  _Superintendent_,
    Rev. Wm. C. Pond, D.D.,                    San Francisco, Cal.

  FRESNO.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss J.R. Beaton,                        Fresno, Cal.
      Gin Foo King,                               "     "

  LOS ANGELES.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. C.A. Sheldon,                       Los Angeles, Cal.
      Miss Jennie M. Sheldon,                       "        "

  MARYSVILLE.
    _Teacher_,
      Miss Mattie A. Flint,                    Marysville, Cal.

  OAKLAND.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss Lillian F. Lamont,                  San Francisco, Cal.
      Yong Jin,                                Oakland, Cal.

  OROVILLE.
    _Teacher_,
      Miss Belle C. Keifer,                    Oroville, Cal.
      Chung Moi,                                   "      "

  PETALUMA.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. M.A. Colby,                         Petaluma, Cal.
      Wong Quong,                                  "      "

  RIVERSIDE.
    _Teacher_,
      Miss F.M. Purdy,                         Riverside, Cal.

  SACRAMENTO.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. S.E. Carrington,                    Sacramento, Cal.
      Lem Chung,                                    "       "

  SAN DIEGO.
    _Teachers_,
      Miss M.M. Elliott,                       San Diego, Cal.
      Chin Toy,                                    "       "

  SAN FRANCISCO, (CENTRAL).
    _Teachers_,
      Miss J.S. Worley,                        San Francisco, Cal.
      Mrs. M.A. Greene,                         "      "       "
       "   H.M. Lamont,                         "      "       "
      Miss Violet W. Lamont,                    "      "       "
      Mrs. A.T. Ruthrauff,                      "      "       "
      Jee Gam,                                  "      "       "

  SAN FRANCISCO, (BARNES).
    _Teachers_,
      Miss Rosa Lamont,                        San Francisco, Cal.
      Wong Chung,                               "      "       "

  SAN FRANCISCO, (WEST).
    _Teachers,
      Miss F.N. Worley,                        San Francisco, Cal.
      Chin Gang,                                "      "       "

  SANTA BARBARA.
    _Teacher_,
      Mrs. E.W. Shattuck,                      Santa Barbara, Cal.

  SANTA CRUZ.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. Kate Thompson,                      Santa Cruz, Cal.
      Pong Fang,                                   "        "

  STOCKTON.
    _Teachers_,
      Mrs. M.H. Langdon,                       Stockton, Cal.
      Lee Sing,                                     "      "

  VENTURA.
    _Teacher_,
      Miss Etta M. Peck,                       Ventura, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *


_THE SOUTH._


_SCHOOL AND CHURCH ITEMS._

The Ballard School at Macon, Ga, is in high prosperity.

Straight University under its new President, Oscar Atwood, is moving
forward most hopefully.

A council of five neighboring churches at McLeansville, N.C., Dec., 31,
1890, ordained Brother C.C. Collins to the gospel ministry. Rev. A.W.
Curtis of Raleigh was Moderator, and Rev. A. Connet of McLeansville,
Scribe.

A gracious religious interest is reported from Fisk University,
Nashville, Tenn., and many hopeful conversions have gladdened the hearts
of our teachers there. The pastor of the Howard Church at Nashville,
Tenn., writes us of twenty-one conversions during Mr. Wharton's stay
with him. Six conversions are also reported at Thomasville, Ga.

From Knoxville, Tenn., comes this word: The labors of Mr. and Mrs.
Wharton were greatly blessed of the Lord, the hearts of Christians were
revived and twenty-six souls were brought to the knowledge of Christ. We
are very hopeful of many of the most promising and influential young
people. Our Sabbath-school has just been reorganized and a number of the
converts have been put into active service. We expect good results to
follow the work of the evangelists for a long time to come.

From Memphis, Tenn: Our attendance for last November ran up to the
goodly number 508. The present month will show an advance on this
number, and for January we expect to reach the 550 stage. The increase
must be confined chiefly to the night school, which is flourishing.

At the recent Tenth Anniversary of the Lincoln Memorial Church in
Washington, the following facts were stated:

The church was organized January 10, 1881, with eleven members, and its
present enrollment is 235. It has sustained a sewing-school, in which
over 400 girls have been taught. It held night schools until night
schools were opened in the public schools, and it now sustains a
kindergarten. It has sustained various branches of missionary,
temperance and charitable work. It has a flourishing Sunday-school and
senior and junior Societies of Christian Endeavor.

A Sunday-school superintendent in the South needs a Bible Dictionary for
the use of himself and his school. Who will send a good second-hand one
for him? We will forward it.

       *       *       *       *       *


_TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS._

The University of Tougaloo is most beautifully located on a plantation
of five hundred acres among great oak trees festooned with Spanish moss.
We have been having delightful weather for the past month, corresponding
somewhat to our Northern October weather.

It is truly pitiful to think how most of our pupils have lived before
coming here. One girl had never seen a flight of stairs before and stood
helplessly at the bottom, not knowing how to climb them: and finally
attempted to go up on her hands and knees as she had climbed a ladder.
But whatever they have been accustomed to before, they can never live
the same again after having been here.

The one-roomed cabin is said to be the curse of the Negro, but the white
man built it for him and it remains for him to give him a desire for
something better. The Negro is essentially religious but he fails to
connect religion and morals. When you call upon one of the old aunties,
she talks about getting religion and what a glorious thing it is, and
describes visions of heaven and hell to you in the most vivid language:
but that doesn't prevent her drinking whiskey or telling lies. I have no
doubt, however, that some of the most egregious sins of these old slaves
are less in the eyes of God than many of our smaller ones.

The students here carry on two literary societies and four religious
organizations, besides several little missionary societies; the King's
Daughters, the King's Sons, Young Men's Christian Association, and a
society called the Covenanters. The latter, however, have no meeting
outside of the regular Wednesday evening prayer-meeting, to which they
come prepared to take a part. This makes our Wednesday evening meetings
very interesting. It might not be a bad plan to have a body of
Covenanters in some of our Northern churches.

The students work hard here. There are only a very few who have money
enough to pay their expenses. They begin school at seven in the morning
and finish at half past three. They work from that time until supper and
have study hours in the evening in the school-room, so that they have
absolutely no time for recreation, and Saturdays they work all day. Many
of them teach all summer after having been in school all the year. It is
really wonderful the way many of them do and it is a great pleasure to
teach them.

Within the last two months we have commenced work among the churches
within four or five miles of here. Many of our older students make
excellent helpers and are so glad to go and teach in the Sunday-schools
and help their ignorant brethren in any way they can. I have never heard
one of our students express a desire to leave the South for anything
more than to complete his education. The most of them are planning to
work among their own people, teaching and carrying on trades in a way
that will be an example to the rest.

Pres. Woodworth has a class composed of the pastors of the neighboring
churches, who meet him twice a week. Most of them can scarcely read a
chapter intelligently. Pres. Woodworth has taken up the Gospel of Mark
with them and is explaining it to them and showing them how to preach
from it, and they seem very appreciative, and say it is strange how long
they have misunderstood things.

Considering the various opportunities for work in the school and
surrounding country, one could not ask for a more satisfactory field
than Tougaloo.

       *       *       *       *       *


_CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES IN CHARLESTON, S.C._

By Superintendent R.C. Hitchcock

Of much interest to me is the "Circular Church" in Charleston. As early
as 1690 a wooden building was erected on the site now occupied by the
Circular church, the street being named "Meeting Street" and the
building known as the "White Meeting." Its members were Scotch
Independents and Presbyterians, with a considerable element of Huguenots
from France. For one hundred fourteen years this house was used as a
place of worship, for the first forty of which the two bodies maintained
a union, after that two churches were formed, the Independents or
Congregationalists retaining the house. In 1731 the Presbyterians
erected a wooden building on the east side of the same street, many of
the Scotch going with this body. During the Revolutionary war, while the
city was held by the British, the church was used as a storehouse and
its interior shared the fate of the Boston "Old South." Its congregation
was composed of both white and colored members, but only "freemen" could
vote in meeting.

The Civil War with its results, effected a separation of the white and
colored members, the white people rebuilding their lecture-room, the
colored worshiping in various places until 1867, when a letter was sent
the old church by a number of the former members, requesting an
honorable dismissal. This was granted and one hundred eight colored
people presented themselves for membership in a church contemplating
organization, as a Congregational church, to be called

     PLYMOUTH CHURCH.

This organization was consummated April 14, 1867, under the auspices of
the American Missionary Association. And in 1872 a suitable edifice was
erected on Pitt Street at a cost of $5,000. The present pastor, Rev.
Geo. C. Rowe, is much beloved by his people.

A tasteful parsonage is being erected on the church lot. It was greatly
needed. Plymouth Church is reaching out in schools and missions among
the colored people with earnest efficiency.

       *       *       *       *       *


_BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK._

Miss D.E. Emerson, Secretary


_OUR HOSPITAL AT FORT YATES, N.D._

By The Physician in Charge, Cynthia E. Pingree, M.D.

I am sure that all will be glad to hear a word about the hospital for
Indians, especially as there is nothing but good news to tell.

This hospital has now been built about two years. It will seem very
small when I tell you that it has but two wards, containing three cots
each, a bath-room, dispensary, reception room, doctor's and nurse's room
and dining room; and yet when the patient comes to us, he feels that we
have not only every convenience, but a great many luxuries, and from
this little Woasui Tipi or House of Healing, goes out many a ray to
gladden the hearts of those whom we to-day are trying to bring from
darkness into light.

But little has been done for these people when ill, except conjuring,
which is synonymous with torturing, but these "medicine men" are
losing their hold upon the faith of those who at one time, and that
not long past, trusted them fully, and the more intelligent ones
gladly avail themselves of treatment. And no class of people needs it
more, the filthy manner in which they live causing much sickness. It
has been a great surprise to me as well as to them, to see how much
simple cleanliness will do in very many of these cases. The old rule,
"remove the cause, the disease is removed," holds true in these cases.
It is encouraging to see how soon some of these come to see the great
importance of this.

I have in mind now a bright little boy nine years old, who was brought
to me wrapped in filthy old rags, unable to take one step on account of
terrible sores, which had received no attention whatever. The mother's
heart was very sad as she told me this was the only boy she had, five
having died. All the while I was attending to the little fellow the
mother carefully watched. She was given all that was necessary to use
for two weeks and when they returned, at the end of that time, it was
very evident that the boy had received good care. The mother cared for
him almost entirely after this, and in two months he came _running_
across the prairie, his braided hair just flying, asking for a piece of
bread. While the child was not cured, he had been made comfortable, the
parents' hearts had been lightened of a great sorrow, and they had
learned more than one lesson in thus caring for their child.

This is only one of many cases. Until they feel their illness is
well-nigh fatal they prefer the tent to the hospital, and even then a
great many wish to die out of doors. So that often the family come with
the ill one and camp just outside the yard. The hospital wards bring
comfort to two classes principally; the more civilized Indian, who
realizes the great benefit derived from good nursing, and those
friendless ones who are brought because they are too much trouble
elsewhere. Both of these classes are very grateful for all they receive.
The dispensary is open all the time and a great many are provided with
medicine. I think the friends of this Hospital may be of good cheer.

       *       *       *       *       *


_WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS._

Co-operating with the American Missionary Association


MAINE.

  WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.
  Chairman of Committee--Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

  FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Joseph B. Walker, Concord.
  Secretary--Mrs. John T. Perry, Exeter.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A.B. Swift, 167 King St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. M.K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R.I.

  [7]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer, Cambridge, Mass.
  Secretary--Miss Nathalie Lord, 33 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Saran K. Burgess, 32 Congregational House, Boston.

       [Footnote 7: For the purpose of exact information, we note that
       while the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass.
       and R.I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]


CONNECTICUT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Jacob A. Biddle, 35 West Street, South Norwalk.
  Secretary--Miss Ellen R. Camp, New Britain.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Greene Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 6 Salmon Block, Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Cobb, 59 Bible House, New York City.


PENNSYLVANIA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W.H. Osterhaut, Ridgway.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.F. Yennee, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T.W. Jones, 218 So. 37th St., Philadelphia.


OHIO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.G.W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F.L. Fairchild, Box 932, Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


INDIANA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W.A. Bell, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.T. Brown, Michigan City.


ILLINOIS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Champaign.


IOWA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Miss Ella E. Marsh, Box 232, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.J. Nichoson, 1518 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 47 Miami Ave., Detroit.
  Secretary--Mrs. Leroy Warren, Olivet.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. H.A. Miner, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A.A. Jackson, Janesville.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.M. Blackman, Whitewater.


MINNESOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 330 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Miss Katherine T. Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. A.J. Pike, Dwight.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Miss Ida E. Willcutt, Willow Lake.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.A. Clark, Lake Preston.


NEBRASKA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. T.H. Leavitt, 837 So. 13th Street, Lincoln.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.S. Smith, Beatrice.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.B. Perry, Crete.


MONTANA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F.D. Kelsey, Helena.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.S. Bell, Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Wallace, Billings.


MISSOURI.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A.W. Benedict, 3841 Delmar Ave., St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.H. Bradbury, 3855 Washington Ave., St. Louis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.E. Cook, 4145 Bell Ave., St. Louis.


KANSAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. F.J. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.G. Dougherty, Ottawa.


OREGON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John Summerville, 275 Washington St., Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. O.W. Lucas, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T.E. Clapp. 333 West Park St., Portland.


WASHINGTON.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. W.E. Dawson, Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. N.F. Cobleigh, Walla Walla.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.R. Abrams, Ellensburg.


CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. H.L. Merritt, 686 34th St., Oakland.
  Secretary--Miss Grace E. Barnard, 677 21st St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Emma Cash, 1710 Temple St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.K.W. Bent, Pasadena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H.W. Mills, 327 So. Olive St., Los Angeles.


COLORADO AND WYOMING.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.W. Pickett. White Water, Colorado.
  Secretary--Miss Mary L. Martin, 106 Platte Ave., Colorado Springs,
             Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S.A. Sawyer, Boulder, Colorado.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.L. Whipple, Cheyenne, Wyoming.


LOUISIANA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock, New Orleans.
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Hammond.


MISSISSIPPI.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Sarah Dickey, Clinton.
  Secretary--Miss Alice Flagg, Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Gibson, Tougaloo.


ALABAMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. H.W. Andrews, Talladega.
  Secretary--Miss S.S. Evans, 2519 Third Ave., Birmingham.
  Treasurer--Miss M.K. Lunt, Selma.


FLORIDA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.C. Partridge, Longwood.


TENNESSEE AND ARKANSAS.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. H.M. Cravath, Nashville, Tenn.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.S. Bennett, Nashville.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Pope, Grand View, Tenn.


NORTH CAROLINA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss M.E. Wilcox, Beaufort.
  Secretary--Miss A.E. Farrington, Raleigh.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.S. Smith, Raleigh.


TEXAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S.C. Acheson, 149 W. Woodard St., Denison.
  Secretary, Mrs. Mary A. McCoy, 122 No. Harwood St., Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.I. Scofield, Dallas.


We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association
be sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however,
should be taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary
Association, since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *


_LETTERS TO THE TREASURER._

"In sending my last subscription to the American Missionary Association
I supposed it to be my last. But the dear Master has not only
spared me hitherto, but he has given me the privilege of sending to the
Society another token of my continued love. You will find draft for
$1,000 enclosed. I am unable to write more. The Lord abundantly bless
and prosper this beloved Society in its noble work."

A friend in Vermont sends $2 and would gladly give more but has
invested about $1,000 in Iowa lots and stock "from which I hoped to get
some profitable honest gain. It has only yielded disappointment. I still
pray the Lord to bless your work--a sure investment--and to help me to
become a better helper in the good work."

A friend in Ohio, with $20, says: "I have read the minutes, papers and
addresses of your last meeting with _thrilling interest_. I hope they
may be widely circulated and thoughtfully and generally read.

Our Annual Report is now ready for distribution. Those who wish it
will please send us a postal card requesting it.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1890.



THE DANIEL HAND FUND,

_For the Education of Colored People_.

FROM

MR. DANIEL HAND, GUILFORD, CONN.

Income for October, 1890 ...$960.00



CURRENT RECEIPTS



MAINE, $559.42.

Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch. ...127.54

Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 25;
  Hammond St. Cong. Ch., adl., 2 ...27.00

Brewer. First Cong. Ch. ...20.50

Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch., to const.
  HUGH A. CRAGIE, FRED A. VERRILL and
  ANDREW B. JORDAN L.M.'s. ...129.87

Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch. ...4.25

Freeport. Cong. Ch. ...6 00

Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc, adl.
  to const. E.H.F. SMITH, MRS. E.H.F.
  SMITH and MRS. STEPHEN HINCKLEY
  L.M.'s. ...69.71

Kennenbunkport. Cong. Churches ...4.15

North Anson. "A Friend." ...10.00

Patten. Cong. Ch. ...15.00

Portland. Williston Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...8.00

Portland. Williston Ch., adl ...1.00

Portland. Sab. Sch. High St. Cong. Ch,
  15; Sab. Sch. Second Parish, 15; Sab.
  Sch. Williston Ch., 15; Sab. Sch. St.
  Lawrence St. Ch., 5; Sab. Sch. West
  Ch., 3.40, _for Atlanta U._ ...53.40

Rockland. Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
  DAVID P. HATCH L.M. ...36.50

South Paris. Cong. Ch. ...13.50

South Berwick. Miss Lena Ridley's S.S.
  Class, _for Indian M._ ...2.00

York. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 26;
  Second Cong. Ch. and Parish 5 ...31.00



NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,712.61.

Concord. South Cong. Ch., to const.
  MARSHALL W. NIMS, CALVIN C. WEBSTER
  and EDWARD B. WOODWORTH L.M.'s ...164.00

Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...31.00

Dover. Southern and Western Aid. Soc.,
  of First Cong. Ch., 30, _for Santee Agency,
  Neb._; Busy Bees, First Cong. Ch., 25,
  _for Library_, _Grand View, Tenn._ ...55.00

Greenland. Cong. Ch. ...23.00

Great Falls. First Cong. Ch., (Somersworth) ...25.00

Hampstead. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...29.28

Hanover. Mrs. A.H. Washburn, _for Indian
  Sh'p_ ...16.50

Keene. "A Friend," _for Indian M._ ...15.00

Lancaster. Cong. Ch. ...5.40

Lyme Center. Mrs. Amos Bailey ...1.00

Manchester. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  15; First Cong. Ch., Mrs. C. Wallace,
  4 ...19.00

Merrimack. First Cong. Ch. ...8.75

Milford. Mrs. W.R. Howard's Class,
  First Cong. Sab. Sch. ...5.00

Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc ...6.00

Nashua. Pilgrim Ch., 90. to const. REV.
  GEO. W. GROVER, MRS. GEO. W. GROVER,
  and MISS M. LIZZIE ANDREWS L.M.'s;
  First Cong. Ch., 42.18 ...132.18

Nashua "Friends," Bbl. Bedding, etc.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

North Hampton. "C." ...10.00

Penacook. Cong. Ch., 20.08; Sab. Sch.
  Cong. Ch., 10 ...30.08

Peterboro. "May Flowers," by Mary E.
  Knight, _for Children's Missionary_ ...20.00

Peterboro. Union Evan. Ch. ...19.75

Pittsfield. Cong. Ch. ...12.47

Pittsfield. Cong. Ch., _for Freight_, _to Marion,
  Ala._ ...2.79

Raymond. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...13.50

Sanbornton. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. ...13.00

Swanzey. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss Etta A.
  Newell, _for Fort Berthold_, _Indian M._ ...20.00

Warner. Cong. Soc. ...10.00

West Concord and Kennebunk. Bbl. C.,
  Mrs. Roper, 2, _for Freight_, _for Storrs
  Sch._, _Atlanta, Ga._ ...2.00

West Lebanon. Mission Band of Cong.
  Ch. ...10.00

Winchester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Wolfboro. Y.P.S.C.E., by R.S. Parker,
  Treas. ...2.91

--------  $712.61


ESTATE.

Keene. Estate of Miss Mary P. Whitney,
by W.H. Spalter, Co. Treas. ...1,000.00

--------  $1,712.61



VERMONT, $10,622.32

Bellows Falls. First Cong. Ch. ...72.44

Brownington and Barton Landing. Cong.
  Ch. ...20.00

Cabot. Christian Endeavor Society and
  Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Colchester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...1.50

East Hardwick. Mrs. Martha S. Stone ...10.00

Fairlee. "A Brother." ...2.00

Manchester. Miss E.J. Kellogg ...5.00

Middlebury. "A Friend." ...1.00

Milton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...11.50

Milton. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Mountain
  Work_ ...10.00

Newport. W. Richmond ...10.00

Northfield. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student
  Aid_, _Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...9.00

Norwich. Cong. Ch., 13.73; Mrs. Harriet
  Burton, 2. ...15.73

Rutland. Mrs. A.H. Perry, _for Mountain
  Work_ ...5.00

Saint Albans. Cong. Christian Endeavor
  Society, _for Student Aid_, _Fisk U._ ...50.00

Saint Johnsbury. Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks,
  20; Miss Mabel Fairbanks, 3; Joseph
  Fairbanks, 2, _for Indian M._ ...25.00

Springfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  M._ ...25.00

Stowe. Cong. Ch. ...50.85

Waterbury. Cong. Ch., 26.25; Rev. L.H.
  Elliot, 5. ...31.25

West Brattleboro. Rev. J.H. Babbitt,
  _for Indian M._ ...1.00

West Westminster. Cong. Ch. ...18.36

Worcester. Mrs. Sophia S. Hobart, _for
  Talladega C._ ...50.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt.,
  by Mrs. Williams P. Fairbanks, Treas.
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Barton Mrs. Mary A. Owen ...5.00

    McIndoes Falls. Sab. Sch. ...5.30

    Newport Aux. ...21.15

    Vergennes. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

--------   36.45

-------- $522.32


ESTATES.

Bennington. Estate of Emily S. Cobb,
by G.W. Harman, Ex. ...100.00

Woodstock. Estate of Frederick Billings,
by Oliver P.C. Billings, Samuel E. Kilner
and Franklin N. Billings Executors ...10,000.00

--------  $10,622.32



MASSACHUSETTS, $10,306.62

Abington. First Cong. Ch. ...31.36

Amherst. Sab. Sch. North Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian M._ ...18.72

Andover. West Cong. Ch. ...24.89

Andover. Sab. Sch. South Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid_, _Santee Indian Sch._ ...17.50
Andover. Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C., _for
  Savannah, Ga._

Ashfield. Mrs. Daniel Williams, _for
  Freight_, _to McLeansville, N.C._ ...1.16

Attleboro. Second Cong. Ch. ...68.34

Auburndale. Cong. Ch. ...203.00

Auburndale. Cong. Ch., 100; Miss S.G.
  Mosman, 3; Mrs. E.E. Sleeper, 1, _for
  Bible School_, _Fisk U._ ...104.00

Ayer. Mrs. A.S. Hudson's Bible Class,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...4.00

Billerica. Mrs. E.R. Gould, _for Sherwood,
  Tenn._ ...3.00

Brimfield. First Cong. Ch. ...6.79

Brockton. THOMAS A. BAXENDALE, bal.
  to const himself and MRS. ESTHER M.
  BAXENDALE L.M.'s ...35.00

Boston. Mount Vernon Ch. ...619.87

    Union Cong. Ch. ...295.75

    Shawmut Ch. ad'l, Frank
      Wood ...100.00

  Dorchester. Village Cong. Ch. ...35.21

  Jamaica Plain. Central Cong.
      Ch. ...107.40

    R.W. Wood. M.D. ...50.00

    Central Cong. Ch., adl.
      (9 of which _for Bible
      School_, _Fisk U._) ...22.05

  Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. ...187.51

    Sab. Sch. of Walnut Av.
    Cong. Ch., _for Indian
    Sch'p._ ...17.50

--------  1,434.93

Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. Miss'y
  Concert Coll., 11.52; Mrs. M.L.C. Whitney,
  1.50 ...13.02

Cambridgeport. Scatter Good Circle of
  Pilgrim Ch., _for Freight_, _to Beaufort,
  N.C._ ...1.00

Charlemont. Cong. Ch. ...7.61

Charlemont. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  C., _for Tougaloo U._

Charlton. Cong. Ch. ...18.54

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. ...55.75

Chicopee Falls. Mrs. Mary C. Bemis ...30.50

Colchester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...1.50

Conway. Cong. Ch. ...26.19

Danvers. Maple St. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
  Student Aid_, _Rosebud Indian Sch._ ...17.50

Dedham. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian Teacher_ ...25.00

Dedham. Allin Y.P.S.C.E., _for Alaska
  M._ ...5.00

Dover. Cong. Ch. ...8.00

Dunstable. ---- ...0.50

Dunstable. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of Books, etc.,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch. ...8.35

East Charlemont. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.
  _for Freight_, _to Sherwood, Tenn._ ...4.50

Easthampton. Payson Cong. Ch. ...208.72

East Northfield. Three Brothers (Daniel,
  George, Pierce) _for New Native Indian
  Station_ ...2.00

East Somerville. Franklin St. Ortho. Ch.
  Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_, _Santee Indian
  Sch._ ...40.00

Edgartown. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Enfield. Cong. Ch. ...49.06

Falmouth. Cong. Ch. ...20.00

Fitchburg. Rollston Cong. Ch., 71.47;
  Cal. Cong. Ch., 49.50 ...120.97

Franklin. Cong. Ch., _for Bible School_,
  _Fisk U._ ...$107.00

Georgetown. Memorial Ch., 30 of which
  to const. JOHN CHAMBERLAIN L.M. ...84.10

Globe Village. Evan. Free Soc. ...33.01

Granby. Cong. Ch., bal. to const.
  SYLVESTER H. TAYLOR L.M. ...25.00

Granville. O.S. Dickinson, (1 of which
  from Oliver, age 6 years, and Ruth 12
  years) ...4.50

Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and
  Soc. ...62.50

Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch. ...25.17

Harwich. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for
  Student Aid_, _Fisk U._ ...100.00

Haverhill. "C." ...50.00

Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (5 of
  which _for Mountain Work_) ...15.00

Holyoke. Mrs. Mary E. Rust ...1.00

Hopkinton. First Cong. Ch. ...88.86

Huntington Hill. Ladies' M. Soc. First
  Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Savannah, Ga._ ...1.75

Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. ...30.00

Lakeville. Precinct Cong. Ch., 67.32; "A
  Friend." 4.50 ...71.82

Lancaster. "B.E.S." ...20.00

Lawrence. Mrs. T.C. Wittemore, _for
  Indian Sch'p._ ...11.75

Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. ...24.50

Littleton. Orthodox Cong. Ch. ...13.00

Lowell. John St. Cong. Ch. ...26.72

Lynn. First Cong. Ch. ...29.10

Malden. First Cong. Ch. ...80.00

Mansfield. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. ...10.00

Marlboro. Union Cong. Ch., to const.
  CATHERINE N. STEVENS L.M., _for Bible
  Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...95.43

Medway. Village Ch. and Soc., adl. ...50.00

Melrose. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...51.54

Methuen. First. Parish Ch. ...22.15

Middleboro. Central Cong. Ch., Everett
  Robinson ...10.05

Milford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...44.14

Milford. "Friends," Bbl. Bedding, etc.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

Millbury. First Cong. Ch., 57.82; Second
  Cong. Ch. and Soc., 38.14, to const. AMOS
  ARMSBY L.M. ...95.96

Milton. Ladies' Soc. First Evan. Cong.
  Ch., 2 Bbls. C., $3.10, _for Freight to
  Talladega C._ ...3.10

Natick. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...47.34

Natick. First Cong. Ch., 13; Primary
  Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., 5 ...18.00

New Bedford. North Cong. Ch. ...74.71

Newbury. First Parish, _for Freight to
  Meridian, Mass._ ...2.00

Newburyport. Whitefield Cong. Ch. ...68.50

Newton. First Cong. Ch., 78.67; Mrs. M.T.
  Vincent's S.S. Class in Eliot Ch., 5,
  bal. to const. MRS. M.T. VINCENT L.M. ...83.67

Newton. Frank A. Day, _for Mountain
  Work_ ...25.00

Newton. Eliot Mission Circle. Eliot Ch.,
  10, _for Mountain Work_, 5, _for Rosebud
  Indian M._ ...15.00

Newton. Mrs. M.T. Vincent's S.S. Class,
  Eliot Ch., _for ed. of an Indian girl_, _Santee
  Agency_ ...7.80

Newton Center. Ch. and S.S., _for Piano_,
  _Tougaloo U._ ...75.00

Norfolk. "A Friend." ...25.00

North Adams. Cong. Ch., to const. DEA.
  ALEXANDER McDOUGALL, DEA. GEORGE
  W. CHASE, FRANK H. WHITNEY, HERBERT
  E. WETHERBEE, DAVID A. ANDERSON,
  JAMES E. HUNTER, DANIEL J. BARBER
  and HARRY R. HAMER L.M.'s ...246.04

Northampton. A.L. Williston, 300;
  Edwards Ch., Benev. Soc., 128.10; Local
  Entertainment Com., 33.78; Miss Eliza I.
  Maynard, 30, to const. MISS ISABEL SWAN
  L.M. ...491.88

Northampton. Smith College, King's
  Daughters, _for Student Aid_,
  _Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...18.00

North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and
  Soc. to const. JAMES B. PEARSONS L.M. ...58.80

Northbridge. Rockdale Cong. Ch. and
  Soc. ...10.00

North Weymouth. Rev. W.D. Leland,
  _for Student Aid_, _Talladega C._ ...10.00

North Woburn. Cong. Soc., _for Indian
  Sch'p._ ...35.00

Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. ...5.25

Norwood. First Cong. Ch. ...125.72

Oxford. Infant Class in Sab. Sch., 5;
  Oxford Woman's Miss. Soc. 1, by Miss L.D.
  Stockwell, _for Children's Missionary_ ...6.00

Pepperell. "Friends." Bbl. C., Ladies
  Benev. Soc., Bbl. Bedding, _for Greenwood,
  S.C._

Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. (22 of which _for
  Mountain Work_, 12 _for Tougaloo U._) ...145.00

Pittsfield. Mary E. Sears ...5.00

Quincy Point. Ladies Miss'y Soc. ...0.35

Reading. Y.P.S.C.E., by Annie B. Parker,
  _for Mountain Student Aid_ ...50.00

Reading. Cong. Ch. ...24.60

Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc. ...160.21

Somerville. Franklin St. Cong. Ch., _for
  Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...65.25

Somerville. ----, _for Straight U._ ...3.00

Southampton. "Cheerful Givers" Mission
  Band, by H.B. Norton, Treas. ...12.00

South Framingham. Cong. Ch., _for Bible
  Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...86.29

South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch. and
  Soc., 37.70; Second Cong. Ch., 22 ...59.70

South Weymouth. Cong. Churches, _for
  Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...61.30

Spencer. Blanche Bryant, _for Indian M._ ...0.10

Swampscott. First Cong. Ch. ...20.00

Townsend. "A Friend," 2 Bbls. C., etc.;
  3, _for Freight_, _for Greenwood, S.C._ ...3.00

Turners Falls. Class of Young Ladies in
  Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Library_, _Grand View,
  Tenn._ ...7.00

Wakefield. Primary Dept, Sab. Sch.,
  Cong. Ch., Christmas Gift ...15.00

Walpole. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk
  U._ ...57.87

Ware. East Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk
  U._ ...41.73

Ware. First Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg,
  Ky._ and to const. DEA. N.H. ANDERSON
  L.M. ...32.50

Warren. Ladies' H.M. Soc., _for_ Church
  Building, _Cumberland Gap, Tenn._ ...72.00

Webster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...80.24

Webster. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  M._ ...12.50

Wellesley. Miss L.F. Clark, _for Raleigh,
  N.C._ ...5.00

Westboro. Evan. Cong. Ch., 190.63; ----
  50c. ...191.13

Westboro. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk
  U._ ...59.18

Westboro Cong. Ch., 17.54; "Friends,"
  25, _for School_, _Orange Park, Fla._ ...42.54

West Barnstable. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...7.25

West Brookfield. Miss Emily S. Woods
  and her Sab. Sch. Class, _for Mountain
  Work_ ...25.00

Westfield. Dr. H. Holland ...3.00

West Medway. Third Cong. Ch., bal. to
 const. MRS. GEORGE H. CLARK L.M. ...20.00

West Newton. Mrs. Elizabeth Price _for
  Mountain Work_ and to const. MISS
  EUNICE G. PECK L.M. ...40.00

West Newton. Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C., _for
  Savannah, Ga._

West Somerville. Day St. Cong. Ch. ...29.11

Weymouth. Y.P.S.C.E. Union ...1.00

Weymouth and Braintree. Class in Union
  Cong. Sab. Sch., Christmas Gift ...1.00

Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., by Edward
  Whitin, Treas. ...1,253.82

Williamstown. First Cong. Ch. ...24.73

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. (1 of which
  _for Mountain Work_) ...71.98

Winchester. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...50.41

Woburn. First Cong. Ch. ...174.02

Wollaston. "A Friend." ...5.00

Worcester. Union Ch. (99.03 of which _for
  Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._) ...292.03

Worcester. Piedmont Ch. 166.71; "A
  Friend," 10, _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...176.71

Worcester. Piedmont Ch. ...79.34

Worcester. J.R. Torry, _for Cumberland
  Gap, Tenn._ ...25.00

Worcester. Ladies' M. Circle of Salem St.
  Ch., Box C., _for Grand View, Tenn._

Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. ...50.00

Yarmouth. Ladies' Sewing Soc., _for
  Raleigh, N.C._ ...10.00

Hampden Benevolent Association, by Charles Marsh, Treas.:

    Chicopee. Second ...47.96

    Holyoke. First ...17.65

    Holyoke. Second ...35.27

    Monson. S.S. ...30.63

    Springfield. North ...83.83

    Westfield. Second ...28.99

    Westfield. Second _for Student
      Aid_, _Fisk U._ ...23.60

    West Springfield. Park St. ...32.34

--------  300.27

Woman's Home Missionary Association,
  by Miss Sarah K. Burgess, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    For Teachers' Salaries ...407.50

    Newton. Eliot Ch., Mr.
      Cobb's S.S. Class, _for Indian
      Sch'p._ ...6.25

--------     413.75

--------  $9,731.62


ESTATES.

Boston. Estate of J.D. Leland, by Geo.
  A. Leland and Edwin P. Stone, Executors ...500.00

Enfield. Estate of J.B. Woods, by Rev.
 Robt. M. Woods. Trustee ...75.00

--------  $10,306.62


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Ashfield. Mass. Mrs. Daniel Williams,
  Bbl. C., _for McLeansville N.C._

Brimfield, Mass. Ladies' Union Second
  Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N.C._

Cambridgeport, Mass. "Scatter Good
  Circle," Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Box, _for
  Beaufort, N.C._

New Bedford, Mass. Mrs. Geo. F. Kingman,
  Box, _for Hampton N. & A. Inst.,
  Va._

Newbury. Mass. First Parish, Bbl. C.,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

Newton. Miss Alice Williston, Bbl. C.,
  etc., _for McLeansville. N.C._

West Boylston. Bbl. Books, etc., _for
  Raleigh, N.C._, by Miss A.M. Lovell



RHODE ISLAND, $312.71.

Central Falls. Cong. Ch. ...39.74

East Providence. S. Belden. 50; Newman
  Cong. Ch., 30, to const. C.C. BALCH
  L.M. ...80.00

Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 101.22;
  Y.P.S.C.E. of North Cong. Ch., 10.75;
  H.M. Kendrick, 1 ...112.97

Providence. Mrs Geo. L. Claflin, 85; Miss
  Elizabeth G. King, 20; Mrs. H.N. Lathrop,
  10; Miss Ellen H. Pabodie, 10;
  "Friends," 15, _for School_, _Orange Park,
  Fla._ ...80.00



CONNECTICUT, $10,247.54.

Berlin. Second Cong. Ch. ...27.35

Birmingham. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...37.81

Bethel. Junior Endeavor Soc. of Cong.
  Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...12.75

Black Rock. Cong. Ch. ...24.00

Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. ...7.20

Branford. Ladies' Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l. Sch., Ga._ ...25.00

Bridgeport. Union Meeting in North Ch.,
  _for Bible Sch_, _Fisk U._ ...114.71

Bridgeport. Y.P.S.C.E. Park St. Cong.
  Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._ ...35.00

Bridgeport. Dwight H. Terry, _for Student
  Aid_, _Tougaloo U._ ...5.00
Bridgeport. "H.M.B.," _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...1.00

Bristol. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

Bristol. Mrs. W. Barnes, _for Student Aid_,
  _Talladega C._ ...5.25

Broad Brook. Cong. Ch. ...15.55

Canaan. ----. ...5.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...37.82

Clinton. Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk
  U._ ...76.45

Columbia. Cong. Ch. ...22.15

Columbia. "Friend," _for Marian, Ala._ ...1.00

Danbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...5.00

Danbury. Miss Arabella Fanton, _for
  Student Aid_, _Williamsburg Academy, Ky._ ...3.50

Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. ...23.46

Darien. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., by Miss
  Ellen M. Nash, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ ...8.00

Deep River. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid_, _Tougaloo U._ ...10.00

East Woodstock. Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Farmington. First Cong. Ch. ...120.27

Hampton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  M._ ...20.00

Hartford. First Ch. ...220.20

Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., $194.87;
  C.S. Beardslee, 15; Miss Katherine
  Burbank, 2, _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...211.87

Hartford. Olive Branch Circle of King's
  Daughters, _for Student Aid_, _Sherwood
  Tenn._ ...5.00

Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Pearl St. Cong.
  Ch., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...31.75

Haddam. Cong. Ch. ...14.18

Hartford. Henry Roberts, _for Piano_,
  _Tougaloo U._ ...25.00

Hartford. Wethersfield Av. Cong. Ch. ...6.42

Lebanon. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl. of C., 2, _for Freight_, _for Marion, Ala._ ...2.00

Litchfield. Newell Soc., by Mrs. F.I.
  Gray ...4.00

Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
  Tougaloo U._ ...25.00

Madison. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...5.00

Meriden. Corner Ch., _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk
  U._ ...136.63

Meriden. First Cong. Ch. ...100.00

Middletown. First Cong. Ch., (Westfield
  Soc.) ...17.69

Milford. First Cong. Ch., 60; Sab. Sch.
  Plymouth Ch., 19.52; "A Friend," 5 ...84.52

Morris. Cong. Ch. ...7.00

New Britain. South Cong. Ch., 175.22;
  First Ch. of Christ, 96.72 ...271.94

New Britain. Sab. Sch. of South Ch., _for
  Mountain Work_ ...50.00

New Canaan. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

New Haven. College St. Cong. Ch. ...58.14

North Haven. Sab. Sch. of Cong Ch., _for
  Rosebud Indian M._ ...23.40

New Haven. Mrs. J.F. Douglass, 3; Miss
  M.H. Blake, 2, _for Indian M._ ...5.00

Newington. Cong. Ch. ...45.38

New London. Union Meeting. First and
  Second Churches, _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...106.88

New London. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p_, _Santee Sch._ ...70.00

New Milford. First Cong. Ch. ...82.98

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 110; "A
  Friend," 5 ...115.00

Norfolk. Young Ladies' Mission Band,
 _for Indian M._ ...25.00

North Greenwich. Mrs. Amy Downs ...1.00

Norwalk. First Cong. Ch., _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...78.00

Old Lyme. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Blowing Rock, N.C._ ...5.00

Plainfield. Box Bedding, _for Greenwood,
  S.C._

Plainville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

Plantsville. Ladies' Industrial Soc. of
  Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._ ...35.00

Portland. First Cong. Ch. ...10.43

Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...11.00

Sharon. J.H. Cleaveland ...10.00

Simsbury. James Reed ...2.50

South Britain. Cong. Ch., (1 of which
  from Averill B. Canfield) ...15.00

South Manchester. First Cong. Ch. ...74.32

South Norwalk. First Cong. Ch. ...61.77

South Norwalk. Margaret McClure, _for
  Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...5.00

Stanwich. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Talcottville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...160.00

Terryville. Sab, Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian Sch'p._ ...17.50

Thomaston. Cong. Ch. ...38.79

Torrington. "Valley Gleaners," for _Sch'p._,
  _Fort Berthold, Indian Sch._ ...70.00

Wapping. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Mountain Work_ ...23.20

West Hartford. First Ch. of Christ ...41.07

West Hartford. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian M._ ...25.00

Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch. ...29.33

Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  M._ ...5.47

West Torrington. Home Miss'y Soc. of
  First Cong. Ch., 5.43, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
  Ga._; 5.43, _for Mountain Work_ ...10.86

Wethersfield. Miss M.J. Harris' Class
  Cong. S.S., _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...1.00

Windham. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid_, _Marion, Ala._ ...7.00

Windsor. Mrs. Mary Pierson, 100, _for
  Student Aid_; Miss Pierson, 48, _for Furnishing
  Room_; Miss Emma J. Peck, Memory of Helen A. Edwards, 16, _for
  Furnishing Room_, _Grand View, Tenn._ ...164.00

Windsor. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  32.50; Mrs. M.E. Pierson, 37.50, _for Indian
  Sch'ps._ ...70.00

Windsor. First Cong. Ch. ...120.87

Windsor. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of First
  Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. etc., _for Sherwood,
  Tenn._

Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...16.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Conn., by Miss Ellen R. Camp, Sec., _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Meriden. Sab. Sch. First Ch. ...25.00

    Plainville. Aux. ...5.00

    Pomfret. Aux. Ladies' Mite
      Box ...15.00

--------  45.00

----, A Christian Endeavor Band,
  _for New Native Indian Station_ ...5.00

--------  $3,662.54


ESTATES.

Groton. Estate of Mrs. B.N. Hurlbutt ...585.00

Hartford. Estate of Mrs. S. Adelaide M.
  White, Hon. E.S. White, Ex., _for Chinese
  M._, by Jennie H. Jacobs, Treas.
  Woman's H.M. Union of Conn. ...1,000.00

New London. Estate of Mrs. Anna H.
  Perkins by Henry C. Haven and Henry
  R. Bond, Executors ...5,000.00

--------  $10,247.54



NEW YORK. $2,383.66.

Alfred Center. Mrs. Ida F. Kenyon ...5.00

Binghamton. Cong. Ch., Pulpit Supply ...30.00

Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch. 555.15; C.T.
  Christensen, _for Plymouth Professorship_,
  25; John Claflin, 100, for _Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...680.15

Brooklyn. "A Friend," 500; Rev. R.R.
  Meredith, D.D., 100; South Cong. Ch.,
  101.50; Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., 87.13;
  Union Cong. Ch., 5; Mrs. Elizabeth B.
  Cone, 1 ...794.63

Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Puritan Ch., _for Indian
  M._ ...24.45

Buffalo. First Cong. Ch. ...100.00

Buffalo. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._ ...30.00

Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch., (25.97 of
  which _for Indian M_) ...34.01

Chateaugay. Joseph Shaw ...5.00

Gaines. Cong. Ch. ...11.50

Gloversville. Cong. Ch., (100 of which
  from Mrs. U.M. Place) ...239.35

Jamestown. Mrs. Frederick A. Fuller ...10.00

Middletown. Cong. Ch., 18.68; S. Ayres, 5 ...23.68

Millers Place. Mount Sinai Cong. Ch. ...10.00

New York. Pilgrim Ch., _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...66.00

New York. Broadway Tab. Sab. Sch.,
  Henry C. Houghton, M.D., _for Bible Sch._,
  _Fisk U._ ...15.00

New York. S.T. Gordon, 50; Robbins
  Little, 30. to const. MRS. SOPHIA LOUISE
  LITTLE L.M.; Broadway Tabernacle,
  "A Friend," 10; Mrs M.D. Wicker, 10 ...100.00

Oriskany. Mrs. R.W. Porter ...1.00

Rochester. Geo. Thayer, 25; G.W.
  Thayer, 10 ...35.00

Sag Harbor. Chas. A. Brown, to const.
  HERVEY T. HEDGES L.M. ...30.00

Sanborn. Mrs. Abagail Peck ...3.00

Spencerport. "Friends," Bbl. C., etc.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

Vernon Center. Rev. G.C. Judson ...0.50

Warsaw. Cong. Ch. ...22.71

Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch. ...12.77

Windham. Mrs. B. Ingraham ...0.50

West Winfield. Cong. Ch. ...9.41

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treasurer, _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Albany. Three Circles of
      King's Daughters. First
      Ch., _for Mt. White Sch'p_ ...25.00

    Greene. Ladies' Aux. ...15.00

    Homer. Ladies' Aux. ...10.00

    Saratoga. The Goodridge
      Memorial Ladies' Aux. of
      Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_,
      _Talladega C._ ...20.00

    Schenechtady. Ladies' Miss'y
      Soc. ...20.00

--------   90.00



NEW JERSEY, $272.61.

Bound Brook. Cong. Ch. ...1.08

Highland. R.R. Proudfit ...10.00

Jersey City. First Cong. Ch., 61.53;
  Waverly Cong. Ch., 10 ...71.53

Montclair. First Cong. Ch., Special to
  const. W.W. AMES, ALICE MAY AMES,
  JAMES WOOD AMES, ALFREDERICK S.
  AMES and CORNELIA AMES L.M.'s ...180.00

Montclair. Mrs. Noyes' S.S. Class, _for
  Student Aid_, _Tougaloo U._ ...5.00

Passaic. "A Friend." ...5.00



PENNSYLVANIA, $246.89.

Braddock. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. ...5.27

Guy's Mills. Mrs. F.M. Guy ...2.00

Philadelphia. William H. Wanamaker,
  _for New Northfield Indian Station_ ...100.00

Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch. ...81.83

Philadelphia. Susan Longstreth, _for
  Mountain Work_ ...10.00

Pittsburg. "Friends," _for Raleigh, N.C._ ...10.00

Scranton. Plymouth Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Woman's Missionary Union of Penn., by
  Mrs T.W. Jones, Treas.

    Braddock. Aux. ...4.00



OHIO, $3,092.35.

Akron. Sab. Sch. West Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Belpre. Cong. Ch. ...13.00

Chatfield. Evan. Free Ch. ...32.75

Chatham. Centre Cong. Ch., to const. U.P.
  Price L.M. ...50.50

Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., 90; Jennings
  Av. Cong. Ch., 35; First Cong. Ch.,
  29.45; Mrs. Fanny W. Low, 10 ...164.45

Cleveland. Whatsoever Band of King's
  Daughters, by Miss E.A. Johnson, _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._ ...6.00

Cleveland. Jennings Av. Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian M._ ...5.00

Columbus. Mayflower Cong. Ch. ...13.41

Cyclone. Cong. Ch. ...22.00

Freedom. Cong. Ch. ...5.91

Geneva. Industrial H.M. Soc., 2 Bbls. C.,
  _for Athens, Ala._

Huntsburg. Family of Capt. A.B. Millard,
  deceased, by Mrs. Mary E. Millard ...15.00

Lafayette. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Lorain. Cong. Ch. (20 of which from Rev.
  A.D. Barber, bal. to const. EUGENE
  GRAY DICK L.M.) ...45.37

Mallet Creek. Cong. Ch. ...22.00

Mesopotamia. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl.
  C., _for Tougaloo U._; 2 _for Freight_ ...2.00

Mount Vernon. First Cong. Ch. ...40.00

North Kingsville. Rev. E.J. Comings ...5.00

Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 37.85; Harris
  Lewis, 5; W. Warner and Wife, 2 ...44.85

Painesville. E.E. Johnson ...1.00

Pittsfield. South Ch. and Soc. ...48.55

Radnor. Edward D. Jones ...5.00

Ruggles. Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for Indian M_) ...22.00

Toledo. Central Cong. Ch. ...18.00

Troy. Cong. Ch. ...7.61

Twinsburg. Cong. Ch. ...5 00

Wauseon. Cong. Ch. ...19.50

Wellington. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV. W.E. BARTON L.M. ...60.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. F.D. Wilder, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Chagrin Falls. W.H.M.S. ...4.00

    Chester. Saint Paul Mission Band ...3.55

    Oberlin. Second Ch. Ladies' Soc. ...30.00

--------    37.55

--------  $836.10


ESTATES.

Hudson. Estate of Hiram Thompson, by
  S.E. Judd, Ex. ...450.00

Mechanicstown. Estate of Benjamin
  Manifold, by William Boyd, Adm. ...1806.25

--------  $3,092.35



INDIANA, $60.21.

Elkhart. Cong. Ch. ...27.00

Terre Haute. First Cong. Ch. ...33.21



ILLINOIS, $1,307.52.

Aurora. N.L. Janes ...10.00

Bunker Hill. W.H.M.U., Sack of C., _for
  Tougaloo U._

Camp Point. Mrs. S.B. McKinney ...20.00

Champaign. First Cong. Ch. ...14.40

Chicago. New England Cong. Ch., 107.01;
  South Park Cong. Ch., 75, to const.
  DEA. EDWARD M. TAYLOR and DEA.
  S.V. HARVEY L.M.'s; "Cash," 50;
  Ch. of the Covenant, 10; Doremus Mission,
  5.05; Tabernacle Ch., 3.81: Rev. M.S.
  Croswell, 2; Lakeview Cong. Ch., 5;
  Bethlehem Ch., 80c. ...258.67

Chicago. B.M. Frees, _for Night School_,
  _Memphis, Tenn._ ...100.00

Chicago. Ladies, Millard Av. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Fisk Sch'p Endowment Fund_ ...25.00

Concord. Joy Prairie Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work_ ...14.00

Crete. Cong. Ch. ...11.18

Earlville. J.A. Dupee ...25.00

Elgin. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV. ALBERT
  H. BALL L.M. ...33.10

Evanston. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...34.72

Hennepin. Cong. Ch. ...3.47

Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. ...80.00

Knoxville. Hezekiah Rowles ...5.00

Kewanee. Mrs. H.E. Kellogg ...5.00

Lombard. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., 2 pkgs.
  Patchwork, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Maywood. Miss Mary Erwin, 5, _for Mountain
  Work_; 5, _for Indian M._ ...10.00

Morrison. Miss Ellen S. Brown ...1.00

Oak Park. Cong. Ch. ...199.92

Newark. Mrs. F. Heavenhill ...1.00

Peoria. Miss Rushford _for Student Aid_,
  _Emerson Inst._ ...6.50

Plainfield. Cong. Ch. ...14.00

Princeton. Mrs. P.B. Corss ...10.00

Rockford. First Cong. Ch., 60; Sab. Sch.
  or Second Cong. Ch., 20 ...80.00

Saint Charles. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

Seward. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...4.10

Sterling. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...4.81

Turner. Mrs. R. Currier ...5.00

Waverly. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...24.50

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Treasurer, _for
  Woman's Work:_

    Amboy ...18.00

    Buda ...7.10

    Chebansee ...5.60

    Chicago. N.E. ...80.41

    Chicago. Lincoln Park ...10.54

    Elgin ...10.00

    Emington ...5.00

    Hamilton ...3.00

    Lee Center. Mrs. S.E. Trowbridge ...1.00

    Oak Park ...40.00

    Oak Park ...8.25

    Central Assn. Lutle Morris'
      Pin Cushion ...10.25

    Rockford. Second ...5.00

--------     204.15

--------  $1,207.57


ESTATE.

Rockford. Estate of Mrs. Eunice B. Lyon ...100.00

--------  $1,307.52



WISCONSIN, $160.76.

Beloit. Cong. Ch. ...16.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch., adl. ...25.55

Delevan. Cong. Ch. ...15.00

Hammond. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

River Falls. First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Rosendale. First Cong. Ch. ...0.50

Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, _for Woman's Work_:

    Bloomer. S.S. ...2.00

    Eau Claire. W.H.M.U. ...9.65

    Madison. W.H.M.U. First
      Ch. ...2.81

    Milwaukee. Ladies Grand
      Av. Ch. ...70.00

    Platteville. W.H.M.U. ...1.25

--------  85.71



MICHIGAN, $152.57.

Battle Creek. J.C. Williams ...0.50

Coldwater. Mrs. H. Bogardus ...2.00

Detroit. Trumbull Av. Cong. Ch. ...14.50

Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Grand Rapids. Young Ladies Park Miss'y
  Soc. of Park Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian
  M._ ...20.00

Greenville. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

Jackson. Friends ...5.00

Jackson. Mrs. R.M. Bennett ...2.00

Kalamazoo. Mrs. J.A. Kent ...5.00

Ludington. Cong. Ch. ...20.00

Milford. William A. Arms, to const. ALBERT
  AVERY LYON L.M. ...30.00

Saint Clair. Cong. Ch. (A Lady) ...2.00

Saline. Mrs. Maria Wood ...1.50

South Haven. Cong. Ch. ...1.75

Tecumseh. James Vincent ...10.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Michigan, by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Churchs' Corners. "Willing
      Workers." ...3.32



IOWA, $439.27.

Burlington. Cong. Ch,. 32.15; Y.P.S.C.E.,
  1.17 ...33.32

Cedar Rapids. First Cong. Ch. ...15.12

Cresco. Cong. Ch. ...25.00

Dover. Mrs. Jane P. Mather, to const.
  MISS LILLIAN MATHER and MRS. EUGENIA
  MATHER L.M.'s ...60.00

Farragut. Package Work, _for Savannah,
  Ga._

Grand View. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Granger. Philla Minns, Pkg work, _for
  Savannah, Ga._

Independence. W.S. Potwin, _for Student
  Aid_, _Talladega C._ ...10.00

Independence. N.E. Cong. Ch. ...6.50

Jewell. Cong. Ch. ...6.50

Lincoln. Cong. Ch. ...2.50

Lyons. Anna M. Smith's Sab. Sch. Class,
  Pkg. work, _for Savannah, Ga._

Manson. Cong. Ch. ...3.85

McGregor. Cong. Ch. ...58.02

Montour. Cong. Ch. ...31.00

Tabor. Cong. Ch. ...57.89

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Central City. W.H.M.U. ...10.00

    Chester Center. Busy Bees. ...3.00

    Dubuque. L.M.S. ...25.00

    Decorah. W.M.S. ...25.00

    Earlville. ---- ...10.00

    Eldora. L.M.S. ...20.00

    Grinnell. W.H.M.H. ...3.39

    Farragut. W.M.S. ...10.00

    Keokuk. S.S. ...5.00

    Lyons. ---- ...4.25

    Maquoketa. S.S. ...1.40

    Toledo. Y.P.S.C.E. ...2.53

--------  119.57



MINNESOTA, $246.72.

Austin. Union Cong. Ch. ...51.15

Belgrade. Cong. Ch. ...3.55

Duluth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. ...51.20

Glenwood. Cong. Ch. ...0.65

Hasty. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid_, _Tougaloo U._ ...2.00

Lake City. Miss Sarah Manning, 8; Miss
  Mary A. Bye, 2, _for Student Aid_, _Williamsburg
  Academy, Ky._ ...10.00

Minneapolis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 20.21;
  First Cong. Ch., 15.51; Park Av. Cong.
  Ch., 11.67 ...47.39

Minneapolis. Dyer Bros., Organ, _for All
  Healing Springs, N.C._

Monticello. Cong. Ch. ...6.80

Northfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid_, _Talladega C._ ...43.91

Northfield. First Cong. Ch. ...24.67

Saint Cloud. First Cong. Ch. ...3.40



KANSAS, $91.51.

Brookville. Cong. Ch., 2.63, and Sab.
  Sch., 2. ...4.63

Council Grove. Cong. Ch. ...3.62

Fort Scott. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. ...2.71

Lawrence. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Second
  Cong. Ch., by Mrs E.M. Jackson. ...3.00

Leavenworth. First Cong. Ch. ...65.00

Topeka. Central Cong. Ch. ...12.55

Topeka. College Hill. "Friends, " Bbl.
  of Books, etc., _for Meridian, Miss._



MISSOURI, $51.92.

Bonne Terre. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV. JOHN B. FISKE L.M. ...30.00

Laclede. Rev. E.D. Seward ...2.00

Neosho. Cong. Ch. ...3.65

Pierce City. First Cong. Ch. ...16.27



NORTH DAKOTA, $12.50.

Cummings. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., by Mrs.
  Mary M. Fisher, State Treas. ...5.00

Mayville. Cong. Ch. ...7.50



SOUTH DAKOTA, $5.00.

Egan. Rev C.W. Matthews and wife ...5.00



NEBRASKA, $35.23.

Ashland. Cong. Ch. ...5.85

Beatrice. Mrs. B.F. Hotchkiss, Box C.,
  etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Cambridge. First Cong. Ch. ...4.32

Nebraska City. Woman's Miss'y Soc., by
  Mrs. J.B. Parmelee, Treas. ...15.00

Olive Branch. German Cong. Ch. ...2.10

Red Cloud. Cong. Ch. ...6.96

Stanton. Cong. Ch. ...1.00



COLORADO, $62.60.

Denver. First Cong. Ch. ...62.60



CALIFORNIA, $24.25.

Belmont. Mrs. F.A. Blackburn, 10;
  Mrs. E.L. Reed, 10 ...20.00

Saratoga. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ...4.25



WASHINGTON, $10.36.

Tacoma. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. ...10.36



DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $29.48.

Washington. Mt. Pleasant Cong. Ch. ...19.48

Washington. Lincoln Memorial Cong. Ch. ...10.00



VIRGINIA, $5.00.

Herndon. Cong. Ch. ...5.00



TENNESSEE, $12.45.

Bon Air. Cong. Ch. ...5.45

Chattanooga. First Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Coal Creek. Cong. Ch. ...5.00



NORTH CAROLINA, $2.51.

Melville. Children's Christmas Offering ...0.25

Nails. Cong. Ch. ...1.10

Pekin. Cong. Ch. ...1.16



GEORGIA, $5.15.

Andersonville. Cong. Ch. ...1.50

Byron. Cong. Ch. ...1.50

Woodville. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 1.42;
  Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke, 73c. ...2.15



FLORIDA, $18.75.

Daytona. First Cong. Ch. ...13.75

Leesburg. Sarah A. Benedict ...2.00

Woman's Home Miss'y Union of Fla.,
  by Mrs. W.D. Brown, Treas.:

    Melbourne. Mrs. Phillips ...3.00



LOUISIANA, $13.81.

Belle Place. Cong. Ch. ...0.70

New Orleans. University Ch., _Straight U._ ...10.30

Roseland. Cong. Ch. ...2.81

--------  $5.00.

------  "Friend," _for Bible Sch._, _Fisk U._ ...5.00



CANADA, $7.00.

Sherbrooke. Mrs. H.J. Morey ...5.00

Sweetsburg. Mrs. H.W. Spaulding ...2.00



SANDWICH ISLANDS, $1,000.

Kohala. "A Friend." ...1,000.00



Donations ...$22,900.05

Estates ...20,616.25

--------  $43,516.30



INCOME, $2,732.82.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._ ...600.32

Brown Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...21.00

De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair_, _Talladega C._ ...485.00

C.F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._ ...50.00

Fisk University Theo. Fund ...7.50

General Endowment Fund ...80.00

Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._ ...150.00

Graves Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...125.00

Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...25.00

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._ ...75.00

Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._ ...18.75

Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._ ...776.25

Le Moyne Fund, _for Le Moyne Sch._ ...82.50

H.W. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...30.00

Luke Memorial Sch'p, _for Talladega C._ ...10.00

Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...11.25

Sch'p Fund, _for Straight U._ ...35.00

N.M. and A.S. Stone Fund, _for Sch'p_, _Talladega C._ ...25.00

Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._ ...87.50

I. & L. Hawes Wood Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...25.00

Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...12.75

--------  2,732.83



TUITION, $4,713.49.

Lexington, Ky. Tuition ...206.20

Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition ...166.90

Crossville, Tenn. Public Fund ...83.00

Grand View, Tenn. Tuition ...13.75

Jellico, Tenn. Tuition ...35.10

Memphis, Tenn. Tuition ...570.30

Mount Verde, Tenn. Tuition ...3.75

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition ...674.07

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition ...41.45

Beaufort, N.C. Tuition ...33.12

Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition ...15.50

Melville, N.C. Tuition ...5.00

Troy, N.C. Tuition ...10.25

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition ...269.50

Charleston. S.C. Tuition ...323.50

Greenwood, S.C. Tuition ...79.20

Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch. Tuition ...268.91

McIntosh, Ga. Tuition ...26.63

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition ...83.90

Woodville, Ga. Tuition ...8.00

Athens, Ala. Tuition ...64.30

Anniston, Ala. Tuition ...65.38

Marion, Ala. Tuition ...83.75

Mobile, Ala. Tuition ...273.83

Selma, Ala. Tuition ...69.50

Talladega, Ala. Tuition ...305.55

Meridian, Miss. Tuition ...112.90

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition ...145.00

New Orleans, La. Tuition ...446.80

--------  4,713.49

United States Government, _for Fort Berthold_, _Indian M._ ...891.00

--------  $51,853.61



SUMMARY.

Donations ...$55,371.68

Estates ...36,158.94

--------  $91,530.62



Income ...4,382.82

Tuition ...9,195.10

United States Government ...891.00



Total from Oct. 1, to Dec. 31 ...$105,999.54



FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for December ...145.81

Previously acknowledged ...85.41

Total ...$231.22



  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer.
  Bible House, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Advertisements._

  +---------------------------------------------------------------+
  |  "A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER."                        |
  |                                                               |
  |  [Illustration: RISING SUN STOVE POLISH                       |
  |  PRICE 10 CENTS                                               |
  |  For beauty of polish, saving of labor, freeness from dust,   |
  |  durability and cheapness, truly unrivalled in any country.   |
  |                                                               |
  |  CAUTION.--Beware of worthless imitations under other names,  |
  |  put up in similar shape and color intended to deceive. Each  |
  |  package of the genuine bears our Trade Mark. Take no other.] |
  |                                                               |
  |  SOLD BY MERCHANTS --IN-- CIVILIZED COUNTRIES.                |
  +---------------------------------------------------------------+

  +---------------------------------------------+
  |  [Illustration: Camel and moon.]            |
  |                                             |
  |  Dr. Warner's Camel's Hair and Natural      |
  |  Wool Health Underwear is superior          |
  |  to silk or any other material.             |
  |                                             |
  |  It is soft and comfortable, free from      |
  |  dyes or other impurities, and a protection |
  |  against Colds, Rheumatism and              |
  |  Neuralgia.                                 |
  |                                             |
  |  It is made in thirty-seven different       |
  |  styles for Men, Women and Children.        |
  |                                             |
  |  Catalogue with samples of material         |
  |  sent by mail on application.               |
  |                                             |
  |  WARNER BROTHERS,                           |
  |  359 BROADWAY, N.Y.                         |
  +---------------------------------------------+

  +---------------------------------------+
  |  JOSEPH GILLOTT'S                     |
  |                                       |
  |  STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                       |
  |  GOLD MEDAL, PARIS EXPOSITION, 1889.  |
  |                                       |
  |  THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS.            |
  +---------------------------------------+

  +------------------------------------------+
  |  [Illustration: INDELIBLE                |
  |                                          |
  |  Mark your Clothing!                     |
  |  Clear Record of                         |
  |  half a Century.                         |
  |                                          |
  |  "Most Reliable and Simplest             |
  |  for plain or decorative marking."       |
  |  Use a common pen.                       |
  |                                          |
  |  for Marking Linen, Silk & Cotton        |
  |  WITH A COMMON PEN,                      |
  |  Without a Preparation.                  |
  |                                          |
  |  Sold by all Druggists, Stationers,      |
  |  News and Fancy Goods dealers.]          |
  |                                          |
  |  "Don't on any account omit to mark      |
  |  plainly all your sheets, pillow cases,  |
  |  napkins and towels. Mark all of your    |
  |  own personal wardrobe which has to      |
  |  be washed. If this were invariably      |
  |  done, a great deal of property would    |
  |  be saved to owners, and a great deal    |
  |  of trouble would be spared those who    |
  |  'sort out' clean pieces."               |
  |                                          |
  |  KATE UPSON CLARK.                       |
  +------------------------------------------+

  +--------------------------------------------+
  |  [Illustration: Bell]                      |
  |                                            |
  |  MENEELY & COMPANY,                        |
  |                                            |
  |  WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS,                   |
  |                                            |
  |  For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes  |
  |  and Peals. For more than half a century   |
  |  noted for superiority over all others.    |
  +--------------------------------------------+

  +--------------------------------------------------------+
  |  YOUNG MAN!                                            |
  |  If you contemplate attending Commercial               |
  |  School, it will pay you to visit the ROCHESTER        |
  |  BUSINESS UNIVERSITY before deciding                   |
  |  where, though you may live a thousand miles           |
  |  away. A thorough examination of this great            |
  |  school, and comparison of it with all others, will    |
  |  help you to promptly decide the question. Illustrated |
  |  Circulars free.                                       |
  |  WILLIAMS & ROGERS, ROCHESTER, N.Y.                    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------+







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 45, NO. 02, FEBRUARY, 1891 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.