Produced by Cornell university, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





The American Missionary

February, 1889.
Vol. XLIII. No. 2



CONTENTS.


EDITORIAL.

  OUR LIST OF GOOD SAMARITANS

  AN EXPLICIT WARNING--PRIVILEGES OF LIFE MEMBERSHIP

  THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY--THE ROMAN CATHOLICS AND THE FREEDMEN

  NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND

  DEATH OF PROF. A. HATCH

  LIST OF OUR FIELD WORKERS

  CONVENTION OF COLORED ROMAN CATHOLICS

  AMONG THE TENNESSEE MOUNTAINS

  ITEMS FROM THE FIELD


THE CHINESE.

  GLIMPSE AT SHADY SIDE

  ANNIVERSARY OF CHINESE MISSIONS


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  THE MOUNTAIN GIRLS


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


President, Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. Behrends, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. F.A. Noble, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. D.O. Mears, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. Beard, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. Hubbard, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  Peter McCartee.
  Chas. P. Peirce.


_Executive Committee._

  John II. Washburn, Chairman.
  Addison P. Foster, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

    J.E. Rankin,
    Wm. H. Ward,
    J.W. Cooper,
    John H. Washburn,
    Edmund L. Champlin.

  _For Two Years._

    Lyman Abbott,
    Chas. A. Hull,
    J.R. Danforth,
    Clinton B. Fisk,
    Addison P. Foster.

  _For One Year._

    S.B. Halliday,
    Samuel Holmes,
    Samuel S. Marples,
    Charles L. Mead,
    Elbert B. Monroe.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. Ryder, _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J.E. Roy, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. Chas. W. Shelton


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. Frank E. Jenkins.
  Prof. Edward S. Hall.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. Emerson, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.


VOL. XLIII. FEBRUARY, 1889. No. 2.


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR LIST OF GOOD SAMARITANS.

This number of the MISSIONARY contains the annual list of our workers,
who go down the Jericho road to care for those who have been wronged,
the poor and ignorant, who need the Gospel. Our ministers and teachers
are not like the priest and the Levite, who looked upon the poor man and
then "passed by on the other side;" nor do they merely pity and utter
words of sympathy. They take right hold and help. They "pour in the oil
and the wine," and they build the _inns_--that is, the churches and
schoolhouses where they instruct and help the needy ones till they can
take care of themselves and help to take care of others--the most
genuine kind of assistance.

It must be remembered that this requires expenditure. The oil and the
wine, the inn and the constant attendance, call for money. Our
constituents, who furnish this, want the work done and well done, and
they are willing to pay for it. But sometimes they need to be reminded
of the cost. At our last Annual Meeting, the "two pence" which they had
during the year put into our hands, counted in American money, amounted
to $323,147.22; and they said: "Whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
come again I will repay thee." We are very careful to watch the receipts
and expenditures, and we find that for the three months since the Annual
Meeting, we have received from all sources $66,958.43; whereas, the
current expenditures for the three months require about $86,000. We give
this timely notice that they who commit to us this work may remit to us
what is needed.

Let it be understood that the generous gift of that noble friend of the
Negro race was not entrusted to us to do the work of the good Samaritans
of the Churches. We are not permitted to use it for this. The yearly
income of the Daniel Hand Fund is to do the work of Daniel Hand--no
more. For this, God will reward him and generations will bless him, but
he leaves the churches and individual Christians to carry on their own
work as before and to reap the blessings of it. We cannot give the
Daniel Hand Fund to the churches. We cannot expend it for the churches. It
relieves no one of duty and privilege. It is limited also, to its use.
The churches and the schools to which we are already committed call for
a great increase in self-denial and benevolence.

Pastors and members of the churches, the work is increasingly great. It
enlarges itself. Other denominations are increasing their efforts to
meet the pressing emergency. Let it not be said that our churches--the
first in the field and the most efficient--are falling behind in the
ranks. Let our banner be ever at the front. Let us do our work.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN EXPLICIT WARNING.

One of our missionaries was recently at the North soliciting aid in
sustaining his work. His appeal was repeatedly met by the response: "The
Association is rich--it has just had a gift of more than a million of
dollars." When he explained that only the interest can be used, and this
for educational work only, the reply was: "This interest can be used in
payment of appropriations already made for schools, thus releasing just
so much for other purposes."

Now this is exactly what _cannot_ be done. The Daniel Hand Fund is for
_new_ work, and only in the industrial, primary and normal schools. It
is a priceless boon in this department, for we can now make enlargements
here which were greatly needed, but for which we had not the means; but
no part of this Fund can be applied to meet appropriations for other
portions of the work. If our constituents will not enable us to meet
those other demands, we can only report a debt; the Daniel Hand Fund
cannot help us. We are confident this needs only to be understood, for
we cannot believe that the 457,584 members of our churches have any wish
to shelter themselves behind Daniel Hand.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRIVILEGES OF LIFE MEMBERSHIP.

The question is sometimes asked in letters we receive, What are the
privileges of a Life Member in the A.M.A.? We answer:

1. The privilege of voting at the Annual Meeting. Our amended
constitution says: "Members of evangelical churches may be constituted
members of this Association for life by the payment of $30 into its
treasury, with the written declaration at the time or times of payment
that the sum is to be applied to constitute a designated person a Life
Member, and such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment
shall have been completed."

2. A Life Member is entitled to THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY and to the
ANNUAL REPORT gratuitously, if desired.

3. The highest privilege is that of being a _live_ member, doing all
that he can to promote the interests of the Association and of the needy
peoples for whom it labors.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We have two objects in printing this magazine. First, to have it read,
and, secondly, to have it paid for. The main purpose is the first, of
course, for we wish to have it read if it is not paid for, yet we
greatly prefer to have it both read and paid for. We believe that those
who pay for it are most likely to read it, and for this reason we fear
that this item will be seen only by those who do not need this reminder,
but we draw the bow at a venture and tell our readers that the price of
the magazine is 50 cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

We wish to inform the pastors and churches that we have just issued a
new _Annual Leaflet_, brief and packed with facts, and suitable for
distribution in the pews before collections are taken for the
Association. We shall be glad to furnish a supply gratuitously whenever
called for.

Our Annual Report, also, is ready for distribution. Those who wish it
will please send us a postal card requesting it.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ROMAN CATHOLICS AND THE FREEDMEN.

Soon after the war the Roman Catholics seemed to have made a strong
effort to win the Freedmen to their faith, and many Protestants felt a
good degree of apprehension that the splendors of the ceremonial and the
absence of race distinction might captivate the Negro. But the effort
was unsuccessful and appeared for a time to have been abandoned. It has
often been said, however, that the Church of Rome never surrenders an
undertaking; it may delay and wait for more auspicious times, but in the
end it perseveres. There are some indications of the renewal of the zeal
of the Papacy for the Negro. The article in another part of the
magazine, entitled "The Colored Catholic Congress," is an evidence.

One thing is certain. The Roman Catholic Church deserves praise for its
disregard of the color-line. The rich and the poor, the white and the
black, bow at the same altar, and one of the highest dignitaries of the
church is not ashamed to stand side by side with the black man on a
great public occasion. Protestants at the North and the South must not
allow the Romanists to surpass them in this Christ-like position.

       *       *       *       *       *

We ask our friends to read Mr. Dodge's article about the school at
Pleasant Hill, Tenn. One thousand dollars has already been pledged for
this building, on condition that the remainder of the $5,000 be secured.
We ask that this remainder be given by _individuals_, and not taken from
Church or Sunday-school contributions--all of which are needed for
current work.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND.

I have swapped horses--exchanged a Georgia mule for a New England
thoroughbred--and hereafter the "Notes in the Saddle" will be written
from this dignified seat. And what a change it is from the South to New
England!

Take a map and look it over. Put down in each State the illiteracy, and
make the comparison. In this good Commonwealth of Massachusetts only
seven-tenths of one per cent. of the native born white population are
illiterate, while in Georgia twenty-three per cent. of the native
whites, and in North Carolina thirty-two per cent. of the native whites,
are illiterate.

The South is pre-eminently the great missionary ground for our
Congregational Churches; for Congregationalism means the school-house as
truly as the church--and here in New England there is most enthusiastic
sympathy with, and support of, the American Missionary Association in
its great work in that section of our country committed to its care by
the churches.

They want the A.M.A. to take Congregationalism into the South, and
whether it organize churches mostly of whites or mostly of blacks, New
England demands that a Christian of any color be admitted into any
church because he is a Christian. The feeling is intense here and
growing more so.

Congregationalism could have planted its churches all over the South
before the war, but it would not strike hands with slavery; so, to-day
the children of the Pilgrims demand that the A.M.A., in its growing
work, shall stand true to the historic principles of the fathers, and
not compromise Christian truth for any seeming temporary advantage.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is great interest in the work among the American Highlanders which
the A.M.A. is pushing with such vigor. I spoke in a church near Boston
recently, and, after the service, a young man, his eyes bright, his face
flushed, hurried down the aisle and exclaimed, "I am a Kentuckian!" I
had been telling some plain and rather painful truths concerning the
people of Kentucky--the murders committed there; their lack of school
privileges, etc. I thought this friend might question some of my
statements, but I was delighted when he said: "I thank God that some one
is ready to call attention to the terrible needs of my own State. I
can't get people to believe me when I tell them of those needs. I was
brought up on the edge of the mountains and know them well, and I do not
believe there is any spot on earth more needy than that region of my own
State." He accentuated his words by a generous gift to the Mountain Work
of our Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

A good friend of the A.M.A. in Gorham, Me., put into my hands the letter
of Edward Payson, in which he accepted the call of the Second Parish
Church of Portland, requesting that it be sold and the proceeds go to
the A.M.A. work. It is a most interesting historical document, of value
to some one collecting historical literature. It was a generous gift,
for this kind woman valued it highly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The President, S.D. Smith, of the "Smith Organ Company," of Boston is
filling our schools with music, gladness and praise. He has sent three
organs to as many schools, within a few months, at no cost whatever to
the Association, giving these grand instruments and paying freight on
them to the field!

       *       *       *       *       *

One message that comes from the work in North Carolina is of so much
interest that it ought to have a place here. A teacher had been visiting
her former field of labor, and she writes of this visit as follows:

"One young man, who was but a small lad when I left there, came to shake
hands with me and said, 'Do you remember how you talked to me right out
there under that tree? I tried at first to get away from you, but you
would not let me go till I promised you I would give myself to the Lord.
I thought, "Now I must not lie to that woman," and I did what I promised
right there, and I have kept serving him ever since.'"

Such evidences of souls renewed is worth a life of even such
self-sacrifice as this brave woman lives. Like testimony could be gathered
of many of these A.M.A. missionaries.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF PROF. A. HATCH.

We are called with sadness to chronicle the death of another of our
noble Christian workers at the South. Prof. Azel Hatch, the Principal of
our Normal School in Lexington, Ky., closed his earthly labors and
entered his heavenly rest on the 31st of December, 1888. His illness
began with a severe cold, but it was soon discovered that congestion of
the brain had set in, and the end rapidly came.

Prof. Hatch was born January 16, 1852, was educated at Oberlin College
and at the Union Theological Seminary in New York. He entered the
service of this Association in 1876, and has occupied honorable
positions in the schools at Montgomery, Ala., Tougaloo, Miss., and in
Lexington, Ky. In every post of duty, Mr. Hatch has shown himself to be
a faithful, conscientious and Christian worker, shrinking from no duty,
winning the confidence of the teachers and pupils, and showing adequate
results from his efficient labors. Mr. Hatch was reserved in manner, but
courteous and affable, and a man of spotless integrity and of entire
consecration to the work of the Master. It is a grief to record the
death of such faithful men, but it is a consolation to know that their
work was done and well done. The Christian life is not measured by its
length, but by the discharge of the duties allotted by the Heavenly
Father.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FIELD.


1888-1889.

The following list presents the names and post-office addresses of those
who are employed in the Churches, Institutions and Schools aided by the
American Missionary Association.



THE SOUTH.



WASHINGTON, D.C.


THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

  Rev. W.W. Patton, D.D.,          Washington, D.C.
   "   J.G. Craighead, D.D.,           "        "
   "   A.W. Pitzer, D.D.,              "        "
   "   S.M. Newman, D.D.,              "        "
   "   John G. Butler, D.D.,           "        "
   "   G.W. Moore,                     "        "


LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH.

  _Pastor_,
    Rev. G.W. Moore,               Washington, D.C.

  _Missionaries_,
    Mrs. G.W. Moore,               Washington, D.C.
     "  Elizabeth A. Duffield,         "        "


PLYMOUTH CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


HAMPTON, VA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. H.B. Frissell,            Hampton, Va.



NORTH CAROLINA.


WILMINGTON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. George S. Rollins,        Monson, Mass.


  GREGORY INSTITUTE.

  _Principal_,
    Mr. Geo. A. Woodard,           Weymouth, Mass.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss Angie L. Steele,          New Hartford, Conn.
     "   Mary Van Auken,           Alpena, Mich.
     "   Cora M. Rogers,           Springfield, Vt.
     "   Louise Denton,            Hempstead, L.I.
     "   Mary D. Hyde,             Zumbrota, Minn.
     "   C.A. Lewis,               Columbus, Ohio.
     "   Mina L. Lewis,            Columbus, Ohio.
    Mrs. Geo. A. Woodard,          Weymouth, Mass.[1]
     "   Geo. S. Rollins,          Monson, Mass.

         [Footnote 1: Deceased]


RALEIGH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Geo. S. Smith,            Raleigh, N.C.

  _Special Missionary_,
    Miss A.E. Farrington,          Portland, Me.


OAKS AND CEDAR CLIFF.

  _Minister and Teachers_,
    Rev. J.N. Ray,                 Oaks, N.C.
    Miss E.W. Douglas,             Decorah, Iowa.


McLEANSVILLE AND CHAPEL HILL.

  _Minister and Teachers_,
    Rev. Alfred Connet,            Solsberry, Ind.
    Miss Nettie Connet,                "       "
    Mr. O. Connet,                     "       "


STRIEBY AND SALEM.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. Z. Simmons,               Dudley, N.C.
    Mrs. Elinor Walden,            Strieby, N.C.


NALLS.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. M.L. Baldwin,             Nalls, N.C.


HILLSBORO.

  _Teacher_,
    Mrs. Carrie E. Jones,          Chapel Hill, N.C.


MELVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.N. Ray,                 Oaks, N.C.

  _Teachers_,
    Mr. Sandy Paris,               Cedar Cliff, N.C.
    Mrs. Sandy Paris,                "     "     "


BEAUFORT.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Michael E. Jerkins,       Beaufort, N.C.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss M.E. Wilcox,              Madison, Ohio.
    ----                           ----

DUDLEY.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. Jno. W. Freeman,          Newark, N.J.


TROY.
  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----

  _Teacher_,
    Mr. S.D. Leak,                 Troy, N.C.


PEKIN AND DRY CREEK.
  _Minister and Teacher_,
    ----                           ----



SOUTH CAROLINA.


CHARLESTON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Geo. C. Rowe,             Charleston, S.C.


  AVERY INSTITUTE.

  _Principal_,
    Mr. M.A. Holmes,               Lee, Mass.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss E. Jennie Peck,           Bristol, Conn.
     "  Harriet N. Towle,          Evanston, Ill.
    Mr. Edward A. Lawrence,        Charleston, S.C.
    Miss Alice Terrell,            Oberlin, Ohio.
     "  Harriet J. Allyn,          Lorain, Ohio.
     "  Mary L. Deas,              Charleston, S.C.
    Mrs. M.A. Holmes,              Lee, Mass.
    Miss May Holmes,               Lee, Mass.


GREENWOOD.

BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Teachers_,
    Rev. J.E.B. Jewett,            Pepperell, Mass.
    Mrs. J.E.B. Jewett,               "        "
     "   M.M. Pond,                   "        "


GEORGIA.

ATLANTA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Evarts Kent,              Chicago, Ill.


  STORRS SCHOOL (104 Houston St.)

  _Principal_,
    Mrs. Lottie M. Penfield,       Minneapolis, Minn.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss Alice E. Brainard,        Cleveland, O.
     "   Amelia L. Ferris,         Oneida, Ill.
     "   Alberta Putnam,           Pipestone, Mich.
     "   Lizzie V. Griffin,        Norwood, N.Y.
     "   Caledonia Philips,        Cannonsburg, Pa.
     "   A.H. Levering,            Philadelphia, Pa.
     "   Nellie L. Cloudman,       So. Windham, Me.
     "   Julia C. Andrews,         Milltown, N.B.


MACON AND BYRON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Chas. F. Sargent,         Macon, Ga.


MACON.

  LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.

  _Principal_,
    Mrs. Liva A. Shaw,             Owego, N.Y.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss E.L. Patten,              Somers, Conn.
     "  E.B. Scobie,               Peninsula, O.
     "  Ada J. Coleman,            Cannonsburgh, Pa.
     "  S.F. Clark,                Medina, O.
     "  Jennie Woodruff,           Berea, Ky.
     "  Sadie L. Poppino,          New Wilmington. Pa.
    Mrs. F.E. Greene,              Rochester, N.Y.
    Miss Emily E. Smith,           North Walton, N.Y.

  _Industrial Teacher_,
    ----                           ----


SAVANNAH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. L.B. Maxwell,             Savannah, Ga.[2]

         [Footnote 2: This church has recently assumed self-support.]


  BEACH INSTITUTE.

  _Principal_,
    Miss A.A. Holmes,              Lee, Mass.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss M.A. Lyman,               Huntington, Mass
     "  M.R. Montgomery,           Arlington, N.J.
     "  C.M. Box,                  Kalamazoo, Mich.
     "  M.M. Foote,                Norwich, N.Y.
     "  H.I. Martin,               Toledo, O.
     "  H.M. Hegeman,              City Island, N.Y.
     "  A.D. Gerrish,              Warren, Mass.


THOMASVILLE.

  NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal_,
    Mrs. W.L. Gordon,              Richmond, Mich.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss Alice E. Jewell,          Olivet, Mich.
     "   Julia. A. Goodwin,        Mason, N.H.
     "   Anna M. Poppino,          New Wilmington, Pa.
     "   Clara A. Dole,            Oberlin, O.
     "   Cornelia Curtis,          Olivet, Mich,
     "   Amelia Knapp,             Greenwich, Conn.


M'INTOSH, LIBERTY CO.

  _Minister_,
    Floyd Snelson,                 McIntosh, Ga.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss Elizabeth Plimpton,       Walpole, Mass.
     "   Mary E. Ayer,             Brookfield, Mass.
     "   Lizzie H. Kuhl,           Lawrenceville, Pa.
     "   Susie L. Leach,           Westminster, Vt.


CYPRESS SLASH.

  _Minister and Teachers_,
    Rev. James S. Walker,          Cypress Slash, Ga.
    Mrs. James S. Walker,             "     "      "


MILLER'S STATION.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. James S. Walker,          Cypress Slash, Ga.


ATHENS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Geo. V. Clark,            Atlanta, Ga.

  _Teacher_,
    Mr. Lewis S. Clark,            Athens, Ga.


MARSHALLVILLE.

  _Teachers_,
    Mrs. A.W. Richardson,          Marshallville, Ga.
    Mr. Edw. Richardson,               "           "


WOODVILLE.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke,        Savannah, Ga.
    Mr. J. Loyd,                      "       "


MARIETTA.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. J.W. Hoffman,             Boston, Mass.


CUTHBERT.

  _Teacher_,
    Mr. F.H. Henderson,            Cuthbert, Ga.


ALBANY.

  _Teacher_,
    Mr. W.C. Greene,               Albany, Ga.


BAINBRIDGE.

  _Teacher_,
    Miss Anna Alexander,           Bainbridge, Ga.


RUTLAND AND ANDERSONVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. N.B. James,               New Orleans, La.


MILFORD.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.A. Jones,               Talladega, Ala.



FLORIDA.


ST. AUGUSTINE.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss Emma R. Caughey,          No. Kingsville, Ohio.
     "  Helen D. Barton,           Terre Haute, Ind.


ORANGE PARK.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. W.A. Benedict,            Orange Park, Fla.



ALABAMA.


TALLADEGA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. G.W. Andrews, D.D.,       Talladega, Ala.


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

  _Instructors and Managers_,
    Pres. H.S. DeForest, D.D.,     Talladega, Ala.
    Prof. G.W. Andrews, D.D.,         "        "
     "    Jesse Bailey,            Woolwich, Me.
    Mr. E.C. Silsby,               Talladega, Ala.
     "  John Orr,                  Clinton, Mass.
     "  E.A. Bishop,               Talladega, Ala.
     "  Fred'k Reed,               Boston, Mass.
    Miss L.F. Partridge,           Holliston, Mass.
     "   Jennie A. Ainsworth,      Winter Park, Fla.
     "   I. Mary Crane,            Gilbert's Mills, N.Y.
     "   May L. Phillips,          Cannonsburg, Pa.
    Mrs. Clara O. Rindge,          Homer, N.Y.
    Miss Ida C. Lansing,           Homer, N.Y.
     "   Alice S. Patten,          Topsham, Maine.
     "   Sarah J. Elder,           Melrose, Mass.
     "   F.L. Yeomans,             Danville, Ill.
    Mrs. E.A. Bishop,              Talladega, Ala.
     "   John Orr,                 Clinton, Mass.[3]
    Miss Lillian R. Upson,         Waterbury, Conn.
    Mrs. E.C. Silsby,              Talladega, Ala.
    Miss Alice F. Topping,         Olivet, Mich.
    Mrs. H.S. DeForest,            Talladega, Ala.
     "   G.W. Andrews,                 "       "

         [Footnote 3: Deceased]


MOBILE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. F.G. Ragland,             Mobile, Ala.


EMERSON INSTITUTE.

  _Principal_,
    Mr. Chas. M. Stevens,          Clearwater, Minn.


  _Assistants_,
    Miss Alice M. Beach,           Cortland, N.Y.
    Mrs. Chas. M. Stevens,         Clearwater, Minn.
    Miss Bessie A. White,          Southwick, Mass.
     "  Anna Z. Woodruff,          Oberlin, Ohio.
    Mrs. H.C. Hecock,              Elyria, Ohio.
    Miss Mary R. Whitcomb,         Redfield, Dak.
     "  Lizzie I. Clarke,          Simons, Ohio.

  _Matron and Special Missionary_,
    Miss L.A. Pingree,             Denmark, Me.


MONTGOMERY, (P.O. Box 62.)

  _Minister_,
    Rev. R.C. Bedford,             Watertown, Wis.


ATHENS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. H.S. Williams,            Athens, Ala.


  TRINITY SCHOOL.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss M.F. Wells,               Ann Arbor, Mich.
     "  Kate E. Sherwood,          St. Joseph, Mich.
     "  Alice M. Whitsey,          Dover, Ohio.
     "  E.C. Albro,                Sherwood, Tenn.


MARION.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. A.W. Curtis,              Crete, Neb.

  _Teachers_,
    Rev. A.W. Curtis,              Crete, Neb
    Miss Gertrude L. Bridgman,     S. Amherst, Mass.
     "   S.J. Goodrich,            Rochester, Minn.
     "   Emma F. Woods,            Knoxville, Ill.
    Miss Eliz. Van Akin,           Oberlin, O.
    Mrs. A.W. Curtis,              Crete, Neb.


SELMA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. E.J. Penney,              Selma, Ala.

  _Special Missionary_,
    Miss Mary K. Lunt,             New Gloucester, Ms.


KYMULGA.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


LAWSONVILLE AND COVE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. W.P. Hamilton,            Talladega, Ala.[4]

         [Footnote 4: Part of the year.]


JENIFER AND IRONATON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.B. Grant,               Talladega, Ala.


SHELBY IRON WORKS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.R. Sims,                Talladega, Ala.


CHILDERSBURG.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


ANNISTON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. H.W. Conley,              Talladega, Ala.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss Adelaide Cruikshank,      Talladega, Ala.
    Mr. J.E. Bush,                 Anniston, Ala.


BIRMINGHAM.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Spencer Snell,            Birmingham, Ala.

  _Missionary_,
    Miss S.S. Evans,               Fryeburg, Maine.


DECATUR.

PLYMOUTH CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


FLORENCE.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. Thos. J. Austin,          Jackson, Tenn.

  _Teacher_,
    Mrs. Katie L. Austin,          Jackson, Tenn.



TENNESSEE.

NASHVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Henry S. Bennett,         Nashville, Tenn.


FISK UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers_,
    Pres. E.M. Cravath, D.D.,      Nashville, Tenn.
    Prof. A.K. Spence,                "         "
     "    H.S. Bennett,               "         "
     "    F.A. Chase,                 "         "
     "    H.H. Wright,             Oberlin, O.
    Rev. E.C. Stickel,               "     "
    Prof. Helen C. Morgan,         Cleveland, O.
    Miss Anna M. Cahill,           Nashville, Tenn.
     "   Laura A. Parmelee,        Toledo, O.
     "   Anna T. Ballantine,       Oberlin, O.
     "   Annie L. Harwood,         Oak Park, Ill.
     "   Mary A. Clark,            Oberlin, O.
     "   Ida M. Abbott,            Oberlin, O.
     "   Jennie A. Robinson,       Oberlin, O.
     "   Mary E. McLane,           New Haven, Conn.
    Mrs. Lucy R. Greene,           No. Amherst, Mass.
    Miss Harriet E. Kimbro,        Nashville, Tenn.
     "   S.M. Wells,               Middletown, N.Y.
    Mrs. W.D. McFarland,           Winsted, Conn.
    Miss M.A. Kinney,              Whitewater, Wis.
     "   M.E. Chamberlain,         Oberlin, O.
    Mr. Wm. R. Morris,             Nashville, Tenn.
    Mrs. A.K. Spence,                 "         "
     "   E.M. Cravath,                "         "


HOWARD CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. D.W. Culp,                Nashville, Tenn.


THIRD CHURCH AND GOODLETTSVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Reading B. Johns,         Reading, Pa.


MEMPHIS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. B.A. Imes,                Oberlin, O.[5]

         [Footnote 5: This church has recently assumed self-support.]


  LE MOYNE SCHOOL.

  _Principal_,
    Prof. A.J. Steele,             Whitewater, Wis.

  _Assistants_,
    Miss Esther A. Barnes,         Tallmadge, O.
     "   E.N. Goldsmith,           Chester, N.H.
     "   C.S. Goldsmith,              "      "
     "   Susie H. Walker,          So. Weymouth, Mass.
    Mrs. M.L. Jenkins,             Marion, Kan.
     "   F.R. Nichols,             Keene, N.H.
    Miss Zulee E. Felton,          Memphis, Tenn.
     "   Fannie A. McCullough,        "      "
    Mr. Fred. R. Nichols,          Keene, N.H.


JONESBORO.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Samuel Rose,              Poquonock, Conn.

  _Teachers_,
    Rev. Samuel Rose,              Poquonock, Conn.
    Mrs. Grace M. Rose,               "         "
    Miss Blanche Page,             Kewanee, Ill.
     "   M. Lena Smith,            Somerset, Mich.


KNOXVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. L.D. Cunningham,          Talladega, Ala.


CHATTANOOGA AND WHITESIDE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Jos. E. Smith,            Chattanooga, Tenn.


GRAND VIEW.

  _General Missionary_,
    Rev. G. Stanley Pope,          Grand View, Tenn.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. C.B. Riggs,               Emmington, Ill.

  _Teachers_,
    Rev. C.B. Riggs,               Emmington, Ill.
    Mr. R.E. Dickson,              Poquonock, Conn.
    Miss Lillie                    E. Dougherty, Oberlin, O.


PLEASANT HILL.

  _Minister and Teachers_,
    Rev. Benj. Dodge,              Centre Lebanon, Me.
    Miss Ninette D. Hayes,         Portsmouth, N.H.
     "   Barbara I. Buchanan,      Oberlin, O.


POMONA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. B. Dodge,                 Centre Lebanon, Me.


ROBBINS, SLICK ROCK, HELENWOOD AND GLEN MARY.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Gideon C. Clark,          Robbins, Tenn.

  _Teacher at Robbins_,
    Miss Kate B. Clarke,           Robbins, Tenn.


CROSSVILLE.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. F.M. Cooley,              Crossville, Tenn.
    Mr. James W. Dorton,               "         "


DEER LODGE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. G. Stanley Pope,          Grand View, Tenn.


  _Teacher_,
    Miss Belle Hodge,              Deer Lodge, Tenn.


GENESIS.

  _Teacher_,
    Miss Inez Chadbourne,          Genesis, Tenn.


SHERWOOD.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop,       New London, Wis.

  _Teachers_,
    Mr. Geo. O. Hannum,            Sherwood, Tenn.
    Miss Mary L. Hubbard,          Sunderland, Mass.


JELLICO.

  _Minister and Missionary_,
    Rev. A.A. Myers,               Jellico, Tenn.

  _Missionary_,
    Mrs. A.A. Myers,               Jellico, Tenn.

  _Teachers_,
    Mr. E. Frank Dizney,           Jellico, Tenn.
    Miss Alice Lickorish,          No. Ridgeville, O.


PINE MOUNTAIN.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.F. Campbell,           Pine Mountain, Tenn.



KENTUCKY.


LEXINGTON.

  NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Instructors_,
    Rev. Azel Hatch,               Oberlin, O.[6]
    Miss Flora C. Clough,          Meriden, N.H.
     "   Kate B. Clough,              "      "
     "   Mira L. Olmsted,          Denver, Col.
     "   Mary A. Peffers,          West Hawley, Mass.
     "   Anna B. Conklin,          Tuscarora, N.Y.
     "   Louise C Hollman,         Lincoln, Neb.

          [Footnote 6: Deceased.]


LOUISVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. G.M. McClellan,           Louisville, Ky.

  _Special Missionary_,
    Mrs. Geo. M. McClellan,        Louisville, Ky.


WILLIAMSBURG AND S. WILLIAMSBURG.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


  ACADEMY.

  _Principal_,
    Rev. L.E. Tupper,              Post Mills, Vt.

  _Teachers_,
    Miss Fannie O. Obenauer,       East Saginaw, Mich.
    Mrs. L.E. Tupper,              Post Mills, Vt.
    Miss M.A. Packard,             Williamsburg, Ky.
     "   Edith Williams,           Minneapolis, Minn.
    Mrs. J.P. Hubbard,             Hiram, Me.


PLEASANT VIEW AND ROCKHOLD.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. L.E. Tupper,              Post Mills, Vt.


CORBIN AND WOODBINE.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. E.H. Bullock,             Woodbine, Ky.
    Miss Hattie Finigan,           Gallipolis, O.


LYNN CAMP, LIBERTY AND MAHAN STATION.

  _Missionary_,
    Mrs. A.A. Myers,               Jellico, Tenn.


DOWLAIS AND SAXTON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. A.A. Myers,               Jellico, Tenn.


ORLANDO.

  _Teacher_,
    Miss Flora M. Cone,            Masonville, N.Y.


CLOVER BOTTOM, GRAY HAWK AND COMBS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Mason Jones,              Berea, Ky.



KANSAS.


TOPEKA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. B.F. Foster,              Topeka, Kan.


LAWRENCE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Welborn Wright,           Lawrence, Kan.



ARKANSAS.


LITTLE ROCK.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. Y.B. Sims,                Talladega, Ala.
    Mr. W.E. Youngblood,               "       "


FAYETTEVILLE.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    ----                           ----



MISSISSIPPI.


TOUGALOO.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Frank G. Woodworth,       Wolcott, Conn.


  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers_,
    Pres. Frank G. Woodworth,      Wolcott, Conn.
    Mr. B.S. Hill,                 Graytown, O.
     "  Wm. D. Hitchcock,          Jackson, Mich.
     "  H.P. Kennedy,                "       "
     "  J.C. Klein,                Stockbridge, Mich.
    Miss Julia A. Sauntry,         Burbank, Minn.
     "   Ellen M. Pease,           West Randolph, Vt.
     "   Sarah Humphrey,           East Saginaw, Mich.
     "   Gertrude M. Sammons,      Wattsburg, Pa.
     "   Clara E. Walker,          Lorain, O.
     "   Ada S. Whiting,           Clearwater, Minn.
    Mrs. Wm. D. Hitchcock,         Jackson, Mich.
     "   A.V. Whiting,             Clearwater, Minn.
    Miss S.L. Emerson,             Hallowell, Me.
     "   H. Eudora Keep,           Madison, Wis.


MERIDIAN.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. James E. Rawlins,         Brooklyn, N.Y.

  _Teachers_,
    Mrs. H.I. Miller,              E. Corinth, Vt.
    Minnie H. Hubbard,             Hiram, Me.


NEW RUHAMAH, PLEASANT RIDGE AND SALEM.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Eli Tapley,               Columbus, Miss.


GREENVILLE.

  _Minister_,
    ----                           ----


JACKSON.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. C.L. Harris,              Jackson, Miss.



LOUISIANA.

NEW ORLEANS.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. W.L. Tenney,              Oberlin, O.


  STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers_,
    Pres. R.C. Hitchcock,          Thompsonville, Ct.
    Prof. W.L. Tenney,             Oberlin, O.
    Mr. Walter H. Perry,           Oxford, Conn.
    Miss Ella J. Ball,             Ithaca, N.Y.
     "   Alice Shovelton,          No. Weymouth, Mass.
     "   Nellie S. Donnell,        Bath, Me.
     "   Amy S. Bridgman,          S. Amherst, Mass.
     "   Anna F. Condict,          Adrian, Mich.
    Mrs. R.C. Hitchcock,           Thompsonville, Ct.
    Miss May O. Johnson,           New Brunswick, N.J.
     "   Ella Samson,              Somerville, Mass.
     "   Jennie Fyfe,              Lansing, Mich.
     "   Sarah A. Coffin,          Beloit, Wis.
     "   Sibyl M. Noble,           Norwichtown, Ct.
    Mr. F.S. Hitchcock,            Boston, Mass.
    Mrs. E.C. Rose,                New Orleans, La.
    Mr. E.C. Rose,                  "    "       "


CENTRAL CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Geo. W. Henderson,        No. Craftsbury, Vt.


SPAIN STREET CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. C.H. Claiborne,           New Orleans, La.


MORRIS BROWN CHURCH.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. I.H. Hall,                New Orleans, La.


NEW IBERIA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Byron Gunner,             Talladega, Ala.


FAUSSE POINT AND BELLE PLACE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Wm. Butler,               New Iberia, La.


CHACAHOULA.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. I.H. Hall,                New Orleans, La.


HAMMOND.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. C.S. Shattuck,            Memphis, Mich.



TEXAS.


AUSTIN.

  TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Henry L. Hubbell, D.D.,   Amherst, Mass.

  _Instructors and Managers_,
    Pres. Henry L. Hubbell, D.D.,  Amherst, Mass.
    Miss Fanny J. Webster,         Sheboygan, Mich.
     "   Lydia S. Cody,            Cleveland, O.
     "   Adelia V. Hunt,           Webster City, Iowa.
     "   Florence A. Sperry,       Rock Creek, O.
     "   Phebe B. Parsons,         Marcellus, N.Y.
     "   Rose M. Kinney,           Oberlin, O.
     "   Carrie M. Park,           West Boxford, Mass.
    Mr. Charles H. Smith,          New Haven, N.Y.
    Miss Florence M. Smith,         "    "     "

  _Special Missionary_,
    Miss M.J. Adams,               Columbus, Wis.


HELENA AND GOLIAD.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. Mitchell Thompson,        Helena, Tex.


CORPUS CHRISTI.

  _Minister_,
    Rev. J.W. Strong,              Talladega, Ala.


PARIS.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. J.R. McLean,              Paris, Tex.
    Mrs. J.R. McLean,                "     "


BOIS D'ARC.

  _Teacher_,
    Rev. J.R. McLean,              Paris, Tex.


DODD AND ROXTON.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. J.W. Roberts,             Dodd, Tex.


DALLAS.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. R.J. Holloway,            Dallas, Tex.
    Mrs. R.J. Holloway,               "     "



INDIAN MISSIONS.


SANTEE AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

  NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.

  _Superintendent and Missionary_,
    Rev. A.L. Riggs,               Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Treasurer_,
    Mr. Joseph H. Steer,           Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Teachers_,
    Mr. J.A. Chadbourne,           Bridgewater, Mass.
    Miss Harriet B. Ilsley,        Newark, N.J.
      "  Susie M. Furman,          Canandaigua, Mich.
      "  Edith Leonard,            Scotland, Mass.
      "  Cora I. Riggs,            Santee Agency, Neb.
      "  Ella Worden,              Topeka, Kan.

  _Native Teachers_,
    James Garvie,                  Santee Agency, Neb.
    Jennie M. Cox,                    "      "     "
    Eugenia LaMoore,               Brown Earth, Dak.

  _Matrons_,
      (Dakota Home),
    Miss L.H. Douglass,            New Haven, Conn.
      (Bird's Nest),
    Miss Harriet A. Brown,         Rocky Point, N.Y.
      (Young Men's Hall),
    Miss Jennie E. Kennedy,        Montrose, Iowa.
      (Boys' Cottage),
    Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees,       Rocky Hill, N.J.
      (Dining Hall),
    Miss Nettie Calhoun,           Kenton, Ohio.
      (Whitney Hall),
    Mrs. E.E. Scolford,            Chicago, Ill.

  _Missionaries_,
     Mrs. A.L. Riggs,              Santee Agency, Neb.
     "    J.H. Steer,                 "      "     "
     "    A.H. Stone,              Philipstone, Mass.

  _Industrial Department_,
    Joseph H. Steer,               Santee Agency, Neb.
    A.H. Stone,                    Philipstone, Mass.
    Edgar H. Scotford,             Chicago, Ill.
    Reuben Cash,                   Niobrara, Neb.
    Ivor P. Wold,                  Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Supt. Printing Office_,
    Chas. R. Lawson,               Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Native Pastors and Helpers_,
    Rev. Artemas Ehnamani,         Santee Agency, Neb.
    Mr. Eli Abraham,                  "      "     "


PONCA AGENCY.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
    Rev. J.E. Smith,               De Smet, Dak.
    Mrs. J.E. Smith,                "   "    "


OAHE, DAKOTA.

  OAHE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

  _Superintendent and Missionary_,
    Rev. T.L. Riggs,               Oahe, Dak.

  _Manager and Treasurer_,
    Mr. Elias Jacobson,            Oahe, Dak.

  _Instructors_,
    Miss M. Lindemann,             West Newton, Mass.
      "  Julia E. Pratt,           Essex. Conn.
      "  Ethel Collins,            Keokuk, Iowa.
      "  Flora Farnum,             Pierre, Dak.
    Mrs. T.L. Riggs,               Oahe, Dak.
    Mrs. Geo. Reed,                Oahe, Dak.


CHEYENNE RIVER AGENCY, DAKOTA.

  FORT PIERRE STATION.

    David Lee,                     Cheyenne River Agency, Dak.


  OPPOSITE FORT SULLY STATION.

    Henry Lee,                     Cheyenne River Agency, Dak.


  CHEYENNE RIVER NOS. 1 AND 2.

    James Brown,                   Santee Agency, Neb.


  CHEYENNE RIVER NOS. 3, 4, AND 5.

    Elizabeth Winyan,              Sisseton Agency, Dak.
    Edwin Phelps,                      "       "     "


  CHEYENNE RIVER NOS. 6 AND 7.

    Joseph Day,                    Flandreau, Dak.


  HOPE MISSION, MOREAU RIVER.

    John Bluecloud,                Brown Earth, Dak.


ROSEBUD AGENCY, DAKOTA.

  _Missionary_,
    Rev. J. Franklin Cross,        Hudson, O.


  BURRELL STATION.

    Francis Frazier and wife,      Santee Agency, Neb.


  PARK STREET CHURCH STATION, WHITE RIVER.

    Louis De Coteau and wife,      Sisseton Ag'cy Dak.


STANDING ROCK AGENCY, DAKOTA.

  _Superintendent and Missionary_,
    Rev. Geo. W. Reed,             Springfield, Mass.


  GRAND RIVER NO. 1.

  _Missionaries_,
    Rev. Geo. W. Reed,             Springfield, Mass.
    Mrs. Geo. W. Reed,                "          "
    Mrs. Sarah W. Devoll, M.D.,    Brookline, Mass.


  GRAND RIVER NO. 2.

  _Missionaries_,
    Miss M.C. Collins,             Keokuk, Iowa.
     "   Josephine Barnaby,        New Haven, Conn.
    Elias Gilbert,                 ---- Wakanna.


FORT BERTHOLD AGENCY, DAKOTA.

  _Missionary_,
    Rev. C.L. Hall,                Fort Berthold, Dak.

  _Teachers_,
    Mrs. C.L. Hall,                Fort Berthold, Dak.
    Miss Mary B. Benedict,         No. Walton, N.Y.
    Mr. L.E. Townsend,             Fort Berthold, Dak.

  _Matron_,
    Miss Roanna F. Challis,        Kampeska, Dak.


S'KOKOMISH AGENCY, W.T.

  _Missionary_,
    Rev. Myron Eells,              S'kokomish, W.T.



NEW MEXICO.


SANTA FÉ.

  _Principal_,
    Mr. Elmore Chase,              Jacksonville, Ill.

  _Matrons_,
    Mrs. Elmore Chase,             Jacksonville, Ill.
    Miss Mary W. Green,            Philadelphia, Pa.

  _Teacher_,
    Miss Ida J. Platt,             Santa Fé, N.M.



CHINESE MISSIONS.

  _Superintendent_,

   Rev. William C. Pond, D.D.,                      San Francisco, Cal.

  _Teachers_,

  Los Angeles,                Mrs. C.A. Sheldon,     Los Angeles, Cal.
   "     "                    Miss Clara M. Watson,     "    "     "
   "     "                    Loo Quong,                "    "     "
  Marysville,                 Miss M.A. Flint,       Marysville, Cal.
  Oakland,                    Miss L.F. Lamont,      Oakland, Cal.
     "                        Chin Chung Mow,           "      "
  Oroville,                   Miss Zilla Deuel,      Oroville, Cal.
     "                        Miss Jessie Martin,       "       "
  Petaluma,                   Mrs. M.H. Colby,       Petaluma, Cal.
  Sacramento,                 Mrs. Rilla Carrington, Sacramento, Cal.
      "                       Chin Foy,                   "        "
  San Buenaventura,           Mrs. Ida White,        San Buenaventura, Cal.
   "       "                  Gin Foo King,           "       "         "
  San Diego,                  Mrs. M.A. McKenzie,    San Diego, Cal.
   "    "                     Quon Newey,             "    "     "
  San Francisco.--_Central_,  Miss J.S. Worley,      San Francisco, Cal.
   "     "            "       Mrs. M.A. Green,        "      "       "
   "     "            "       Miss Rosa E. Lamont,    "      "       "
   "     "            "       Miss Violet W. Lamont,  "      "       "
   "     "            "       Thomas E. Haven,        "      "       "
   "     "            "       Jee Gam,                "      "       "
   "     "      --_Barnes_,   Mrs. H.W. Lamont,       "      "       "
   "     "            "       Wong Gam,               "      "       "
   "     "      --_West_,     Miss F.N. Worley,       "      "       "
   "     "           "        Mrs. C. Goodwin,        "      "       "
   "     "           "        Chin Gaing,             "      "       "
  Santa Barbara,              Mrs. E.M. Shattuck,    Santa Barbara, Cal.
  Santa Cruz,                 Miss Mary L. Perkins,  Santa Cruz, Cal.
    "    "                    Yong Jin,                "     "    "
  Stockton,                   Mrs. M.H. Langdon,     Stockton, Cal.
     "                        Hong Sing,                "       "

       *       *       *       *       *


CONVENTION OF COLORED ROMAN CATHOLICS.

"A National Convention of Colored Roman Catholics, composed of delegates
from nearly all the colored Roman Catholic churches and societies in the
country, began its sessions on the morning of January 1st, in the St.
Augustine Colored Catholic Church in Washington. Every seat was occupied
when Father Tolton, of Quincy, Ill., the only colored Catholic priest in
the United States, began the celebration of solemn High Mass.
Immediately in front of and beneath the pulpit sat his Eminence,
Cardinal Gibbons, who delivered the sermon. He was clad in scarlet
robes. At the conclusion of the sermon, the Cardinal welcomed the
delegates in his own name, and in the name of the clergy and of the
congregation. He said:

"'This gathering will mark an era in the history of the colored people
of the United States, for never before have colored Catholics of the
country met in convention.' He suggested that the convention discuss the
education of the children--the religious education necessary to the life
of the Republic. _The universal level of the Catholic Church--its
equality--was eloquently dilated upon, and attention was directed to the
fact that a colored priest had celebrated mass in company with two white
clergymen._"

We quote the above from the _People's Advocate_, a paper published in
Washington, D.C., by colored editors and in the interests of the colored
people. In comments upon the above report, it adds:

"The presence of a Negro priest of pure lineage, born a slave, ordained
at Rome, Augustus Tolton--the property of Stephen Elliot, as the record
stands in the Vatican--the appearance of Cardinal Gibbons in his
official robes to sanction the meeting, his eloquent reference to the
universality of the Church of Rome that 'knows neither North, South,
East or West; that knows neither Jew nor Gentile, Greek, Barbarian nor
Scythian,' may mislead the unwary as to the real object of the movement.
Its real purpose is to propagate the Roman Catholic faith among the
colored people. So far as this meeting will secure from white
Protestants a greater interest in, and a more Christian recognition of,
the Negro as an equal participant in the Gospel plan, we regard it as
Providential. We are not ready to concede that the Roman Catholic Church
has been the friend of freedom, of education, of human rights and of
progress. We do not see that anything is gained by claiming for Roman
Catholicism to-day, or in the past, what is clearly not so. But the
Roman Catholic Church has placed itself squarely on the doctrine of the
Gospel as taught by Christ upon the question of universal brotherhood.
Prejudiced as many may be by long years of training against the tenets
of this church, all must acknowledge that this practice of the Romanists
as manifested in the presence of a black man on terms of perfect
equality, officiating at the altar of St. Augustine's Church, assisted
on his right and left by white priests, in the presence of his Eminence
Cardinal Gibbons, will be put in striking contrast with that of the
white American Protestant churches who are willing on every occasion to
sacrifice the Negro to secure the co-operation of the South on other
than Gospel terms."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. George W. Moore, of the Lincoln Memorial Congregational Church, at
Washington, to whom we are indebted for a full account of the sessions
of the Congress, comments upon it as follows:

"Mr. D.A. Rudd, of Cincinnati, editor of the _American Catholic
Tribune_, a colored Catholic paper, was chosen permanent Chairman. Upon
assuming the office he spoke favorably of the attitude of the Catholic
Church towards the Negro, saying especially: 'The Fatherhood of God and
the brotherhood of man is taught and practised by the Catholic Church in
no doubtful terms.' He advocated the starting of Catholic schools and
the aiding of those already started. The following facts were presented
by the Committee on Resolutions: There are twenty colored Roman Catholic
churches in the country, each of which has a school annexed. There are
sixty-five other colored Roman Catholic schools; eight colored Roman
Catholic orphan asylums; and three reformatories. Five thousand colored
children are taught in these schools, and three hundred children in the
asylums. Seven colored students are preparing to become priests. The
Pope from Rome cabled his greetings in response to a cable from the
Congress, saying: 'The Sovereign Pontiff gladly and proudly blesses you
with all his heart.' The influence, patronage and wealth of the Roman
Catholic Church are all at the service of this movement, and if
Protestants build up caste-churches in the South, the Romanists will
not."

       *       *       *       *       *


AMONG THE TENNESSEE MOUNTAINS.

BY EVANGELIST JAMES WHARTON.


My visit to the people among the mountains was rather a departure from
my usual work--that of preaching to the colored people. I have preached
here about two weeks, the attendance being good, and the interest
deepening as the meetings went on, until now we have more than a score
who have professed to find Jesus precious to their souls.

The condition of the natives in this vicinity is very sad. Their
ignorance and pride coupled make it almost impossible to do anything for
them. The rough roads over the rocks and mountains make it a dangerous
undertaking for them to attend church in the evenings. Several of us
started for a meeting among them on a recent Saturday afternoon, with
rubbers, umbrellas and waterproofs, prepared for mud and rain. We
crossed a rickety old wooden bridge that had been nearly washed away by
the floods, and commenced to climb the mountain side by a road that was
nearly as steep as a steeple and which wended around to nearly every
point of the compass, ever going up, over ruts and rocks, roots and
trunks of trees, now jumping across a ravine, and next climbing a fence.
At last among the thickets and brush there were some signs of life, and
we came to an opening among the trees where we saw a miserable-looking
old shanty. The first thought was, can it be possible that human beings
live in a shed like this? We drew near and saw two women sitting with
their knees up to the open fire on the hearth. They looked much
surprised to see us. We told them that we were going to hold a meeting
at a house a little farther on; will they go? No, they don't care to go,
expectorating the tobacco juice from their mouths into the fire at the
same time. We replied, "You would better go; it may be you will never
have a chance to hear an Englishman again;" to which we got a reply,
"Hear a w-h-a-a-t?" Whether they knew what an Englishman was, or not, or
even if they ever heard there was such a country as England I cannot
say; but I understand there are thousands of these people who know
nothing of the outside world, and many who were never five miles away
from their own door-step in their life. With a patch of ground for corn,
another for tobacco, with wood for the fire, they are as contented as
the President; alas, too contented!

We entered the cabin to which we were going by a door-way in which we
must needs bend our heads very low to get inside. The first thing that
struck us was the gloom and darkness. In each corner of the room was a
bed, with a smaller one pushed underneath, and two sick people suffering
from slow fever. It is no wonder, for eleven people occupied this one
room, about twelve feet square. Need we wonder that misery and squalor
are seen all around? An old soap box from the grocery formed a corner
cupboard. Two old chairs which perhaps belonged to their
great-grandmother, all frame and no seat, an empty box, and a bucket of
water with a tin scoop, formed the whole furniture of the mountain cabin.
Poor souls! I was told that I had done wonders when one day, during an
address, I got them to smile! It was quite a treat to see a smile upon
their faces. Joy seems to be outside their domain altogether, and the
worst feature appears to be that they have no desire for anything
different. If they get the idea that you think them low down and want to
lift them up, they at once commence to stretch themselves up to their
full height and stand upon their dignity. They will not fail to tell you
plainly that you must not think they belong to the "know-nothing" class.
They "know what is right and what is wrong, without you coming here."
This is often said, even by those who live immoral lives. Pride of race
is often affected towards the colored people. A colored man
unfortunately had been drinking and was left at the depot. Some one
stumbled against him, saying, "I did not know it was a man; I thought it
was baggage." His companion spoke up and said, "It isn't a man; it's a
nigger." Often their children are bright, cheery-looking children,
well-behaved, unassuming and quiet. These poor mountain people might do
well to take a few lessons from many of their despised, dusky neighbors.

The whole work, in my little time among these people, has greatly
touched my heart and drawn out my sympathies towards them.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.


Trinity School, Athens, Ala.:

"During December there was a special religious interest in view of the
meetings held by Rev. Mr. Wharton, your missionary evangelist. The
meetings were well attended by our students and by the people. These
meetings were greatly blessed to the quickening and upbuilding of
Christians, and twelve persons professed conversion. All of our pupils
except one, above the primary department, are professing Christians. Our
student prayer meetings are exceedingly precious seasons to teachers and
pupils. We have just organized a Young People's Society of Christian
Endeavor which promises to be very helpful.

"On account of these meetings we could not make our usual preparations
for a Christmas concert and presents to the children. Accordingly, we
invited them all to our parlors to a reception on Wednesday the 26th,
and to our great surprise, there came a Christmas box on Tuesday, with
presents for every one, greatly to the joy of the little ones, yes, and
of the large ones also. After the distribution of the gifts, delightful
music bubbled from every throat, and the universal testimony was, 'This
is the best Christmas I ever spent.'"

Straight University, New Orleans, La.:

"We are having a glorious revival. Every night during the Week of Prayer
there have been glad hearts. I think there is scarcely a boarding
student who is not thoroughly aroused. Most are seeking the Saviour.
Eighteen have found peace. Many day students, and others who are not
students, have been much interested. One young man who has been a
scoffer at all good things, came to the meetings, and soon came under
the influence and asked us to pray for him. As I write in Stone Hall, I
hear on all sides the sound of prayer and singing."

The new church at Crossville, Tenn., was dedicated on Sunday, Dec. 30th.
The new building is very tasteful and convenient, in a beautiful and
central location. Six new members were received--all Northern people.
The house was full both morning and evening. Much interest was shown.
Rev. G.S. Pope preached in the morning and Rev. S.E. Lathrop in the
evening.

Sherwood Academy opened its new winter term with increasing numbers. The
school is gaining favor with all classes and is doing an excellent work.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Habits and Manners," is the title of a neat little volume by Mrs. W.A.
Armstrong, of Hampton, Va. It is made up of the lectures delivered by
Mrs. Armstrong to the students of the Institution, and is a remarkably
clear statement of the rules that should govern the habits and manners
of ladies and gentlemen. These lectures, though originally addressed to
colored students, are equally applicable to white people, for here, at
least, color makes no difference. The book has many other items of
interest, as for example, rules for cooking, recipes, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GLIMPSE AT SHADY SIDE.

REV. W.C. POND, D.D.

Our friends will get a quite one-sided and mistaken view of our work
among the Chinese, as of any other missionary work, if they have nothing
but the sunny-side reports to read. It is a war that we are waging, and
war is serious business. The varied fortune of the battle involves
defeats, incidental and temporary, on the way to the final victory.
Sometimes it is hope deferred.

There are Chinese in whom we have come to be deeply interested, for whom
we have long prayed, who have for years been among the most constant and
most pleasing of our pupils, and for years have been convinced that an
idol is nothing, but that the God of the Bible is the only true God, and
the Christ of the Gospel the only true Saviour, who stop just there.
Over and over again we ask about them, only to find them still _just
there_. Not a step forward seems to have been taken, and meanwhile
time--weeks that grow to months, and months that grow even to years--
time that might be full of service, runs to waste. The heart gets sick
with this hope deferred.

Then there are cases of disappointment. Bright hopes have darkened
almost to the blackness of very despair. A brother whose conversion,
(_must_ I say _apparent_ conversion?) has seemed to be unusually clear;
whose walk as a Christian seemed, while he was with us, to be well-nigh
perfect; whose spirit was singularly humble, devout and Christly; who
was growing rapidly in knowledge of the word, and could already preach
the word with power, goes back to his home in China. Sore pressure is
brought to bear upon him, and he pays some sort of homage at an idol's
shrine. He feels forthwith condemned. He will not be a hypocrite, and
therefore will no longer profess to be a Christian. Now that he has
returned to California, he is ashamed, he says, to show himself among
the brethren. He stands aloof; keeps out of sight, and thus takes the
very path along which Judas hastened to his doom. In vain do we show him
the better way of faith; in vain speak to him of Peter, or of the
Father's welcome to the prodigal, and the delight we once had in him
adds soreness to the heartache of our disappointed hope.

These are not solitary cases. Yet we may thank God that they represent
not the general rule, but the exceptions. The general rule is that of
constancy and faithfulness, and these exceptions are such as occurred
even in the Apostolic ministries: how much more to be expected in ours!
Yet the pain they bring and the shadow they cast are none the less real
and deep.

Another element in shady side arises in a quite different quarter.
"Coming events cast their shadows before," and these shadows just now
obscure our sunny side. We resolve not to be worried about to-morrow,
and yet we must not enter doors that open except we first count the
cost. That coming event is a deficit that seems inevitable, unless we
shut our ears to what sound like the calls of God. Our plan heretofore
has been to listen to these calls and answer them if possible, believing
that he who gives the commission will not fail to supply the means. Nor
has this faith been put to shame. Yet, when the rules of arithmetic
confront one at every summing of his probable resources and subtracting
of his fixed expenditures, and the figures, like fleshless, bony
fingers, point him to deficits and unpaid bills impending, then, even
while faith maintains her hold, it cannot be denied that shadows cross
our path. Our friends who have helped us hitherto must expect some
urgent appeals before this fiscal year is ended. The utmost economy
shall be practised. Each dollar shall be made to do full service, if
care and watchfulness on our part can assure this, but the work must not
be hindered. Souls are at stake, priceless and immortal.

I have not yet reached the end of my catalogue of shadows, but I soon
tire of looking at the shady side. Shadow pre-supposes sunshine, and
sunshine there is, clear, abundant, having cheer in it for the present
and promise for the future--promise of harvests such as may make this
year to be as the last and even more abundant.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY OF CHINESE MISSIONS.

Superintendent Dr. Pond is a modest man, and we, therefore, take the
liberty of quoting from the _Congregationalist_ a little sketch by our
friend Dr. Holbrook, of the recent anniversary of the Chinese Mission as
presenting a broad ray of sunshine over the "Shady Side," as given in
Brother Pond's candid article above.

     The Chinese Mission of the A.M.A. on the Pacific coast, under
     the superintendence of Rev. W.C. Pond, D.D., is very efficient
     and successful. Its thirteenth anniversary was held on Sunday
     evening, December 9, in the First Congregational Church in San
     Francisco, Prof. I.E. Dwinell presiding. The exercises by the
     Chinese converts indicated remarkable proficiency in the English
     language and in music, both in solos and choruses. Jee Gam, the
     first convert, and now employed by the courts as an interpreter,
     read an address on "The Congregational Association of Christian
     Chinese," of such merit in thought and language, that some
     doubted its originality, which, however, was vouched for by Dr.
     Pond. The writer sketched its origin in 1871 and the progress of
     the Association since, and said it had been the means of the
     conversion of more than 700 Chinese, and that it designs to send
     missionaries to China. It is self-supporting, though the
     expenditures during the year have been $9,619.50, of which
     $2,066 were for rent. Dr. Pond advocated the appointment of
     itinerant preachers to labor with the Chinese in the moving
     camps on the railroads. Rev. Dr. Barrows made a very effective
     appeal for funds, and a collection was taken. Dr. Pond certainly
     deserves great credit for his labors in this department, in
     addition to the pastorate of Bethany Church in San Francisco, in
     which there are a large number of Chinese.


       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Ellen Osgood, Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. William Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.W. Andrews, Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs.
  C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Miss Katharine Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue,
  Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Miss Ella E. Marsh, Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.L. Epps, Topeka, Kan.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Mary B. Warren, Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead, Wis.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 N. Broad St., Fremont, Neb.

COLORADO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Packard, Pueblo, Colo.

DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, President,
  Mrs. T.M. Hills, Sioux Falls; Secretary, Mrs.
  W.R. Dawes, Redfield; Treasurer, Mrs. S.E.
  Fifield, Lake Preston.

We would suggest to all ladles connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MOUNTAIN GIRLS.

But why the _girls_? Because the girls are immortal as well as the boys.
Because the girls in their education have been neglected far more than
the boys. Because the _girls_ are to be the _mothers_ of the next
generation.

That they are immortal, and capable of becoming and doing much in this
life would seem to be doubted even by their parents. The neglect of the
girls in their physical, mental, moral, and religious education, is
enough to draw pity even from the most stupid Christian.

Hundreds are put into field work from spring till autumn. They follow
the mule and "bull tongue." They wield the heavy hoe, sprouting newly
cleared land. They look after cattle on the ranges and the mountain
swine, and if these are needed for meat, kill and dress them as a man
would do. Said a woman the other day, "I wish I had as many dollars as I
have alone killed and dressed hogs." With parents the _boy_ means a
"heap" more than the _girl_. A boy can shoot deer and coon, fox and
rabbit, can build cabins, can keep school, and "seems" be a doctor or go
to Congress. With this impression, if anybody is clothed and sent to
school, it is the _boy_, while as a rule, the girl is poorly clad and
stays at home to do the boy's work, to make "craps," and grow up in
ignorance. If in berry time they can get a few dimes to buy a calico
dress and a pair of shoes, contentment settles over their faces.
Aspirations for anything better they have not, for an avenue leading to
a more hopeful life they have never dreamed of. To look into the future
there is nothing sunny or bright. Illiterate, they marry young some poor
fellow, and with no money they begin life, build their cabin home in the
timber land, girdle a few acres of the stately trees of oak and
chestnut, and there raise a family to take the same dark and gloomy view
of life the parents have had.

Must this condition of things continue, among a people, too, who are all
native born Americans, who have fair native abilities to become a power
for good if trained in Christian schools?

_Is it not time a special_ effort be made for these _girls_? They are
growing older. They will soon be the mothers of a new generation. With
illiterate mothers what will that generation be? Just what the present
generation now is. What will it be if these girls now growing up are
brought into a school like ours at Pleasant Hill? Here, if there can be
sufficient room and ample teaching force, they will be taught and
trained in a practical knowledge of all the duties of life, especially
in those of the household. If we educate and save the _girls_ we are
using the very lever needed to lift these hopeless and neglected
thousands living at our very doors, out of their degraded life and bring
them into the light of the 19th century, and qualify them to take
positions among the best women of the land.

The work for which I plead is full of encouragement and hope. It is not
in Africa. It is within one or two days' ride of the largest and most
wealthy churches of our country, those who love the Kingdom of Christ
and have sent, and are still sending, their thousands of dollars to the
ends of the earth, while these bright American girls are, by some
strange oversight, neglected at our very doors.

The American Missionary Association has undertaken a noble work among
them, and something has been accomplished, yet this good work has but
just begun. The grey dawn has only cast a few signs of daylight over the
mountains. To carry this work forward successfully in behalf of the
neglected girls, there should be, in a great natural center of
operations like Pleasant Hill, a spacious boarding hall with an
industrial department and home, for those girls. It should not be
stinted in size, but large, well-arranged, and well-equipped in all its
departments from the primary upwards, where they can be taught
everything a girl ought to learn, not only in books and in a Christian
life, but taught to sew, knit, darn stockings, to make good bread, and
keep house with order and neatness, and do everything needed to be done
in a Christian home. If the _native girls_ can come from their cabin
homes into such an institution and be thus thoroughly trained, the axe
is then laid at the very root of the tree of a squalid life of
illiteracy, and a life of Christian culture and hope comes in its place,
where Christian mothers throw angelic brightness over their households,
and families of children are trained to act well their part in this
great and growing nation. The institution I suggest, and for which I
must plead, should not only be large enough to accommodate girls near at
hand, but from other neighboring States who stand in need of such a home
and training. It should be a Bethel for these immortal waifs, a house of
bread, so well provided for as to take the poorest who cannot pay a cent
of their own expenses. On this base it will be doing the greatest and
grandest work possible for the two millions and a half who are scattered
as lost sheep over the mountains of our own land.

B. DODGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1888.



MAINE. $371.03.

Auburn. Sam'l J.M. Perkins                     $10.00

Augusta. Mite Boxes, Miss K. Carpenter's
  S.S. Class, 7.50: S.S. Class, Mite
  Boxes, 2, _for student Aid, Talladega C._      9.50

Bangor. First Ch.                               30.00

Bath. "Helping Hands" of Central Ch.,
  _for Ind'l Sch., Williamsburg, Ky._           50.00

Blue Hill. Mission Circle, by Grace
  Dodge, _for Selma, Ala._                       2.50

Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                21.70

Brunswick. First Cong. Ch.                      50.00

Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch.                      5.93

Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard                      2.00

Freeport. Cong. Ch.                             15.32

Gorham. First Cong. Ch.                         95.08

Island Falls. Cong Ch.                          10.00

Machias. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                  5.00

North Bridgton. Cong. Ch.                        4.50

Norway. Mrs. Mary K. Frost                       0.50

Patten. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Emerson Inst._                    7.00

Portland. Fourth Cong. Ch.                      15.00

Portland. Infant Class, St. Lawrence St.
  Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._    3.00

Skowhegan. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box
  Goods, by Mrs. L.W. Weston

South Paris. Cong. Ch.                           4.50

Phippsburg. Cong. Ch.                           10.00

York. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  19.50



NEW HAMPSHIRE, $314.87.

Brookline. Cong. Ch.                             1.00

Concord. South Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
  ALFRED T. HILLMAN L.M.                        60.64

Concord. "Light Bearers," _for Student
  Aid, Storrs Sch._                             18.00

Concord. "Friend" _for Rev. Alfred Connet_      10.00

Great Falls. First Cong. Ch.                    20.00

Greenfield. Cong. Ch.                            6.00

Goffstown. Sab. Sch. Class, _for Brewer
  Normal Sch._                                   5.00

Hampton. Cong. Ch.                              13.70

Hancock. Cong. Ch.                              25.00

Hanover. "Dartmouth Religious Soc."
  _for Indian M._                               25.00

Hudson. Miss E.A. Warner, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            15.00

Keene. "Friends in Second Ch.," 32.25;
  "Friend." 1, _for Indian M._                  33.25

Lisbon. First Cong. Ch., ad'l                    0.50

Nashua. Ladles, Bbl. of C., _for Greenwood,
  S.C._

New Ipswich. Cong. Ch.                           6.66

Peterboro. Sab. Sch. of Union Evan Cong.
  Ch., _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._          31.30

South Newmarket. Miss H.L. Fitts, _for
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                    15.00

Stoddard. "Pansies," _for Christmas Tree,
  Meridian, Miss._                               3.00

Tilton. Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. Class of
  boys, _for Student Aid_                        3.00

Wolfeboro. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., (8
  of which _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._)
  and bal. to const CHARLES F. PARKER L.M.      28.82

Winchester. Cong. Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._   24.00



VERMONT, $514.95.

Cabot. Cong. Ch.                                10.00

Castleton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                               25.00

Castleton. Cong. Ch.                            31.45

Chelsea. Miss'y Concert Cong. Ch.                6.35

Coventry. Mrs. S.P. Cowles,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

Bakersfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const
  DEA. JOHN A. PERKINS L.M.                     11.78

Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                    45.34

Berlin. Bbl. and Box of C., _for
  McIntosh, Ga._

Burlington. College St. Cong. Ch.               61.27

Burlington. Mrs. O.D. Owen,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                            4.07

Dummerston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   4.56

Hartford. Second Cong. Ch.                      29.60

Jericho Center. First Cong. Ch.                 11.19

Manchester. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._;
  2 for Freight                                  2.00

McIndoes Falls. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                           21.73

Milton. Cong. Co. and Soc.                      15.71

North Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              7.00

Pittsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   67.00

Putney. Cong. Ch.                               10.25

Shoreham. "Willing Workers," and Cong.
Sab. Sch., _for Woman's Work,
Savannah, Ga._                                  20.00

Stowe, Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       46.25

Vergennes. Eliza C. Benton                       1.00

Vergennes. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Wallingford. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 10.00

Westminster West. Cong. Ch. and Soc.            22.28

West Randolph. Miss Betsey Nichols.              1.00

Windsor. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 10.31;
Gilbert A. Davis, Supt., 10.31, _for
  McIntosh, Ga._                                20.62

Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                               4.50

Vermont Woman's Home Missionary
Union, by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks,
Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

  Jamaica. "Sunbeam Band"             3.00

  Charlotte. Rosebud Mission Band.    5.00

  Saint Johnsbury. Girls' Mission
  Band of North Cong. Ch.,
  _special for Marion, Ala._          7.00      15.00

                                           ----------

                                              $509.95

ESTATE.

Wilmington. Estate of Mary Ray, by
E.M. Haynes, Trustee                             5.00

                                           ----------

                                              $514.95



MASSACHUSETTS, $4,999.62.

Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.45

Amherst. First Cong. Ch., 30;
  South Cong. Ch., 10.50                        40.50

Andover. M.E. Manning, _for Talladega C._        7.50

Andover. Mrs. S.E. Abbott, Box Sewing
  Sch. material, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Ashburnham. Hosea Greene                         5.00

Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 331.55

Auburn, Boston, Springfield, Mass.,
  Randolph, Vt. "Friends," Set of Chambers
  Encyclopædia, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch. Ga._

Boston. Mount Vernon Ch.                       306.69

  "A Lady"                          100.00

  H.G. Maynard, to const.
    Miss E.I. MAYNARD L.M.           30.00

  Edward A. Strong                   25.00

  S.D. Smith, _for Organ_            60.00

  "Friend," _for Mountain Work_      10.00

  Woman's Home Miss. Ass'n.,
    _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._        5.00

Dorchester. "E."                     10.00

  "Friends," _for Indian M._          6.25

  Miss Mary A. Tuttle,
    1.75, _for Indian M._
    and 76c., _for Marie
    Adlof Sch'p Fund_                 2.51

  Roxbury. Immanuel Ch.              50.00

  Mrs. Abbey W. Smith, 25;
    Miss Lucy M. Smith, 10,
    _for Reading Room,
    Tougaloo U._                     35.00

  "A Friend," _for Miss Collins'
   Work, Indian M._                   1.50

South Boston. Phillips Ch.          212.11

West Roxbury. Emily J. Hazeltine      5.00

                                 ---------     859.06

Baldwinsville. Sab. Sch. of
  Memorial Ch. _for Wilmington,
  N.C._                                          8.00

Belchertown. C.B. Southwick                      1.00

Belchertown. By Mrs. C.F.D. Hazen,
  _for Indian M._                                0.80

Boxboro. Cong. Ch.                              15.00

Brimfield. Ladies' Union of Second Cong.
  Ch., _for Freight to Oaks, N.C._               2.00

Brockton. Mrs. L.C. Sanford, _for Freight
  to Tougaloo, Miss._                            2.00

Brookfield. Cong. Ch. adl                       10.00

Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
  ALICE M. ALDRICH L.M.                         40.97

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch., 58;
  Central Cong. Ch., 29.55                      87.55

Colerain. Mrs. P.B. Smith                        1.00

Conway. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                   7.78

Cummington. Mrs. H.M. Porter, Books
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Dalton. Mrs. Louise F. Crane, 100;
  Miss Crane, 100.                             200.00

East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.      12.04

Easthampton. Payson Cong. Ch.                  222.05

Easthampton. Sab. Sch. of First Ch.,
  _for Santee Indian M._                        12.50

Edgartown. Cong. Ch.                            31.88

Enfield. Mrs. Geo. C. Ewing and Sab.
  Sch. Class, _for Indian Sch'p._               10.00

Everett. Cong. Ch., ad'l                         5.00

Framingham. George Nourse, 10;
  Mrs. S.N. Brewer, 5                           15.00

Gardner. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  ERWIN CONANT L.M.                             30.00

Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch.                     45.00

Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               50.00

Grafton. Three Bbls. of C.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.      71.08

Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                    52.92

Gilbertville. Sab. Sen. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    50.00

Hanover. Second Cong. Ch.                       10.00

Hardwick. Cal. Ch. ad'l'                         1.50

Hinsdale. "Friends" by Mrs. Kate C. Plunkett,
  _for Sch'p Endowment Fund,
  Fisk U._                                      28.00

Holliston. Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4.     50.00

Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.             21.32

Lakeville. Ladies' Foreign Miss'y Soc.,
  _for Teacher, Indian M._                      26.25

Lawrence. United Cong. Ch.                       5.00

Leominister. Ortho. Cong. Ch., 99.75;
  "Thanksgiving reunion," 4                    103.75

Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 13;
  "In Memoriam, E.C.H.," 5                      18.00

Lowell. John St. Cong. Ch., 27.90;
  Pawtucket Cong. Ch., 18.57; "A Friend," 14    60.47

Ludlow. "Precious Pearls," by Miss M.E. Jones,
  _for Macon, Ga._                               2.00

Lynn. First Cong. Ch.                           26.77

Malden. First Cong. Ch.                         36.00

Marion. Cong. Ch.                                3.26

Medford. Miss Mary F. Ellis, _for Reading
  Room, Tougaloo U._                            25.00

Medford. McCollom Mission Circle                15.00

Medfield. Second Cong. Ch., _for Freight
  to Chattanooga, Tenn._                         3.00

Medway. Village Ch.                             40.00

Medway. E.F. Richardson, 2 Boxes of
  C. etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Merrick. Marcia M. Hoisington                    4.50

Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               69.00

Milford. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                             5.50

Milbury. Mrs. Louise S. Putnam                   5.00

Montague. Cong. Ch.                             11.00

Monson. Young Ladies' Working Club
  of Cong. Ch., Bbl. and Box of C.,
  _for Tougaloo U._

Mittineague. Southworth Paper Co.,
  Case Paper, _for Talladega C._

Neponset. Stone Mission Circle of Trinity
  Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Talladega C._       2.28

New Bedford. "A Friend," 128.50;
  North Cong. Ch., 58.13                       186.63

Newburyport. Whitefield Cong. Ch.               26.31

Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                               28.50

Newton Highlands. Mrs. C.H. Guild,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

North Brookfield. Mrs. W.H. Montague,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     5.00

Pepperell Evan. Cong. Ch.                       47.52

Pepperell. Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for Freight
  to Greenwood, S.C._                            1.50

Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch., 81.74;
  South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 41.82              123.56

Princeton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._                        10.00

Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               22.71

Shelburne. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.          8.10

Somerville. "Friend," Box of C.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

South Deerfield. Cong, Ch., 56.11, and
  Sab. Sch. 13,30 to const. LUCIUS T. HARRIS
  and COLTON STEBBINS L.M.'s                    69.41

South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._                        30.00

Springfield. Miss N. Burnham, 10,
  _for Mountain Work_,
  Mrs. Persis Burnham, 2                        12.00

Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                          22.58

Stoughton. First Cong. Ch.                       4.99

Swampscott. First Cong. Ch.                     22.50

Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch., to const
  FREDERICK E. AUSTIN, MISS FLORENCE E.
  FRANCIS, MISS SARAH A. CARPENTER,
  MRS. GEORGE H. RHODES and MRS. H.B.
  CASWELL L.M.'s                              185.00

Templeton. Mary Wilkinson, _for Mountain
  Work_                                          1.00

Walpole. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                       40.21

Townsend. Cong. Ch., 23.90 and Special
  Christmas Coll, 3.89                          27.79

Wakefield. Infant Dept., Sab. Sch.
  Cong. Ch., 15; Mr. Morris 1, _for
  Mountain Work_                                16.00

Waltham. S.S. Class, _for Student Aid,
  Storrs Sch._                                   6.00

Wellesley. Young Ladles in Wellesley
  College, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      57.00

Wellesley Hills. Cong. Ch.                      60.00

West Medford. Cong Ch.                           6.06

West Boxford. Cong. Ch.                          9.00

West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.         20.28

Westfield. Rev. L.H. Blake, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                 60.45

Westminster. First Cong. Ch.                     9.50

Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._                        10.00

Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                   23.51

Winchendon. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.             15.00

Worcester. Union Ch.                           202.93

Worcester. Salem St. Mission Harvesters,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    75.00

Worcester. Primary Dept. of Piedmont
  Sab. Sch., _for Bell, Paris, Tex._            50.00

----. "S."                                      405.00

----. "A Friend in Massachusetts,"
  _for Mountain Work_                           40.00

----. "Friends," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                  6.00

Hampden Benevolent Association,
  by Charles Marsh, Treas.:

    Chicopee. Second                $33.69

    Chicopee. Third, (1.84 of
    which _for Indian M._)           11.86

    Huntington. Second               11.83

    Mittineague                      10.35

    South Hadley Falls               11.91

    Springfield, North               48.00

    Springfield, Memorial             7.78

    West Springfield, Part St        39.79

                                  --------     175.21


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Boston, Mass. "A Friend," Package _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

Brockton, Mass. Mrs. L.C. Sanford, Bbl.
  _for Tougaloo U._

Cambridgeport, Mass. Miss L. Palmer, Box

East Cambridge, Mass. Miss M.F. Aiken, Box,
  _for Kittrell, N.C._

Gardner, Mass. Members of First Cong. Sab.
  Sch., Box

Medfield, Mass. Second Cong. Ch. Bbl.

Neponset, Mass. Stone Miss. Circle of Trinity
  Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls., _for Talladega C._

Newbury, Mass. First Parish, Bbl.

Roxbury, Mass. Jane D. Proctor, Box Christmas
  Gifts, _for Storrs Sch._

South Framingham, Mass. Ladies Ass'n of Cong.
  Ch., Bbl., _for Howard U._

Watertown, Mass. Ladies of Phillips Ch., Bbl.,
  _for Oaks. N.C._, and Bbl., _for Atlanta U._

Weymouth and Braintree, Mass. Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  Bibles, Papers, etc.

Winchester, Mass. By Miss Lizzie Chapin, Bbl.,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Worcester, Mass. Old South Ch., Bbl., val. 77,
  _for Hampton Inst._



RHODE ISLAND, $273.44.

Barrington. Cong. Ch.                           75.50

East Providence. Newman Cong. Ch.               17.00

Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.,
  (8 of which _for Mountain Work_)             180.94



CONNECTICUT, $3,252.43.

Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                        75.97

Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                           28.77

Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                            7.90

Birmingham. "A Friend"                           5.00

Branford. Ladies Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                   25.00

Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch.                  21.04

Bridgeport. Dea. Edward Sterling, 5;
  Rev. H.A. McKelvey,5; Dea. Joel
  Blakeslee, 3; Mrs. Richardson, 2;
  Mrs. G. Baldwin, 1; W.H. Marigold, 1,
  _for Student Aid Tougaloo U._                 17.00

Bridgeport. Infant Sch., Sab. Sch. of First
  Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud M._                   15.00

Bristol. Cong. Ch. Young Men's S.S.
  Class, _Special for Tougaloo U._              10.00

Burnside. "Friends," _for Rosebud
  Indian M._                                     1.00

Danbury. First Cong. Ch.                        84.68

Danbury. Second Cong. Ch.                       11.25

Deep River. Cong. Ch., to const.
  JOHN H. H'LOMMEDIEU L.M.                      30.69

East Haddam. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75.20;
  "A Friend," 5                                 80.20

East Woodstock. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                        25.65

East Woodstock. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. and
  Valise of C., etc., _for Thomasville, Ga._

Everett. Cong. Ch. ad'l                          1.00

Farmington. Nancy S. Gaylord                    10.00

Glastonbury. Geo. G. Williams, 100;
  J.B. Williams, 50, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                     150.00

Glastonbury. Bernard T. Williams,
  _for Teacher, Indian M._                      50.00

Guilford. John S. Evarts                        10.00

Guilford. "Wigwam Club," First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p._                           10.00

Hampton. "A Friend."                             5.00

Hartford. Mrs. Mary C. Bemis                    20.00

Hebron. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  of C. etc., _for Thomasville, Ga._

Kensington "A Friend"                            4.50

Kent. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn., Mountain Work_                   20.00

Meriden. Center Ch., (25 of which _for
  Tougaloo U._ and 25 from Levi B. Yale,
  _for Mountain Work_)                          50.00

Middletown. Third Cong. Ch.                     19.05

Middletown. Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch.,
  _for Teachers, Indian M._                     25.00

Milford. First Cong. Ch., 150, _for Indian
  M., Santee Agency_ and 5 _for Hampton N.
  and A. Inst._                                155.00

Morris. Cong. Ch.                               10.91

New Canaan. Cong. Ch.                           26.25

New Britain. South Cong. Ch., (2 of
  which _for Hampton N. and A. Inst._)         186.91

New Britain. First Church of Christ             46.70

New Haven. Humprey St. Cong. Ch.,
  to const. REV. FRANK R. LUCKEY L.M.           75.60

New London. First Cong. Ch.                     61.24

New London. J.N. Harris,
  _for Talladega C._.                           10.00

New Milford. First Cong. Ch., 66.72;
  Miss Lucy Turrill, 15                         71.72

Newington. Cong. Ch.                            12.20

Norfolk. "Friend," 17.50, _for Indian Sch'p_;
  Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 20,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                       37.50

Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                        17.05

Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch.                    580.05

Norwich. Sab. Sch. of Buckingham Ch.,
  _for Teacher_, 25; Mrs. Frances D. Leavens,
  2; James Dana Coit, _for Sch'p Fund_, 1,
  _for Indian M._                               28.00

Oronoque. Mrs. Mary E. Curtis                    5.00

Plantsville. Ladies Ind'l Soc., _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                              35.00

Plantsville. Collected by "little Reuben"
  Twitchell, _for Rosebud Indian M._              0.30

Plainville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Oaks, N.C._                              20.00

Plainville. Mrs. S.H. Dunham                     0.50

Plymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                12.00

Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                        22.21

Rocky Hill. Cong. Ch.                           10.00

Rockville. Union Cong. Ch.                      41.43

Salisbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Teacher, Indian M._                      25.00

Saybrook. Mrs. G.F. Ward, 30, to const.
  J.L. HAYDEN L.M.; Cong. ch. and Soc.,
  20.74                                         50.74

Scitico. Mrs. Chas. E. Stowe                     1.50

Sharon. Cong. Ch.                               10.00

Simsbury. James Reid, _for Indian M._            1.50

Somers. Hon. H.R. Kibbe, 10; Mrs. H.R.
  Kibbe, 10; E. Cutler, 1; E.P. Russell, 1;
  Halsey Huff, 1; Col. Amos Pease,
  1; Cong. Ch., 7.90                            32.90

Southbury. Cong. Ch.                             7.77

South Manchester. First Cong. Ch.               74.65

South Norwalk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.           75.00

Talcottville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               180.75

Terryville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. ad'l,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                        2.46

Thomaston. P. Darrow                            11.10

Torrington. First Cong. Ch.                      5.00

Unionville. First Cong. Ch. of Christ           20.00

Vernon. Cong. Ch.                               10.00

Voluntown and Sterling. Cong. Ch. ad'l           1.00

Washington. F.A. Frisbie                         1.00

Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch.                     30.00

Westbrook. "Christmas Offering from a
  Lady."                                         2.00

West Hartford. First Ch. of Christ             128.42

West Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tougaloo U._                             52.00

West Torrington. Ladies' Soc. of First
  Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._        12.67

Wethersfield. Miss Emma C. Harris' S.S.
  Class, 2.80; Miss Mary J. Harris' S.S.
  Class, 1, _for Rosebud Indian M._              3.80

Willimantic. Willimantic Linen Co., Box
  Thread, _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Winchester. "Young People's Mission
  Circle," by Miss S.J. Marsh, _for Teacher,
  Santee Indian Sch._                           15.00

Windsor Locks, "A Friend."                       2.00

Windham Cong. Ch.                                5.21

Winsted. First Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._
  and to const. FRED. LOU GRANT, L.M.           57.00

Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                               7.20

Woodbury. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of First
  Cong. Ch., _for Thomasville, Ga._             25.00

Woodstock. First Cong. Ch., bal. to const.
  MRS. ERASTUS H. BLACKMER L.M.                 26.54

----. ----, _for Home Station,
  Indian M._                                    75.00

----. Woman's Home Missionary
  Union of Conn., by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss,
  _for ed. of girls, Williamsburg, Ky._         10.95



NEW YORK, $4,179.17.

Antwerp. First Cong. Ch.                        31.27

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for purchase
  of Land in Williamsburg, Ky._              1,800.00

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Ballard
  Building, Macon, Ga._                      1,615.00

Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 75; Central
  Cong. Ch. ad'l, 5; Sab. Sch. of Central
  Cong. Ch., 37.50; Lee Ave. Cong. Ch.,
  10.25; Wm. H. Kent, Bdl of C.                127.75

Brooklyn. Mrs. Joseph H. Adams, _for
  Teacher, Indian M._                           25.00

Brooklyn. King's Daughters, by Miss A.H.
  Benjamin, _for Williamsburg Academy, Ky._     16.00

Chateaugay. Joseph Shaw                          5.00

Cincinnatus. Cong. Ch.                          25.00

Clifton Springs. Rev. W.W. Warner                8.00

Coventry. Samuel A. Beardslee                   10.00

Fairport. Primary Class Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  40, _for Santee Indian Sch._; Contents
  Birthday Box, 4                               44.00

Fairport. A.M. Loomis                            5.00

Frankfort. Dewey Hopkins                         1.50

Fredonia. Wm. McKinstry, 25; Sab. Sch.
  of Pres. Ch., 25, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      50.00

Homer. Cong. Ch.                                15.58

LeRoy. Miss Delia A. Phillips, 10;
  Mrs. M.J. McEwen, 5                           15.00

Lima. Mrs. A.E. Miner                            1.00

Millers Place. Cong. Soc.                        9.75

Munnsville. Cong. Ch.                            6.00

New York. Pilgrim Ch., 106.25; Gen'l
  Clinton B. Fisk, 60, to const. MISS M.E.
  McLANE and Miss M.A. KINNEY L.M.'s           166.25

New York. Mrs. H.B. Spelman, _for Student
  Aid, Atlanta, Ga._                            25.00

New York. Miss Georgiana Kendall,
  _for Santee Chapel, Indian M._                10.00

North Walton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.             9.88

Ogdensburg. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.              9.00

Port Chester. Milo Mead                          4.00

Perry Center. Ladles' Benev. Soc., Bbl.
  of C., _for Tougaloo U._

Rodman. "Willing Workers," Bbl. of C.,
  _for Talladega C._

Sag Harbor. Charles N. Brown, to const.
  REV. JOHN JAY HARRISON L.M.                   30.00

Sherburne. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of
  Articles _for Fair, Talladega C._

Smyrna. Cong. Ch. to const. L.L. FERRIS
  L.M., 50; Upperville Sab. Sch., 3             53.00

Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Ch.                  5.00

Walton. H.E. St. John, _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._                             5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Binghamton. Helpers H.M.
      Soc., to const. MRS. W.G.
      TROWBRIDGE L.M.                30.00

    Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Puritan
      Ch.                            11.55

    Paris. "Judd Mission Band,"
      _for Rosebud Indian M._         9.64

                                    ------      51.19


NEW JERSEY, $15.25.

Arlington. "Ladies' Mission Band,"
  _for Student Aid, Beach Inst._                 1.25

Jersey City. Waverly Cong. Ch.                  10.00

Orange Valley. Two Scholars in Sab.
  Sch., by Miss Annie Bradshaw                   1.00

Orange. Mrs. Austin Adams, Box of
  Stockings, 123 pairs, new

Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.,2 Bbl's Christmas
  gifts and Articles for Fair,
  _for Talladega C._

Roseville. Florence C. Lyman, _for Indian
  M._, 2; Lucy I. Seymour, 1                     3.00



PENNSYLVANIA, $42.10.

Arnot. Katie Barr on True Blue Card              2.10

Bradford. Charles E. Webster                     4.00

Carlisle. W.W. Woodruff                         10.00

North East. Miss C.A. Talcott                    1.00

Philadelphia. Susan Longstreth,
 _for Chinese M._                               25.00

West Chester. Geo. B. Thomas, Lot of
  Pear, Peach and Cherry Trees
  _for Talladega, Ala._



OHIO, $885.05.

Akron. Sab. Sch of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    50.00

Chardon. Cong. Ch.                               5.03

Charlestown. Cong. Ch.                           4.35

Chatham Center. Cong. Ch., (10 of which
  from Luther Clapp and 10 from Mrs.
  Mary Clapp), to const. Miss EDITH
  THATCHER L.M.                                 40.00

Cincinnati. Walnut Hills Cong. Ch. ad'l
  5.42; Mrs. Betsey E. Aydelott, 5.              9.42

Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch. 210.91,
  to const MRS. MARTIN L. BERGER, MRS.
  ALVA BRADLEY, MISS E.J. BARNUM,
  MRS. WILLIAM E. HART, MISS ELIZABETH
  C. AVERY, MISS SARAH HALL, MRS.
  THEODORE M. BATES L.M.'s.; Sab. Sch.
  of Zion Cong. Ch., 11; Plymouth Ch.,
  7.64. Mrs. E.A. Clark, 50c.                  230.05

Cleveland. M.L. Berger, D.D., 6,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                6.00

Cleveland. "Friends," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 15.00

Donnelsville. Ella Purssell                      5.00

Elyria. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., Box of
  Basted Work, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._

Florence. "C.S.F."                              40.00

Geneva. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._

Greenfield. "Coral Workers" of Cong.
  Ch., _for Dakota Indian M._                    5.00

Hartford. Cong. Ch.                             10.00

Hudson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                       10.00

Kelley's Island. Rev. C.H. Phelps                5.00

Lodi. Ladies M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Box of
  C., _for Tougaloo U._

Mallet Creek. Mrs. J.A. Bingham                  5.00

Marietta. Mary B. Dimond, Bundle C.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Mesopotamia. Cong. Ch.                           7.67

North Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. ad'l                 1.10

Oberlin. Dudley Allen, M.D., to const.
  PROF. F.F. JEWETT L.M.                        30.00

Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._               10.00

Oberlin. Mrs. Maria Goodell Frost,
  _for Woman's Work_                             5.00

Oberlin. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._

Perrysburg. Rev. J.K. Deering                    2.00

Rochester. Cong. Ch.                             2.68

Tallmadge. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc.,
  _for Memphis, Tenn._                          20.00

Wellington. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
  CARRIE VISHER L.M.                            50.00

West Williamsfield. Cong. Ch.                    2.25

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Cleveland. Ladies H.M. Soc. of
      Euclid Ave. Ch., (40
      of which _for Dakota Bibles
      and Primers_)                 100.00

    Cleveland. Y.P.S.C.E. of
      First Cong. Ch.                 1.50

    North Bloomfield. "King's
      Daughters," _for Student
      Aid, Storrs Sch._              12.00

                                    ------     113.50

                                            ---------
                                              $685.05

ESTATE.

Mount Vernon. Estate of William
  Turner, by George J. Turner                 $200.00

                                            ---------

                                              $885.05


INDIANA, $10.00.

Bloomington. Mrs. A.B. Woodford,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    10.00



ILLINOIS, $1,482.96.

Amboy. Pkg. Patchwork, _for Mobile, Ala._

Batavia. Cong. Ch.                               5.00

Beecher. Cong. Ch.                               8.32

Bunker Hill. W.M.U. of Cong. Ch.,
  Pkg. of C., _for Tougaloo U._

Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 79.53; New
  England Cong. Ch., 40.15; South Park
  Cong. Ch., 12; "Cash," 1; "Lamp
  Lighters Band," Lincoln Park Ch., 7.09       139.77

Chillicothe. R.W. Gillian, Bbl. Books,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Creston. Cong. Ch.                              15.90

Danville. Mrs. A.M. Swan                         5.00

Elgin. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 13.31,
  _for Student Aid in the South_,
  and 12.64 _for Indian M._                     25.95

Elgin. Mrs. E.E.C. Borden                       25.00

Galesburg. Rev. Geo. T. Holyoke                  5.00

Jacksonville. Cong. Ch.                          3.00

LaGrange. L.M. Union                             5.00

Lowell. "V.G.L."                                 5.00

Malta. Cong. Ch.                                 5.78

Oak Park. First Cong. Ch., 143.59;
  Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 29.46                173.05

Oneida. Cong. Ch.                               20.00

Ottawa. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Fisk U._                                 25.00

Payson. Cong. Ch.                               15.14

Paxton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Sch'p Endowment Fund, Fisk U._           10.00

Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch.                          5.00

Princeton. Mrs. P.B. Cross                      12.00

Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                   47.78

Rockford. Mrs. M.H. Penfield and Miss
  M.F. Penfield, _for Sch'p Endowment
  Fund, Fisk U._                                25.00

Stillman Valley. Lovejoy Johnson, 100;
  Cong. Ch., 37.97                             137.97

Sycamore. Henry Wood                            10.00

Tonica. Mrs. K.J. Moore                          1.00

Turner. Mrs. R. Currier                          5.00

Wyanet. Richard Herrick on
  "True Blue" Card                               3.90

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Treas.
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Buda                              7.40

    Elgin. First Cong. Ch.           15.00

    Hamilton                          2.50

    Milburn                          25.00

    Oak Park                         27.00

    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._     26.50

    Rockford. First Cong. Ch.        15.00

                                    ------     118.40

                                            ---------

                                              $857.96

ESTATE.

Chicago. Estate of Mrs. Ruth A.H. Cook,
  by A.L. Sweet, Ad'm                          625.00

                                            ---------

                                            $1,482.96



MICHIGAN, $395.67.

Battle Creek. "A Friend."                        0.50

Dexter. Dennis Warner                           20.00

Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                   14.28

Grand Blanc. Ladies' Soc., by Mrs. J.H.
  Cartwright, _for Athens, Ala._                 2.75

Grand Ledge. Ira P. Holcomb                      5.00

Grand Rapids. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.            25.00

Greenville. Cong. Ch.                           60.00

Hancock. First Cong. Ch.                       106.80

Kalamazoo. T. Hudson, (50 of which
  _for Robert Sengstacke_)                     100.00

Lansing. Plymouth Ch.                           32.84

Pine Creek. Cong. Ch., _for
 Wilmington, N.C._                              12.00

Salem. Mrs. Chas. McLaughlin                     6.50

Tecumseh. Rev. James Vincent                    10.00



IOWA, $331.52.

Ames. First Cong. Ch.                           12.80

Castalia. W.H. Baker                             1.00

Charles City. Cong. Ch.                          5.00

Clear Lake. Christian Endeavor Soc., by
  Mary J. Thompson, _for Beach Inst.,
  Savannah, Ga._                                 2.70

Cresco. Willard Converse                         5.00

Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                               21.80

Durant. Mrs. L.M. Dutton                         2.00

Eldora. First Cong. Ch.                         20.26

Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch.                           4.75

Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                             12.41

Hickory Grove. Cong. Ch.                         2.15

Independence. Rev. W.S. Potwin,
  _for Student Loan Fund, Talladega C._         25.00

Independence. New England Cong. Ch.,
  6.90; Pleasant Prairie Ch., 3.70              10.60

Muscatine. German Cong. Ch.                      2.00

Oskaloosa. Cong. Ch.                            11.00

Rock Rapids. L.B. Soc.                           5.00

Spencer. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                 10.00

Waucoma. Bbl. Of C., _for Savannah, Ga._

Wayne. Cong. Ch.                                10.85

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Cedar Rapids. Mrs. Louisa
    B. Stephens                      50.00

    Chester Center. W.M.S.            0.25

    Dubuque. Sab. Sch. of
    Cong. Ch.                         7.00

    Grinnell. W.H.M.U.                7.69

    Genoa Bluff. W.M.S.               2.10

    Rockford. L.M.S.                  0.16

                                    ------      67.20

                                            ---------

                                              $231.52

ESTATE.

Toledo. Estate of Mrs. Elizabeth N.
  Barker, by L. Clark, Ex.                     100.00

                                            ---------

                                              $331.52



WISCONSIN, $218.95.

Beloit. First Cong. Ch., 70; Sab. Sch.
  of First Cong. Ch., 28.04; Second Cong.
  Ch., 28.88                                   126.92

Eau Clair. "Cheerful Givers." by Bertha
  L. Duganne, Treas.                             6.75

Fox Lake. Cong. Ch.                             11.01

Green Bay. Mrs. J.M. Smith and
  "Friends." Box of C., etc.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Green Bay. Pkg. Patchwork,
  _for Mobile, Ala._

Lancaster. Cong. Ch., to const.
  CHARLES H. BAXTER L.M.                        53.23

Menomonie. Cong. Ch.                             9.13

Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch.                            11.91



MINNESOTA, $239.40.

Duluth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                       52.44

Faribault. Cong. Ch., _for Jewell Mem. Hall,
  Grand View, Tenn._                            40.71

Glyndon. Cong. Ch., 2.31; Union Sab.
  Sch., 74c.                                     3.05

Grand Meadow. "Mission Band," Bbl. C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Litchfield. "Mission Band," 21.50;
  "Two Friends," 11, _for Meridian, Miss._      32.50

Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                       14.00

Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                     41.85

Saint Cloud. First Cong. Ch.                     6.85

Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary
  Society, by Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.        24.00

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.,
      Y.L.M.S.                       11.00

    Minneapolis. Mrs. H.L. Chase      8.00

    Minneapolis. Park Ave. M.S.       5.00

                                     -----      48.00



MISSOURI, $110.81.

Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                   105.81

Kansas City. Miss S.O. Hill,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                5.00



ARKANSAS, $1.55.

Little Rock. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.              1.55



KANSAS, $74.00.

Brookville. Mrs. Emma E. Stevens                 3.00

Emporia. First Cong. Ch.                        61.00

Highland. Miss Annie Kloss,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    10.00



DAKOTA, $10.10.

Buffalo Gap. Cong. Ch.                           5.10

Fargo. Cong. Ch., 4; Y.P.S.C.E., 1               5.00



NEBRASKA, $31.98.

Exeter. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.         5.00

Oxford. F.A. Wood, _for Indian M._              10.00

York. First Cong. Ch.                           16.98



COLORADO, $25.13.

Colorado Springs. Sab. Sch of Cong. Ch.          7.78

Denver. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong, Ch.,
  _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                5.00

Highland Lake. Sab. Sch. Miss'y Soc., by
  Harry Oviatt, Treas.                          10.35

Pueblo. J.A. and H. Dunlap                       2.00



UTAH, $8.75.

Salt Lake City. Phillips Cong. Ch.               8.75



CALIFORNIA, $368.55.

San Francisco Receipts of the Cal.
  Chinese Mission. (See items below.)          368.55



OREGON, $96.90.

Portland. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
  W.P. JONES L.M., 55; Dr. Z.B. Nichols
  of First Cong. Ch., 39.90; W.H.
  Holcomb, Sen., 2                              96.90



WASHINGTON TERR., $10.00.

Anacortes. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                    10.00



DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $52.00.

Washington, Mt. Pleasant Cong. Ch., to
  const. A.B. CHATFIELD L.M.                    52.00



KENTUCKY, $7.46.

Berea. "The Church of Berea."                    5.80

Woodbridge. Rev. K.H. Bullock                    1.66



TENNESSEE, $30.60.

Glen Mary. Cong. Ch.                            23.60

Jonesboro. Cong. Ch.                             6.00

Rhea Springs. James Martin                       1.00



NORTH CAROLINA, $50.75.

Hillsboro. Carrie E. Jones                       2.00

Oaks. Miss E.W. Douglas, 30; Cong. Ch.,
5                                               35.00

Troy. "Friends."                                 2.00

Wilmington. Miss H.L. Fitts, 10; Miss
  A.E. Farrington, 1.75, _for Student Aid_      11.75


GEORGIA, $2.25.

McIntosh. Bbl. of C., from unknown
  source

Marietta. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., 75cts.
  each                                           1.50

Savannah. M.R. Montgomery, _for Student
  Aid, Beach Inst._                              0.75


ALABAMA, $4.98.

Selma. First Cong. Ch.                           1.70

Talladega. "Friends," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                  3.28


FLORIDA, $24.00.

Georgiana. F.W. Munson                           2.00

Lake Helen. F.E. Nettleton                      15.00

Winter Park. W.H.M. Union, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                             7.00


LOUISIANA, $6.05.

New Orleans. Central Ch.                         6.05

                                               ------

Donations                                  $17,542.27

                                    Estates    930.00

                                               ------

                                           $18,472.27


INCOME, $1,791.94.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._          742.22

DeForest Fund, _for President's
  Chair, Talladega C._               22.50

C.F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._    50.00

General Endowment Fund               80.00

Graves Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                               125.00

Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._      54.72

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._      75.00

Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta
  U._                                12.50

Howard Theo, Fund, _for Howard U._  397.50

H.W. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for
  Talladega C._                      30.00

Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis,
  Tenn._                             95.00

Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                                 9.00

Scholarship Fund, _for
  Straight U._                       27.50

Theological Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                                21.00

Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._    50.00

                                    ------   1,791.94


TUITION, $6,454.77

Williamsburg, Tenn. Tuition          81.00

Grand View, Tenn., Tuition           38.50

Jellico, Tenn., Tuition              29.25

Jonesboro, Tenn., Tuition           112.97

Memphis, Tenn., Tuition             878.00

Nashville, Tenn., Tuition         1,404.56

Pleasant Hill, Tenn., Tuition        17.25

Wilmington, N.C., Tuition           350.35

Charleston, S.C., Tuition           443.25

Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch.,
  Tuition                           931.05

McIntosh, Ga., Tuition               30.25

Thomasville, Ga., Tuition            81.50

Macon, Ga., Tuition                 531.00

Savannah, Ga., Tuition              409.34

Athens, Ala., Tuition                31.60

Talladega, Ala., Tuition             99.85

Marion, Ala., Tuition               108.52

Mobile, Ala., Tuition               287.75

New Orleans, La., Tuition           223.00

Meridian, Miss., Tuition             42.80

Tougaloo, Miss., Tuition            109.25

Austin, Texas, Tuition              210.33

Robbins, Texas, Tuition               3.40

                                    ------   6,454.77

                                             --------

United States Government for the education
  of Indians                                 3,193.45

                                           ----------

Total for December                         $29,912.48

                                           ==========


SUMMARY.[7]

Donations                                  $48,804.26

Estates                                      4,891.29

                                           ----------

                                           $53,695.55

Income                                       3,614.66

Tuition                                      6,454.77

United States Government appropriation
  for Indians                                3,193.45

                                           ----------

Total from Oct. 1 to Dec. 30               $66,958.43

                                           ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for December                     158.33

Previously received                             72.15

                                             --------

Total                                         $230.48

                                             ========

[Footnote 7: RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSIONS, between
Sept. 21, 1888 and Nov. 20, 1888, to meet expenses of year ending
Aug. 31, 1888.

    FROM LOCAL MISSIONS.--Alameda, 3.--Los
      Angeles, Ann. Mem's, 30.--Sacramento,
      Ann. Mem's, etc. 10.75, Chinese
      Friends, 10, bal. to const. REV. W.C.
      MERRILL L.M.--San Buenaventura,
      Ann. Mem's, etc. 54.90, SOO HOO SING
      KAY, to const. himself L.M., 25;--Santa
      Barbara, Ann. Mem's, 2.--Stockton,
      Ann. Mem's, etc., 15. Cong. Ch., 4.80        155.45

    FROM CHURCHES.--Bethany Cong. Ch., 5.--Haywards,
      Cong. Ch., 4. Oakland, First
      Cong. Ch. ad'l, 92.10--Plymouth Ave.
      Cong. Ch., Rev. Geo. Mooar, D.D., 15; Rev.
      J.A. Benton, D.D., 5; Rev. I.E. Dwinell,
      D.D., 5; Mrs. S. Richards, 5; Mrs. A.B.
      Sargent, 5; Mrs. M.L. Merritt, 2.--San
      Francisco, Bethany Ch. Chinese Off's, 3;
      American Members, Mrs. Helen P.
      Searls, 3; W.C.P., 5, toward Rev W.C.
      Merrill's L.M. To const. Rev J.H.
      Harwood, D.D., L.M., 25.--Saratoga
      Cong. Ch. ad'l, 2.--Vacaville, Cong.
      Ch. 12                                       188.10

    INDIVIDUAL HELPERS.--Messrs. Williams,
      Dimond & Co., 10; Messrs. Redington &
      Co., 10; J.J. Vasconcellos, 5    25.00

                                                 --------

    Total                                         $358.55

                                                 ========
]


DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND FOR COLORED PEOPLE

Income for December, 1888,
  from investments                          $2,325.00



  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  56 Reade St., N.Y.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 43, NO. 02, FEBRUARY, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.