Produced by Cornell university, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Distributed Proofreaders Team





The American Missionary

JANUARY, 1889.

VOL. XLIII. NO. 1.




CONTENTS


PICTURE OF MR. DANIEL HAND


EDITORIAL.

  NEW YEAR'S GREETINGS

  FINANCIAL--LARGE GIFTS OF THE WEALTHY

  THE SOUTHERN SITUATION

  PARAGRAPHS--ITEMS FROM THE FIELD

  DEATH OF MRS. GEO. A. WOODARD

  SYSTEMATIC SPENDING. REV. C.J. RYDER


THE CHINESE.

  SCRAPS FROM CORRESPONDENCE


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  STATE ORGANIZATIONS

  ANNUAL MEETING

  MOUNTAIN WHITE WORK. MRS. A.A. MYERS

  NEEDS OF COLORED WOMEN AND GIRLS. MRS. G.W. MOORE


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association


PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LLD., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  J.E. RANKIN,
  WM. H. WARD,
  J.W. COOPER,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


  _For Two Years._

  LYMAN ABBOTT,
  CHAS. A. HULL,
  J.R. DANFORTH,
  CLINTON B. FISK,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER.

  _For One Year._

  S.B. HALLIDAY,
  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELBERT B. MONROE.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions.

 Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS.
  Prof. EDWARD S. HALL.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.


[Illustration: Daniel Hand]


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. XLIII.      JANUARY, 1889.        No. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

We present to our readers, on the opposite page, a picture of Mr. Daniel
Hand from a photograph taken some time ago. It presents the likeness of a
man of fine physical proportions and with energy and intelligence
impressed on the features. The signature at the bottom of the picture is
copied from one of Mr. Hand's recent letters, and shows the remarkable
physical vigor of a man in his 88th year.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YEAR'S GREETINGS.

The New Year opens upon us auspiciously, and we send forth our joyous
greetings to our patrons at home, and to our fellow workers in the field.
Above all we thank God for putting us into this ministry for the poor and
the ignorant, and for the success granted to us in prosecuting it. We
have had sorrows and anxieties, but they have been followed by
consolations and deliverances. The hand that penned the "Happy New Year"
in our MISSIONARY for last January, is now silent in the grave, but the
memory of Brother Powell's life and character is so precious that it
mitigates our loss. The yellow fever prevented the opening of many of our
schools, and awakened fears of widespread hindrance to our work
throughout the South; but the scourge was restrained, and the work now
goes on prosperously. Our last fiscal year drew towards its close with
the cloud of a large debt looming up, but our friends responded so
generously to our appeals, that the year ended with a debt so small as to
be only a salutary warning.

But the crowning mercy of the year came at our Annual Meeting, when we
were able to announce the gift of over a million of dollars from that
generous friend of the poor Negro, Mr. Daniel Hand. It is a wonderful
gift, and comes in a good way. The income only can be used, and that will
do just so much more for the Negro, and will not be applied to work now
in progress. We are tempted to fear that our patrons will diminish their
gifts because Mr. Hand has been so liberal. But we will have faith in
God, who has entrusted us with this great work, and we will enter upon
our new year with the full confidence that every friend of the
Association who appreciates our responsibilities to Christ and the
Nation, will decide that his gifts to us shall be increased and not
diminished in this year of grace 1889.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Financial._

Emphasis is added to the closing words of the preceding article by the
report of our Treasurer for the first two months of our fiscal year,
October and November. The receipts for those two months were, from
donations, $31,261.99; from estates, $3,961.29; from income, $1,822.72,
making a total for current work of $37,046. The Association needs $62,500
for these two months. Let us remind our patrons that Mr. Hand's gift will
do its own work and not theirs. We think they will feel that it is only
honorable to let Mr. Hand's benefaction add so much new work, and that it
should not be used simply to relieve others. The great, pressing, and
stupendous work which rests upon this Association as the representative
of the churches, must not stand still. Patriots and statesmen are
becoming alarmed at the Southern situation, and while they will do what
they can to meet the emergency, we believe that the grand solution of the
problem is in the Christian enlightenment and the industrial progress of
the Negro. May God grant that the Christians of this land may not fail to
see their special responsibilities and to meet them in the spirit of
Christian liberality and self-sacrifice.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Large Gifts of the Wealthy._

It is refreshing to find in this grasping, selfish and money-making world
that there are wealthy men who amass fortunes and use them for noble
purposes. It is said that growing wealth only tightens the grip on the
money and hardens the heart against the calls of benevolence. But the
examples are accumulating that give shining evidence that there are noble
exceptions. Mr. Hand has added his name to the number. He knows the needs
of the colored people, and he devotes a vast fortune to their benefit.
But Mr. Hand has not exhausted the opportunities, even in the range of
the work of this Association, for blessing needy races of men, or of
aiding in the varied forms of effort for the colored people. The mountain
regions of the South present an unique and promising field of effort. The
inhabitants are a noble people, descendants of some of the best races
that settled America. Their mountain isolation separated them from the
people around them. The want of schools and churches left them ignorant,
their thin mountain lands kept them poor; but they never held slaves and
they were loyal to the Union in the war. Railroads now penetrate their
mountains and valleys, and the hitherto unused wealth of mines and timber
is brought to light. A new future opens out to these people, and the
question is, "Shall that future be one of prosperity and piety, or one of
intemperance and infidelity?" Some other man wise and wealthy can do for
these people what Daniel Hand has done for the primary and industrial
education of the Negroes. But this does not exhaust the opening for large
investments in the work of the Association. The Indians are fewer in
number than the blacks or whites of the South, and their future will
sooner be determined by their being incorporated into the national life
as citizens, yet that problem is not settled, and a large fund could be
wisely used for their benefit. Then, too, our higher schools and colleges
need endowment, and our church work should be _indefinitely_
expanded.

If this review does not succeed in drawing large gifts for these several
objects, it may at least serve to show that our wants are not all
provided for, and that smaller contributors have still the duty and the
privilege of aiding by gifts and prayer this good work of patriotism and
Christianity.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTHERN SITUATION.

The position of the South is becoming once more clearly defined. Before
the war, it was fully formulated thus: The Negroes are an inferior race,
and slavery is their divinely ordained condition. To this was added: The
Negro question is purely local, and with it no one outside of the South
has any right to interfere. To these axioms agreed the press, the pulpit
and the politician. But the war came as an earthquake, with the utter
upheaval of these firm foundations.

During the years of reconstruction and political agitation, uncertainty
prevailed, but now again the Southern position is becoming settled. It is
the old position with a variation. It runs: The Negroes are an inferior
race, and must be held as a peasant class in subjection to the superior
white race. To this the warning is again added: This is purely a domestic
affair, and all outsiders must keep tongues and hands off. This revised
version of the old theory is proclaimed by Senator Eustis in his now
somewhat famous article in the _Forum_. More recently it has been
re-affirmed in the fervid eloquence of Mr. Grady, of Atlanta, in his
address at Dallas, Texas.

This is the same orator (he is an orator) who a few years since
electrified the whole country by his speech at the New England dinner, on
the "New South." But the logic of Southern events has driven him down
again to the platform of the "Old South." More recently still, the
Governor of South Carolina, in his message to the Legislature, has taken
the same position.

These three gentlemen, representing the press and the politician, are
sustained by the pulpit in the South. For example, the Presbyterian
church South repels all overtures for re-union with the Presbyterian
church North, because such a re-union would involve a practical
recognition of the equal manhood of the inferior race. The Presbyterian
church South does not stand alone on this platform. Other denominations
are arrayed side by side with it, and we fear that even the
Congregationalists in the South, with two Conferences in the same State,
one white and the other black, are in danger of being numbered with them.

This is the Southern position. It portends the renewal of the old
antagonism. It repels the North, denying its right to interfere, and thus
draws again the sectional line; and above all, it sets up sharply the
antagonism of races, consigning the Negro permanently to an inferior
place. This implies, of course, that if the Negro will not quietly accept
this place, he must be compelled to do so by force of arms, and in this
struggle the North is notified that it has no right to interfere. We can
only express our amazement at this theory! With the memory of the war so
fresh, when the North broke over all warnings against interference, and
stepped in to aid the helpless slave, can the South now hope to make
these warnings any more efficacious? Can it hope that the North will
acquiesce in a quasi slavery, that sets aside substantially all that it
gained and established by the long war?

And if the struggle comes again, what hope of success can the South
cherish? If in the last national struggle, it was overpowered when the
slave, as Mr. Grady acknowledges, guarded the house while his master
fought for his perpetual enslavement, what can it do when the Negroes
have tasted freedom for a quarter of a century, and now number nearly as
many as the whites in the South? It is for the white people of the South
to say whether that struggle shall come. The North does not desire it,
the Negro does not desire it, and we sincerely believe that a large share
of the people of the South do not want it. Rev. Dr. Haygood, the
efficient agent of the Slater Fund, in a recent article in _The
Independent_, in reply to Senator Eustis, voices, as we hope, the
sentiments of thoughtful and influential Southerners. But it remains to
be seen whether these wise counselors will be heard. Such voices were
uttered before the war, but they were drowned in the noise of sectional
hatred and the imperious demands of slavery. God grant that the sad
lesson of the past may be heeded.

In the meantime, the A.M.A. will continue its efforts at what it believes
to be the true solution of the Southern problem--the Christian,
educational and industrial advancement of the colored people. With the
help of the great benefaction of Mr. Hand, whose money was made in the
South, and is now consecrated to the South, we shall go forward with
greater zeal and encouragement. We are not partizans; we are not
sectionalists. We are working for the good of both whites and blacks, and
for the peace and prosperity of our common country.

The election of Benjamin Harrison as President of the United States, and
the restoration of the Republican party to power, awakens special
attention to the probable attitude of both towards the great Southern
problem. We have no opinion to express on the subject, and we have no
interest in it as a mere party question, but only as it may lead to the
sober and earnest investigation of that transcendently important problem
which requires the unbiased and honest consideration of the patriot, the
statesman and the Christian.

       *       *       *       *       *

The combination of the Christian powers of Europe for the suppression of
the nefarious African slave-trade is a measure sanctioned by Christianity
and humanity, and is in the interest of the world's commerce. The effort
can be hopefully undertaken. The abolition of slavery in the Western
Hemisphere--once the great slave mart--confines the outlet of the traffic
to the eastern coast of Africa, and the blockade can be made more
effective than when both sides of the great continent had to be guarded.

       *       *       *       *       *

An esteemed Christian brother, who made his wife a Life Member of the
Association in 1854, and who has added a member to the list each year
since by his personal gift, speaks of the pleasure he finds in thus
contributing to our treasury, and at the same time enlisting others in
our work. We commend to our patrons this helpful and agreeable way of
doing good. Try it.

       *       *       *       *       *

ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

From a teacher in one of our schools in the mountain country:

"As I go among the homes I continually see something new which shows me
how great are the needs of the people here. The primitive ways and
simplicity of the mountain people strike me and I sometimes imagine that
I am in a country a century behind the times. Last week I made a call at
the home of one of my pupils whose mother was sick. As I entered the room
I could not distinguish the faces of those who sat about the fire, for
the room had no windows. The only light that came in was through a door
in an outer room, and it seemed to let in more cold than light. I
wondered how much work or enjoyment could be got out of such dark, small
quarters, while the sick woman told of her struggle with sickness and
poverty. She also gave me some history of her early life, which showed a
great lack of necessary instruction in what are the best things. The
children of this home look like sickly plants which have always lived in
the dark and which have never felt the invigorating influence of God's
beautiful sunshine. We are praying that the sunshine of God's love may be
felt in the hearts of this people, even if there are no windows in their
homes to let it in."


From a pastor in Kentucky:

"We are busily at work in this mountain country, and as we think of wider
possibilities for the mountain boys, you cannot imagine our gratitude in
view of our hopes that a new industrial department will be opened. It has
been the subject of many a prayer in the closet and in teachers'
meetings, and we feel that all that is needed will be supplied according
to His riches who gave himself for us. He has heard our united petitions
for a pastor to gather the straying flock and relieve our overworked
missionaries. We held our weekly teachers' meeting on Friday. Last
evening as we were sitting together as usual, one spoke of the coming
pastor, when lo, he was ushered in. He has really come. We rejoice in our
work, but we see so much just ahead. I long for the time to come when
this interesting people shall be a 'peculiar' people in the better
sense."


From a teacher at Jonesboro, Tenn.:

"Each week brings new accessions to the school: there are now nearly a
hundred enrolled. All the seats in the primary room are in use, so that
when Miss Smith has a full school she has to seat some of her scholars in
chairs. The seats in Miss Page's room are also full. We have eight pupils
who room here and board themselves. Four of them come from Scott Co.,
Va., coming ninety miles. They are young men and women, but they have had
very little opportunity for education. They are anxious to learn and try
to carefully obey the rules of the school. We hope they will gain much
from church and Sunday-school and the influences thrown around them here,
as well as the lessons from the school room. Yesterday we had
applications from four others from the same region for accommodations--a
young married man and his little daughter, seven years old--a young man
and a young woman. We said, 'Come and we will do our best for you;' but
if others apply we shall have to tell them we are full. These are just
the kind of people we want; eager to learn and willing to do the best
they can."


From a school in North Carolina:

"Your letter of the 28th, informing us that we can have assistance from
the Hand Fund for a certain number of pupils, is received, and we have
had a continual thanksgiving ever since. If I could tell you how the
mothers looked when I told them, and if I could put down the tones of
their voices as well as their words, you would be sure that the help is
appreciated."


The pastor of the church and teacher of the Theological Department of
Straight University writes us:

"The religious interest has so deepened that for several weeks I have
been preaching three times a week. Four or five prayer meetings have been
started by the students of their own accord in each other's rooms. Eleven
united with us on profession of faith at our last communion, and as many
more have made a start at different meetings, and will unite with us at
the next communion. A remarkable feature about the work is the fact that
numbers of the older students who are most deeply interested are Roman
Catholics. One young man who united with us is a Spaniard from Matamoras,
Mexico, and has been educated as a Roman Catholic. I believe he may be
counted on to do loyal service in his native city. In this way the A.M.A.
is ever doing 'foreign work,' and work which I believe will tell in
Mexico, Cuba, and the Central American States.

"If some benevolent friend in the North would send us twenty-five copies
of Stalker's Life of Christ, it would be of great help in this work."


Information respecting a very interesting revival of religion comes to us
from Sherwood, Tenn.

Increased religious interest is reported from Fisk University, Nashville,
Tenn.

The teachers in the Normal School at Lexington are taking new courage in
their work in view of their increasing facilities.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our young men who expects to take up missionary work this fall
thus expresses himself: "I don't suppose that I know very much; but one
thing I know, and that is the Dakota Bible. I can read that to the people
and talk about it in my own language, and they can understand me, and
that is what they need; they need the Bible."--_Word Carrier._

       *       *       *       *       *

A CHINAMAN'S VIEW OF A FAMILIAR TEXT.--The writer was for a time a pupil
in the White Street Mission School in New York, but he is now a
prosperous laundryman at Kingston, N.Y. In a recent letter to one of his
former teachers, he gives the following bit of New Testament exegesis: "I
led the Young Men's Christian Association meeting on the Sunday before
January 11th. The subject which I gave out: 'The Christian must be born
twice;' and also read the Scriptures in chapter iii of the Gospel St.
John, and explain to them. I said if a man in this world born twice, he
only die once, and if a man born once he die twice. I mean if a man born
twice he must born again of the spirit; his soul shall save; that is, he
only die once. If a man born once his body shall die and his soul also
perish; that is, he die twice. After the meeting was pass one of the old
gentleman came to me and said, 'Are you a missionary?' I answered him
'No.' I said 'I am a laundryman.' And good people thought I was
missionary."--_The Foreign Missionary._

Full of encouragement to the workers for the Chinese here in America is
the fact that most of the students entering the new Christian college in
Canton were formerly Sunday-school scholars in America. Most of these
converted Chinamen who return to their own country are said to take their
part in various forms of Christian work. What an inspiration to the
patient teacher, who spends an hour or more every Sunday in trying to
Christianize a single Chinaman, to think that, in this indirect way, he,
or more frequently she, may be helping on the conversion of China.--_The
Congregationalist._

These very just remarks are equally applicable to the work the American
Missionary Association is doing so largely and effectively among the
Chinese on the Pacific coast. A letter from Mr. Pond gives us this
corroborative item:

"On Monday evening, November 26, we expect to hold a farewell meeting for
Joe Jet, once one of our missionary helpers, who is going back to China
to superintend missionary operations for our Chinese Missionary Society.
He takes over $1,100 with him, contributed for this purpose by the
Chinese connected with our mission. To this Missionary Society, our
Christian Chinese contribute regularly each month, from twenty-five to
fifty cents. They aim to do quite a large work, which they hope that the
representatives of the Board will superintend, but the whole expense of
which they mean to bear."

       *       *       *       *       *

The American Missionary Association has been greatly afflicted in the
death of Mrs. George A. Woodard, the wife of the Principal of Gregory
Institute, Wilmington, N.C. She was a most devoted missionary,
consecrating her earnestness and fidelity to the cause of Christ. She
will be sadly missed by the colored people of Wilmington, and by those
who are inmates of the Teachers' Home at Gregory Institute.

       *       *       *       *       *

SYSTEMATIC SPENDING.

BY REV. C.J. RYDER.

The pastor of a Boston church recently handed to the District Secretary
of the A.M.A. $1, saying as he did so: "That one dollar is really more
than some hundreds of dollars. It is the gift of a poor woman in my
congregation who depends upon her own labor for support. She gives this
dollar to the A.M.A. from her hard economy." It may be that God's decimal
pointing is not the same as ours in many cases.

On a table of the same district office of the A.M.A., there stands a
little brown pasteboard box. In it are some tracts offered for sale. All
the proceeds from their sale go into the treasury of the Association.
These tracts were printed at the expense of a poor woman who has spent a
long and useful life in service for others. She comes into that office
now and again to see if her gift is increasing. She is not fashionably
dressed. No! She never drives to the Congregational House in a carriage.
I doubt if she often enjoys the luxury of a street-car ride, although she
is upward of seventy years of age; and yet she never comes through that
office door but she brings with her the bright glory of spiritual
sunshine, and the wealth of her Lord's own presence. She is pinching
herself in almost painful economy that she may have $100 to give to this
great mission work before she dies, and

     "Her great Redeemer shall call her to inherit
     The heaven of wealth long garnered up for her."

Now let us turn a moment to the other side of the A.M.A. work. I hold in
my hand a letter written upon this scrap of paper by a colored boy in the
South and sent to one of our missionaries who had come North:

"_Oct. 21._ My Dear Friend, Mr. Brown--I wish you would if you please if
you please send me three dollars and a half now if you please send it I
want to buy a good little shot gun please send it."

These facts present the double responsibility which the A.M.A. sustains
to its constituency in this vast and complex missionary work. None of
these facts are exceptional in character. The Association must so present
its work to the churches as to "constrain" them to give; drag them by the
chains of Christian duty to give; those who can of their abundance
abundantly; those who must of their penury, with this tremendous
self-sacrifice.

An old colored preacher in Georgia, in my hearing, preached on
"Pasteboard Christians." He said: "Brethren, did you neber see a
pasteboard box? It's mighty nice; maybe all covered with gilt paper;
looks right stiff and stout, but you just set it out in the rain and see
it when it goes 'pooh,' and am all omnatiously busted. It am jest so with
some Christians. They comes to meetin' with good clothes on; they looks
drefful fine! But you just pass the contribution box 'round, da goes
'pooh!' and dar ain't nothin' left of 'em." It has not been my experience
that there are many pasteboard Christians in the district of New England.
Systematic giving, giving constantly, giving because the safety of our
country requires it, and the kingdom of Christ demands it; this is the
sort of giving which I have found to be the rule.

But there must be systematic spending as truly as systematic giving. The
gifts of the churches must be husbanded, and the churches must be warned
from time to time against wasteful and unwise efforts, by which others
are seeking to do the work, which is being done systematically through
your agent, the American Missionary Association.

My personal experience as Field Superintendent, has pressed upon me the
imperative importance of this side of the responsibility which this
Association holds to the churches. One must pass back and forth often,
and become personally familiar with this great field, before he can
understand the importance of the systematic spending of this Association.
Wrecks of schools and churches are not few in the Southland. Godly men
and women and godless adventurers have experimented in many places. Money
has been and is being wasted, that might be used to great and permanent
advantage if contributed through the A.M.A. and disbursed according to
the principles which long experience has proved to be sound.

It is the purpose of this paper to emphasize some of the facts concerning
this great missionary field, and to point out the advantages of
systematic spending, which you secure when you commit your funds to this
society rather than to the hap-hazard efforts which you have no power to
supervise and no control over.

An organized society controlled and directed by those who contribute is
the surest possible way of securing this systematic spending. This method
has both negative and positive advantages:

I. It prevents waste.

(a.) Waste in administration of funds. Its accounts are open to and
audited by those whose money is being spent. Reports of the financial
standing, receipts and expenditures to the half-penny are presented every
year. Look them over and note how minutely your accounts are kept.
Officers and missionaries are held by you to strictest responsibility.
This is sound business sense applied to missionary work. But one
naturally asks why, when such absolute safeguards are thrown around the
administration of the funds committed to the A.M.A., some of those who
established those safeguards give a considerable portion of their money
to individuals over whose expenditure they have absolutely no control,
and where funds may be, and often are, wasted? And in this way the
percentage of the cost of administering the funds committed to the A.M.A.
is also increased. This can scarcely be called sound business wisdom.

(b.) Waste in field work. It requires wide experience and knowledge of
the whole field in order to adjust and direct, without waste of laborers,
the force of missionaries. Those who know only one locality cannot do
this. It is often remarked that each missionary thinks his particular
field the most important, and the one especially needing help and
enlargement. This is a grand tribute to their faithfulness and Christian
enthusiasm. But the systematic investigation of the whole field,
constantly and patiently carried on as it is by the A.M.A., determines
with larger wisdom whether work should be strengthened and developed in
Tennessee, or Georgia, or Texas. Gen. Grant was familiar with the whole
field, and placed his men according to the varying exigencies of the
campaign. Just so the systematic methods of this Association place these
noble missionaries where there will be least waste of labor.

But there are also positive advantages secured by the systematic methods
of the A.M.A. in expending the money committed to its treasury.

II. It secures proportion in different parts of the work.

(a.) In appeal.--This Association, constituted, as it is, the immediate
agent of the churches, ought to be your watchman on the tower.

Every pastor is crowded with parish duties. Few intelligent laymen can
give time enough to study thoroughly the whole field covered by the
missions of the A.M.A. It is now an enormous field. Representatives of
five distinct races, Japanese, Chinese, Indians, Mountain Whites and
Negroes wait for Christian instruction very largely upon the missionaries
you are sending out.

Now, no one who is not compelled by official duties to do it can find
time, nor has he the information at hand, to investigate thoroughly each
department of this missionary work. The A.M.A. is your agent to discover,
through careful and patient investigation, the exact facts, and so to
direct its appeals to the churches that the department of work which is
especially pressing may be given due prominence. Systematic spending
involves this.

(b.) Greatest care is required and exercised in planting new work. Let us
in fancy plant a new school in the South, as the Association does it.
Exhaustive correspondence is of course, the first step. Then the Field
Superintendent visits the field. He gathers every possible fact bearing
upon the question: The population; schools, if any; the opinions of white
and colored citizens; the religious complexion of the community, etc.,
etc., etc. Now this Field Superintendent has studied maps and statistics
and school reports, and been back and forth until the whole field is in
his mind, not simply this one locality. These facts _in extenso_ are
reported to the officers in New York. Conferences many and patient are
held over them until finally it is settled that this place rather than
some other shall be selected for the new school. Now such care as this
would be impossible except as the A.M.A., through its officers and
teachers, knew the whole field. By independent or individual effort this
could not be done. It is not the absolute, but the comparative need and
hopefulness that determine the wisdom of fixing upon a certain place for
a school or church. This comparative need can only be known by an
organized society which has frequent and abundant communication with the
whole field, and has officers whose business it is to know that field.
The experiments being tried in different places have already been made by
the A.M.A., and proved to be either absolutely failures or relatively an
uneconomic use of funds.

The saving to you who furnish the money is very great by this method of
systematic spending. Let me illustrate by a single example which occurred
only a few months ago. Two towns, only a few miles apart, were clamoring
for help in school work. We opened a school tentatively in one of these
places, as we had one missionary there already, and I visited the other
place. This is what I found: A teacher independent of any society, and
consequently knowing only a small part of the South, had opened a school.
She had labored very faithfully, but very unwisely, putting money and
years of hard work into a field which, from its very conditions, could
not be largely successful. She had a poor building for teachers' home, a
rough school-house with no desks, a narrow strip of land, and an
enrollment of about eighty pupils. She was anxious to have the A.M.A.
take the work. She informed me that in order to secure it, it would be
necessary to pay out from $2,500 to $3,000 in paying debts and putting
the buildings in shape for advantageous use. This was the case then: A
fairly good house, a rough school-house, a bit of land, and a school of
less than one hundred pupils, costing at least $2,500. At the other point
under discussion, there were five acres of land, five buildings, an
enrollment of about 250 pupils, and the whole property could be secured
for $600! $2,500 vs. $600.

These are not very exceptional cases. It is only fair to the generous
constituency of this Association to know that their funds are being thus
guarded, and that those who give through independent agencies may have
their funds squandered because they cannot hold those doing this
independent work to strict account as they do the Association, nor can
these independent missionaries know the whole field as the A.M.A. knows
it. Here are nearly 500 missionaries in constant correspondence with this
office, besides the field officers appointed especially to gather
information.

(c.) Again, this systematic method of disbursing funds secures a
methodical arrangement of field work. Take the mountain field as an
illustration of this. This field has been divided into two general
districts; one having for its base the L.N.R.R., the other lying along
the Cincinnati Southern Railroad. Each department has its general
missionary, who goes back and forth in his district to lay out new work,
and to superintend the old. The missionaries, pastors and teachers are
all busy in their own places. Here then is systematic development of
this whole work. These noble missionaries in this way form a
well-organized army, and are not guerrillas fighting behind trees and
stones, and scattered hap-hazard over the mountains. We shall hold these
lines of railroad in the name of the Lord. Churches and missions and
Sunday-schools will supplant the saloons and gambling hells if you as
churches generously support this painfully urgent work. But when
school-houses shall stand in all their fertile coves and church bells
shall call to intelligent Christian worship on all those mountain sides,
and the people shall be lifted up into spiritual citizenship, it will
simply be the victory under God of the systematic planning and execution
possible only when funds are disbursed on the sound principles of this
Association.

III. This systematic spending of benevolent funds also secures
permanency. How few deaths there are in the family of A.M.A. schools and
churches! Why? Because these missions are born through wisdom and sound
judgment. These schools and churches are not only permanent but they will
also perpetuate the great fundamental principles of the churches whose
prayers and money have gone into their establishment.

These missions cannot become Roman Catholic or infidel. They cannot drift
away from the safe moorings of evangelical truth, unless the churches to
which they are tied up give way. The churches control these missions
forever. Local management in this work often means mismanagement, on
account of the peculiar surroundings in which these schools are placed.
They differ radically from schools and colleges planted among the new
settlers in the West. Here in the South there is no considerable
intelligent Christian constituency to direct their work, manage their
affairs and keep them in close connection with Congregational conferences
and councils.

IV. Lastly. By means of this systematic spending you keep step with the
grand onward movement of God's providence in the marvelous openings of
this great missionary field. How wonderfully this work develops! The
primary schools of the early period have grown into normal and
preparatory institutes and colleges and theological seminaries, although
the primary work is still being done and well done! New schools are being
planted. "Enter the mountains with your mission host," came the command,
and it was done. Industrial training became necessary to the best
furnishing of these young people for their life-work and their largest
intellectual development, and now thorough training in these departments
is furnished by the schools of the American Missionary Association. The
grand work has kept step with the developing needs.

I asked one of the most experienced teachers and missionaries in the
South what feature of the A.M.A. especially impressed him. He replied at
once, "The wonderful and consummate statesmanship displayed in its
management. The wisdom manifested in planting schools and churches, and
in keeping pace with the new and constantly changing conditions of this
great and perplexing field, absolutely astounds me." This is no tribute
to those of us who have recently entered this service.

To sum up this argument, then: By the systematic method of spending
through the A.M.A., you avoid--

I. Waste, (1.) In administration. (2.) In field work.

II. You secure the wisest apportionment of the work, (1.) Appeals are
systematic. (2.) The work is developed proportionately. (3.) And each
department is systematically conducted.

III. You can secure permanency in the work, (b.) And perpetuate the
principles you believe to be of fundamental importance in uplifting these
races.

IV. You keep step with God's providence in the development of these
fields.

It is told us that during the days that immediately preceded the capture
of Richmond, Sheridan was in hot pursuit of Lee's retreating troops. He
telegraphed to Grant, "I think if the thing is pushed Lee will surrender."
There came flashing back this laconic message from that silent soldier,
"Push things." They were pushed, and within a few weeks Lee's army was
annihilated, and the sword of the haughty rebel was in the hands of the
loyal Grant. The Union army had pushed through the broken fortifications
around Richmond and planted the grand old stars and stripes,
battle-stained and bullet-torn, above the dome of the rebel capitol,
never, never, never to be pulled down again by disloyal hands.

My brethren, there comes flashing to us to-day from this army of
Christ-like men and women away out yonder in front of us, from out the
heat of battle against ignorance, and prejudice, and misery, and sin,
these stirring words: "We can take these lowlands and mountains and
prairies and ocean coasts for our Lord, and for his Christ, now if the
thing be pushed."

What message shall we send back to them, O people of God?

Shall it not be this? "We pledge you our prayers, our sympathy, our best
sons and daughters and five hundred thousand dollars in consecrated money
this year; and in the great name of the Lord our God let the thing be
pushed."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.


SCRAPS FROM MY CORRESPONDENCE.

BY REV. W.C. POND.

Our limited space forbids the publication of extended correspondence; and
yet, often, in the familiar and unstudied letters which I receive from
our workers, there are paragraphs or sentences which I greatly desire
that our Eastern friends and helpers might share with me. The following
are a few of these.

Mrs. Carrington, our very faithful and efficient teacher at Sacramento,
writes as follows: "Our school seems in better condition than for many
months. Chin Toy [missionary helper] is true and watchful. Two joined the
church at the last communion, one has given his name to join the
Association, and others seem almost ready."

Our school at Oroville has been for a year past in the hands of two quite
young, but true hearted and enthusiastic teachers, from one of whom I
hear in this way: "We have had a very good school this month. The
attendance has been very good; the scholars seem to feel better, and I
think the teachers do too. We had quite a re-union one evening last
month. There was one brother who had just returned from China, and
another from away out in the country. The former had not been here for
years, nor the latter for more than twelve months. It would have done any
one good to see how glad they were to meet each other. I never saw so
much hand-shaking, and talking, and laughing. Both these are good
scholars and will help us much. We have the Bible lessons twice a week,
and they are very interesting to us both. We have nearly finished the
Gospel of Mark, and it gets more interesting towards the last."

Other extracts shall be from letters of our Chinese brethren. Here is one
who has evidently gotten over into an American way of thinking. He is so
much in earnest that his English is badly wrenched in the effort to
convey his views, but I give his words very nearly as he wrote them.
"What I think and what often I observed is that the Chinese very meanness
and sordidness, just exactly what were the Jews. Scatter all round the
world, and still they feel very proud of their country, despise the
foreigners, close all their sea-ports, would not allow the poor celestial
to go out or have civilized men to enter the happy country. On account of
their ignorance of Christ, unhappy, miserable, wretched. Some of them
think good deal of their improvement, national, naval, but if the
Government will not adopt the Christianity and put behind their ancestor
and evil ways and the wicked custom, they will not be very flourishing
what they look for." For himself he says, "I hope I will have a good
opportunity while I am working for the Lord and looking for some souls to
bring to the Lord, as His will be done."

Another writes: "I speak in Chinatown yesterday. Then we had very good
singers of American Christian young men (they were five) and Chinese
brethren (they were eight.). All go on to sing with me. Then I have a
good chance. I pray God to help and hope our countrymen immediately come
to repent and follow Christ and worship Him." And again, "I thank God for
His blessing. This school now is increasing. Last evening we had
twenty-three scholars. Six new ones came in this month. I like stay here
two or three months more and talk this gospel of Christ."

Another translated for me a letter just received from his father-in-law
in China--a letter which gives him great joy. "Dear Son-in-law:--Your
letter was reached me some ten days ago, and glad to read it and that you
are all right in California, _doing Jesus work_. But there was a fellow
named ---- ---- who had come back from San Francisco last year. This
fellow came to me with some news to tell me, so he said. So I asked him
to sit down and gave him a cup of tea. Then he commenced his false story
about you _being poisoned by the Jesus doctors_, and that your heart had
been poisoned so that you don't want to come back any more. After the
length of his false talks, I commenced to ask him questions which he
cannot answer. I told him that I had known my son-in-law too much about
his faith in Jesus. People with the same report came to me from time to
time, before you [i.e., the son-in-law addressed in the letter,--W.C.P.]
came back the last time. At first I have faith in their talks, but since
you came home, I have found you all right. Now a mission is near my
house, and I have time to talk and to read the Jesus books, and have
found that Jesus is like our Confucius, and I believed Jesus words all
right and so my son-in-law all-right too. Thus I have told the dog,
[i.e., the tale-bearer] to get off from my door and not call on me
again."

I hope there may yet be space for this extract from a letter from Jee
Gam, who took a vacation of two weeks, spending it not far from a Chinese
fishing village near Monterey. "Sunday morning, accompanied by about ten
American friends, I went to Chinatown to hold a preaching service. After
singing several times and offering prayer, I took the stand and preached
to a large crowd of my countrymen, of both sexes and all ages, drawn by
our loud invitation and our songs. Before I began my sermon I told them
what we had been singing about, also what we prayed for, and to whom we
prayed, and asked them to see the difference between these Christian
Americans who sang and prayed for us, and those who would crowd us out
Then I preached on Gal. 6:7, for nearly an hour, and all listened
attentively. Not one of the hearers said anything against us. I was told
that two years ago a Chinaman had tried to preach there, but the people
drowned his voice by beating their tin cans, and drove him off with
various missiles. When I heard this I said, 'I am not afraid, God will go
with us; with his help I will preach Christ to them.' And he did help,
and oh, may he bless the seed sown! On Sunday evening one of the Chinese
came out decided as a Christian, and one other seemed almost persuaded."

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ME--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Ellen Osgood, Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. William Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.W. Andrews, Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs.
  C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Miss Katharine Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue, Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Miss Ella E. Marsh, Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.L. Epps, Topeka, Kan.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Mary B. Warren, Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead, Wis.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 N Broad St., Fremont, Neb.

COLORADO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Packard, Pueblo, Colo.

DAKOTA,--Woman's Home Miss. Union, President,
  Mrs. T.M. Hills, Sioux Falls; Secretary,
  Mrs. W.R. Dawes, Redfield; Treasurer,
  Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Lake Preston.


We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANNUAL MEETING.

The public meeting of the Woman's Bureau was held Thursday afternoon,
simultaneously with the business meeting of the A.M.A. in Providence, and
was conducted by Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, of Portland, Me. The report of the
Secretary, Miss D.E. Emerson, of New York, was presented, and then
missionary addresses were delivered by Mrs. A.A. Myers on "Mountain
Work;" by Mrs. Geo. W. Moore on the "Colored People;" and by Miss Collins
on "Indians," all of which were listened to with deep interest.

Mrs. Woodbury, on taking the chair, said:

The object of this meeting is well understood. It is to decide what the
women of the Congregational Churches shall do in connection with woman's
work--that part of the Association's work which is designed to be among
women. It is woman's work among women. It is designed at this time to
hear from those fields in which the speakers are especially interested.
We shall hear from the Mountain Work, from the Negroes in the South, and
from the work among the Indians in the West. Like a very close man who,
to the surprise of those who approached him, gave money enough to
purchase a town clock, who explained by saying he liked to hear his money
tick, so it is meant here this afternoon that the women shall hear the
tick of their work from all these fields to which I have referred, and
may the sound of it reverberate all down through the ages.

       *       *       *       *       *

A special meeting for ladies was held on Thursday morning, at which there
was a full attendance. Brief remarks, interspersed with song and prayer,
made the occasion an enjoyable one. Miss Plimpton, of McIntosh, Ga., gave
bits of her experience among the colored people, and Miss Haynes
described her work for the Indians at Santee Agency, Neb.

       *       *       *       *       *

The annual report made by the Secretary was given in full in our November
Magazine, and is also published in leaflet form for free distribution to
those desiring it.

We give below extracts from the addresses of the missionaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOUNTAIN WHITE WORK.

BY MRS. A.A. MYERS.

In my younger days I never remember looking at the forests that skirt the
horizon without an indefinable questioning as to what lay beyond. It was
easy to picture stretches of landscape and quiet homes like our own, but
the query was ever the same, what is _still beyond_?

The first Sabbath I attended church in the mountains of Kentucky, having
listened to the quaint singing before entering the rough-board building,
seating myself on one of the slab benches near a box stove, which had but
one length of pipe, out of which the smoke was pouring towards an opening
in the roof, glancing around on the women in their sun bonnets, the
babies in their little calico caps and the men in homespun, then out of
the open door into a ravine where the tops of the tall trees were beneath
us, I said to myself, I've reached "_that beyond_." The undefined has
taken shape and I have reached the place of which I could never formulate
a picture. Seven years' acquaintance in this mountain country has not
changed my opinion. We are in another world, and if I could describe that
world so you could see it as it is, could feel its needs as we feel them
day by day, it is all I could ask.

Philosophers might describe it as the dead centre of motion; at least it
has remained seemingly unmoved, while all the world around it has been
moving forward.

Here in these mountains live over two million people, two-thirds of whom
have never written nor received a letter, could not read one if printed
and sent them. They take no newspapers, and the great events of nations
or discoveries of science have been nothing to them. Questions of vital
importance to our country have never troubled them. They knew there was a
war, for contending armies met on their grounds. With few exceptions
their sympathies were with the Union. Too poor to own slaves to any
extent, they had no motive for seceding, and many of them joined our army
and were faithful soldiers.

At the close of the war, they went back to their secluded homes, and
between them and the world the curtain fell again. We very well know that
mortals cannot rise above their surroundings only within defined limits.
Alas! for the defeated manhood and blasted womanhood in our land, held
down to earth by unfortunate surroundings. They are looking to you for
help. You have done nobly in sustaining a work in their midst. Besides
what you have done at Pleasant Hill, Grand View and other points, you
have enabled us to organize eight churches and build one academy and
eight houses of worship. You have sent among us most efficient teachers.
Besides their school duties they have taken upon themselves to visit the
homes, to pray with the sick, to distribute clothing among the needy, to
go to the homes of the students, to share their humble fare and sleep in
their crowded rooms. They have spared neither time nor strength to carry
the uplifting word to those needy souls. From the better classes we have
been fortunate enough to draw a nucleus for each of our churches. We have
some Sunday-school superintendents that for zeal and tact are models in
their work and many a Northern school might rejoice in the possession of
such officers. They are not so well versed in Scripture as we could wish,
but they spare neither time nor expense to prepare themselves for their
work.

This class of people responds quickly to the new life that comes to them
by the school, the railroad or the business man. If we could find as
ready response in the masses as we find in the individuals, our work in
the mountains would be quickly done. But, alas! what of these hundreds of
thousands who seemingly have no more aspiration than the brute in their
field? They are wedded to the customs of their ancestors, and they rebel
at any innovation. Give them tobacco, and whiskey, and pistols, a little
meal and bacon and coffee, a crude bed and a roof, and that, to them, is
living. Oh, those purposeless lives! They exist simply because they are
in the world and cannot help it. With the girls especially, marriage is
the chief aim, and what should be the holy relation is entered upon
almost in childhood. As soon as they begin to lisp they are talking of
their lovers. A little wee girl came to a teacher's home, and after
answering in monosyllables the common questions as to schools and
Sunday-schools, there was a lull in the conversation, when she spoke up:
"I hain't got no sweetheart." For all marriage is the chief aim, it is
surprising how little preparation they make for it. No bridal trousseau
is ever thought of; not even a new dress is made for the occasion. I have
seen many a bride in calf-skin shoes, old calico dress, long apron, with
no cuffs nor collar, and her hair falling from her comb, while the groom
appeared with uncombed hair, stogy shoes, jean pants and in shirt
sleeves.

We have no rollicking girls or boisterous boys; we never see a crowing,
cooing baby. The children are born old. The babies have a sad and
dejected look, as if this world were a "dreary wilderness of woe," and
they grieve they were ever born. Poor little ones in the Southland! how
many are gathered home ere a twelve months' stay on earth. Besides this
weary, aged look of the children, we frequently find those who look like
walking corpses. A little inquiry reveals the fact that they are clay
eaters. We have them in our schools. In our Jellico school, we have
children whose elder sisters had to sprinkle pepper around the
hearthstones to keep them from digging out the clay and eating it. The
habit once formed, it seems to last them during life; where it ever
originated I don't know, but have no doubt it was from lack of proper
nourishment.

Our women! how shall I describe them? I wish I might picture them before
you as they ride into town with their babies in their arms and a child or
two on their horses with them, or as they walk in with heavy, dragging
gait, loaded with some produce for sale, or as they stand for hours
open-eyed and open-mouthed around the counters of some country store. I
wish you could see them in their cabin homes, as bare of comfort as a wild
desert waste, or at work in the field with the family, but always and
everywhere with a chew of tobacco or a snuff stick in their mouths. They
never express a desire for what they have not, nor a murmur at what they
have, but their very movements are a complaint--a wail. On their face is
ever seen that weary, resigned, passionless look. They never lighten with
joy or surprise. If you could manage to fire a Vesuvius before their eyes
you would never know by any outward expression but that they had seen
volcanoes every day of their lives. There is no imagery, no ideality. The
world to them is a humdrum routine, a common-place affair. They have no
heroes, and they look upon all men, not as protectors, but seducers, not
as beings formed in the image of a pure and holy God, but in the image of
a God of lust and debauchery.

When first going among these people, the ludicrous or comical keeps
presenting itself, but as you stay year by year the terrible _reality_ of
their lives presses sore upon you. You are cramped by their narrowness;
you are depressed by their lack of buoyancy; you grow distrustful because
of their perfidy; you become sharer of their woes, but they have no joys
to share.

Our work among them was begun none too soon. The eye of the speculator is
being turned to our mineral and timber resources, and with unscrupulous
money-makers for a centre and a demoralized people to gather round them,
and no Christ in their midst, what strongholds of Satan would be formed.
When we commenced our work seven years ago the field was open to the
Congregationalists. If we could have had means to have secured helpers we
could have planted ourselves largely, for we had continuous calls to come
and organize churches. The people of better minds are sick and tired of
the church life around them; they cannot indorse it and so are called
infidels. But we have found no infidels there; still it takes no prophet
to see that the reaction from this demoralized church life all through
the mountains is going to create a great wave of infidelity unless real
Christians come to the rescue very soon.

How these things nerve us to increased efforts to save the children and
youth from these ways of death. Our hope for the land is in saving them,
and our work is largely for them. We have many Sunday-schools connected
with our churches and many others where we furnish some helps and where
our students teach. Our Bands of Hope are encouraging. Our Christian
Endeavor Society has a large membership, and is a power for good. But
while we rejoice over these places that have these helps we think of the
hundreds of counties along this mountain range that have no such helps.
Senator Plumb has stated that the assessment in Alabama for pistols, guns
and dirks is four times that on farming implements, and Kentucky's record
of crime is far worse than Alabama's. Who of us can say that he is
innocent of this shed blood, unless he is doing something toward sending
the only cure--a Christian civilization? Because the work has many
discouragements, are we excused? Because the people are prejudiced
against us and our principles, shall we withdraw, and let them sink lower
and lower?

But the question is asked: "Have you no public schools or churches in
this large section of the country?" Yes, schools for a few months in the
year, taught in little log school houses, some with floors and some with
none; some with a tiny window and some without; some have doors and some
haven't. Very few have desks; in most there are but slab benches. But
worse than the school house and its surroundings is the illiterate,
immoral teacher who attempts to teach the children. As for church
organizations they are numerous, and a large majority are church members;
but alas for the Christianity taught and practiced. Religion and morality
are divorced. With most of them, religion is the thing of a moment and
not of a life. Meetings once a month during the summer, and that is all
the Christian institution the people have, and we call it _instruction_.
We are inclined to smile at the thought of a preacher prefacing his
sermon with the boast that he has no learning; that his "jeens" coat has
never brushed the chalk off college walls, and what he has to say is "no
fixup" of his own, but direct from "_sac_-rid writ" or an "inspiration of
the Speret." But our smiles end with a sigh when we see that there is not
only _ignorance_, but "the poison of asps is under their lips." Their
hatred for all other churches than their own is intense. They have no
charity for any religion outside of their own church. The excitement and
strife for membership is unequalled even in the craze of their political
wars. They are bigoted and intolerant, they have no idea of practical
Christianity. They have no prayer-meeting, no family prayers, no
Sunday-schools. One minister living near where we have recently planted
some Sunday-schools gave a whole sermon to talking against them, and said
if any one would show him from the Bible where Sunday-schools were taught
he'd believe they were right; but a few weeks later, pressed by seeing
our schools drawing so largely from the community, he thought something
must be done, so with a few of his leading members they announced the
organization of a school near ours. They sent to Jellico on Saturday and
bought two gallons of whiskey in order to draw the crowd. Of course, such
a school lasted but a few days, but their hatred doesn't die so easily.
We could help many churches if it were not for this jealousy among their
ministers. The people are our friends, and our growing churches are a
stimulant to them. Paul said: "What matter if Christ were preached
through envy, only so he were preached," and if we can provoke them to
good works, will not the children be blessed? Whatever cause prompts them
to church building, to prayer or outward Christian living, they must be
bettered by it.

And so, slowly, but steadily, this great mass is going to be leavened. It
may not come in your day or mine, but come it will, and happy will we be
in that far-off time to know that we had something to do in bringing
about such needed results. We are confident of success. Right must win
"since God is God," and the day is coming when the great "I Am" will
dwell in all these churches. Then the bigot will say, "my brother;" the
intolerant will grasp hands in loyal fellowship, and Christian hearts
will pulsate in one common rhythm. Then will our mountains and hills
break forth into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEEDS OF THE COLORED WOMEN AND GIRLS.

BY MRS. G.W. MOORE.

I have been asked to speak to you on the needs of four millions of women
and girls. The time allotted for this paper is far too limited for me to
give more than a glimpse of their real condition.

In considering the needs of the colored women and girls of the South, you
must bear in mind their past condition, present status and future
prospects, together with the forces that have contributed to each, before
you can know and feel the heart yearnings and struggles of my sisters.

No human lips can tell the story of that dark night that has left its
impress upon the habits, customs and life of a whole race of people. The
crudest results of that iniquitous system fell heaviest upon the colored
woman. From childhood, no matter how favorably situated, she was liable
to become the doomed victim of the grossest outrages. There was no
assurance that she would not be a constant associate in the field with
the coarsest and most ignorant men of both races, or at any moment, at
the caprice of the master, be sold. Swayed, body, mind and spirit, by a
master class who found it necessary to close every avenue of intelligence
in order to accomplish his fiendish purposes, this creature, made in the
image of God, was often taught that there was no God of justice for her.
Her body, instead of being a fit temple for the indwelling of the Holy
Spirit, was subject to the foulest demands of sensuality. No wonder they
sang,

     "Nobody knows the trouble I see, Lord,
     Nobody knows but Jesus."

These slave songs, born of agony, might well be called "The Passion
Flowers" of the slave cabin. Thank God that all of my sisters were not
thus brutalized, and even to those who were, God was merciful. Deep down
underneath the lacerated and bruised heart, rested the "Shekinah of the
Lord," preventing the wholesale transmission of vice. Two hundred and
fifty years of such tuition gave her but little chance to develop her
womanhood.

Intuitively she knew that there was a living God, and she sought Him in
visions, and listened for His voice, and looked forward and persevered
for that home not made with hands, and from her heart were wrung these
words:

     "O Lord, O my Lord, O my good Lord,
     Keep me from sinking down."

And then comforted, she cried out triumphantly--

     "Didn't my Lord deliver Daniel,
     Then why not every man?"

Many have told me their struggles, and I know of others who even suffered
death rather than submit to the outrage of chastity. One poor mother with
three beautiful baby girls, driven to despair by realizing their probable
doom if allowed to live, sent them back to the God who gave them and then
took her own life.

Thus the colored women and girls lived before the war.

How have they fared since Freedom?

Have they had a fair chance in the race of life? No. They have met
caste-prejudice, the ghost of slavery, at every step of their journey
during these years of freedom. They have been made to feel that they are a
separate species of the human family. The phrases "Your people" and "Your
place," do not so much designate their race identity, as the fixed status
in the sisterhood of races. This idea, as harmless as it may appear, or
as much as it is used, with varied phrases of meaning, according to the
attitude of the speaker, has been one of the greatest barriers to the
progress of the Negro, especially of the women and girls. It has colored
everything they have to do. Their place, like the ebony of their skin, is
a dark place. In the home, and in social life, "their place" is confined
to colored society, colored schools and colored churches. Be it
understood, I am not reflecting upon colored society, but am pointing out
the limitations that no other race in this country has to contend with,
in its efforts to rise.

The higher the plane of culture the colored women and girls reach, the
more sensitive they become, and the more keenly the effects of ostracism
are felt. In wages it does not matter how capable she may be, she must
not aspire. I have asked several persons, "What is the greatest need of
the colored woman and girl?" and many have replied, "To be good
servants." Assuming that this is her highest need, can good servants be
had without good wages?

In education, her place is the colored school, if there is one far or
near, and if there is no school for colored youth, (as is sometimes the
case) the no-school is her place. In religious life, her place is the
colored church. No matter how her soul may long for a more intelligent
Gospel than perchance surrounds her, she must find it there.

Her place in the work of reform, if she has fallen or desires to reform,
is the public street. I could relate many incidents which have come under
my personal observation in Washington, (and Washington is far ahead of
many places in the South) to illustrate how our fallen sisters have
suffered worse than death, because doors have been shut against them.
Several cases have been brought to me this year, one since writing this
paper, but my sisters, the sad fact is like the advent of our blessed
Lord, there is no room in the inn for her.

What is the true place of our women and girls? It is that place which is
not circumscribed by the mere accident of birth and race, where she can
rise just as high as she has the ability to reach and sustain. My five
years' experience in Europe as a Jubilee Singer gave me a taste of the
sweets of true womanhood, unfettered by caste-prejudice and by a low
estimate of my position. There my complexion was not a target for insult
and ostracism. Our needs are not only those common to other races, but
are in a vast measure greater, because of the past and present
difficulties. The masses furnish the most difficult problem to solve. How
can we rescue them from poverty and illiteracy, and not pauperize them?
How can we prevent crime, check immorality and decrease mortality? The
answer lies in giving to them better home life, more elevating social
surroundings, better educational advantages in school and industries, and
a higher type of Christian life and worship.

My first introduction into an intelligent idea of practical Christianity
was at Fisk University. There, and at many similar institutions under the
A.M.A., may be found the epitome of a Christian home. Such schools
furnish potent object lessons; such are the factors of the problem in
answer to the question of how to meet the needs of the colored women and
girls, who are to preside over the homes of eight millions of people, who
had no home twenty-three years ago. Washington, alone, has a population
of eighty thousand colored people, and more than forty thousand of these
are women and girls.

It is said that the "hand that rocks the cradle, rules the world." It
matters not whether that hand be black or white, but it does matter
whether that hand be intelligent or ignorant. They not only need the
education of the schools to develop their minds, and industrial training
to prepare their hands for the practical duties of life, but Christian
education, such as is given in the schools of the Association.

More than three thousand women and thousands of men have gone out under
the A.M.A., in school, home and church, for the uplifting, Christianizing
and elevating of our people.

Eternity alone will reveal the work that these Christian heroines and
heroes have done in the Master's name. The eleventh chapter of Hebrews
would need be extended to give to them their rightful place in the role
of achievements of faith. We need not wait for eternity, we now see some
of the grand results; their memory is already engraven upon the hearts,
and their spirit infused into the life of thousands of educated colored
young men and women, who have gone out among their people, carrying
educated minds, trained hands and warm hearts, as an outgrowth of that
labor which has not been in vain. This magnificent record of Christian
endeavor and conquest has largely been made possible by the foresight,
energy and fidelity of the many who have been and are at the head of the
different departments of the A.M.A.

How can the Association more fully meet these needs? By continuing
woman's work for woman, through their Woman's Bureau. Through this
agency, ladies of the churches can furnish volunteers for the work and
the base of supply. While we at the front are in the heat of the battle,
you at home, through your missionary societies, young people's meetings,
and Sunday-schools, can aid us with your prayers, your sympathy, your
gifts and service. Those in the larger churches can sustain a missionary
in the field, and may it be said of all, both large and small, "They have
done what they could." Then we can sing,

     "March on, and you shall gain the victory,
     March on, and you shall gain the day."

My sisters, we must first be touched by the Spirit of the Master, and
through him touch them. This work cannot be done perfunctorily or
professionally.

And now in conclusion allow me to thank you in behalf of the millions
whom I represent, for the faithful work and practical sympathy already
given, and appeal to you in his name, and through you to the thousands
whom you represent, for a continuation of your Christian efforts and
support, also for greater supplies and larger gifts to the treasury of
the A.M.A., that it may be able to furnish the laborers according to the
demands of the growing needs of more than four millions of colored women
and girls, who are trying to help themselves. Our lamented President
Garfield said to the Jubilee Singers during their visit to Mentor:
"Ethiopia is not only stretching out her hand unto God, but God is
stretching out his hand unto Ethiopia." We believe this, and that the
time is coming when all races shall sing:

     "O, brethren, rise and shine and give God the glory,
     For the year of Jubilee."

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1888.


MAINE, $186.96.

Augusta. North Parish Sab. Sch., _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            $3.60

Bangor. W.S. Dennett, for _Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._                                        20.00

Bangor. Y.M.C.A., 9.66; Miss Mary F.
  Duren, 1, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          10.66

Bath. Sab. Sch. of Central Ch.,
  _for Mountain White Work_                     23.00

Bluehill. "A Friend"                             1.00

Brewer. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.            15.00

Brunswick. Marshall Cram                        10.00

Falmouth. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for
  Freight to Williamsburg, Ky._                  0.50

Gorham. "A Friend," bal. to const. MRS.
  HENRY J. LEAVITT L.M.                         21.00

Gorham. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 10, _for
  Selma, Ala._, 10 _for Mountain White Work_    20.00

Gorham. "Friend," _for Mountain White Work_     10.00

Lyman. Cong. Ch.                                 4.85

Machias. Gilbert Longfellow                     10.00

Orono. Cong. Ch.                                15.10

Patten. Cong. Ch.                               15.00

South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis' S.S. Class,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._                         3.00

West Brooksville. Cong. Ch.                      2.25


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $430.96.

Candia. John P. French and Mary E.C.
  French                                       200.00

Exeter. Mrs. Samuel Hall, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                   5.00

Franklin Falls. Mrs. Stephen Kenrick            25.00

Great Falls. Ladies, _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._                                         8.20

Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                             11.06

Keene. G.E. Whitney, 5; Mrs. C. Hatch,
  4.25; Rev. G.H. De Bevoise and other
  "Friends," 4.75; Sab. Sch.
  of First Cong. Ch., 5                         19.00

Keene. C.D. Robertson, _for Mountain
  White work._       1.00

Nashua. First Cong. Ch.                         47.17

Nashua. "Friends," 27; Ladies' Charitable
  Soc., 10 _for Dormitory, Brewer Normal
  Sch., Greenwood, S.C._                        37.40

Newington. Cong. Ch.                             4.68

New Ipswich. Children's Fair, _for Freight
  to Straight U._                                1.10

Pelham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      40.40

Pembroke. Mrs. Mary Thompson, 10;
  Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 8, _for
  Wilmington, N.C._                             18.00

Raymond. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     11.00

Tamworth. Cong. Ch.                              2.00


VERMONT, $159.10.

Lunenburg. Charles W. King                      15.00

Norwich. William E. Lewis                        5.00

Springfield. "Splinters of the Board,"
  by Myrtle A. Ellison, Treas., 2.25 for
  _Tougaloo U._, and 2.25 _for Indian M._        4.50

  Saint Johnsbury. South Cong. Ch.              64.85

Swanton. Cong. Ch.                              15.65

Wallingford. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and
  Soc., Bbl. of C.: Cash, 1, by Miss C.M.
  Townsend, _for McIntosh, Ga._                  1.00

Westminster West. Sab. Sch. of Cong.
  Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._                      19.10

West Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 6.00

Vermont Woman's Home Miss'y Union,
  by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks, Treas.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._:

     Castleton. Ladies, by
     M.K. Adams                       3.00

     Dorset. W.H.M. Soc., _for
     School, Marshallville, Ga._      5.00

     Newport. Ladles of Cong.
     Ch.                             20.00

                                     -----      28.00


MASSACHUSETTS, $7,332.96.

Amesbury. Main St. Cong. Ch.                     9.87

Amherst. Members of Amherst College
  Ch.                                           45.00

Andover. George W.W. Dove, _for Tillotson
  C. and N. Inst._                              25.00

Arlington. Rev. R.B. Howard, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                   2.00

Boston. Shawmut Cong. Ch.            20.00

     Mrs. Emily P. Eayers             5.00

     "Friend"                         4.50

     Daniel S Ford. _for Laundry,
     Talladega C._                  300.00

     Rev. C.A. Richardson,
     _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._      10.00

     W.H. Emerson, _for Sherwood,
     Tenn._                          10.00

     Mrs. J.B. Potter, _for
     Wilmington, N.C._                8.00

     A.A. Winsor, _for
     Talladega C._                    5.00

Dorchester. Rev. Mrs. Houston,
     _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._      10.00

     Miss Mary A. Tuttle, _for
     Rosebud Indian M._               0.50

     "Miss T.," _for Indian M._       5.00

Roxbury. Walnut Ave. Cong.
     Ch., ad'l                       10.00

Somerville. Sab. Sch. of Franklin
     St. Ch., _for Student Aid,
     Santee Normal Sch._             40.00

     Mrs. N.B. Wilder, _for
     Pleasant Hill, Tenn._           15.00

West Somerville. Ladies' Aid Soc.,
     Box of Bedding, _for
     Talladega C._

                                   -------     443.00

Bernardston. Cong. Ch.                           8.00

Blackstone. Rev. L.M. Pierce                    10.00

Brimfield. First Cong. Ch.                       8.50

Brockton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc.,
  69.28 to const. HARRISON D. WILBUR and
  MISS MARY A. CHADBOURNE L.M.'s;
  Mrs. J.R. Perkins, 5; Mrs. S.A.
  Southworth, 2                                 76.28

Brockton. Central Methodist Ch. Sab.
  Sch., 5.11; Mrs. O.M. Littlefield, 2,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                     7.11

Cambridge. Mem. First Ch. and Shepard
  Soc., 50; MRS. J. RUSSEL BRADFORD, 15,
  bal. to const. herself L.M.                   65.00

Cambridgeport. Mrs. J.D. Merriam, 50;
  Mrs. E. Kendall, 25; Ladies' Miss'y
  Soc., 25, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._         100.00

Cambridgport. Y.P.S.C.E. of Pilgrim Ch.          7.00

Campello. South Cong. Ch.                      100.00

Chelsea. Third Cong. Ch.                        48.98

Chelsea. Mrs. Mary A. Hallgreen, 5; Mr.
  Flanders, 5, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._       10.00

Chester Center. D.B. Lyman                       1.00

Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                          5.00

Colerain. Mrs. Prudence B. Smith                 5.00

Curtisville. Cong. Ch.                          20.85

Dalton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                       45.00

Danvers Center. Sab. Sch. of First Ch.,
  _for Atlanta, U._                             11.98

Dedham. First Cong. Ch.                        105.40

Dover. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                10.87

Dracut. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00

East Bridgewater. Sab. Sch., _for
  Talladega C._                                 12.50

East Cambridge. Miss Mary F. Aiken
  (3.85 of which _for Freight to Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._)                                        5.35

East Dennis. Union Sab. Sch., _for
  Talladega C._                                  5.00

East Granville. Y.P.S. of C.E., by John
  A. Gellett, Treas.                             2.50

Easthampton. First. Cong. Ch.                   61.07

East Taunton. Ev. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain
  White Work_                                    5.06

East Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.           28.00

East Weymouth. Mrs. James Vining, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          5.00

Enfield. Mrs. F.W. Kimball's Primary
  Class, Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
  Indian M._                                     5.00

Essex. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       46.00

Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     30.05

Florence. Florence Ch.                          20.00

Fitchburg. Cal. Cong. Ch.                       50.50

Fitchburg. Sab. Sch. of Rollstone Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    50.00

Franklin. First Cong. Ch. addl.                  9.60

Franklin. ---- _for Wilmington, N.C._            2.00

Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    56.21

Haverhill. A.P. Nichols, _for Talladega C._    100.00

Hinsdale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Indl. Sch., Williamsburg, Ky._                40.40

Holbrook. Sab. Sch. of Winthrop Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Gregory Inst._                   10.00

Holliston. "Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4."   50.00

Holliston. Rev. Geo. M. Adams, D.D., _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         10.00

Holyoke. F.B. Jones, _for Macon, Ga._            9.50

Hyannis Port. Cong. Ch., 6.63; Sab. Sch.,
  3.36; Dr. W.J. Wright, 2.01, _for Student
  Aid, Straight U._                             12.00

Ipswich. First Ch.                              10.00

Lakeville and Taunton. Precinct Ch. and
  Soc.                                          60.00

Lanesville. William L. Saunders, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          5.00

Lawrence. J.H. Eaton, _for Talladega C._         5.00

Leverett Y.P.S.C.E., _for Grand View,
  Tenn._                                        13.00

Littleton. "A Friend"                           50.00

Lowell. R. Stevens                               5.00

Lynnfield Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 33,
  to const. REV. HARRY L. BRICKETT L.M.;
  Cong. Sab. Sch., 5.10                         38.10

Ludlow. Cong. Ch.                                5.00

Malden. Mrs. Mary D. Convers, _for Laundry,
  Talladega, Tenn._                            500.00

Maplewood. Infant S.S. Class, _for
  Wilmington, N.C._                              1.00

Marblehead. J.J.H. Gregory, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         66.00

Melrose. Ortho. Cong. Ch. ad'l.                 51.69

Monson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Wilmington, N.C._                             12.00

Newburyport. Prospect St. Cong. Ch.,
  273.25, to const CHARLES H. COFFIN, MRS.
  FRANCES E. COFFIN, REV. P.S. HULBERT,
  MRS. P.S. HULBERT and KATE CAMPBELL
  HURD, M.D., L.M.'s.: North Cong. Ch.
  and Soc., 30                                 303.25

New Marlboro. Cong. Ch.                          5.00

Newton. Eliot Mission Circle, _for
  Rosebud Indian M._                             5.00

North Adams. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      50.00

Northampton. A. Lyman Williston                300.00

Northampton. A. Lyman Williston, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         21.00

Northampton. Geo. W. Cable's Sab. Sch.
  Class. Edwards Ch.                            75.42

North Billerica. Mrs. E.R. Gould,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._                          3.00

North Brookfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
  Ch., _for Pleasant Hill. Tenn._               25.00

Northfield. Trin. Cong. Ch.                     12.00

North Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  8: Ladies of Cong. Ch., 7, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                  15.00

North Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim
  Ch., _for Student Aid, Gregory
  Inst._                                         8.00

Norton. Sab. Sch. of Trin. Cong. Ch.            10.00

Pepperell. "Friends," 2 Bbls. C., etc.,
  _for Greenwood, S.C._

Phillipston. D. & L. Mixter                      2.00

Pittsfield. A.A. Mills, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      13.95

Plainfield. Mrs. Albert Dyer                      5.00

Randolph. Rev. J.C. Labaree, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         10.00

Reading. Cong. Ch.                              18.00

Reading. Miss E.A. White, _Freight for
  Sherwood, Tenn._                               2.00

Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                             10.00

Salem. Sab. Sch. of Tabernacle Ch.              25.00

Salem. "Friends," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                  2.00

Southampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 50.00

South Natick. John Eliot Ch.                    14.63

South Weymouth. Union Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Wilmington. N.C._                        50.00

Spencer. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                    40.00

Sudbury. Cong. Ch.                              52.42

Townsend. Ladies' Soc., bbl. of C., etc.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Townsend Harbor. By Helen E. Haynes,
  _for freight to Greenwood, S.C._               2.00

Uxbridge. Wm. H. Seagrave                       25.00

Ware. Young Men's Class, Sab. Sch. East
  Cong. Ch., _for Indian Scholarship_           35.00

Walpole. Mr. & Mrs. Loring Johnson, _for
  new building, McIntosh, Ga._                  60.00

Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                        21.27

Wendell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      6.55

Wellesley. Wellesley College, Woman's
  Christian Ass'n, _for Library Fund,
  Macon, Ga._                                   40.00

Wellesley College. Miss Marion Metcalf,
  _for Indian M._                                5.07

Westfield. Mrs. M.A. Shurtleff. 5; Miss
  Elizabeth Phelps, 5, _for Jewett Hall,
  Grand View, Tenn._                            10.00

Westfield. Mrs. C.W. Fowler, Box of
  C., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Westford. "A Friend"                             5.00

West Medway. Dorcas Soc. Third Cong.
  Ch., 10: Ladies' Char. Soc. Third Cong.
  Ch., 5, _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 15.00

West Springfield. Miss Mary W. Southworth,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    50.00

Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (300 of
  which for _Mountain Work, Tenn._)          1,077.73

Whitinsville. Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                  15.00

Williamstown. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Fisk U._                                 20.00

Williamstown. South Cong. Ch.                   15.50

Winchendon. First Cong. Ch., 11; and
  Sab. Sch., 20.79                              31.79

Winchendon. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.,
  (3 of which _for freight to Grand View,
  Tenn._)                                        7.82

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. (25.08 of
  which _for Indian M._)                        52.68

Wollaston. Cong. Ch., 16.35;
  Friend, 50 cts                                16.85

Worcester. Central Ch., 141.35; Summer
  St. Mission Chapel Ch., 6.40    147.75

Worcester. Piedmont Ch., _for Paris, Tex._      61.86

Worcester. Primary and Intermediate
  Depart's. Piedmont Sab. Sch., _for church
  building, Roxton, Texas_                      50.00

Worcester. Union Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._     75.00

Worcester. Ladies of Union Ch., _for Indian
  Scholarship_                                  20.50

Worcester. Infant Class of Central Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Lincoln Normal Inst.,
  Marion, Ala._                                  8.00

Worcester. "Friend," _for Rev. J.R. McLean,
  Paris, Texas_                                  5.00

----. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 50.00

Hampden Benevolent Association, by
  Charles Marsh, Treas.:

     East Granville                 $10.00

     Ludlow                          17.64

     Monson                          35.42

     South Hadley Falls              31.29

     Springfield. First              20.00

     Westfield. Second               19.20

     West Springfield, Park St.      18.00

                                  --------     146.55

                                            ---------
                                            $5,832.96


                 ESTATES.

Medfield. Estate of Mrs. Abigail Cummings,
_for education, instruction and improvement
of the Colored population of the
South_                                       1,000.00

Phillipston. Estate of Trowbridge Ward,
by James Watts, Ex.                            500.00

                                            ---------

                                            $7,332.96


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC. RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Falmouth, Me. First Cong. Ch., Bbl., _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._

South Berwick, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl., _for Wilmington, N.C._

New Ipswich, N.H. Cong. Sab. Sch. and
  Mrs. L.A. Obear, Case, _for Straight U._

Pittsfield, N.H. By S.G. French, Bbl.
  and Box, _for Marion, Ala._

Auburndale, Mass. Mrs. Johnson, 2 Packages.

Cambridgeport, Mass. Pilgrim Ch., Case
  Comfortables, Val. 20, _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._

Dorchester, Mass. Ladies of Harvard Ch.,
  2 Bbls., _for Selma, Ala._

Ipswich, Mass. Ladles' Benev. Soc. of
  First Ch., Bbl., Val. 25. _for Oaks, N.C._

Marshfield Mass. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of
  First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls., Val. 48.25

Millbury, Mass. Miss Emily S. Ewell,
  Box, _for Mrs. J.T. Ware, Atlanta, Ga._

Phillipston, Mass. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  and Mrs. Annie S. Sawyer, 2 Boxes.

Reading, Mass. E.A. White, Bbl., _for
  Sherwood, Tenn._

Somerville, Mass. Young People's Miss.
  Circle of Day St. Ch., Bbl., val. 92.75,
  Box. val. 75, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Townsend Harbor, Mass. By Helen E.
  Haynes, Bbl., _for Greenwood, S.C._

Winchendon. Mass. Y.P.S.C.E., Case,
  _for Grand View, Tenn._


RHODE ISLAND, $525.54.

Bristol. First Cong. Ch.                     45.91

East Providence. S. Belden.                  75.00

Hughsdale. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._                          4.28

Kingston. Cong. Ch.                          36.22

Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.             75.00

Thornton. Union Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._                     2.75

Westerly. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 33.96

Providence. Churches, by G.E. Luther:

     Beneficent Cong. Ch.            48.40

     Central Cong. Ch.               85.75

     Union       "                   70.80

     Pilgrim     "                   15.65

     North       "                    7.80

     Plymouth    "                    5.22

     Park Place, Pawtucket Cong.
     Ch.                              8.15

     Pawtucket. Cong. Ch.            15.65

                                    ------     252.42


CONNECTICUT, $2,239.19.

Abington. Cong. Ch., to const. MISS
  ALTHEA M. LORD L.M.                           35.50

Canaan. ----                                     1.00

Chester. Cong. Ch.                              37.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     57.47

East Hampton. Philo. Bevin, 25; Dea. S.
  Skinner, 10; A.H. Conklin, E.C. Barton
  and H.H. Abbe, 65, _for Talladega C._        100.00

Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                             9.50

Granby. Cong. Ch.                                3.75

Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. MISS
  CALLIE F. DAVIS L.M.                          30.00

Guilford. "Wigwam Club," First Cong.
  Ch., _for Indian Sch'p_, and to const.
  CATHARINE L. GRISWOLD, L.M.                   30.00

Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                           2.00

Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch., 72.48;
  Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., "A Friend," 10;
  "A Friend," 1                                 83.48

Hartford. C.A. Jewell, 25; Roland Mather,
  25; John C. Parsons, 5; J.S. Wells,
  5; "R.D.," 5; "Amicus," 5; "A Friend,"
  5; "A Friend," 5; "A Friend," 50 cts.,
  _for Jewett Hall, Grand View, Tenn._          85.50

Kensington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 30, to
  const. MRS. GEORGE L. TAYLOR L.M.;
  Mayflower Mission Circle, 5, _for
  Tougaloo U._                                  35.00

Mansfeld. Mrs. N.J. Stevenson, _for
  Indian M._                                     5.00

Meriden. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._     25.00

Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                           20.57

Middletown. First Ch., 116.50; South
  Cong. Ch., 52.59                             169.09

Middletown. Benj. Douglass, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 10.00

Milton. Cong. Ch.                               13.00

Mount Carmel. Cong. Ch.                         35.36

New Britain. First Cong. Ch., _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 50.00

New Britain. Sab. Sch. of South Ch., _for
  Indian M._                                    25.10

New Canaan. Woman's Home Miss'y Soc.
  of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._     26.00

New Haven. Mrs. E.G. Cady, 30, to const.
  MISS MARY LUCY JEWETT L.M.;
  Howard Ave. Cong. Ch., 7.66,
  _for Jewett Hall, Grand View, Tenn._          37.66

New Haven. Miss Fannie Skinner, 6 Silver
  Forks, _for Teachers' Home, Macon, Ga._

Newington. Cong. Ch.                            40.50

North Branford. Cong. Ch.                       16.68

Norwich. Mrs. Mary B. Holyoke, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 25.00

Norwich Town. Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
  Ch., 17.90; Rev. W.B. Clark. 50 cts., _for
  Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._          18.40

Old Lyme. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                              20.00

Plainville. "King's Daughters," _for
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                     4.00

Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Atlanta U._                                   32.06

Plymouth. George Langdon, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 10.00

Salisbury. Proceeds of Fair by the King's
  Daughters, by Mrs. John C. Goddard,
  _for Decatur, Ala._                           25.00

Southington. Geo. B. Finch                       1.00

Southport. "Friends" in Cong. Ch., _for
  Out-Station, Grand River, Indian M._         186.00

Southport. "Friends," 90; "Friends,"
  75, _for Grand River, Indian M._             165.00

Stonington. Miss Anne Williams Hill's
  S.S. Class, _for Talladega C._                 8.00

Stratford. Cong. Ch.                            25.12

Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                            35.10

Thomaston. H.M. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                   30.00

Thompson. Cong. Ch.                             17.05

Thompson. Cong. Ch., collected by Miss
  Julia Shaw, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._       30.75

Torringford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 11.00

Vernon. Cong. Ch.                               13.55

Washington. Cong. Ch., by S.J. Nettleton,
  _for Student Aid, Santee Normal Sch._         25.00

Wauregan. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., by Carrie
  Fellows, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._           8.00

Westminster. Rev. S.B. Carter and Wife.         10.00

Winsted. David Strong, _for Theo. Dept.,
  Talladega C._                                 25.00

----. "A Friend"                               500.00

----. "A Conn. Friend"                          80.00


NEW YORK, $4,826.43.

Alfred Center. Mrs. Ada F. Kenyon                5.00

Amsterdam. D. Cady                              10.00

Ashland. Rev. O.B. Hitchcock                     5.00

Binghamton. First Cong. Ch.                     53.08

Blodgett Mills. Miss E.C. Nason, Bbl. of
  Papers, _for Savannah, Ga._

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Ballard
  Sch. Building, Macon, Ga._                 2,060.00

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Student
  Aid_                                         144.00

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Student
  Aid, Atlanta U._                              40.00

Brooklyn. Miss J.E. Prentiss' Sab. Sch.
  Class, Ch. of Pilgrims. _for Indian
  Scholarship_                                  70.00

Brooklyn. Lee Ave. Cong. Ch.                    13.75

Brooklyn. Lee Ave. Cong. Ch., Infant
  Class "Birthday offerings," _for
  Williamsburg, Ky._                            10.00

Brooklyn. Mayflower Mission Sab. Sch.,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._                        5.00

Brooklyn. Rev. T.L. Cuyler, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 10.00

Elmira. Park Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._       50.00

Fredonia. Miss Mary F. Lord                      5.00

Ithaca. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p._                           27.70

Marion. "Friend."                                1.00

Massena. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            18.00

Medina. M.P. Lyman                               1.50

Mexico. E. Wheeler                               1.00

New Haven. Cong. Ch., to const. DEA.
  EDWARD W. ROBINSON L.M.                       34.00

New York. Gen. Wager Swayne. 50;
  Ralph Wells, 25, _for Talladega C._           75.00

New York. H.P. Van Liew, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            10.00

Orient. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                  12.50

Schenectady. Mrs. J.W. Chute, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          5.00

----. "A Friend," _for Jenkins Chapel,
Talladega, Ala._                                 6.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas., _for
  Womans' Work_:

     Churchville. Ladies' Aux.       10.00

     Homer. Mrs. Coleman Hitchcock    5.00

     Homer. Ladies' Aux.              1.00

                                     -----      16.00

                                            ---------

                                            $2,683.48


ESTATES.

Brooklyn. Estate of Alfred S. Barnes,
  _for Fisk U._                                925.00

New York. Estate of W.E. Dodge, _for
  Theo. Student Aid_                           150.00

Ransomville. Estate of John Powley           1,067.95

                                            ---------

                                            $4,826.43


NEW JERSEY, $222.99.

Arlington. Arlington Mission Band,
  _for Savannah, Ga._                            1.00

Chester. "A Friend of Missions,"
  _for Mountain White Work_                     30.00

East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch.                19.10

Montclair. D.O. Eshbaugh, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            30.00

Montclair. Young Ladies Miss'y Soc.,
  Bbl. of C., _for Meridian, Miss._

Morristown. Woman's Indian Ass'n,
  _for Indian M._                               20.00

Newark. Belleville Ave. Cong. Ch.              107.89

Newark. Rev. J.M. Whitin, _for Prize in
  English Composition, Talladega C._            15.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $29.00.

Franklin. Sab. Sch. of M.E. Ch., _for
  Wilmington, N.C._                              8.00

Guy's Mills. Mrs. F. Maria Guy                   2.00

Lansford. First Cong. Ch.                       10.00

Montrose. Mrs. D.T. Brewster, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall_, Grand View, Tenn._                 1.00

New Milford. H.A. Summers                        5.00

Philadelphia. A.L. Elwyn, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                  1.00

Saire Oaks. Miss Jane Wilson                     2.00


OHIO, $612.18.

Alexis. Cong. Ch.                                6.00

Canfield. Cong. Ch.                             10.10

Claridon. First Cong. Ch., 33.65; L.T.
  Wilmot, 10                                    45.65

Claridon. Ladies' Benev. Soc.; Pkg.
  sheets and quilts, _for Tougaloo U._

Cincinnati. Walnut Hills Cong. Ch. and
  Sab. Sch.                                     86.63

Cleveland. "In Memory of J.M.F. and
  H.B.F.", 50; Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.,
  21.90; Union Cong. Ch., 2                     73.90

Hampden. Cong. Ch.                               3.00

Hicksville. E.M. Ensign                         10.00

Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                 3.00

Napoleon. Mrs. N.B. Palmer                       1.00

New Richland. Mrs. Elizabeth Johnston            2.00

North Bloomfield. F.O. Reeve                     5.00

Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                       85.20

Oberlin. Rev. C.V. Spear, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                   5.00

Parisville. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.             27.05

Radnor. Edward D. Jones                          5.00

Ruggles. Cong. Ch.                              18.65

Wauseon. Cong. Ch.                              25.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

     Harmar. Ladies' Oak Grove
     Miss. Band                       5.00

     Hudson. W.H.M.S.                 5.00

     Ravenna. Cong. Ch. Miss.
     Band.                           30.00

                                   -------      40.00

                                              -------

                                              $452.18

ESTATE.

Tallmadge. Estate of Rev. John Seward,
  by Wm. H. Upson, Ex.                         160.00
                                              -------

                                              $612.18


INDIANA, $9.00.

Fort Wayne. Cong. Ch.                            9.00


ILLINOIS, $724.06.

Aurora. Mrs. J.L. Greenfield, _for Chinese
  M._, and to const. S.H. SHERWOOD, MRS.
  H.H. BONSLOUGH and MRS. J.E. GREENFIELD
  L.M.'s                                        100.00

Camp Point. Mrs. S.B. McKinney                  12.00

Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 149.88; O.B.
  Green, 125; Rev. Arthur Little, D.D., 25;
  E.F. Parr, 15                                314.88

Chicago. Bethany Cong. Ch., _for Printing
  Dept, Santee Ag., Neb._                        8.10

Chicago. Estate of Dea. Philo Carpenter,
  by Rev. J.E. Roy, Trustee, Box of books
  etc., _for Talladega C._

Danville. First Presb. Sab. Sch, 14.10;
  Col. Candler, 5: Mrs. C.M. Young, 2;
  Mrs. A.M. Swan, 2; Mrs. Crane, 50c, _for
  Talladega C._                                 20.00

Danville. H.M. Kimball, _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 20.00

Dover. Cong. Ch.                                31.50

Elmwood. Cong. Ch.                              21.15

Lyndon. J.M. Hamilton                            1.00

Napersville. "Friends" _for Sch'p
  Endowment Fund, Fisk U._                      21.08

Paxton. George L. Shaw                           3.00

Pecatonica. Seward Cong. Ch.                    34.25

Plainfield. Mrs. A.E. Hagar                      5.00

Polo. Miss Emma R. Pearson, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                  10.50

Rockford. Miss Gracie Morton, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          1.00

Stillman Valley. Lovejoy Johnson                25.00

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

     Ashkum                           2.91

     Alton. _for Mt. White Work_     20.01

     Chicago. New England Ch.        42.00

     Oak Park                        13.00

     Danvers. "Busy Bees"             5.00

                                    ------      82.91


MICHIGAN, $295.12.

Battle Creek. J.B. Chapin, M.D.                  1.00

Calumet. Sab Sch. Cong. Ch. _for Theo.
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                    25.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch.                              12.25

East Gilead. Rev. L. Curtis                      1.60

Galesburg. Cong. Ch.                            23.00

Hancock. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               25.00

Union City. First Cong. Ch., 100.87: I.W.
  Clark, 100                                   200.87

Wheatland. Cong. Ch.                             1.40

Whittaker. Cong. Ch.                             5.00


IOWA, $319.27.

Atlantic. Bear Grove Cong. Ch.                   0.50

Cedar Falls. Cong. Ch., adl                      3.00

Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                       15.50

Clinton. Cong. Ch.                              15.00

Des Moines. North Park Ch., 12.30, and
  Sab. Sch. 2                                   14.30

Edgewood. Cong. Ch.                              2.75

Fort Dodge. Cong. Ch.                           12.10

Grinnell. Cong. Ch., 11.36; Sab. Sch. Concert,
  Cong. Ch., 14.28                              25.64

Grinnell. Mrs. J.B. Grinnell, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            10.00

Hawarden. Cong. Ch.                              4.47

Independence. Rev. W.S. Potwin, _for
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                    25.00

Monticello. Cong. Ch.                           10.00

Montour. Cong Ch., to const. MRS. J.G.
  CRONK L.M.                                    31.82

Muscatine. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                    20.00

Newton. Cong. Ch.                               19.96

Sioux Rapids. Cong. Ch.                          3.14

Strawberry Point. Cong. Ch.                      2.75

Tipton. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.         7.50

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union
  _for Woman's Work_:

  Dubuque. L.M.S.                    25.00

  Dubuque. Y.L.B.S.                  18.00

  Des Moines. L.M.S. Plym.            5.27

  Fairfield. W.M.S.                   2.20

  Lyons. L.M.S.                       7.53

  Magnolia. W.H.M.U.                  4.25

  Osage. L.M.S.                       3.20

  Shenandoah. ----                    2.78

                                    ------      68.23


WISCONSIN, $165.09.

Beloit. Mrs. C.M. Nelson, Box of C.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Clinton. Cong. Ch.                              37.18

Emerald Grove. "Friends" _for Marion, Ala._      0.50

Lake Geneva. Y.P.M. Soc., _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      25.00

Leeds. Cong. Ch.                                10.50

Milton. Cong. Ch.                                5.00

Racine. Mrs. Canfield Sith                      20.00

West Salem. Cong. Ch.                            4.00

Whitewater. Cong. Ch., 31.54; Sab. Sch.
  Cong. Ch., 11.37                              42.91

Windsor. Cong. Ch.                              20.00


MINNESOTA, $187.18.

Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                       20.00

New Richland. Ladies, Box of C., _for
  Jonesboro, Tenn._

Northfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Talladega C._                    59.93

Saint Paul. "Members and Friends"
  Pacific Cong. Ch., to const. REV. E.C.
  EVANS L.M.                                    30.00

Saint Paul. H.B. Ayres, _for Jewett Mem.
  Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                      75.00

Saint Paul. S.S. Class, _for Talladega C._       2.25


MISSOURI, $138.05.

Laclede. Miss Clara A. Seward, _for Woman's
  Work_                                          2.00

Saint Joseph. Tabernacle Cong. Ch.              25.30

Saint Louis. Wm. Humphrey, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                  10.00

Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                      100.75


KANSAS, $14.45.

Burlingame. "A Friend."                         1.00

Meriden. J. Rutty                              10.00

Stockton. First Cong. Ch.                       3.45


DAKOTA, $43.50.

Chamberlain. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.             4.00

Jamestown. Mrs. M.S. Wells                      3.50

Rapid City. "A Friend."                         2.00

Ree Heights. Olive Branch Mission Band,
  by Nettie Galloway                            1.00

Yankton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.          20.00

Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas., _for Woman's
  Work_:

    Henry. W.M.S.                     5.00

    Sioux Falls. W.M.S.               5.00

    Vermillion. W.M.S.                3.00

                                   -------      13.00


NEBRASKA, $2.20.

Red Cloud. Cong. Ch.                             2.20


COLORADO, $124.10.

Brighton. Presb. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                    14.00

Denver. First Cong. Ch.                         46.60

Denver. Ladies' Aid Soc., 50; Zion Bapt.
  Sab. Sch., 3.50, _for Student Aid, Tillotson
  C. and N. Inst._                              53.50

West Denver. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._       10.00


CALIFORNIA, $15.50.

Eureka. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00

Riverside. Mrs. D.C. Parsons' S.S. Class
  Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                  5.50


OREGON, $12.50.

Forest Grove. First Cong. Ch.                   12.50


WASHINGTON TERR., $5.00.

Roy. Mrs. Eliza Taylor                           5.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $8.82.

Washington. Lincoln Mem. Ch.                     8.82


KENTUCKY, $1.66.

Woodbine. Rev. E.H. Bullock                      1.66


TENNESSEE, $43.00.

Crossville. G. Walton                            2.00

Nashville. Rev. P.A. Chase                      10.00

Pleasant Hill. "A Friend," 5; "A Friend,"
  5; "A Friend," 1; "A Friend," 10; Rev.
  Mr. Vincent and Others, 10, by Rev. B.
  Dodge, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._             31.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $27.50.

Salem. Cong. Ch.                                 1.50

Strieby. Cong. Ch.                               8.50

Troy. S.D. Leak                                  0.50

Wilmington. Miss H.E. Fitts, 11; Miss
  A.E. Farrington, 6; _for Wilmington,
  N.C._                                         17.00


GEORGIA, $1.50.

Marietta. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., 75c
  each                                           1.50


ALABAMA, $2.00.

Marion. Miss Estelle Lovelace, _for tuition
  of a little girl, Lincoln Normal Inst._        2.00


TEXAS, $42.50.

Austin. Rev. H.L. Hubbell, D.D.                 15.00

Helena. Cong. Ch.                               27.40


CANADA, $15.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander                        5.00

Sherbrooke. Mrs. H.J. Morey                     10.00

                                           ----------

Donations                                  $14,959.26

Estates                                      3,802.95

                                           ----------

                                           $18,762.21


INCOMES, $1,822.72.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._          128.97

De Forest Fund, _for President's
  Chair, Talladega C._              481.25

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._      62.50

Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for
  Atlanta U._                        12.50

Howard Theo. Fund, _for
  Howard U._                        615.00

Tuthill King Fund, 125 _for Atlanta
  U._ and 75 _for Berea C._         200.00

Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis,
  Tenn._                            162.50

Luke Mem. Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                                10.00

Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._      50.00

Stone Sch'p Fund, _for
  Talladega   C._                    25.00

Sch'p Fund, _for Straight U._        45.00

Rev. J. and Lydia Dawes Wood
  Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._     25.00

Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                                 5.00

                                  --------  $1,822.72

                                             --------

Total for November                         $20,584.93

                                             ========


SUMMARY.

Donations                                   31,261.99

Estates                                      3,961.29

                                           ----------

                                           $35,223.28

Incomes                                      1,822.72

                                           ----------

Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30               $37,046.00
                                           ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for November                     $51.90

Previously received                             20.25

                                               ------

Total                                          $72.15


  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  56 Reade St, N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 43, NO. 01, JANUARY, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.