Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

March, 1889

Vol. XLIII.  No. 3.



CONTENTS.


EDITORIAL.

  TO THE PASTORS AND CHURCHES

  A CALL FOR ENLISTMENT

  PARAGRAPHS

  SUPREMACY OF THE WHITE RACE IN THE SOUTH

  TRAINING OF COLORED STUDENTS FOR THE EPISCOPAL MINISTRY

  A MONTHLY CONCERT AND SUPPLEMENT

  NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND

  ENGLISH AS IT IS NOT TAUGHT--CLIPPINGS


THE SOUTH.

  REVIVAL AT LEMOYNE INSTITUTE

  EVERY-DAY LIFE

  CROWDED SCHOOL-ROOMS

  PARAGRAPHS--DEATH OF MRS. HATTIE B. SHERMAN


THE CHINESE.

  LOO QUONG'S APPEAL


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  PARAGRAPHS

  CHRISTMAS AT FORT YATES

  MISS COLLINS


FOR THE CHILDREN.

  OUR SCHOOL GIRLS--JOSIE MIKE--POLLIWOG


RECEIPTS



  NEW YORK:
  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LLD., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

    J.E. RANKIN,
    WM. H. WARD,
    J.W. COOPER,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For Two Years._

    LYMAN ABBOTT,
    CHAS. A. HULL,
    J.R. DANFORTH,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER.

  _For One Year._

    S.B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    CHARLES L. MEAD,
    ELBERT B. MONROE.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS,
  Prof. EDWARD S. HALL.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St. N.Y._



COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.


VOL. XLIII.       MARCH, 1889.        No. 3.


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE PASTORS AND CHURCHES

_Who take Collections for the A.M.A. in March, April and May._

Dear Brethren: The work of this Association requires $1,000 per day. The
receipts for the first four months of our fiscal year have been only
about $800 a day. Here is the germ of a debt. Unless it is chilled and
destroyed in the vigorous months of March, April and May, when the
churches are full and active, it will, during the hot summer months,
when the audiences are thin, grow rapidly, and develop its bitter
fruit--a great deficit. The coming three months will be the test. We are
the servants of the churches and are doing their work, and we are
confident that they intend to give us the means to carry it forward.

We, therefore, appeal to the pastors whose collections come during these
three months, or whose collections can conveniently be brought within
these three months, to lend us their great help by emphasizing our needs
when the collections are taken, and we appeal to our patrons that they
will, both in their church collections or by their special donations,
come to our aid in a time when that aid will be so beneficial.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CALL FOR ENLISTMENT.

Perhaps we never shall cease our urgent appeals for the "sinews of war."
The growing work of this Association requires increasing funds to meet
the enlarged demand. But we are beginning to feel the need of a greater
force in the field. We sound forth the bugle note calling for recruits
for the army of the Lord in our glorious warfare. We appeal to students
in theological seminaries, colleges, normal schools and female
seminaries, to consider the claims of this great work. We make this
appeal with special urgency to the Congregational institutions of the
land, for it is from this body of Christians that we receive nearly all
the funds with which we carry on our work, and there is a special
fitness that the sons and daughters of these churches should enter the
field for which the funds are contributed.

But we wish to make a distinct announcement in connection with this
appeal. We wish only to "get the best." The needy people for whom we
labor have suffered such privations, and such absolute destitution of
all adequate religious instruction, that we feel they are now entitled
to as good as can be given them. We send no teachers to the field that
are incompetent and without adequate experience. We do not believe that
everybody is qualified to teach the Negroes, at least it is not fair to
them, that we should employ those who cannot find occupation anywhere
else. Good health, good training, good powers of discipline, a
missionary spirit and a membership in some evangelical church, are the
absolute essentials for all persons that we employ. We call for
recruits, but we ask for only those that are well equipped, courageous
and ready to endure hardness as good soldiers of Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *

The treasurer of a church in the West, who had been an officer in a
colored regiment during the war, in remitting the contribution of the
church to which he belongs, thus expresses his reason for his interest
in the welfare of the colored people:

"I was an officer in the 5th United States Colored Troops, the first
colored regiment raised west of the Alleghenies, just before the
massacre of colored troops at Fort Pillow, and knowing so much of the
fidelity and valor and good service of those troops in the war to the
Nation, to which they then owed so little, I have special interest in
the enlightenment and uplifting of the colored race in the South."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the last month's _Missionary_, we published some statements showing
that persons declined to contribute to our treasury because we had been
so enriched by the Daniel Hand Fund. It gives us pleasure to know that
all our patrons do not take this view of the matter, as will be seen
from the following extract from the letter of a practical business man:

"If A.M.A. means _A Million Accepted_, I hope you will be able to write
it once a year till you can build churches, school-houses and colleges
all through the South, but not enough to take away from the churches of
the North and East the privilege of helping the poor and needy till they
are able to take care of themselves."

       *       *       *       *       *

     Rev. Chas. H. McIntosh has for some months assisted Dr. Roy in
     collecting funds for the Association, using a stereopticon as a
     means of illustrating his lectures on the varied phases of our
     work.

Pastor Leeper of Red Oak, Iowa, writes: "We were much pleased with
Brother McIntosh's lecture and exhibit. He does well, and makes in every
way a good impression. The lantern works promptly and makes clear
pictures. That mode of presenting the work is the best I have seen. The
people will not soon forget what they saw and heard. They were surprised
to know that the A.M.A. is doing so extensive a work. I had often
preached on the subject, but pictures make the facts stand out so much
more vividly. We had crowded houses."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. J.B. Chase, of Hull, Iowa, wishes to complete his files of the
_American Missionary_ to have them bound for a public library. If any of
our readers have the numbers for August and September, 1880, and April,
1878, that they can spare and willingly give, it would be a favor to us
if they would mail them to the above address. Our edition for those
months is exhausted.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SUPREMACY OF THE WHITE RACE IN THE SOUTH.

Never since the days of reconstruction and of the adoption of the
Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution, has the question of the equal
suffrage of the races in the South awakened public attention as it does
now. In many quarters, some of them very influential, the right of the
Negro to a fair vote and a fair count is strenuously advocated. On the
other hand, the supremacy of the whites as the ruling race in the South
is set forth by leading Southern men more distinctly than ever before.


WHITE SUPREMACY.

Col. Grady, of Atlanta, in his famous speech at Dallas, Texas, urges
this in these emphatic terms:

     Standing in the presence of this multitude, sobered with the
     responsibility of the message I deliver to the young men of the
     South, I declare that the truth above all others to be worn
     unsullied and sacred in your hearts, to be surrendered to no
     force, sold for no price, compromised in no necessity, but
     cherished and defended as the covenant of your prosperity, and
     the pledge of peace to your children, is that the white race
     must dominate forever in the South, because it is the white
     race, and superior to that race with which its supremacy is
     threatened.

Hon. W.C.P. Breckinridge, member of Congress from Kentucky, and many
other prominent men in the South, express the same sentiment, so that
this may be regarded as the ultimatum of Southern popular requirement.


HOW THIS SUPREMACY IS TO BE ATTAINED.

The most _obvious_ way is that which is in use at present, the
intimidation of the colored man and the manipulation of the ballot-box.
But against this the sober second thought of the South itself begins to
revolt. Thus a paper so thoroughly Southern as the Charleston _News and
Courier_ utters this salutary and emphatic protest:

     "It appals thinking men to know and see that the present
     generation and the rising generation of white men in the South
     are taught in practice that republican institutions are a
     failure, and that elections are to be carried, not by the honest
     vote of a fair majority, but by campaigning, which begins with
     rank intimidation and ends with subterfuge and evasion. The
     white people suffer more by the trickery and malfeasance by
     which they score victory than the colored people suffer. The
     supremacy of what, for convenience, is called Anglo-Saxon
     civilization, though there is little of the Anglo-Saxon manner
     or of civilization in the mode of securing it, must and will be
     maintained, but it can be maintained without sectional divisions
     in politics and without the maintenance of radical lines at
     elections."

As these old methods are beginning to find little favor with the South
itself, a multitude of other schemes are brought to the front.

The _Age-Herald_, of Birmingham, Ala., claims a patent (which it says
others are infringing) for the scheme which it thus sets forth:

"The Negroes could be induced to emigrate to a Western Territory, if it
were set apart for their especial use without any force being used to
compel them to go."

A writer in the Richmond _Dispatch_ proposes that the Negroes in the
South be induced to voluntarily emigrate to Brazil, Mexico or other
countries where they are wanted, and even the old plan of fifty years
ago, to return them to Africa is again brought forward. To this last
suggestion, the _Yonkers Statesman_ replies:

     The notion that the black can be successfully re-shipped to
     Africa dies hard; but there are few things plainer than that he
     has no desire and no purpose to be thus disposed of, but regards
     this land as being as much his as it is the white man's. It
     would be hard to dispute his title, grounded as it is in age and
     effective service. The Negro believes he belongs here, and here
     he means to remain; and the prospect that his mind can be
     changed is certainly not very cheering.

The _Times-Democrat_ of New Orleans thinks that the true solution is
white immigration, but the _Daily Express_ of San Antonio, Texas,
replies: "The principal objection to this scheme is that the Negro will
not go till the white immigrants come, and the white immigrants will not
come until the Negro goes."

Congressman Oates, of Alabama, advocates the disfranchisement of the
Negroes, or rather as a Democrat he suggests that the Republicans do it.
He says that as the Republicans gave him the ballot, the South would
cheerfully acquiesce if they should take it away from him. But it is not
likely that the Republican administration will lead off in such a
movement. Indeed, from present appearances, the new President is looking
in exactly the opposite direction.


WISER VIEWS.

There are men, however, in the South, wise, conscientious and "to the
manner born," who take entirely different views of this great problem.
The Hon. J.L.M. Curry, once a General in the Confederate Army,
subsequently the efficient Secretary of the Peabody Fund, more recently
our Minister in Spain, and now again at his post as Secretary of the
Peabody Fund, utters himself in this forcible language:

     "I want to say to you, in perfect frankness, that the man who
     thinks the Negro problem has been settled is either a fanatic or
     a fool. I stand aghast at the problem. I don't believe
     civilization ever encountered one of greater magnitude. It casts
     a dark shadow over your churches, your government of the future.
     It is a great problem which will tax your energies. Your
     ancestors and mine a few years ago were cannibals and pagans.
     They have become what they are, not by virtue of white skin, but
     by improving government and good laws. You let the Negro
     children get an education where yours do not, let the Negro be
     superior to you in culture and property, and you will have a
     black man's government. Improvement, cultivation, education is
     the secret, the condition and guarantee of race supremacy. I
     will astonish you, perhaps, by saying that if the Negro develops
     and becomes in culture, property and civilization, superior to
     the white man, the Negro ought to rule. You see to it that he
     does not become so. The responsibility rests with you."

Rev. A.G. Haygood, D.D., Secretary of the Slater Fund, closes a review
of Senator Eustis's recent paper in these earnest words:

     Whatever political theory men form or oppose; whatever their
     speculative opinions about the origin of races; whatever their
     notions concerning color or caste; whatever their relations
     heretofore to slavery and what went along with it, this is
     absolutely certain: no question involving the rights and wrongs
     of men, civilized or savage, white or black, was ever yet
     settled so that it would stay settled by any system of mere
     repression. And to those who believe in Jesus Christ it is
     equally certain that nothing can be rightly settled that is not
     settled in harmony with the teachings of the Sermon on the
     Mount. If there be a Divine Providence no good man need be
     afraid to do right to-day; nay, he will fear only doing wrong.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TRAINING OF COLORED STUDENTS FOR THE EPISCOPAL MINISTRY.

A very interesting discussion occurred in the Missionary Council of the
Episcopal Church, held in Washington, D.C., November 13th and 14th, in
regard to the education of colored students for the ministry in the
Episcopal Church. The motive for not educating them in the existing
Episcopal Seminaries appeared to be simply the caste-prejudice, and some
marked utterances and facts were given on that subject, which we wish to
preserve.

The Bishop of Kentucky, whose generous feelings toward the colored race
we have had occasion to notice heretofore, quoted from another, and
endorsed for himself, the declaration: "The white man is not fit to
study for the ministry who is not ready to have his black brother sit by
him in the class room," and he subsequently added: "I believe I can
speak for my brothers, and I say out of my heart I would just as soon
sit by the side of a black man if he were in the House of Bishops, as
one of my white brothers." But yet the Bishop suggested and endorsed the
plan for the separate education of colored students, for two reasons:
(1) "The power of heredity is not to be overthrown in a day nor an
hour... This subtle spirit of caste is perhaps the demon hardest to cast
out of the human spirit, the one that requires the most prayer and
fasting, without which it will not go out," and (2) "It is certainly
true that the colored men themselves do not want to go there. It is just
as true that the white men do not want to have them there."

As to the first point, it is to be regretted that the good Bishop did
not give himself to fasting and prayer to cast out this malignant demon,
rather than to yield to it, and that he did not heed the words which
Jesus uttered when his disciples could not cast out a demon, "_Bring him
hither to me._" If bishops and churches will only bring this demon of
caste to Jesus, the work will be done.

The Bishop's second point, that the colored people desired the
separation, was pointedly answered by Dr. Crummell (rector of St. Luke's
Colored Church, Washington,) who was invited to speak on the subject.
Dr. Crummell said: "I do not think that any man in this country has seen
any statement by any number of black men or black students that they
wanted to be by themselves. I do not think such an utterance can be
found among the race. I myself never heard such a thing, and wherever
they have had entrance to other schools they have gone to them."

The decision reached by the Council was to erect, in connection with
some of the colored universities in the South, a hall under Episcopal
control for colored Episcopal students for the ministry, who should also
attend the college classes in the University. So far as the principle is
concerned, we regret this decision. How much better if the wealthy and
intelligent Episcopal Church in this country had lent its vast influence
in repudiating the spirit of caste by introducing colored theological
students into its own excellent seminaries.

       *       *       *       *       *


A MONTHLY CONCERT AND SUPPLEMENT.

BY REV. EDWIN N. ANDREWS.

Do they say the monthly concert is dull? If so, it is likely owing to
one or two causes like the following, (1) Perhaps only two or three
families take any missionary Magazine, hence but little information can
be expected. People are not interested in what they know nothing of. Or,
(2) there is a lack of preparation and purpose to make the meeting
interesting on the part of those to whom the leader ought to look for
help.

However, our last meeting took a rather interesting turn. It had been of
the average sort only, when towards the close one of the ladies spoke of
a call among the Freedmen for dolls and clothing, (not clothing for
dolls). The pastor suggested that we gather together, from the families,
various contributions, such as partly-worn garments, toys, books,
religious papers, etc., and make a New Year's donation to the people to
whom such things would be a god-send and good as new.

The suggestion was favored, and the animated countenances and talk that
followed betokened an after-meeting of unusual interest, and certainly
the most practical if not the best part of our conference. Something to
do, then and there, had been suggested; tongues were somehow set loose;
each one seemed to have a new-born interest, each held common stock in
the enterprise. Dr. Roy was consulted by the pastor as to a proper and
responsible party. Meanwhile the goods began to come in, often sent by
the boys or girls, who thus began to do missionary service, The pastor's
wife and daughter did the packing. Picture cards were pasted in cloth
folios for the little ones; old hats were trimmed; coats and vests went
in, shawls, Bibles, toys, etc., till a barrel, a large sugar barrel,
take notice, was crammed.

After awhile there came the address of a colored graduate of Tougaloo
University, living at or near Chattanooga, whose name was marked on one
end of the barrel, and the freight sent forward. After some delay, the
letter of acknowledgment came, saying, "The barrel came safe. The things
are just what so many of the people need, and they will go to those most
in need. Accept our thanks."

This letter will be read at our next concert, which should be a
thanksgiving occasion for the opportunity of doing something for the
destitute, and for the discovery of a way to make a monthly concert
interesting.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY C.J. RYDER.

Here comes a gift of five dollars from an aged friend ninety-one years
old! He has contributed to the A.M.A. every year for a generation. Who
will step into the place of these grand veterans when they are called
from the ranks? Such examples ought to thrill younger men and untie
their purse strings.

       *       *       *       *       *

At a recent visit to Wellesley College, the great company of students
listened patiently more than an hour to the story of the "American
Highlanders; where they are, who they are, and what the A.M.A. is doing
for them."

This interest on their part is characteristic of the intelligent people
throughout New England. The churches are asking for information
concerning these most interesting mountaineers, and are prayerfully
considering their duty toward them. In view of this general interest, I
give in these notes this month the following review of a book which I
have been requested by several New England pastors to present in THE
AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

_The Loyal Mountaineers of Tennessee._ By Thomas William Humes, S.T.D.
Ogden Brothers & Co.: Knoxville, Tenn.

Another interesting book on the Mountain people of the South. Those who
are familiar with the mountain missions of the A.M.A. will hail this new
volume with special delight. Those who read it will understand better
the magnitude and importance of this great field into which the A.M.A.
has pushed out its vanguard, and the necessity of following up these
advances with a solid phalanx of intelligent and enthusiastic
missionaries. This historical sketch brings prominently before us the
heroic manhood of these American Highlanders during the years of bitter
and systematic persecution by the rebel government. There is stuff in
these Highland chieftains and their clans!

Three facts that stand out from the pages of this history must intensify
our interest in these American Highlanders. One, the systematic and
brutal outrages inflicted upon them by the rebel authorities and their
heroic endurance; second, their unimpeachable and unswerving loyalty to
the country; third, the tremendous debt the loyal Christian people of
the North owe them. Take the following order issued by J.P. Benjamin,
Secretary of War, November 25, 1861, which appears on the 140th page of
this book;

"_First._ All such as can be identified in having been engaged in
bridge-burning are to be tried summarily by drum-head court martial,
and, if found guilty, executed on the spot by hanging. It would be well
to leave their bodies hanging in the vicinity of the burned bridges."

The State had voted in February, by sixty thousand majority, to remain
loyal to the Union. These Highlanders had sought to save their section
of the State from rebellion, and to defend their cabin homes from
outrage and butchery. In doing so, they had burned bridges, and for this
the government at Richmond deliberately instructs its army officers to
hold a mock trial, to hang, and to brutally expose the bodies of those
who had been executed, so that surviving friends would have to look upon
these sickening horrors! It seems almost impossible that any man could
deliberately perpetrate such monstrous cruelties. But the order was
issued by the rebel government and carried into effect. Indeed, the
brutalities went even farther than this. In December, 1861, two men by
the name of Harmon, father and son, were hanged. Only one gallows was
provided, and the authorities compelled the father to stand by and see
his own son pass through the horrors of strangulation while awaiting his
own execution. (Page 151).

The diary of Parson Brownlow, from which abundant quotations are given
in this volume, furnishes many similar instances of cruelty perpetrated
against these loyal mountaineers; but they were true to the flag from
beginning to end. They left their homes, and camped in the forests and
"down the coves" of their own wild mountains. Parson Brownlow encamped
for days in concealment in Tuckaleeche and Wear's Coves in the great
Smoky Mountains. Had fair and honorable means been used, these loyal
mountaineers would have saved Tennessee from that disgraceful chapter in
her history which records the dark story of her treason. This book must
stir the patriotism and Christian enthusiasm of every one who reads it.
It ought to lead us to make genuine sacrifices to show our appreciation
of their supreme devotion to the country by sending to this Mountain
Work, opened by the A.M.A., generously of men and of means.

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGLISH AS IT IS NOT TAUGHT.

He didn't crack a smile.

I feel many gratitudes to you.

His forgiven name is John.

Help us to bring forth meats for our repentance.

I won't fool with the Lord no more.

Help us to pray as the Republican did, "God be merciful to me a sinner."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one of our schools, students had been learning the Beatitudes to
recite at the table, and one Sunday they were asked to write the meaning
in their own language. One wrote, "To be poor in spirit means weak but
willing." Another, "Poor in spirit means that a person who has religion
and don't make a great to-do over it, has as much as one who cuts up
over theirs." ("Cutting up" means the noisy demonstrations in meeting).

A pupil gives us the following insight into the precise appearance of
the beings of the future world. "An angel is two lines which intend to
meet," in response to the question, "What is an angle?"

According to one of our growing historians here, Gen. Gage, of
Revolutionary fame, didn't altogether believe in the then existing
styles, for we were told the other day, that, "Gage, learning that there
were millinery stores at Concord, at once sent a force to destroy them."

       *       *       *       *       *


CLIPPINGS

FROM PAPERS EDITED BY COLORED MEN.

The only colored daily paper in America is printed at Columbus, Ga. It
is a four column folio, neat in make-up and well edited.


COLORED EXHIBITIONS TO THE FRONT.--At the recent Virginia Exposition Mr.
J.C. Farley, the colored photographer, was awarded the first premium for
his work, for which he is to receive a diploma and medal. Our esteemed
townsman has entered a new field and ascended to the topmost round of
the ladder at one bound.


A COLORED PRIZE WINNER.--Give a colored man a fair show and he is
certain to give a good account of himself. One of the notable college
contests in Illinois is known as the Swan Oratorical Contest, and is
held annually at Lombard University, at Galesburg. This contest was held
Thursday night of last week. The first prize was awarded to Burt Wilson,
a colored student, who lives at Galesburg, and is one of the most
promising scholars in the university. His oration is said to have been
an unusually brilliant effort.


WHAT THE NEGRO HAS DONE.--In the South there are now 16,000 colored
teachers, 1,000,000 pupils, 17,000 in the male and female high schools,
and 3,000,000 worshipers in the churches. There are sixty normal
schools, fifty colleges and universities, and twenty-five theological
seminaries. The colored people pay taxes on nearly $200,000,000 worth of
property valuation. This is a wonderful showing for a race that has two
hundred years of slavery and four thousand years of barbarism back of
it; it needs no silent sympathy or patient waiting, when in twenty years
it makes such a showing. American generosity has done for the South in
twenty years what statesmanship has failed to do in over a century; but
generosity should not be depended upon, as even that can reach a limit.


SUCCESSFUL IN BUSINESS.--North Carolina has a colored man whose business
success is hard to find surpassed by even the white people. The Concord
_Times_, a white journal, gives the following interesting sketch of his
career:

He was born a slave, and until he was twenty-one years of age, never had
a copper of his own. Possessed of a keen and adaptable mind, he has by
his energy and untiring efforts accumulated a competency, equalled by
few of his race in the South.

Warren Coleman commenced business here in 1879. He has lost everything
by fire three times,--one time meeting with a loss of $7,000 and no
insurance. Various purses of money were made up and sent him at this
time, all of which he very nobly returned. But by pluck and energy he
rose again.

He owns four farms, amounting in all to some 300 acres of land, and
employs on them twenty regular hands. He is the owner of ninety-eight
tenement houses and is still adding to the list, having in his employ at
this time twenty carpenters and eight or ten brick masons, laborers,
etc.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVAL AT LE MOYNE INSTITUTE.

PROF. A.J. STEELE.

It has been my privilege and my great joy to write you often during my
nearly twenty years of continuous service under the Association, of
God's blessing upon our work. We are now in the midst of one of the most
gracious visitations that I have ever experienced, and I recall "times
of refreshing" not a few. In 1875, the first great revival in connection
with this school saw over a hundred and twenty-five of our pupils
hopefully converted to Christ, and the young converts, by their
faithfulness, overcame all the fixed notions and ways of the old
churches on the subject of early conversions.

I have since that time, year by year, followed many of these young
people, and know that the great majority of them have proven faithful
followers of the Saviour, and many have lived lives of exceptional
influence and usefulness. Since that notable year in the history of the
school, but one year has passed without most evident tokens of God's
gracious presence in the conversion of pupils attending the school. In
some years the number has been large, and in others not so many have
made open profession of faith in Christ. I think I am safe in saying
that not a year, nor a month, has passed in which the school has not
been markedly under the influence of the Spirit, giving guidance and
instruction, and drawing, as with cords of love, many of our pupils to
see in the religion of the cross a peace and joy to be found nowhere
else. To this influence, the school owes all its success in every
direction. For myself I can truly say that in the midst of the sorrow
that has been my constant and only companion, besides my Saviour, the
joy of this work and the consciousness of its acceptance with God have
alone held me to the task laid upon me these years. I rejoice now, with
all my fellow workers, that we are in the midst of another season of
reaping, after months of sowing precious seed.

During the past week, two members of the senior class, young men,
professed their faith in Christ in the quiet prayer meeting of the
school, as did also a young lady of a lower class, and now, this week,
Brother Wharton is with us, and to-day, at the first meeting led by him
in the school, sixteen of our students, three more of the senior class,
quietly but hopefully profess to become followers of the Master, with
scores more earnestly seeking to enter in.

Since writing the above, two days of great but quiet interest have
passed in our work. Between thirty and forty of our scholars, including
five of the seniors and nearly every pupil of the other higher classes,
have learned the joy of Christian experience, and there are yet others
to follow.

The night meetings at the church are very interesting and in them
conversions are occurring in considerable numbers. The class work of the
school has not been interrupted, as half-hour meetings only have been
held, morning and noon. We rejoice greatly in this work that crowns and
confirms all the other work of the school.

       *       *       *       *       *


EVERY-DAY LIFE.

MRS. A.W. CURTIS.

Put on your best glasses, dear friends, and take a peep at the regular,
every-day life of some of the workers among the colored people South.

Rap, rap, rap.

"Come in!"

It is a toil-worn, sad-faced woman, with hard, bony hands, and that look
of patient endurance that is so pathetic. She is poorly clad, with only
a thin bit of an old shawl around her shoulders, and a hat so
disreputable that she instantly removes it, and drops it behind her on
the floor. After a few kindly words of greeting, she tells her story. A
sickly husband, deranged for the last nine years of his life, whom she
had to support and care for; a daughter who married a wretch who treated
her so cruelly that she, too, lost her mind, when he left her entirely,
with their child. She kept the daughter confined to bed or chair, while
she worked out as cook, to support them all. She had several other
children. Finally the crazy daughter got away, and she does not know
whether she is dead or alive.

What had she come to us for? Money, old clothes, help of some kind?

No, indeed. She came to see if we would take her grand-daughter and her
own daughter, both about twelve years old, into our school. She had
never been able to make them fit to go to any school, so they could not
even read, but she would do her very best, if we would take them now. I
wish Mr. Hand could have seen her shining face and tearful eyes, when we
told her of the kind friend who had provided so grandly for just such
cases as these.

A patter of small feet, a hasty rap at the door.

"Please ma'am, send little sister some medicine."

"What ails sister?"

The little fellow looked puzzled for a moment, then confidently
answered, "Her stomach has settled on her bowels!"

It is a perplexing diagnosis, but a few skillful questions draw out the
fact that she has a bad cold, and some chamomilla is sent at a venture.
Word comes back the next day that "Sister is well: that medicine did her
_all_ the good."

Next comes, one after another, a perfect rush of small boys and big
girls, with now and then a man or woman for variety, on various errands.
"Please ma'am, give me a settin' of eggs. Our old hen wants to set, and
we haint got no eggs." The great brown eyes grow round with astonishment
when we tell them that the hens are A.M.A. hens now, and not ours, and
these hungry teachers eat every egg they lay. Two or three others, who
have been accustomed to rely on our good nature for their winter supply
of greens and salad, receive the same reply, and it is evident that the
new order of things is very unsatisfactory and perplexing to them.

"Please ma'am, give me some castor oil for the baby; she's awful sick;
Doctor says it's indigestion of the lungs."

She gets the castor oil, but soon comes back to say in most cheerful
tones--"Baby is dead. She died at ten o'clock, but she's better off, and
please, ma'am, give mother a black basque to wear to the funeral."

Heartless? Oh no. There was great wailing and moaning at the funeral,
and when the one carriage, with as many of the family as could crowd in
beside the poor little coffin, started for the cemetery, this same child
stood in the doorway, waving her handkerchief, and shouting tragically,
"Fare thee well, baby! Fare thee well!"

A half-grown girl came up the steps with two tiny chickens about as
large as pigeons, their legs tied together, their voices lifted up in
shrill squawks.

"Father sent you these two chickens for a Christmas present, and says
please send him a coat and pair of breeches, and a vest, too, if you
can. And mother sent you these eggs for a present, and please send her a
warm underskirt and a pair of shoes!" A modest request, surely.

Next, a great girl, barefooted, though it was a raw, cold day that made
us huddle gladly over a big fire, and with her a small boy, literally
naked so far as his bony little legs were concerned. A few fluttering
rags that had once been pants depended from the remnant of what had once
been a calico waist. An old bag was pinned around his shoulders, which
completed his entire outfit. "Please ma'am, mother says she'll send
Johnny to school if you'll give him a coat and some breeches." Alas,
there is neither on hand, nothing for the boy except a thin cotton
shirt, and a pair of thin overalls to make over, by a mother who is more
accustomed to the use of a hoe than a needle, and who has seven children
as ragged and miserable as poor Johnny.

A messenger rushes in without knocking. "Come quick--Mattie's baby
burnt!"

"Yes, I'll come. Wrap it in cotton and oil."

Away flies the messenger. I seize the bottle of morphine and a hat, and
follow to the child's home. The floor is strewn with fragments of burnt
clothing. A sickening odor of burnt flesh fills the room. The scorched
high chair, in which the child was tied and put before the open
fireplace, while the mother went to a neighbor's for milk, lay in a pool
of water, and beside it, the burnt whisk-broom that an older baby had
put in the fire, then dropped blazing under the baby's long clothes,
these told the whole sad story. They were all at the grandparent's house
next door--a crowd of screaming people. Upon the bed lay what was left
of the poor child, moaning in conscious agony. A drop of water
containing the precious anodyne which alone could ease it then, soon
brought blessed unconsciousness until death kindly bore the little soul
to God. But oh! the heart-rending grief of that poor mother! God grant
we may never witness such suffering again. We tried to comfort her with
our tearful sympathy and prayers, but God alone can ever heal her sore
heart.

A sad-faced man wants to see the minister. We know his pitiful story and
his errand before he speaks. A sick wife and six young children. The
desperate daily fight with the hunger-wolf at the door, spite of the
little lifts we try to give them. Now the wife is dead, and he comes to
ask for money to buy a coffin and a place to lay her away. He has tried
in vain elsewhere, so comes to us, and we cannot refuse. A few hours
after, the pitiful little procession passes by. The pine coffin in an
old cart, the husband and children, the minister and a few friends,
following on foot. Such calls are frequent. Does the money ever come
back? _Once_ it did.

So it goes on, day after day, twenty, thirty, sometimes forty calls, for
all these incidents are actual facts, and fair samples of our daily
experiences and only a small part of our work. There is a large
household to look after, and between times there must be flying visits
to the distant kitchen to see that everything is going on right there. A
watchful eye must look after the details of the dining room and see to
the comfort of the whole household. Supplies must be ordered; bills must
be paid; there are countless letters to write; there are sorrowful
hearts to be comforted; wayward church members to look after; cold, dead
prayer meetings to warm up; the Sunday-school to carry along; mother's
meetings and children's meetings and missionary societies. An unlimited
stock of patience, tact and good nature must be constantly on hand to
keep all the machinery running smoothly, while the work is exhausting,
wearing out body and soul far too soon.

Does it pay? _Yes!_ for slowly but surely this people is being lifted up
to a higher life, and while we sometimes grow faint and heartsick and
discouraged, still there are rifts in the clouds and bits of sunshine
now and then to cheer our hearts, and someday we hope to hear the Master
say, "_Well done!_"

       *       *       *       *       *


CROWDED SCHOOL-ROOMS.

Perhaps some of our friends would be glad to hear a few words concerning
Brewer Normal School, Greenwood, S.C. The work goes on, but we are
hurried and crowded almost beyond endurance. We have only two
school-rooms and one recitation room. In one school-room fitted for
fifty-eight scholars, there are ninety-seven. They are obliged to sit,
three in a seat made for two, on chairs, stools and even on the teacher's
platform. Classes are sent from this room, and their recitation room is
the teacher's kitchen and dining-room--not very pleasant for the teachers,
but a necessity. The teacher of these classes is the Principal's
daughter, who has been taken from her own school to aid in this
emergency. In the other school-room, fitted for fifty-eight, there are
eighty-six--not quite as many as in the other room, but what is wanting
in numbers is made up in size. There are several men six feet tall, and
one minister six and a half. In many instances, we are obliged to look
up to our scholars.

Some of our classes in this room number thirty-five or forty. The
smaller classes from this room recite in the recitation room. It is with
difficulty that some of our men, weighing two hundred, get into the
seats in the school-room, but they bear the crowding and close packing
with great patience. The small boarding-houses in the yard are as badly
crowded as the school-rooms. In two small rooms, having two beds each,
there are twelve young men, six in each. Here they cook for themselves,
sleep and study out of school hours. One can hardly find standing-room
among the chairs, trunks, etc. Other rooms are crowded nearly as much.
And still the scholars come. What shall we do with them? Our cry is
_more room_. O, that God would put it into the heart of some one to give
the money needed for another building at Brewer!

       *       *       *       *       *


PARAGRAPHS.

The congregation of Lincoln Memorial Church, Washington, D.C., rejoiced
in a renovated and newly-furnished church edifice, Sunday, Jan. 6th. The
pastor, Rev. George W. Moore, preached an interesting sermon on "The Law
of Christian Growth." At the conclusion of the services a statement of
the cost of the recent improvements was read. The total cost was $1,500,
about $200 of which was given by contractors and workmen. Hon. A.C.
Barstow, of Providence, R.I., presented the church with one of the large
and beautiful stoves, and gave the other at the cost of manufacture. The
present membership of the church is one hundred, ninety of whom are
resident members. The people have done nobly in their gifts and
self-denials, and Pastor and Mrs. Moore have in their hands a great work
which promises to be greater in the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a pastor in a remote part of Georgia:

"I have seen more of the condition and wants of the people than ever
before, but whiskey and tobacco are the great evils of this part of the
country. The colored people are not very much in advance of what they
were twenty years ago, but the sad part of it is, that the leaders are
no better than the people. I think almost every minister about here uses
whiskey and tobacco, as far as I can learn, and of course the members of
the churches can see no harm in doing what their minister does. This is
a sad picture, but it only shows the need of intelligent and consecrated
leaders, such as the American Missionary Association is raising up for a
people who have been led by those who are neither intelligent nor
consecrated."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Hattie B. Sherman, the daughter of Rev. R.F. Markham, died January
14th at her residence in Stockton, Kansas. For two years she was a
missionary of this Association at Beach Institute, Savannah, Ga., where
she rendered faithful and effective service in the education of the
colored people. We tender our sympathies to her father, who was for so
many years a useful missionary of the Association in the South, and to
her husband, in their great bereavement.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOO QUONG'S APPEAL.

     Loo Quong is one of our Evangelistic Helpers. His special field
     at present is Southern California. The appeal is not only
     original, but spontaneous; written out of the anxious longings
     of his own heart, and not upon any suggestion from me. I have
     simply condensed it, to bring it within the limits of our space.
     I ask for it a kind and responsive hearing.

WM. C. POND.

_Dear friends of the American Missionary Association_:

We, the Chinese, have appreciated the generous Christian acts of the
members of this great Association, who not only have done good to other
souls of the United States, but have saved hundreds of poor sinners of
our Chinese race, in which I, myself, was one of the lost and now am
found. It was through the generosity and God-loving heart of the
Association that the Chinese found Jesus Christ the Saviour of the
world. And it was through the hard labors and patience of our
Superintendent of the California Chinese Mission that the Chinese have
become partakers of the blessings of the gospel. Though it is here that
the good news is told, it has echoed back far away across the Pacific,
where the four hundred millions of heathen Chinese are living. Just as
our Lord said to his disciples, "There is nothing covered that shall not
be revealed, neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore, whatsoever
ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light, and that which
ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the house
tops." Luke 12: 2, 3.

Those who have been converted in California and who have visited their
homes in China, have seen the necessity of Christianity for their
countrymen in China. Within these ten years there were hospitals
established and missionary societies organized by native Christians and
by those who have returned to China from California. Contribution books
are often sent over to the United States to the different denominations
of Christian Chinese to raise money and send back to support the
hospitals and missionary societies in China. But this is not all; not
long ago the Congregational Association of Christian Chinese in
California organized a missionary society to Southern China, from which
part nearly all the Christian Chinese that are now in the United States
have come, and this is the most important part of China in which to do
the missionary work. There are now many native preachers and
evangelists. This society proposes to buy property in China, for a
headquarters must be established in some of the middle cities in the
south of China, and then to sustain some of those native preachers and
evangelists.

Now I must come back to our work in California among the Christian
Chinese. There are about one thousand Christian Chinese in California.
You may hear in our towns and cities Chinese preachers and Chinese
evangelists preaching the gospel to their countrymen. The American
Missionary Association has put three more Chinese missions in Southern
California during the year 1888, one of them in Tuscon, one in San
Buenaventura and one in Los Angeles. Each of these is doing good work.
As to our mission at Los Angeles, which was only opened April 1, 1888,
it has twenty-five Christian members, and it has nearly one hundred
pupils who attend the evening schools and preaching service at the
mission house from night to night. There are union meetings of all the
denominations of Christian Chinese at Los Angeles, and at San Francisco
and Santa Barbara. These meetings occur once a month; Chinese preachers
and speakers are appointed to address the meetings, a week beforehand.
We have found these meetings a great help to us. Street meetings were
often held in the Chinese quarters in many cities and towns throughout
the State. Thousands of Bibles and tracts in Chinese were given away to
Chinese readers, and thousands of heathen have heard the blessed gospel
of Jesus, and, perhaps, there are other thousands who may give their
hearts to Christ through this operation. Surely God is hastening the
time when His will will be done in all parts of the earth, since the
Chinese themselves have summoned their people to Christ. And now I
respectfully and earnestly request of all the friends of the A.M.A., and
even people of every name, race and creed of this Christian land of the
United States, to follow the example of our Master who has given himself
for us all, and we do ask for your prayers both for the Chinese in your
country and in China.

LOO QUONG.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Ellen Osgood, Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. William Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Association, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.W. Andrews, Talladega, Ala.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Miss Katharine Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue,
  Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Miss Ella E. Marsh, Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.L. Epps, Topeka, Kan.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Mary B. Warren, Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead, Wis.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 N. Broad St., Fremont, Neb.

COLORADO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Packard, Pueblo, Colo.

DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, President,
  Mrs. T.M. Hills, Sioux Falls; Secretary, Mrs.
  W.R. Dawes, Redfield; Treasurer, Mrs. S.E.
  Fifield, Lake Preston.

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association be
sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however, should be
taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary Association,
since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the most encouraging signs of the times is found in the numerous
letters that are now received at the Woman's Bureau of the following
import:

"We have started a 'Young Ladies' Missionary Society,' and are anxious
to inform ourselves in regard to the different Indian Missions. Please
forward whatever you have that relates to the past and present work."

"We have received the missionary letters you sent and are very anxious
to learn more about the colored people of the South, and also the
Mountain Whites, of whom we have very little knowledge."

"Kindly send us all information at your command regarding the Chinese
and Mountain Whites and the work of the Association among them. The
ladies of our Missionary Society are taking up these subjects as studies
for their meetings."

"The missionary letters are full of interest, and the ladies are always
attentive listeners."

"We take pleasure in enclosing check for forty dollars toward the salary
of Miss ----. The ladies of our society are much interested in her work
and have also been sewing for the boarding hall."

       *       *       *       *       *

In response to inquiry from many who wish to sew, while also studying
the missions and contributing to the support of teachers, we give below
a list of standard needs in all our mission homes and boarding halls.

_Furnishing._--Sheets and bed-ticks for double beds; pillow cases for
pillows twenty to twenty-two inches wide; bed spreads, large size;
quilts of medium weight; tablecloths from three to five yards long;
napkins, kitchen towels; rugs or mats for the floor.

_Garments._--Underwear for boys and girls of ages from twelve to twenty,
especially night wear, of strong, unbleached muslin; work aprons for
students in industrial schools; dresses of all sizes, of print, gingham
or wool; long-sleeved aprons for children.

_Sundries._--Shoe bags, soiled-clothes bags, spool and thimble bags,
whisk broom cases, comb and brush cases, hairpin holders, pin cushions,
paper and letter racks, bureau covers, stand covers, lamp mats, etc.

Whatever a girl or boy may need away from home to maintain habits of
neatness and order, and for refining influences, these students need in
our boarding-schools. We can always assign special schools to those who
will render this form of help.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHRISTMAS AT FORT YATES, DAKOTA.

     Our readers will be glad to welcome Miss Josephine E. Barnaby to
     her new field of work, and to a place in the pages of the
     _Missionary_. She is of the Omaha tribe, was a student at
     Hampton, then spent some time in a training school for nurses in
     New Haven, Connecticut, and is now the assistant of Miss Collins
     at the Grand River Station.

     Miss Collins writes of her: "Josephine is very much interested
     in her work. She said to-day, 'I wish every one interested in
     Indians could come here and stay long enough to see how the
     foundation _ought to be laid_, and how much better off our
     native teachers, Elias and Wakanna, are with the Bible knowledge
     they have without the English, than the Indians are who speak
     English and are without Christ.' She knows, for her people are
     largely godless but English-speaking."

_My Dear Friends_:

We have been so busy getting ready for Christmas that we have had no
time to write to our friends. Miss Collins told the Indians on Sunday
last that we were going to have a tree and wanted all the Indians to
come, the real old ones as well as the young men and women. She told
them of how our Saviour was born on Christmas day, how the people came
and gave him gifts, and we, in remembering his birthday, would give them
little gifts. The next day, a very old woman came to the school-house
and told Mary (that is the native teacher's wife) that she heard we were
going to have a "Ghost feast" and give away everything we had, so she
thought she would come and ask for one of the school-room lamps for fear
she might not get it if she waited, as there would be so many people to
get the things, and she needed a lamp very much.

Doesn't that sound like an Indian? I was very sorry the poor woman did
not get the lamp.

Yesterday morning, while Miss Collins pinned the names on to the
presents, I went up to the school-house, and by the help of two native
teachers planted the tree in a cracker-box and put the little colored
candles on. In the afternoon, we took the presents up and hung them on
the tree; we put up a curtain to hide the tree, and then in the evening
put out several Japanese lanterns on the corners of the house and over
the door, and rang the bell; while the bell was ringing, you could see
the Indians coming from all parts of the village. It was a pretty sight.
The ground was covered with snow, it was just between the light and
dark, and a few bright stars were shining through the clouds.

The room is not very large, so Miss Collins proposed that they should
stand. It was well they did, for they were packed tightly together, the
men and boys on one side, the women and girls on the other.

After all came, we sang "Joy to the World," in Dakota, with several
other hymns; they all sang very loud. Then Wakanna told them about
Christ's birthday, then we lighted the little candles and took the
curtain away, and you can imagine there were some wide-open eyes and
big, smiling faces. There were over two hundred, and each one received
something; as one man came to day and said to Miss Collins, "Why,
Winona, you did not forget the little babies; their names were read out
the same as the old men." The tree was very pretty, and it would be
useless for me to tell what each one received, but the boys were
delighted with their tops as much as the girls were with their pretty
dolls; the old men received feather fans and were delighted. After they
had their gifts, we passed refreshments; we then had the fireworks; the
red light was wonderful to them--the first they had ever seen. They went
home seeming very happy.

We want to thank our friends who were so kind as to send us those pretty
things for the Christmas tree.

I myself have never before spent such a happy Christmas, because
previously all my kind friends have always tried to make me happy, and
this time I worked hard to make some one else happy, and I find that is
the best kind of happiness.

My benches were almost crowded to-day in school, as I had so many
children; married women come with the children; they are all very
anxious and earnest to learn to read and write. I ask you to pray, my
dear friends, that there may be some good seed sown each day, that may
spring up and bring forth fruit for His service.

Truly your Indian Friend,

JOSEPHINE E. BARNABY.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISS COLLINS.

     Our friends will recollect Miss Collins's visit to the East, and
     many will cherish a very pleasant remembrance of her addresses
     at Lake Mohonk and elsewhere. We give below extracts from a
     letter received from her, presenting a vivid picture of her
     experience in crossing the Missouri River with the ice breaking
     up, the loss of her clothing, and her subsequent labors among
     her people at home.

I was so late in returning from the meetings at Oahe, though I hurried
as fast as possible, that the river was frozen, detaining us nearly
three weeks. The ice broke, letting the wagon with all my winter
supplies go down. My trunks with all my clothing also went down. It
wholly ruined all the clothing which could not be washed. My best dress
was a frozen block of ice when I took it out--can never be worn again,
and, in fact, all my clothes were ice. I was so thankful that no lives
were lost that it hardly seems worth speaking of. I find myself poorer,
if not wiser. I am worked down at present. Have kept "open house" now
for two weeks, and my head refuses to be worked any further. Miss
Emerson must wait for my letter. After Christmas I can write. I have so
many patients, and so much work to take care of spoiled clothes and
provisions, and to look out for winter supplies again, that I am not in
a condition to write.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR THE CHILDREN.

A few weeks ago, I stood by my window watching the children gathering
for school. My attention was attracted to three girls coming up the
street, one carrying a bundle done up in a handkerchief in one hand and
books in the other, while the other two carried a trunk between them. As
they turned toward the house, I ran down to meet them; they came with
smiles, saying they had come to school. As I bade them welcome, my eyes
filled with tears, and a prayer went up to God that he would bless those
girls and make them a blessing. Susan, Angeline and Emma have proved to
be intelligent, pleasant girls and very appreciative.

I have had one hundred and seven girls in sewing, this quarter; they
seem as interested in their work as ever. Some of the older girls are
doing well in cutting and basting. We hope to have a class in
dressmaking soon. The little ones are very happy to have sewing days
come. I am often met with the question, "Is us going to sew to-day?" I
meet these forty little ones in a large sunny room, (that is to be our
parlor some day, I hope) for an hour and a half each week. Their eyes
brighten at the sight of the basins of water and the work basket. They
apply themselves as demurely as their elder sisters; they love to sing
little sewing songs and hear stories while they ply the needle.

From a teacher in Beach Institute, Savannah:

One of my new pupils has a name much longer than himself. It is Ulysses
Virginia Lee, and in addition, the surname Smith. Another new boy is
Josie _Mike_, and I think it might well be changed to "Mite," because he
is such a small specimen. He could not tell his age, and we thought him
too much of a baby to come, but took him for a week on trial, and as he
is rapidly learning the ways of the school, we shall let him stay. Last
Friday, while trying to impress upon him that only good behavior would
insure him a desk in my room, I wrote some of his sayings. "Why do you
want to come here to school?" "To larn something." "What if you are
naughty and we send you away?" "Go to other school." "Why did you leave
that other school?" "They won't teach me nothin." In answer to the
question what kind of a boy he intended to be, instead of saying "good"
as I expected, he replied, "I'll be a Beach boy." So he was ready with
an answer to every question, and I am only sorry that I cannot reproduce
for you his little face and the funny inflections of his voice, as he
looked me right in the eye, his own little eyes just dancing with fun.

One of the little Indian girls whose name is Polly has just come in to
ask, "Miss D., what is a wog? One white boy called me a polliwog, and I
thought a wog must be something bad."

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR JANUARY, 1889.



MAINE. $1,161.38.

Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch., (of which
  131.70 _for Freedmen_; 40.77 _for
  Indian M._ and 9.26 _for Chinese M._)       $247.00

Bangor. Central Ch., _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._       5.00

Bath. Central Ch. and Soc.                      46.45

Bluehill. Mrs. A.D. Hinckley on _True
  Blue Card_                                     5.00

Brunswick. Bbl. and Box of C. Mrs. E.
  Lincoln, 2, _for Selma, Ala._                  2.00

Castine. Class 9, Trin. Sab. Sch. _for
  Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                      1.70

Castine. Bbl. of C., _for Wilmington N.C._

Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch., to const.
  WINGATE C. TITCOMB and HUGH M.
  WOODSIDE L.M.'s                               89.29

Cumberland. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
  Selma, Ala., 2 for Freight_                    2.00

Dennysville. Cong. Ch.                          12.75

Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch., _for Freight
  to Macon, Ga._                                 2.00

Fryeburg. Cong. Ch.                              6.30

Gorham. Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._; 3.04
  _for Freight_                                  3.04

Gorham. Miss E.B. Emery, _for Freight
  to Sherwood, Tenn._                            2.00

Hampden. Mrs. R.S. Curtis                        3.00

Harpswell Center. Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._

Limerick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    18.00

Limington. Cong. Ch.                            12.00

Norridgewock. Missionary Sewing Class,
  by Woman's Aid to A.M.A.                      30.25

North Bridgeton. ----, _for Wilmington, N.C._   10.00

North Bridgeton. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Freight to Tougaloo, Miss._               2.00

Oquinquit. B. Maxwell                           25.00

Orland. "Friends," 23, "A Friend," 1            24.00

Patten. Members Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._

Portland. Second Parish Ch., bal. 161.01;
  State St. Cong. Ch., 150.00; High St. Ch.,
  108.30; Sab. Sch. High St. Ch., H.W.
  Shaylor's Class, 8; Williston Ch., adl.
  78.83, to const. DEA. JOHN H. TRUE, DEA.
  N.W. EDSON, DEA. S.R. WILCOX, DEA.
  SAMUEL PETERS and GEO. F. THURSTON
  L.M.'s                                       506.14

Portland. Brown Thurston's S.S. Class
  in High St. Ch., _for Hampton N. and A.
  Inst._                                        15.00

Rockland. Cong. Ch.                             16.59

Saccarappa. Second Cong. Ch., Westbrook         60.16

Skowhegan. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C., _for
  Selma, Ala._

South Berwick. Miss Ricker's S.S. Class,
  1.52; Miss Brooking's S.S. Class, 42c;
  Mrs. Lewis 45c, _for Wilmington, N.C._         2.39

Sumner. _For Freight to Wilmington, N.C._        2.00

Union. Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._

Waterford. Cong. Ch., 3.85 and Sab, Sch.
  6.47, _for Mountain Work_                     10.32

Waterville. Bbl. of Merchandise, _for
  Meridian, Miss._



NEW HAMPSHIRE, $515.35.

Bedford. Presb. Ch.                              2.56

Brookline. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                4.00

Camden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      16.25

Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.00

Concord. Granite Mission Band, 10;
  Frank Coffin's S.S. Class, 10, _for
  Wilmington, N.C._                             20.00

Concord. "Light Bearers," by Mrs. Alice
  M. Nims, _for Santee Indian M._               10.00

Exeter. Mrs. John L. Lovering, _for Freight
  to Jellico, Tenn._                             1.00

East Derry. First Ch., adl.                      2.03

Farmington. Cong. Ch.                           12.22

Hanover. "Friend," 20; "Friend" 10;
  Brewster Pelton, 1; Miss Mary Pelton,
  1; Children's Offering, 2, _for
  Rosebud Indian M._                            34.00

Hanover Center. Cong. Ch.                        1.80

Harrisville. Mrs. L.B. Richardson               10.00

Keene. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 120,
  to const. DEA. HARVEY PHILLIPS, WILLIAM
  H. JONES, HERBERT E. FAY and
  WILLARD I. BISHOP L.M.'s; Sab. Sch. of
  Second Cong. Co., 43.31                      163.31

Manchester. Franklin St. Ch., adl.              27.70

Milford. First Cong. Ch., (1 of which _for
  Mountain Work_), to const. MRS. N.W.
  ROBINSON, SUSIE H. KIMBALL and ROYAL
  MANSFIELD L.M.'s                             100.00

Milton. "A Lady."                                1.00

Nashua. First Cong. Ch.                         19.45

Pembroke. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 25.85;
  Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, 5                      30.85

Penacook. Cong. Ch.                             21.18

South Newmarket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              8.00

South Newmarket. Miss H.L. Fitts, 2
  Bbls. of C., _for Wilmington, N.C._

Stoddard. Pkg. material for Sewing
  Class, etc., _for Meridian, Miss._

West Lebanon. "Children's Band," by
  Mrs. C.E. Havens, _for Storrs Sch.,
  Atlanta, Ga._                                 20.00



VERMONT, $614.96.

Barnet. Cong. Ch., 50.66 and Sab. Sch.,
  18.12; Alexander Holmes, 20                   88.78

Barton. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Barton Landing. Children's Miss'y Soc.,
  _for Santee Indian M._, adl                    5.00

Bethel. Mrs. Laura F. Sparhawk                   5.00

Brattleboro. "A Friend."                         5.00

Brownington. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._;
  5 _for Freight_                                5.00

Cambridge. Mrs. Charlotte Safford, Bbl.
  of C., etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Charlotte. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._; 1
  _for Freight_                                  1.00

Charlotte. Minerva E. Wing, _for Marion, Ala._   1.00

Chester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                 26.00

Coventry. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Derby. Ladies of Cong. Soc., _for McIntosh, Ga._ 3.00

East Burke. Pkg. Christmas Cards, _for
  McIntosh, Ga._

East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.          58.26

Enosburg. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Fairlee. Mrs. P.C. Blodgett                      2.00

Georgia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     14.40

Granby. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Infant
  Class, _for Rosebud Indian M._                 1.02

Jonesville. Union Soc.                           9.60

Manchester. "A Friend."                          5.50

Marlboro. Rev. O.F. Thayer                       1.00

McIndoes Falls. Cong. Ch.                       10.00

Montpelier. Bethany Sab. Sch., _for McIntosh,
  Ga._                                          13.26

Newport. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._; 2
  _for Freight_                                  2.00

North Craftsbury. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh,
  Ga._; 3 _for Freight_                          3.00

North Thetford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               5.00

Pittsford. Mrs. Nancy P. Humphrey               10.00

Richmond. Cong. Ch.                             20.00

Rutland. Young Ladies' Miss'y League,
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            70.00

Rutland. King's Daughters, Pkg., _for McIntosh,
  Ga._

Saint Albans. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                 50.00

Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                30.00

Saint Johnsbury. Sab. Sch. of South
  Cong Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._                 30.00

Saint Johnsbury. "Friend," _for Marion, Ala._    5.00

South Royalton. Mrs. Susan H. Jones             25.00

Waterbury. Cong. Ch.                             9.20

West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                     24.81

West Brattleboro. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Freight to McIntosh, Ga._                 5.00

Westminster West. Bbl. of C.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._

West Randolph. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                8.00

Windsor. "A Friend," 25; Cong. Ch. and
  Soc., 6.75; Cong. Ch., Mrs. John E.
  Freeman, 3, to const. ALONZO KENT L.M.        34.75

Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   16.38

----. "Friends," _for Freight to
  McIntosh, Ga._                                 1.00

Vermont Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, by Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks,
  Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    Pittsford. Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._       20.00      20.00

                                           ----------

                                              $623.96

ESTATE.

Jericho. Estate of Hosea Spaulding,
  C.M. Spaulding, 10; A.K. Spaulding, 5;
  K.J. Spaulding, 3; Nellie M. Percival, 3      21.00

                                            ---------

                                              $644.96



MASSACHUSETTS, $11,013.71.

Abington. Mrs. H.F. Peirce, _for Cal.
  Chinese M._                                    2.00

Adams. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    22.25

Amherst. Mrs. Wright, 5; Mrs. Wm.
  Bangs, 2; Mrs. Lucy Bentley, 2; Miss
  Jennie Kendricks, S.S. Class, 1;
  Cong. Ch., Bbl. and Box of C.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    10.00

Andover. West. Cong. Ch., adl, 46.78;
  South Cong. Ch., adl, 56.20                  102.98

Andover. Juvenile Mission Circle of West
  Cong. C., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          25.00

Ashby. Cong. Ch.    13.25

Ashfield. "Ishi," _for Indian M._                2.00

Ashland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                 11.37

Bedford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     25.00

Beverly. Washington St. Cong. Ch.               17.57

Boston. Shawmut Cong. Ch.           472.83

        Union Ch.                   190.55

        Park St. Homeland Circle,
         by Isabella H. Hobart,
         Treas., 100, _for
         Tougaloo U._; 54,
         _for Student Aid,
         Straight U._;
         30, _for Mountain Work_,
         and 6, _for Indian M._     190.00

        S.D. Smith, Organ            75.00

        Y.P.S.C.E., of Park St.
        Ch., _for Indian Sch'p,
        Oahe, Dak._                  50.00

        W.H.M. Ass'n,
        _for Santee Indian M._       10.83

        Rev. C.J. Ryder, _for
          Sch'p Endowment Fund_      10.00

        "Cash."                       1.88

Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch.        104.31

        Mrs. Eleanor J.W.
          Baker, _for Student Aid,
          Fisk U._                   60.00

        Thos. Knapp's S.S.
          Class, 8; B. Wilkins's
          S.S. Class, 8,
          _for Wilmington, N.C._     16.00

        Mrs. Mary A. Tuttle,
          _for Indian M._            10.00

  Jamaica Plain. Nellie F. Riley,
    _for Sherwood, Tenn._             2.00

  Roxbury. Immanuel Cong. Ch.       102.43

     Sab. Sch. of Immanuel Cong, Ch.,
     _for Indian M._                 50.00

     South Boston. "A Member of
       Phillips Ch."                 50.00

     West Roxbury. South Evan.
       Cong. Ch.                     22.14

                                   -------   1,417.97

Brockton. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Marion, Ala._

Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                   189.27

Brimfield. First Cong. Ch.                       7.40

Cambridge. Margaret Shepard Soc.,
  _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                9.00

Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch., 131.01;
  Pilgrim Ch., 37.45                           168.46

Campello. Mrs. Allen Leach                       0.50

Chelsea. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    25.00

Chelsea. Miss E. Davenport,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

Clarendon Hills. Cong. Ch.                       9.00

Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.             10.91

Concord. Mrs. Elizabeth Hunt                     5.00

Curtisville. Geo. E. Dresser, 6;
  Mrs. Frances M. Clarke, 5                     11.00

Dalton. Mrs. James B. Crane                    100.00

Dedham. Allen Evan Sab. Sch. of First Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Straight U._                13.76

Easthampton. "S.R.," _for Rosebud Indian M._     1.00

East Marshfield. Mrs. C.T. Prior's S.S. Class    5.00

Easton. Cong. Ch., 16.60; Sab. Sch. of
  Evan. Cong. Ch. (30. of which special,
  from one class, _for Lady Student_)
  71.72, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             88.32

Enfield. Mrs. F.S. Wood's S.S. class,
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            15.00

Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                  169.47

Fall River. First Cong. Ch. (of which 24.60
  _for Indian M._)                              86.82

Fall River. Mary L. Holmes,
  _for Indian M._                               10.00

Fitchburg. William Leathe,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    10.00

Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.               74.28

Gardner. Members of First Cong. Sab.
  Sch. Christmas Offering                        8.57

Gilbertville. Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV. ARTHUR TITCOMB L.M.                      40.28

Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch.                     64.00

Greenwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    7.27

Groveland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   11.00

Hardwick. Calvinistic Ch.                        4.45

Haverhill. Center Cong. Ch. and Soc., 106;
  Proceeds of Harvest Festival West Cong.
  Sab. Sch., 30; Class No 2, 11.30; Class
  No. 4, 8.09; to const. F.A. RUSSELL L.M.;
  West Cong. Ch., 10                           165.39

Haverhill. Mrs. Geo. Gleason, Bbl. of C.,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._

Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 13.72

Holbrook. Sab. Sch. of Winthrop Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._,
  in part                                       41.52

Holliston. "A Friend."                         100.00

Holyoke. F.B. Towne, 9.50, _for Macon, Ga._,
  (incorrectly ack. in January number
  from F.B. Jones)

Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. in part 66.84;
  Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Primary Class. 5;
  "A Friend," 50c                               72.34

Hopkinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mobile, Ala._                             4.00

Huntington. First Cong. Ch.                      5.00

Hyde Park. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.               23.83

Ipswich. South Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._,
  10; Sab. Sch. of South Cong. Ch.,75;
  _for Student Aid, Ramona Sch., Santa Fe._     85.00

Ipswich. First Ch. and Soc., _for Ramona Sch.,
  Santa Fe, N.M._                                0.05

Islington. "An old time friend,
  81 years old."                                 5.00

Lakeville. "A Friend."                           4.50

Lawrence. Lawrence St Cong. Ch.                193.93

Leicester. First Cong. Ch.                     122.31

Lexington. Hancock Ch.                          10.16

Linden. "A Friend" for L.M., and
  _for Mountain Work_                           30.00

Longmeadow. Thomas P. Carleton,
  _for Testaments, Fort Yates, Indian Boys_      2.00

Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch.                     125.80

Ludlow. Mission Circle, by M.E. Jones,
  Bbl. of C., _for Macon, Ga._

Ludlow. Mission Circle, Bbl. of C., etc.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Marshfield. _For Freight to Wilmington, N.C._    1.45

Melrose. "A Lady Friend."                        5.00

Middlefield. Cong. Ch.                          18.00

Milton. Mrs. T.E. Ruggles' Mite Box              3.16

Monson. Sarah E. Bradford                        4.00

Natick. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.            60.00

Newburyport. Mrs. Ann P. Bassett, 10;
  Foster W. Smith, 5                            15.00

Newton. Eliot Ch.                              231.09

Newton Center. J.M.E. Drake, _for Rosebud
  Indian M._ and to const. J.M.E.
  DRAKE, DURANT DRAKE and STELLA
  DRAKE L.M.'s                                 100.00

Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.                  92.25

Newton Center. Maria Furber Miss'y Soc.
  First Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._         2.00

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.00

North Adams. Cong. Ch.                         190.41

North Amherst. Mrs. Johnson's S.S.
  Class, 20; Mrs. C.H. Bentley's S.S.
  Class, 10; Mrs. G.E. Fischer, 15,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    45.00

North Amherst. Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._

Northampton. "C."                              170.00

North Brookfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
  Ch., _for Student Aid, Santee
  Indian Sch._                                  25.00

Northfield. Trin. Cong. Ch.                     15.00

North Weymouth. Pilgrim Ch.                     18.27

Norwood. First Cong. Ch.                       108.50

Otis. Rev. S.W. Powell                           5.00

Otis. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch, _for Sabbath
  School Work, Beach Inst, Savannah, Ga._        3.47

Oxford. Sab. Sen. of First Cong. Ch.            23.33

Peabody. "Friend," _for Marion, Ala._            5.00

Peabody. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch. 3
  Boxes of C., etc. _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Pittsfield. James H. Dunham                     50.00

Pittsfield. "Friends," Bbl. and Box of C.,
  _for Marion, Ala._

Pittsfield. Mrs. H.M. Hurd, Bbl. C., etc.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Princeton. Cong. Ch., Box of C.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._

Quincy. Rev. E. Norton, _for tuition of a
  little boy, Gregory Inst.,
  Wilmington, N.C._                              8.00

Reading. Cong. Ch.                              18.00

Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                              4.50

Rockland. Cong. Ch.                             30.00

Rockland. Miss C. Chase, _for freight to
  Nashville, Tenn._                              1.35

Salem. South Cong. Ch., 67.41; Crombie
  St. Ch. and Soc, 62.19                       129.60

Somerville. E. Stone,_for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                      50.00

Somerville. Day St. Cong. Ch., 16.13; W.E.
  Valentine of Day St. Ch., 1.15                17.28

Southbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 77.07

Southbridge. Miss N. Vinton, _for Freight
  to Wilmington, N.C._                           1.00

South Weymouth. Ladies of Second Cong.
  Ch., Bbl. and Box of C., _for
  Wilmington, N.C._

Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.              149.39

Spencer. W.H.M.S., _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._        10.00

Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. in part           55.63

Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                        29.03

Waltham. "Friend," _for Marion, Ala._            5.00

Ware. Mrs. Wm. Hyde and Miss S.R.
  Sage, _for Native Indian Missionary_         225.00

Ware. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., H.B. Anderson's
  Class, 85; East Cong. Sab. Sch., 25,
  _for Indian M._                               60.00

Ware. Ladies' Benev. Soc. of First Cong.
  Ch., 15; Wm. L. Brakenridge, 5                20.00

Warren. L.H.M.S. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._               70.00

Warren. Cong. Ch.                               30.00

Webster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               17.00

Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 170.34;
  Miss Mary A. Stevens, 10                     180.34

West Attleboro. First Cong. Ch.                  7.87

Westboro. Evan. Cong. Ch.                      108.09

Westboro. Young Ladies' Benev. Soc., by
  Miss E.L. Howard, _for Mountain Work_         20.00

West Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                      47.00

West Newbury. J.C. Carr                          4.00

Whitinsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for School Work, Meridian, Miss._            75.00

Williamsburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
  const. REV. HENRY SPEKE SNYDER L.M.           50.70

Wilmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Straight U._                     13.00

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. (5.92 of which
  _for Indian M._)                             119.61

Woburn. First Cong. Ch. 155.66; North
  Cong. Ch., 19.98                             175.64

Woburn. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                           15.00

Woburn. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch.,
  6.20; Mrs. Susan T. Greenough, 5              11.20

Worcester. Piedmont Ch., 96.64; Salem
  St. Ch., 19.28; "Friend," 25                 140.92

Worcester. Mrs. Geo. M. Price, _for Sch'p,
  Santee Indian Sch._                           35.00

Worcester. "Friend," 9; Central Ch.,
  Bbl. of C. and Christmas gifts,
  _for Marion, Ala._, 2.40 _for Freight_        11.40

Hampden Benevolent Association, by
  Charles Marsh, Treas.:

    Blandford                         5.00

    Chicopee, First                   4.56

    East Longmeadow                  19.00

    Holyoke, Second                  53.19

    Palmer, Second                   27.00

    South Hadley Falls               16.00

    Springfield, First               90.69

    Springfield, South               92.02

    Westfield. Sab. Sch. of
      First Ch., _for Sch'p,
      Hampton Inst._                 70.00

    Westfield, _for Jewett Mem.
      Hall, Grand View, Tenn._       50.00

                                   -------     427.46

                                            ---------

                                            $7,503.71


ESTATES.

Cambridge. Estate of C. Thayer Reed,
  by W. Minot, Jr., Trustee                  1,000.00

Greenfield. Estate of Martha O. Farrand,
  by Mrs. Ellen M. Russell                     200.00

Phillipston. Estate of Trowbridge Ward,
  by James Watts, Ex.                        1,300.00

Pittsfield. Estate of Asaph D. Foot, by
  Joseph Foot, Ex.                           1,000.00

                                           ----------
                                           $11,003.71


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

Falmouth. Me. Second Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  _for Macon, Ga._

Gorham, Me. Miss E.B. Emery, Bbl.
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

North Bridgeton, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl., _for Tougaloo U._

Exeter, N.H. Mrs. John L. Levering, Bbl.
  and Case, _for Jellico, Tenn._

Hollis, N.H. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. _for Storrs
  Sch., Atlanta, Ga._

Mason, N.H. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Boston, Mass. Miss H.H. Stanwood, Fine
  Steel Engraving of the Lord's Prayer,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Brimfield, Mass. Ladies' Union of Second
  Ch., Bbl., _for McLeansville, N.C._

Cambridgeport, Mass. Miss L, Palmer,
  Box basted patchwork, _for Tougaloo U._

Rockland, Mass. Ladles' Sew. Circle of
  Cong. Ch., Bbl. Val. 61.60, _for Fisk U._

Springfield, Mass. A Gift of Webster's
  Unabridged Dictionary through Mrs. N.B.
  Wilder, of Somerville, _for Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._

Ware, Mass. East Ch., Bbl., _for Birmingham, Ala._

Winchester. Mass. E.D. Chapin, Bbl.
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._


RHODE ISLAND, $967.08.

Central Falls. "Mission Workers," Cong.
  Ch., _for Indian Sch'p._                      68.50

Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                        62.25

Providence. Mrs. Mary White, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                  5.00

Providence. Union Cong. Ch. (39.75 of
  which _for Indian M._)                       796.16

Newport. United Cong. Ch. adl., 25.17;
  "A Friend," 10                                35.17


CONNECTICUT, $4,602.55.

Bantam. Cornelia Bradley                        10.00

Bethel. Cong. Ch., 47.03; "A Friend," 5         52.03

Bozrah. Cong. Ch.                               10.00

Bristol. Mission Circle, Bbl. of C. and
  Box of Christmas Gifts,
  _for Charleston, S.C._

Broad Brook. Cong. Ch.                          13.55

Brooklyn. "In Memoriam" of Dr. Wm.
  Woodbridge, by Mrs. Wm. Woodbridge           200.00

Central Village. Cong. Ch.                       6.00

Collinsville. Mission Circle, by Mrs. Warren,
  Bbl. of C., 1.10 _for Freight,
  for Charleston, S.C._                          1.10

Columbia. Cong. Ch.                             26.92

Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  Christmas offerings, _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                              19.50

Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                            140.23

Danielsonville. Ladies of Westfield Cong.
  Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Marian, Ala._,
  10 _for Freight_                              10.00

Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.     9.06

Darien. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                              10.00

Durham. Cong. Ch.                               17.17

East Hampton. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._        38.75

East Hartford. First Ch.                        57.51

East Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              10.00

Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                        75.00

Enfield. Primary Dept. Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Freight to Macon, Ga._                    0.75

Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch.                    54.03

Farmington. First Cong. Ch.                    104.73

Greeneville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Straight U._                 7.62

Hadlyme. R.E. Hungerford, 100; Cong.
  Ch., 2.36; J.W. Hungerford, 100              202.36

Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.                276.30

Hartford. First Cong. Ch., 50; C.A.
  Jewell, 25; Miss C.A. Jewell, 25;
  Henry Roberts, 25; John C. Parsons, 10;
  Rev. Wm. Thompson, D.D., 10;
  Miss Fannie H. Wells, 5, _for Tougaloo U._   150.00

Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Park Ch., 15; Sab.
  Sch. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., 10,
  _for Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._     25.00

Hartford. Girls Circle, Sab. Sch. of Fourth
  Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Grand View Normal Sch._                       25.00

Harwinton. "A Friend," to const. DEA.
  A.W. BUELL L.M.                               30.00

Higganum. Cong. Ch.                             15.00

Jewett City. Second Cong. Ch.                   19.83

Kensington. Cong, Ch., to const. THERON
  UPSON L.M.                                    42.55

Lakeville. Sab. Sch. Class, by Mrs. Geo.
  Burall, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._           10.00

Lakeville. Mrs. S.P. Robbins                     5.00

Ledyard. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     21.00

Litchfield. Miss Phoebe F. Benton,
  _for Indian M._                                1.00

Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                           42.45

Madison. First Cong. Ch. (5 of which from
  Mrs. A.D. Lee, _for Mountain Work_)            9.00

Manchester Center. Ladies' Benev. Soc.
  of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._     22.00

Meriden. A.W. Gardner, _for Jewett Mem.
  Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                       1.00

Middlefield. John O. Couch, 85; Rev. A.
  Winter, 10, _for Jewett Mem. Hall,
  Grand View, Tenn._                            35.00

Middleton. Miss Williams, 50; John N.
  Camp, 25, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._      75.00

Milford. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch.,
  _for Bird's Nest, Santee Agency_              24.54

Mystic Bridge. Cong. Ch.                        16.00

New Britain. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for
   Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._         25.00

New Haven. College St. Cong. Ch.                56.85

New Haven. Dwight Place Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  of C., _for Fisk U._

New London. Second Cong. Ch.                   664.80

New London. Mrs. J.N. Harris, _for
  Indian M._                                    20.00

New Preston. Mrs. Betsey Averill
  (5 of which _for Mountain Work_)              10.00

Newtown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     15.00

Northfield. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._    8.00

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    159.85

Norfolk. "Friend," _for Indian Sch'p._          17.50

North Greenwich. Cong. Ch.                      69.82

Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., ad'l. 208.70,
  to const. MISS HENRIETTA LANZ, MRS.
  LOUISE M. WOODMANSEE, MRS. MARGARET
  J. PARKS, JOHN P. HUNTINGTON,
  WILLIAM JARDINE, MISS MABEL A. UNDERWOOD,
  MRS. MARTHA A. ROATH, EVERARD
  P. BRIGDEN, and WM. SMITH WILSON L.M.'s;
  First Cong. Ch., 7.98                        216.68

Norwich. R.D. Jones, _for Jewett Mem. Hall_,
  _Grand View, Tenn._                            1.00

Norwich Town. Miss Grace McClellan              24.00

Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                             15.70

Orange. Cong. Ch.                                8.74

Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                              5.00

Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                        21.75

Pomfret Center. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., 2
  Bbl's of C., etc., _for Thomasville, Ga._

Putnam. "A Friend."                             17.50

Roxbury. Cong. Ch., 14.69; Sab. Sch., 5;
  Mrs. D.H. Beardsley, 4.50                     24.19

Salisbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                    6.62

Scotland. Cong. Ch.                             24.25

Simsbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Fisk U._                                 15.00

Somers. Cong. Ch.                                3.00

South Britain. Cong. Ch.                        14.09

Southington. Cong. Ch.                          29.67

South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                   8.65

Stafford Springs. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                            8.35

Terryville. Cong. Ch.                           57.33

Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                            10.96

Thomaston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._     10.00

Tolland. Mrs. Lucy L. Clough                     8.00

Wallingford. Cong. Ch.                          89.37

Waterbury. Mrs. W.H. Camp, _for Indian M._      50.00

Wapping. Cong. Ch.                              18.07

West Avon. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                5.00

Westchester. Cong. Ch.                          17.74

West Hartford. Anson Chappell                   10.00

West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ad'l, to
  const. W.L.G. PRITCHARD, NATHANIEL
  V. PERRY, MISS WINNIE KENDRICK,
  MISS ALICE J. WALKER L.M.'s                   66.00

Westminster. Westminster Cong. Ch.,
  (5.60 of which from Mrs. A.C. Greene
  and her S.S. Class _for Rosebud M._)
  _for Indian M._                               11.90

Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch., 8.44;
  Saugatuck Cong. Sab. Sch., 5.96               14.40

Wilton. Cong. Ch., 60;
  Mrs. S.L. Adams, 5                            65.00

Windsor. First Cong. Ch., _for Grand
  View Normal Inst._                            30.00

Windsor. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            18.03

Winsted. Mrs. M.A. Mitchell,
  _for Talladega C._                            25.00

Winthrop. Mrs. M.A. Jones, 1.50;
  Miss C. Rice, 1                                2.50

Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                           12.50

Woodstock. Miss Frances H. Butler, Pkg.
  of C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._

Woman's Cong. H.M. Union of Conn.,
  by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, Sec:

    Bridgeport. "A Friend"
      of L.H.M.S., First Ch.,
      _for Oahe Indian M._            5.00

    Enfield. Ladies' H.M. Soc.,
      Mrs. Horace Patton,
      _for Santee Indian M._          5.00

    Hartford. "Mite Box," L.H.M.
      Soc. Of First Ch., _for
      Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._          1.00

    South Coventry. Sab. Sch.
      of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Ind'l
      Sch., Ga._                      5.69

                                    ------      16.69

                                            ---------
                                            $3,952.55


ESTATES.

Meriden. Estate of Mrs. Betsey H.
  Tuttle to const. JOHN TUTTLE HUBBARD L.M.,
  by Chas. L. Taylor, Adm'r                     30.00

New Britain. Estate of Augustus Stanley,
  by J.A. Pickett, Ex.                         500.00

Pomfret. Estate of Caroline D. Adams,
  by C.M. Adams                                 20.00

Rocky Hill. Estate of Rev. A.B. Smith (in part)
  by Rev. Elijah Harmon, Ex.                   100.00

                                            ---------

                                            $4,602.55


NEW YORK, $3,224.93.

Albany. Mrs. Electa M. Eames, 10,
  Miss E. Maria Eames, 10                       20.00

Albany. Ladies' H.M.S., by Miss Celia
  Jones, Sec., Bbl. of C.,
 _for Williamsburg, Ky._

Binghamton. "A Friend,"                          5.00

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Ballard Sch.
  Building, Macon, Ga._                      1,035.00

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Student Aid_    25.00

Brooklyn. Clinton Ave. Cong. Ch., (100
  of which from George E. Nichols,
  _for Talladega C._)                        1,302.69

Brooklyn. Atlantic Ave. Mission Sab.
  Sch. Association, by A.C. Pohl, Treas.,
  (30 of which _for Mountain Work_)             30.00

Brooklyn. Lee Ave. Cong. Ch., 12.78;
  Mrs. J.M. Hyde, 1                             13.78

Brooklyn. Mrs. Rev. Geo. Hollis,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

Buffalo. First Cong. Ch., _for Freedmen
  and Indian M._, ad'l, to const. W.H. WASSON,
  JOHN B. SQUIRE, FRANKLIN M. ERLENBACH,
  MISS MAUDE DAVIS AND MISS
  AGNES A. JUSTIN L.M.'s                       100.00

Copenhagen. Cong. Ch.                           12.00

Fulton. Juv. Miss'y Band, Bbl of C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Goshen. Fannie E. Crane, _for Atlanta U._        1.00

Hudson. Mrs. D.A. Jones                         15.00

Holley. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Jamestown. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.          7.03

LeRoy. Mrs. L.A. Parsons                         2.00

Lima. Mrs. M.D. Warner                           2.00

Livonia. Mrs. William Calvert                   15.00

Lowville. Mrs. L.C. Hough, to const.
  MRS. ANNA VERAH MERRILL L.M.                  30.00

Marcellus. Mrs. L. Hemenway                      5.00

Mount Vernon. "A Friend," _for Indian M._      100.00

New York. M.D. Herrick, by J. Dougall & Co.      1.00

New York. American Bible Soc., Grant
  of Scriptures, Val.                        1,079.85

North Walton. Union M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.        21.85

Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 32.46;
  H.T. Dunham, 10                               42.46

Oriskany. Mrs. R.W. Porter                       1.00

Oswego. Y.P.S.C.E., Rag Carpet,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Pitcher. Miss Nancy Wire                         1.00

Rome. Welch Cong. Ch.                           10.00

Sherburne. Miss E.A. Rexford,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

Syracuse. Plymouth Ch., ad'l, 35.19;
  Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch., 15.71              50.90

Troy. Mrs. E.C. Stewart                          0.50

Vernon Center. Rev. G.C. Judson                  1.00

Volney. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.             3.80

Walton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                           66.68

Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                               14.15

Webster Station. Mamie Safford and
  Others, Box of C., _for Athens, Ala._

West Brook. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.,
  _for Indian M._                                5.00

West Winfield. Cong. Ch.                         7.50

Whitesboro. Mrs. L. Halsey                      10.00

----. "A Friend," Communion Set,
  8 pieces, _for Church in the South_

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Albany. Ladies' Aux.,
    First Ch                         20.00

    Camden. Ladies' Aux.             20.00

    Northville. W.H.M.U.              8.00

                                   -------      48.00

                                            ---------

                                            $3,024.93


ESTATE.

Waverly. Estate of Phebe Hepburne, by
  Howard Elmer, Ex.                            200.00

                                            ---------

                                            $3,234.93



NEW JERSEY, $70.45.

Arlington. "Mission Band," _for Student
  Aid, Savannah, Ga._                            2.10

Bound Brook. Young Ladies' Mission
  Band of Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._            10.00

Montclair. Bbl. of Table and Bed Linens,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

Orange. F.W. and Bleecker Van Wagenen,
  25.50; F.W. Van Wagenen, 8.50,
  _for Student Aid, Marion, Ala._               34.00

Orange. "Friends," Pkg. Christmas
  Gifts, _for Marion, Ala._

Orange. Miss M. Shoemaker                        4.50

Upper Montclair. Sab. Sch. of Christian
  Union Cong. Ch.                               15.85

Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch.                      4.50



PENNSYLVANIA, $35.67.

East Springfield. Mrs. C.J. Cowles               4.50

Farmers Valley. E.C. Olds.                       0.50

Franklin. M.E.S.S., Box of C., etc.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._

Pittsburg. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                   10.57

Ridgway. Y.P. Bible Class by Minnie J.
  Kline, _for Oaks, N.C._                        5.00

Shenandoah. Welsh Cong. Ch.                     10.00

West Alexander. John McCoy and wife              5.00



OHIO, $548.21.

Akron. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Jewett
  Memorial Hall, Grand View, Tenn._             25.00

Ashland. Mrs. E. Thomson                         2.28

Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                7.30

Berea. J.S. Smedley                              5.00

Cleveland. Dr. C.N. Cooper                      10.00

Cleveland. Young People, by Miss E.A.
  Johnson, _for Williamsburg, Ky._               1.50

Cleveland. Young People, by Miss E.A.
  Johnson, _for Mountain Work_                   1.50

Conneaut. H.K. Pond                              5.00

Defiance. Mrs. Dr. J.L. Scott,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     5.00

Dover. Box of Christmas Gifts,
  _for Athens, Ala._

Geneva. "A Friend."                              1.50

Hudson. Cong. Ch., (1.50 of which
  _for Indian M._)                              12.00

Madison. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch.         20.00

Marietta. "New Year Thank Offering,"
  _for Indian M._                                1.00

Medina. Congregational Y.P.S.C.E.               12.45

Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                         31.00

North Ridgeville. L.M.S., Bbl. of Preserved Fruit,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._

Norwalk. Thomas Hagaman, 5;
  Mrs. C. Lawrence, 50c                          5.50

Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 61.15; Second
  Cong. Ch., 30.53; Harris Lewis, 5;
  Lyndon Freemen, 1.50                          98.18

Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., _for Jewett Mem.
  Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                       6.25

Painesville. Cong. Ch.                          45.00

Tallmadge. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 15.73;
  "Friend of Missions," 9.50                    25.23

Toledo. Central Cong. Ch.                        7.52

Unionville. Mrs. E.F. Burnell, 5;
  Mrs. E. Stratton, 2                            7.00

Windham. Wm. A. Perkins                          5.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Columbus. Eastwood Ch.,
      Mrs. P.L. Alcott, _for Indian
      M._, and to const. MRS.
      BEATRICE F. BUCKLAND L.M.      30.00

    Columbus. Eastwood Ch.,
      "Mrs. P.A.C.," _for Indian
      M._, and to const. KATHARINE
      A. CRAFTS L.M.                 30.00

    Hudson L.H.M.S.                   7.00

    Oberlin. Sab. Sch. of Second
      Cong. Ch.                      10.00

    Olmsted. M.S., _for Fort
      Yates Indian M._                5.00

                                    ------      82.00

                                            ---------

                                              $427.21

ESTATE.

Oberlin. Estate of Alonzo Bailey               221.00

                                            ---------

                                              $648.21



INDIANA, $2.00.

Sparta. John Hawkswell    2.00



ILLINOIS, $595.87.

Aurora. N.L. Janes                              20.00

Batavia. Cong. Ch.                              41.00

Bone Gap. O.S. Rice                             20.00

Canton. First Cong. Ch.                         30.60

Chicago. "Hapland," 100; Sab. Sch. of
  New England Cong. Ch., 50.61; Leavitt
  St. Cong. Ch., 8.78                          159.39

Concord. Joy Prairie Sab. Sch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                           13.10

Danville. Mrs. A.M. Swan, Box of C.,
  etc., _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Englewood. First Cong. Ch.                      29.32

Elmwood. Mrs. George Avery                      15.00

Galesburg. First Cong. Ch., ad'l                 7.88

Hampton. Henry Clark                             5.00

Hyde Park. Harvey Olin, 1; A.W. Cole,
  1; Class of S.S. Boys, Pres. Ch., 75c.,
  _for Student Aid, Marion, Ala._; Sab. Sch.
  of Pres. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C., _for Marion,
  Ala._                                          2.75

Ivanhoe. Mrs. S. Sanford                         0.50

Kewanee. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. of C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Mendon. Mrs. Jeanette Fowler, to const.
  ARTHUR C. GARRETT L.M.                        40.00

Morris. W.H.M.U. _for Woman's Work_             10.00

North Monroeville. First Cong. Ch.               6.06

Ottawa. First Cong. Ch.                         45.47

Providence. Cong. Ch.                            7.80

Princeton. Cong. Ch.                            15.00

Ridge Prairie. Rev. Andrew Kerr                  2.00

Rockford. First Cong. Ch.                       42.10

Rockford. Blanche Goodall,
  _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._                          3.00

Roscoe. Mrs. A.A. Tuttle                         5.00

Saint Charles. Cong. Ch., 16.86 and Sab.
  Sch., 3.39                                    19.75

Shabbona. Cong. Ch.                             52.15

Shabbona. Mrs. E.J. Bouslough, Box of C.,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

----. "Friends."                                 3.00



MICHIGAN, $303.81.

Agricultural College. PROF. ROBERT C.
  KEDZIE, to const. himself L.M.                30.00

Ann Arbor. Mrs. Cady, Bbl. of C., etc.,
  _for Athens, Ala._

Armada. Cong. Ch., 15.30, and Sab. Sch., 2      17.30

Banks. Cong. Ch.                                 8.35

Benzonia. Cong. Ch., 13; W.J. Pettitt,
  _Special_, 10; Mrs. L. Barnes, 40c.           23.40

Charlevoix. Banks Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._     4.60

Detroit. Trumbull Ave., Cong. Ch., 14;
  Mrs. B.B. Hudson, 5                           19.00

Detroit. Mrs. Leete, _for Student Aid,
  Athens, Ala._                                  6.00

Detroit. Sab. Sch., Trumbuil Ave. Cong.
  Ch., Miss Park's Class, _for Santee
  Indian M._                                     5.00

Eastport. Cong. Ch.                              1.75

Grand Haven. Cong. Ch.                           7.00

Grand Rapids. Y.L.P. Soc., by Mary L. Elliott,
  Treas., _for Indian M._                       10.00

Grass Lake. Cong. Ch.                           11.40

Hancock. First Cong. Ch.                        46.87

Jackson. Mrs. R.M. Bennett                       2.50

Laingsburg. Cong. Ch.                            3.50

Milford. Mrs. Wm. A. Arms                        5.00

Republic. Mrs. S.A.B. Carrier                    1.00

Romeo. Miss E.B. Dickinson, 50; Miss
  Mary A. Dickinson, 30, to const. EDGAR
  LATHROP GILLETT L.M.                          80.00

Somerset. Y.P.S.C.E., Box of C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Union City. Ladies' Home M. Soc.,
  by Miss Emma Wemple, Sec.,
  _for Athens, Ala._                             5.00

Union City. A. Lucas                             0.50

White Lake. Robert Gerner                       10.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Mich., by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Greenville. _For Trinity School,
      Athens, Ala._                   5.64

                                   -------       5.64



IOWA. $552.15.

Albia. Mrs. Mary A. Payne                        2.00

Alden. Mrs. E. Rogers                            2.00

Almoral. Cong. Ch.                               7.50

Anita. Cong. Ch.                                16.00

Atlantic. Cong. Ch., 37.30, and Sab. Sch.,
  8.70, to const. DEA. R.D. McGEEHON L.M.       46.00

Atlantic. Infant Class, Bear Grove Union
  Sab. Sch., by Mrs. O.C. Warne,
  _for Mountain Work_                            5.00

Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                2.31

Burlington. Cong. Ch.    2.06

Cedar Rapids. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.             3.00

Des Moines. Plymouth Cong. Ch., to
  const. DEA. J.S. CLARK, DEA. M.H.
  SMITH, DEA. W.G. WORK, DEA. HENRY
  M. McFARLAND and DEA. ELLIOTT
  S. MILLER L.M.'s                             157.81

Earlville. Cong. Ch.                             9.90

Eldora. Birthday Gifts, Miss Fell's Class
  Cong. S.S., _for Indian M._                    2.10

Eldora. C.M.K. Duren's S.S. class,
  Birthday Gifts, _for Mountain Work_            1.70

Grand View. German Cong. Ch.                     5.00

Harlan. Cong. Ch.                                4.60

Jewell. Cong. Ch.                                2.30

La Moille. Cong. Ch.                             2.16

Logan. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00

McGregor. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. C.A.
  MARSHALL L.M.                                 65.00

Maquoketa. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   28.15

Marion. Cong. Ch.                               13.51

New Hampton. Cong. Ch.                          11.03

Newton. Children's Mission Band, by
  Mrs. Alice Hadley, _for Savannah, Ga._        20.00

Newton. Wittenberg Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._              14.15

Ogden. Cong. Ch.                                 4.00

Oldfield. Highland Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                           11.53

Red Oak. Cong. Ch.                              25.00

Shenandoah. Cong. Ch., 16.40, and Sab.
  Sch., 1.72                                    18.12

Waterloo. Box of C., _for Marion, Ala._

Waucoma. Sab. Sch., Birthday Offerings,
  _for Mountain Work_                            4.00

Victor. Y.L. Miss'y Soc., Pillow Slips, etc.,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Ames. Sab. Sch.                   4.60

    Ames. Sab. Sch., _for Marie
      Adlof Fund_                     0.40

    Anamosa. Junior M. Sec            5.00

    Cedar Falls. Ladies' Ass'n.       1.43

    Des Moines. Plym. Ch. W.M.S.      8.88

    Fairfield.                        1.85

    Grinnell. W.H.M.U.                8.11

    Le Mars. L.M.S.                   3.90

    McGregor. W.M.S.                 15.00

    Magnolia. W.H.M.U.                2.10

    Marion. Y.L.M.S.                 15.00

    Montour. Y.L.M.S.                 1.10

    Osage. W.M.S.                     1.75

    Wayne. L.M.S.                     5.00

    Webster City. L.M.S.              9.50

    Wentworth. Isabel Kimball's
      S.S. Class                      8.10

                                   -------      91.22



WISCONSIN, $322.22.

Appleton. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. JOHN
  FAVILLE L.M.                                  52.50

Beloit. E.P. Wheeler, _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._      5.00

Beloit. Cong. Ch.                                2.00

Berlin. Miss'y Soc., by Mrs. L. Waring,
  Treas.,_for Austin, Texas_                     5.00

Columbus. Cong. Ch., (15 of which
  _for Indian M._)                              33.80

Emerald Grove. Cong. Ch.                         6.00

Johnstown. Cong. Ch.                             2.00

La Crosse. Cong. Ch.                            25.00

Lake Geneva. Mary J. Barnard, 15;
  First Cong. Ch., 10.71                        25.71

Madison. First Cong. Ch.                        10.83

Menasha. William P. Rounds                      30.00

Racine. Mrs. D.D. Nichols                        0.50

Ripon. First Cong. Ch.                          64.25

Sheboygan. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  12.55 and 2 Boxes Books, etc., _for Lathrop
  Mem. Library, Sherwood, Tenn._                12.55

Sheboygan. W.M.S. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._               10.00

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, _for Woman's Work_:

    Arena. W.U.M.S.                   1.36

    Brodhead. "Willing Workers."      7.00

    Eau Claire. W.U.M.S.              2.35

    Evansville. Ladies' Birthday
    Boxes                             3.05

    Evansville. "Little Gleaners."    2.45

    Fond du Lac. W.U.M.S.             5.00

    Lancaster. "Willing Workers."     3.00

    Lake Geneva. Photos of
      Elizabeth Winyan, Sold          1.00

    Madison. W.U.M.S.                 9.87

    Ripon. Mrs. C.L. Tracy            2.00

                                    ------     $37.08



MINNESOTA, $156.99.

Ada. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._                         6.45

Litchfield. Mrs. M.E. Weeks. 5;
  Mrs. C.A. Greenleaf, 50c.                      5.50

Mazeppa. Cong. Ch.                               2.11

Minneapolis. First Cong. Ch., 59.71;
  Bloomington Ferry Sab. Sch., 5.18             64.89

New Richland. The Ladies Soc. and Sab.
  Sch., Box of Christmas Gifts,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Northfield. Woman's Home M. Soc. of
  Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Christmas Gifts,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Saint Charles. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.            1.50

Waseca. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._                          5.00

Winona. First Cong. Ch.                         50.00

Worthington. Cong. Ch.                          21.54



MISSOURI, $143.72.

Laclede. Miss Clara Seward, Pkg. Needle-books,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._

Meadville. Ladles' Miss'y Soc.,
  _for Indian M._, by Mrs. A.A. Myers, Treas.    7.00

Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 74.42;
  First Cong. Ch., ad'l, 52.30; Young People's
  Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch., 10           136.72



KANSAS, $145.81.

Atchison. Cong. Ch.                             14.15

Independence. S.P. Ingraham                      1.00

Kirwin. First Cong. Ch.                          6.00

Neosha Falls. S.B. Dyckman                       3.00

Osawatomie. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 2.50;
  "S.L.A.," 2.50, _for Indian M._                5.00

                                             --------

                                                29.15

ESTATE.

Manhattan. Estate of Mrs. Mary Parker,
  of Cong. Ch., deceased, by Rev. R.D.
  Parker, Ex.                                  116.66

                                             --------

                                              $145.81



DAKOTA, $31.02.

Ipswich. Rosette Park Ch., 1,
  and Sab. Sch., 1                               2.00

Meckling. Cong. Ch.                              1.57

Oahe. A. Ward, _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._             2.00

Ponca Agency. Ponca Mission, by Rev.
  John E. Smith                                 10.00

Redfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                 6.78

Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Highmore                          1.60

    Huron                             3.00

    Yankton                           0.50

    Yankton. W.M.S.                   3.57

                                   -------       8.67



NEBRASKA, $31.56.

Cambridge. Cong. Ch.                             1.56

Lincoln. First Cong. Ch. ad'l                    2.65

Rising City. First Cong. Ch.                    27.35



COLORADO, $48.85.

Denver. John R. Hanna                           25.00

Greeley. Park Cong. Ch.                         23.85



OREGON, 63c.

East Portland. First Cong. Ch.                   0.63



WASHINGTON TERR., $40.00.

Seattle. Plymouth Cong. Ch., to const
  MRS. CASSANDRA E. GEORGE L.M.                 30.00

Seattle. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Athens, Ala._               10.00



MARYLAND, $5.00.

Federalsburg. Sarah A. Beals                     5.00



KENTUCKY, $1.66.

Woodbine. E.H. Bullock                           1.66



TENNESSEE, $6.24.

Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch.                            3.63

Grand View. By E.H. Davison, _for Freight
  to Grand View, Tenn._                          2.00

Sunbright "Friends,"                             0.61



NORTH CAROLINA, $54.50.

Hillsboro. Carrie E. Jones                       2.00

Troy. "Friends," by Rev. S.D. Leak               2.50

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                           50.00



GEORGIA, $4.92.

Cyprus Slash. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.             1.00

Savannah. M.R. Montgomery,
  _for Student Aid, Savannah, Ga._               0.75

Thomasville. Sab. Sch. of Conn. Ind'l
  Sch., _for Fort Berthold, Indian M._           3.17



ALABAMA, $52.06.

Marion. Cong. Ch.                               19.04

Montgomery. Rev. R.C. Bedford, _for Lathrop
  Mem. Library, Sherwood, Tenn._                 5.00

Talladega. Miss'y Societies, Talladega C.,
  _for Indian M._                               20.00

Talladega. Talladega College Ch.                 8.02



FLORIDA, $12.75.

Altoona. Mrs. J.S. Blackman                      5.00

Dayton. First Cong. Ch.                          7.75

Montclair. Mrs. E.C. Downing, Basted
  work for 3 quilts, _for Jonesboro, Tenn._



MISSISSIPPI, $3.10.

Tougaloo. "King's Daughters," _for Indian M._    2.00

Meridian. Cong. Ch.                              1.10

Meridian. Barker & Grandberry,
  Material for Sewing Class,
  _for Meridian, Miss._



CANADA, $9.00.

Montreal. Chas. Alexander                        5.00

Sweetsburg. Mrs. H.W. Spaulding,
  _for Mountain Work_                            4.00



AUSTRIA, $1.62.

Prague. "From the Children, _For little
  Colored Children in the South_"                1.62



JAPAN, $20.00.

Kyoto. Mission Ch., by Rev.
  D.W. Learned                                  20.00

                                           ----------

Donations                                  $20,711.01

Estates                                      4,708.66

                                           ----------

                                           $25,419.67



INCOME, $729.55.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._          570.00

Graves Library Fund                 150.00

Scholarship Fund, _for
  Straight U._                        4.09

Yale Library Fund, _for
  Talladega C._                       5.46

                                   -------     729.55



TUITION, $3,185.30.

Wllliamsburg, Ky., Tuition           36.63

Wilmington, N.C., Tuition           160.75

Charleston, S.C., Tuition           217.60

Jellico, Tenn., Tuition              55.85

Jonesboro, Tenn., Tuition            10.85

Memphis, Tenn., Tuition             376.25

Nashville, Tenn., Tuition           513.84

Pleasant Hill, Tenn., Tuition        16.25

Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch.,
  Tuition                           283.70

Macon Ga., Tuition                  212.35

Savannah, Ga., Tuition              208.65

Thomasville, Ga., Tuition            70.75

Athens, Ala., Tuition                44.75

Marion, Ala., Tuition                38.33

Mobile, Ala., Tuition               170.85

Talladega., Ala., Tuition           265.45

Tougaloo, Miss., Tuition             70.00

New Orleans, La., Tuition           253.00

Austin, Texas, Tuition              131.55

                                   -------   3,185.30

United States Government for the
  education of Indians                       1,032.30

                                           ----------

Total for January                          $30,366.82

                                           ==========


SUMMARY.

Donations                                  $69,515.27

Estates                                      9,599.95

                                           ----------

                                           $79,115.22

Income                                       4,344.21

Tuition                                      9,640.07

United States Government appropriation
  for Indians                                4,225.75

                                            ---------

Total from Oct. 1 to Jan. 31               $97,325.25

                                            =========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for January                      186.10

Previously acknowledged                        230.48

                                            ---------

Total                                         $416.58

                                             ========


DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND FOR COLORED PEOPLE.

Income for January, 1889, from investments     832.50

Previously acknowledged                      2,325.00

                                           ----------

Total                                       $3,157.50


  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  56 Reade St, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Advertisements._

       *       *       *       *       *


Mr. Spurgeon's New Work

JUST PUBLISHED.


THE CHEQUE BOOK OF THE BANK OF FAITH.

     Being precious promises arranged for daily use With brief
     experimental comments. Nearly 400 pages, cloth, 12mo, Price,
     $1.50.

     "Mr. Spurgeon's words are so plain, his style so sparkling, and
     his spirit so devout, that the reading of his productions is
     almost sure to excite a mental glow and awaken holy
     aspirations. This book is brimful of quickening, soothing,
     soul-lifting power and is admirably adapted to the end in
     view."--_N.Y. Witness._

     "The reader will find here a treasure-house full of riches,
     especially if he has learned what Mr., Spurgeon desires to
     teach, to 'treat the promise as a reality--as a man treats a
     cheque.'"--_Boston Golden Rule._

     Sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price.


New Catalogue. Now Ready.


BEFORE YOU BUY ANY BOOKS FOR YOUR Sunday-School Library,

     Send to me for a full Catalogue of the cheapest and best
     Sunday-School Books ever offered, and our

     SPECIAL OFFER to Sunday-Schools.

     Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded.


IF YOU WANT AN "OXFORD" TEACHER'S BIBLE OR BAGSTER BIBLE,

     send for complete Bible Catalogue giving full description of
     styles, sample of type, prices, and full particulars.


IF YOU WANT ANY BOOKS,

     It makes no difference where you see them advertised, or by
     _whom_ or _where_ they are published or sold, _send your orders
     to me_ and I will attend to them _promptly_, send all books to
     you _prepaid_, and _guarantee_ that they reach you safely.
     Postage stamps received for fractional parts of a dollar.


J.E. JEWETT, Publisher and Bookseller, 77 Bible House, New York.

_When you write, please mention_ THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

PILGRIM'S LETTERS.

BY JOSEPH E. ROY.

     Issued by the Congregational S.S. and Publishing Society:
     Congregational House, Boston; 175 Wabash Av., Chicago.

     PRICE, $1.50.

     Dr. A.H. Clapp says: "How much wife and I have enjoyed the
     _Pilgrim Letters_. There certainly is a vast deal of Historical
     (especially church historical) matter that has present value,
     but will have _accumulating_ value in the coming years."

     THE N.Y. INDEPENDENT.--"They carry the reader back to the times
     in which they were written, and reproduce the passion of those
     stirring days."

     THE CONGREGATIONALIST.--"It goes without saying that these
     treat of significant topics, are breezy and graphic, and are
     full of earnest patriotism and piety."

     THE ADVANCE.--"A good book. Instantaneous photographs of just
     the most vital and significant events which have given
     character and the turn of destiny to this epoch-making period."

     NORTH WESTERN CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE. Chicago.--"Dr. Roy's book
     deserves to live and nobody can kill it if he tries. We hope it
     may have a large sale,--10,000 copies, and then a new edition."


The Great Value and Success of Foreign Missions.

     Proved by Distinguished Witnesses.

     BY REV. JOHN LIGGINS.

     With an introduction by Rev. Arthur T. Pierson, D.D. 16mo, 249
     pages. Paper, 35c.; cloth, 75c.

     "A grand massing and marshalling of testimony.--Dr. Pierson in
     the Introduction.

     "It is a 'settler.' Send out the book as on the wings of the
     morning."--Rev. Theo. L. Cuyler, D.D.

     "The distinguished witnesses are well chosen and
     unanswerable."--Rev. Joseph Cook.

     "An admirable book and pre-eminently timely."--Bishop Potter.

Sent, post-paid, on receipt of price, by

THE BAKER & TAYLOR CO.,

_740-742 Broadway, New York._

       *       *       *       *       *


PURE JUICE of the GRAPE.

     "Unfermented Wine received International Medal."--_New England
     Churchman._

     "Chicago has used this with great acceptance."--_E.W.
     Blatchford._

     "To churches it gives universal satisfaction--for invalids it
     receives preference over any other."--_Dr. C.R. Blackall._

Write to T.H. JOHNSON, NEWBURGH, N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 43, NO. 03, MARCH, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.