E-text prepared by Joshua Hutchinson, Donald Perry, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team from page images generously
provided by Cornell University



THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

JUNE, 1889

VOL. XLIII. NO. 6







CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  FINANCIAL OUTLOOK
  VOICES FROM THE FIELD
  DIVIDING LINE BETWEEN THE TWO CENTURIES
  REV. C.W. HIATT
  PARAGRAPHS--THIS NUMBER--MRS. BORDEN
  SCHOOL ECHOES
  BOOK NOTICE
  NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND
  FREDERICK DOUGLASS


THE SOUTH.

  CHURCH BUILDING IN A DAY
  ITEMS FROM WHITLEY COUNTY
  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY
  WORK AT HAMPTON
  DEVELOPING PATRIOTISM AMONG THE COLORED PEOPLE
  A NEGRO GIRL'S PROSE POEM


THE INDIANS.

  ONE DAY'S MISSIONARY WORK
  WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?


THE CHINESE.

  METHOD OF CONDUCTING CHINESE SUNDAY-SCHOOLS


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  MEETING OF WOMAN'S STATE HOME MISSIONARY ORGANIZATIONS
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF ALABAMA


FOR THE CHILDREN.

  LETTER FROM A TEACHER IN GEORGIA


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LLD., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  J.E. RANKIN,
  WM. H. WARD,
  J.W. COOPER,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For Two Years._

  LYMAN ABBOTT,
  CHAS. A. HULL,
  CLINTON B. FISK,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER.

  _For One Year_

  S.B. HALLIDAY,
  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELBERT B. MONROE.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.
  Rev. C.W. HIATT, _Cleveland, Ohio_.


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._
  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS.
  Prof. EDWARD S. HALL.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._
  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._



COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.



VOL. XLIII.       JUNE, 1889.         No. 6.



American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL OUTLOOK.


_The Figures._

Our receipts for seven months to April 30th are, from donations,
$118,051.25, estates, $20,308.09, incomes, $4,829.21, tuition, etc.,
$22,719.89, United States Government for Indians, $9,540.87; total,
$175,449.31. Our payments to April 30th are $203,777.45. Debt balance,
$28,328.14.

_The Meaning of the Figures._

These figures mean a debt--growing at the rate of $4,000 a month. In
passing "through the dark valley and shadow of"--debt, we walk with a
goodly company. It is said that nearly every missionary society in
Christendom reports a deficit this year. A common cause must underlie so
broad a fact, and no one society deserves special censure.

_How we get into Debt._

A missionary society cannot make its expenditures as a man provides for
his family--from day to day--but must lay out its plans for the year.
The missionaries, the teachers, the matrons and all employ√©s must be
engaged for that length of time. The appropriation must be made on the
general expectation of receipts, with some allowance for added growth.
Every prosperous business firm plans for enlargement. Shall the Lord's
business only lack enterprise and growth? Must it move on a dead level,
or on a declining grade? The churches would not long endure that, and
the word of the Lord is: "Speak unto the children of Israel that they go
forward."


_How our Debts are to be Paid._

This cannot be done near the close of the year by dismissing the
ministers and shutting up the schools. These self-sacrificing workers
are dependent on their salaries, and the teachers, some of whom out of
their small pittance are helping to sustain an invalid mother or sister,
and in not a few cases are aiding needy students, and should not be
deprived of their wages. Repudiation of such debts is not the relief for
a missionary society.

The only way, therefore, that we can see is, to throw ourselves upon the
benevolence of the churches, whose agents we are in doing their work,
and ask them to come to the rescue by increased donations. A little from
each will make it easy for all.

       *       *       *       *       *


VOICES FROM THE FIELD.

We wish our friends to see as we see and hear as we hear from the field,
as to the need of enlargement and the difficulty of closing schools
prematurely, and hence we present some condensed facts as specimens.

McINTOSH, GA.--One hundred and nineteen in a single room and with only
  one teacher. No boarding department and scores must be turned away.

FLORENCE, ALA.--In a rapidly growing city, school held in our church
  building. Large numbers turned away for lack of room.

JONESBORO, TENN.--No boarding place for either boys or girls. Boys live
  in rough rooms in a barn, six in a small room. No more can possibly be
  accommodated.

GRAND VIEW, TENN.--Buildings crowded full; no place for any more, yet
  pupils are trying to crowd in.

PINE MOUNTAIN, TENN.--Situated in a region nearly a hundred miles long,
  without a single school except the almost worthless district schools
  for two or three months.

WILLIAMSBURG, KY.--Crowded full of students; more than sixty in one room
  large enough for only thirty.

JELLICO, TENN.--Our church and school building will not hold either our
  Sunday-school or those who attend the preaching services. Must be
  enlarged or no growth can follow.

ATHENS, TENN.--Growing town; nearly a thousand Northern people with no
  church suited to their needs. Some Congregationalists need aid in
  starting a church.

FORT BERTHOLD, DAKOTA.--Rev. C.L. Hall writes: "We have not at Fort
  Berthold the necessary buildings for our work. Our girls are in an old
  Government building out of repair, and a little cottage 16x22, and our
  boys and industrial teacher are crowded into the missionary's house,
  and a little one-story annex 14x22. There is no room for a guest to
  stay over night."

CHINESE IN CALIFORNIA.--Dr. Pond, the Superintendent of our Chinese
  Missions, makes a dollar go as far as any man in our service. He is
  one of the most careful men in making ends meet. But he has been
  caught in the cyclone and writes thus about the premature closing of
  the schools:

"Nothing seemed left for me to do but to notify the teachers that I
could pay all bills for May, but could promise nothing more. When I had
resolved to do this, the workers passed before me, one by one: most of
our teachers are dependent on this slender stipend for their daily
bread--teachers that had been in our service for many years, never
measuring their service by their pay, but working in season and out of
season, and most of the time rendering help not bargained for fully
equal to that which I could have required. The helpers also passed
before me. Jee Gam with his wife and five children; our brave, unselfish
Low Quong; our faithful, almost saintly Chin Toy, our earnest and
eloquent Yong Jin--all of whom have sacrificed their pecuniary interests
for service in the mission, and all of whom, if their income from
missionary work ceases, will be compelled at once to seek an income
elsewhere because of those dependent upon them. Then the schools passed
before me--closed and silent, most of them, the scholars scattered and
the momentum from many years of earnest, unremitting effort gradually
dying away."


_The Daniel Hand Fund._

It may be asked, Why not meet such pressing claims out of this Fund? We
answer, That Fund is doing its noble work in its chosen field, among the
colored people in the South, but cannot do all even in that; and it will
be observed that most of these calls come from the other portions of our
field, the mountains of the South, the Indians of the West, and the
Chinese on the Pacific coast. Our main dependence must ever be on the
churches.

       *       *       *       *      *


THE DIVIDING LINE BETWEEN THE TWO CENTURIES.

The first century of the American Constitution has passed, and has been
grandly celebrated. We now stand on the dividing line, and enter upon
the Second Century with its unknown trials and triumphs. What these may
be, we may judge, perhaps, in part, if we turn to those of the past.
Among the many and serious objections made against the Constitution at
the outset, demanding protracted discussions, Compromises and
Amendments, none were graver or more far-reaching in their consequences
than those respecting State Rights and the recognition of Negro slavery.
The bottom difficulty in these was probably that of slavery, for, if it
had not introduced such radically different industries in the two
sections of the country, with their different interests, and habits of
thought and life, the question of State Rights might have slumbered in
quietude. But when slavery had to be defended, State Rights was the
bastion behind which the defence sheltered itself. Whether the
Compromise with slavery at the outset were the wise thing or not, it is
not worth while now to consider. We do not know what the consequences
would have been if the Compromise had not been made. We all know now,
only too sadly, the dreadful price that was at last paid for the
Compromise.

But the war killed slavery and buried it beyond resurrection. Logically,
it also killed the State Rights doctrine. But we fear it "still lives"
in the heart of Jefferson Davis, and in the hearts of the many millions
who still revere him as the leader of the "lost cause." Its avowal is
still heard from Southern lips and in the Southern press. Will there be
any occasion for its revival into active life? We fear there will be.
Slavery has left behind it a ghost which no more than that of Banquo
will "down." Race prejudice is as unyielding in the Southern heart
to-day as was the purpose once to maintain slavery. Should that prejudice
persist in its inexorable demands, another contest may arise, in which
the enfranchised millions may be goaded to take part, and the North, as
in the case of slavery, may be involved in the dreadful struggle. At
what time in the coming hundred years of the Constitution this new
struggle may come, no one can predict. The crisis will not be averted by
merely deprecating it, and we know of no Compromise that can reach it.
The only possible relief that we can see is by educating the Negro, till
he shall rise to a position that will challenge the respect of his
fellow-citizens and secure to him his equal rights under the glorious
Constitution of the United States of America.

       *       *       *       *       *


REV. C.W. HIATT.

The American Missionary Association has divided its Western Collecting
Field. The boundary separating the two parts is the western line of
Indiana. Dr. Roy, who has made so honorable record in the past, will
retain the western portion with his office still in Chicago. The eastern
portion will have its headquarters in Cleveland. Rev. C.W. Hiatt has
been invited to take this District Secretaryship, and we have now the
pleasure of announcing his acceptance. Mr. Hiatt is not unknown in his
district, having made his mark in his pastorate in Columbus, Ohio. We
ask the churches to give him a cordial welcome for his own sake as well
as that of the Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


PARAGRAPHS.

The letter of Dr. Pond in this number was written in response to a
request from a Northern lady for hints in regard to the methods of
teaching the Chinese. Many besides this lady will find profit in reading
it. The article on "Church Building in a Day" cannot fail to interest.
We only wish we could add that church services were held in the building
on the following day, but of this we are ignorant. If any of our readers
are desirous of knowing what expedients our missionaries among the
Indians have to resort to in administering the communion at their
out-stations, let them read "One Day's Missionary Work," by Rev. T.L.
Riggs. We give our readers also a problem in the letter from Miss Collins
at Fort Yates, "What shall we do about it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

We have learned of the death of Mrs. Villa (Crumb) Borden at her home in
Norwich, N.Y. During her three years' service in the work of this
Association at Athens, Ala., she was untiring in efforts for the
improvement of her pupils. By her genial spirit, unselfish life and
faithful labor in school, church, Sunday-School and the community, she
greatly endeared herself to the people as well as to pupils and fellow
teachers, who sincerely mourn her departure.

       *       *       *       *       *

A friend who reads the magazine and studies it minutely, sends us a
postal containing these encouraging words:

"A stimulating fact appeared in the MISSIONARY for April just received.
The summary of receipts October 1st, to February 28th, shows nearly
$14,000 received for tuition in that time--more than one-sixth of the
donations."

Our friends who are denying themselves, oftentimes, to aid in sustaining
our work, will be cheered to know that the funds they contribute are not
thrown into a slough and lost, but are touching mind and heart and
industry, and thus stimulating the people whom we benefit to help
themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

In making up the catalogue of Fisk University for this year, the
following facts are culled out:

Total number of students, 505, which is a gain of thirty over last year,
and last year the attendance was the largest the University had ever
had. Number of students in the Department of Music, 110; a gain of
twenty over last year. Special students in Theology, 9; a gain of six
over the previous year. There has been a gain of eight in the College
Department, two in the Normal, and four in the College Preparatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Coffin graduated from Fisk University in 1885, and has held
important positions as a teacher ever since graduating. He has also
bought about $250 worth of books on one of the special courses of study
established by the Illinois Wesleyan University, and so successfully
complied with the requirements of the course that the result mentioned
in the letter below has been reached.

     ILLINOIS WESLEYAN UNIVERSITY, Bloomington, Ill.

     _Dear Sir._--Mr. A.O. Coffin has just been here for his final
     examination for his Ph.D., and desires me to report to you his
     performance.

     This last work closes a series of about six examinations upon
     some thirty papers, requiring from three to five hours' writing
     on each. The examination held here was oral, before a committee
     of three of our faculty, and lasted nearly three hours. Mr.
     Coffin was probed on all sides with everything that had a
     bearing on his course (Biology), both as to technical and
     general matters, and slipped but twice in the whole ordeal. Our
     professors report to me that his previous written work was of
     the same high character. Of the forty or fifty men who have
     taken this degree here, within the past fifteen years (all on
     examination), Mr. Coffin easily stands among the half dozen who
     have most distinguished themselves. We were much pleased with
     the gentlemanliness and strength of character he displayed, and
     no doubt have Fisk University to thank in large measure
     therefor. Very Truly Yours,

     CHARLES M. MOSS.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL ECHOES.

Spelling by different authorities: Edgeucation, fraze, teadgeous,
roughf, icecikles, natcheural, quallyfide, muskeline, femeline and nutur
gender.

Definitions: "A word is a sound that consists from the loungs." "A
participle is a form of a verb partaking of the nature of an adjective
or a noun and expressing action or _human_ being as flying and sleep."

A sentence reported in class of small boys: "By the time your brother
get home, you'll be done et." (Translation, You'll be through eating.)

An example of a sentence containing an infinitive used as subject: "To
be in the way is bad habits."

At a meeting held at Hampton last "Indian Emancipation Day," one of the
Indian boys in his speech said:

"Whenever we do anything white man don't like, he call us 'Injun,'
whenever we do anything Injun don't like, he call us 'white man.'" He
also expressed his conviction that "Injun boy great deal smarter than
white boy, 'cause folks expect that Injun will learn as much in three
years as white boy does in nine or ten years."

An Indian boy writes from the country, "I have been confusion at the
United States language."

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOK NOTICE.

_The Great Value and Success of Foreign Missions._ Proved by
    distinguished witnesses. By Rev. John Liggins, with an introduction
    by Rev. Arthur T. Pierson, D.D. Published by The Baker and Taylor
    Co., 740 and 742 Broadway, New York.

This book contains not only leading facts and statistics regarding
missionary work which are very valuable to all who are studying this
subject, but also the testimony of diplomatic ministers, consuls, naval
officers, scientific and other travelers who have witnessed the results
of missionary labor in heathen and Mohammedan countries. This testimony
from hundreds of representative men and women, among which we find the
names of Lew Wallace, James Russell Lowell, R.H. Dana, Charles Darwin,
James B. Angell, with English viceroys, governors and military officers,
as well as prominent American and English ministers of the gospel,
cannot but commend the book to all Christian people, and make it
interesting at any page at which one may open it.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND.

BY REV. C.J. RYDER, DISTRICT SECRETARY.

A trip to Ohio this month to attend the State Association and to
indoctrinate the new District Secretary into the esoteric mysteries of
the American Missionary Association was a delightful experience, and yet
one does not get out of New England by going to Ohio. The hills and
valleys, and clear mountain brooks are left behind, but New England
people are there as much as here. And what grand opportunities there are
in these interior States for growth in missionary enthusiasm and
benevolence! Congregationalism is taking Ohio. I remember when a boy in
the Buckeye State there were few churches of our order off the
"Reserve," or "New Connecticut," as the northern counties were called.
"Congregationalism was not adapted to those conditions," we learned in
our unwritten, uncongregational catechism. But since 1860 it has been
discovered that Congregationalism is fitted for any conditions where
Christians are seeking the advancement of our Lord's kingdom, and there
are souls outside of that kingdom. So Congregationalism has grown in all
sections of Ohio.

The beautiful city of Mt. Vernon opened her homes and hearts in large
and generous hospitality. The American Missionary Association received
an especially cordial welcome, because many remember the golden days
when the senior Secretary of the Association was pastor of this Mt.
Vernon church. It was he they wanted to present the work of the
Association in his old pulpit, but a younger man went because he was
younger.

The new District Secretary of the American Missionary Association, Rev.
C.W. Hiatt, was welcomed enthusiastically, and his record merits such a
welcome. The office of this district will be in Cleveland, Ohio, and its
territory includes Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Western Pennsylvania and
Western New York--a large field for one laborer to till successfully!
Take this New England district: there are eleven hundred and forty-five
churches in it, and only one Secretary to reach them all! Were it not
that the pastors and many of the lay members were ready to give their
cordial and hearty assistance, and for the occasional, earnest help of a
missionary, it would be impossible even "to shuffle round in it." But
there is this hearty assistance and it constantly increases in
heartiness.

       *      *      *       *       *

Rev. B. Dodge of Pleasant Hill, Tenn., a faithful worker in that
mountain region, has returned with a glad and thankful heart to his
field of labor. His appeal published in the February magazine, and his
indefatigable personal labors with individuals, were crowned with
success, and he rejoiced in sufficient receipts to warrant the erection
of the "Girls' Dormitory" for the mountain girls. The help rendered was
most generous and timely. But this new building, as imperative as its
need is, _increases the annual expense of the work._ Larger
contributions are necessary in order to carry on this work in its larger
quarters. Prosperity involves expense.

One of the true friends of Missions has hit upon a plan for gaining
information that is worthy wider adoption than in her own church. She
has organized a club of those who desire to read the magazines of the
various Congregational Societies. This plan puts the magazine of each
society into the hands of a large circle of readers, and the expense to
each is very small. Are there any other clubs of this kind? Cannot one
be organized in each church?

       *       *       *      *      *

Few books would be of more real and lasting value in the libraries of
our schools than "The Deathless Book," by Rev. David O. Mears, D.D. Dr.
S.E. Smith says of it:--"It contains more items of knowledge in many a
field than are often brought together, and all legitimately associated
with the precious Book of Divine Revelation." A pledge has been given
for a part payment in the purchase of one hundred volumes of this book,
to be paid when the whole is pledged. It would be a great addition to
our school libraries if this book were put into them. The publishers
offer special rates. Will not some one make a special gift to complete
this fund?

       *       *       *      *      *

A letter just received from Corpus Christi brings the glad news of a
deep and far-reaching revival in progress there. Many have been
hopefully converted and the interest still continues.

       *       *       *       *       *


FREDERICK DOUGLASS.

Few colored men in the United States have occupied a more prominent
position than Frederick Douglass; and there are none whose opinions are
more worthy of respect. His address delivered at the celebration of the
Twenty-seventh Anniversary of the Emancipation of the Slaves in the
District of Columbia was thoughtful, well-expressed and emphatic in its
utterances. While we might not accord with every sentiment, we wish we
could publish the whole. We content ourselves with a few pointed
extracts.


THE IRREPRESSIBLE CONFLICT STILL IN PROGRESS.

"From every view I have been able to take of the present situation in
relation to the colored people of the United States, I am forced to the
conclusion that the irrepressible conflict, of which we heard so much
before the War of the Rebellion and during the war, is still in
progress. It is still the battle between two opposite civilizations--the
one created and sustained by slavery, and the other framed and fashioned
in the spirit of liberty and humanity, and this conflict will not be
ended until one or the other shall be completely adopted in every
section of our common country."


THE CONDITION OF THE PLANTATION NEGRO.

"From my outlook, I am free to affirm that I see nothing for the Negro
of the South but a condition of absolute freedom or of absolute slavery.
I see no half-way place for him. One or the other of these conditions is
to solve the so called Negro-problem. Let it be remembered that the
labor of the Negro is his only capital. Take this from him and he dies
from starvation. The present mode of obtaining his labor in the South
gives the old master-class a complete mastery over him. The payment of
the Negro by orders on stores, where the storekeeper controls price,
quality and quantity, and is subject to no competition, so that the
Negro must buy there and nowhere else--an arrangement by which the Negro
never has a dollar to lay by, and can be kept in debt to his employer
year in and year out, puts him completely at the mercy of the old
master-class. He who could say to the Negro when a slave, you shall work
for me or be whipped to death, can now say to him with equal emphasis,
you shall work for me or I will starve you to death. This is the plain,
matter-of-fact and unexaggerated condition of the plantation Negro in
the Southern States to-day."


WHY THE NEGRO DOES NOT EMIGRATE?

"I will tell you. He has not a cent of money to emigrate with, and if he
had, and desired to exercise that right, he would be arrested for debt,
for non-fulfillment of contract, or be shot down like a dog in his
tracks. When Southern Senators tell you that they want to be rid of the
negroes, and would be glad to have them all clear out, you know, and I
know, and they know, that they are speaking falsely, and simply with a
view to mislead the North. Only a few days ago, armed resistance was
made in North Carolina to colored emigration from that State, and the
first exodus to Kansas was arrested by the old master-class with
shotguns and Winchester rifles. The desire to get rid of the negro is a
hollow sham. His labor is wanted to-day in the South just as it was
wanted in the old times when he was hunted by two-legged and four-legged
bloodhounds."


NO FEARS OF THE FINAL RESULT.

"In conclusion, while I have plainly portrayed the sources of danger to
our people, I have no fears as to the final result. The American people
are governed, not only by laws and selfish interests, but by large ideas
of moral and material civilization. The spirit of justice, liberty, and
fair play is abroad in the land. It is in the air. It animates men of
all stations, of all professions and callings, and can neither be
silenced nor extirpated. It has an agent in every bar of railroad iron,
a servant in every electric wire, a missionary in every traveler. It not
only tunnels the mountains, fills up the valleys, and sheds upon us the
light of science, but it will ultimately destroy the unnumbered wrongs
inherited by both races from the system of slavery and barbarism. In
this direction is the trend of the nation. States may lag, parties may
hesitate, leaders may halt, but to this complexion it must come at last.
States, parties and leaders must, and will in the end, adjust themselves
to this overwhelming and irresistible tendency. It will make parties,
and unmake parties, will make rulers, and unmake rulers, until it shall
become the fixed, universal, and irreversible law of the land. For fifty
years, it has made progress against all contradictions. It stemmed the
current of opposition in church and State. It has removed many
proscriptions. It has opened the gates of knowledge. It has abolished
slavery. It has saved the Union. It has reconstructed the government
upon a basis of justice and liberty, and it will see to it that the last
vestige of fraud and violence on the ballot box shall disappear, and
there shall be one country, one law, one liberty, for all the people of
the United States."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SOUTH.


       *       *       *       *       *


CHURCH BUILDING IN A DAY.

Condensed from the _Southern Enterprise_ of April 18th.

Saturday morning, the 13th instant, at nine o'clock, was the time
appointed for the laying of the corner stone of our first church edifice
in Deer Lodge, Tennessee. Rev. G.S. Pope--founder of the church, and now
General Missionary of the American Missionary Association for the
Cumberland Plateau, had been notified of the occasion, but not in time
to be present, and the duties were committed to Rev. Aaron Porter, the
present pastor. The early morning was a little cloudy, but before nine
o'clock the sun shone out, and the remainder of the day was as pleasant
as possible.

The locality of the Church is on Ross Avenue between Knoxville Avenue
and Spring Street, where four beautiful lots were selected some time ago
by Rev. Mr. Pope and the building committee, and donated by Mr. A.L.
Ross. At the appointed hour, the citizens and neighbors collected around
the foundation, and occupied the piles of lumber as seats while they
listened to the interesting exercises. These consisted of singing,
reading of Scripture, an original hymn composed by the pastor, prayer,
address, enumeration of articles to be placed in corner stone,
depositing, cementing and closing the box, remarks, singing and
benediction.

After a few moments of interchanging of views of the situation, and of
the good fellowship now prevailing in our pioneer community--all the men
present took hold, and soon raised the entire framework to its place; it
having been prepared previously by Mr. Hodge and his assistants in such
careful manner that every piece fitted to its proper place. The crowd
then retired to enjoy the good dinners some of the citizens had prepared
for them; after which they returned to the grounds, and before sundown
had the entire frame work enclosed with sheeting in diagonal style. In
addition, the frame of the tower was raised and encased. Saturday was a
day of pride to Deer Lodge, as probably the same amount of work has not
been accomplished in the same time on any other occasion in this
country.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM WHITLEY COUNTY.

MRS. A.A. MYERS

In giving a little report of the condition of Prof. Lawrence, and of
what has been done with the assassin who attempted his life in May last,
I think I will but be answering the unexpressed wish of many of the
readers of the MISSIONARY. Mr. Lawrence is far from well. We fear he
will never recover from the nervous strain and great suffering of the
past year. He has but little use of his right arm and hand. He is now at
Champaign, Ill., and has not been able to attend trial. As to the
assassin, he walks our streets and frequents our saloons at pleasure. He
is out on $1,000 bail; whiskey men on his bonds. Northern people need
not be surprised at such justice, when Haddock's murderers are running
at large; and here we have not only whiskey and its money against us,
but secret fraternities, Southern prejudice, and sectarian intolerance.
We have hardly dared hope for justice in these courts, but rely on the
truth of the motto we have put in our church on the wall near where one
of the bullets struck--"Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the
Lord."

One of our native preachers not far from here made this unanswerable
argument in a sermon on _apostacsy_. He said, "'_If_ they shall fall
away'--means that they _cannot_ fall away, for anybody that knows
anything about the English language, knows it is a verb in the
_impossible_ mode and _everlasting_ tense."

Two ministers in Whitley County had called a public meeting to discuss
their peculiar doctrines. They became quite excited, and at the close of
the discussion, one of them prayed, "Oh God, make Elder So-and-so's
heart as soft as his head is."

A good meeting means a big excitement as much among the white people as
among the colored. This little incident, which occurred in a service
among the hills of northern Alabama, was told us by an eye witness, and
goes to show the depth of Christ-like feeling (?) that prompts _some_,
at least, of the great happiness they express. An underwitted youth
seemed to get religion in one of these times of shouting and excitement.
He swung his arms and marched back and forth shouting with the rest. To
see him so happy made the others shout the more. Amid all the noise, no
one knew what he was saying till, all of a sudden, as often happens,
there was a lull; then, as he kept on he was understood, and these were
the words he was repeating over and over: "Run, chicken, with your head
pecked off, a'n't we having a good time?"

It may not be uninteresting to hear how some of the bodily ills are
ministered to here in the mountains.

If a person is subject to headache, he can be cured by cutting some of
his hair off and putting it in a stream of running water.

In certain kinds of sickness, there must be the greatest care that none
of the covering on the bed be turned over. If it should be, the case
will terminate fatally.

In fevers, I have known milk to be strictly forbidden, but ham and
biscuit recommended by the physician.

Quite a number of people, and even those of whom you would expect better
things, employ "charm" doctors. They make passes and say over a lingo,
and it will cure cancers, toothache, or any other disease. I have never
heard what their magic words are. In fact, if a woman tells a woman,
they lose all their curative properties. But these are the words they
use to charm away the botts in horses. I think they ought to be given to
the public for the benefit of stock growers generally. Putting the
fingers on the animal's nose, they pass the hand along the head and
spine, repeating, "King Solomon plows with a golden plow. He plows deep
and he plows shallow, and he kills all the worms."

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

The year thus far at Tougaloo University has been one of great success.
The enrollment, three hundred and thirty-five, has already surpassed
that of any previous full year, and many more have signified their
intention of attending next term, when a special Teacher's Training
Course is to be held. The necessity under which many labor, of teaching
school in order to pay their own school bills, makes attendance somewhat
irregular. The grade of the school is being steadily advanced, and under
efficient teachers and Principal, the pupils are making solid
advancement. The upward grading process will prevent the graduation of
any pupils from the normal department this year, but that is of slight
moment compared with the substantial gain of more thorough scholarship.

The industrial work of the school has this year been more thoroughly
systematized and made more efficient than before. There has been special
improvement in the girls' industrial work. Even the younger pupils enter
into the sewing and cooking classes with zest. The boys' industries
include blacksmithing, carpentry, tinning, wagon making, painting, steam
sawing, turning, scroll sawing, and farm-work in its various branches,
the care of stock, etc. It would be difficult to estimate the value that
this combined school and industrial work is destined to have on the
Negroes of this State of Mississippi. Not in legislative enactments, but
in the gradual process of education along this line, will the main
problems connected with the Negro race be solved.

The Biblical department of the school, recently established, designed to
train preachers, has as yet but one class, of three members. These are
making good progress, and they take turns in preaching at Clinton, at
the Mt. Hermon School, fourteen miles away. The training in this
department under the President, is especially directed towards knowledge
of the Bible and of human nature, earnest and practical preaching, and
the development in the preacher of sterling character. If preachers can
be sent forth who are well grounded in these things, much may be
expected of them. Says Dr. Haygood, "The hope of the black race lies
mainly in the pulpit."

The most interesting feature of the work of this year has been the very
deep religious interest which began soon after the Week of Prayer and
which has not passed away. Special services were conducted for several
weeks by President Woodworth, and the feeling was strong and earnest. It
has been a quiet work, but it is believed that it is deep. Between fifty
and sixty expressed a determination to live the Christian life. One of
the most helpful features in the Christian work of the school is the
Covenant for Christian Service, a pledge somewhat similar to the
Christian Endeavor pledge, though there is no organization. Over one
hundred have signed this covenant within the past year. The school is
growing rapidly; its outlook is most hopeful. It is already cramped for
room. Every recitation room has been full, and many crowded, this term.
One class had to overflow into the chapel. Between thirty and forty
girls who wished to come were obliged to stay at home because the
Ladies' Boarding Hall has been crowded to its utmost capacity. A new one
is very greatly needed.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK AT HAMPTON.

REV. H.B. FRISSELL.

You will be glad to know of the missionary work that the students are
doing in the community. Our graduates have started a Young Men's
Christian Association in the town of Hampton, hired rooms, chosen one of
their number secretary, paid a large part of the expense out of their
own pockets, have fitted up the rooms prettily and made an attractive,
pleasant place for the young men of the town. They have social,
literary, musical and religious gatherings there. A boys' club has been
started in connection with the Association. The colored pastors have
became interested in the work, and take turns in conducting the Sabbath
afternoon prayer meeting in the rooms.

Our Holly Tree Inn, on the school grounds, is now in active operation.
It is under the direction of our school temperance society. Coffee and
rolls are furnished for five cents, with a pleasant room and open fire
in winter. The result has been that some of our students who used to be
tempted into saloons and doubtful places, find a comfortable, pleasant
room on the school grounds where they can get what they want. We
consider it a valuable object lesson, to the students, of what they can
do at their own homes.

The work of the students in the Sunday-schools about is continually
increasing. The school at Slabtown, started by the students with twenty
scholars, had over a hundred last Sabbath. The school-room given by a
generous friend in New York is fairly ready to burst with its living
contents. During the week, teachers and normal school scholars go out
and teach the women and children how to sew.

Another Sunday-school, at Little England, is conducted very largely by
our Indians under the direction of teachers. The Indian boys hold
services at the jail and furnish music for an afternoon service at the
Soldiers' Home. You would be interested to be here of a Sunday morning
and see the happy groups of missionaries going forth in every direction,
on foot, by boat, by wagon, to jail, to poor house, to the cottages of
the old and sick, carrying the good news. Every colored Sunday-school in
the neighborhood has a large number of its teachers from the Normal
school. We consider this missionary work of the students most important
in keeping up their interest in their own people, and in developing the
Christ-like spirit of work for others.

Our school for Bible study, though cramped for room, is exerting an
important influence on this community. Almost all the colored pastors of
the place have received instruction in its classes. All the white
pastors of the place, with one exception, take part in the instruction
of their colored brethren. This school has sent out colporteurs under
the American Tract Society into the country about. With what knowledge
they have received here, they have been able to unite the office of
teacher and preacher in the country districts; they have earned their
way by the work of their hands and so secured a chance to preach. In
this way, they are able to stay in one community during the whole year.
One of these men went over to the eastern shore of Virginia last year;
worked on the railroad during the day, taught a night school in the
evening, got together a congregation, put up a comfortable church,
building it largely with his own hands, and came back to school in the
fall with money enough for his next year's expenses. One of the class
sailed last spring for Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEVELOPING PATRIOTISM AMONG THE COLORED PEOPLE.

REV. G.S. ROLLINS.

The security of any nation rests largely upon the patriotism of its
people. America is in danger, not from foes without, but from within her
own borders. How to Americanize the foreign element, is the problem
which confronts the people of our great cities; a question which more
directly concerns the Northern portion of our country.

Here in the South is a different case. We have eight million negroes--
born Americans. The one all-absorbing question is, how to fit them for
citizenship--how to make patriotic citizens of them.

Is patriotism in danger among the colored people? Yes, and mainly for
two reasons.

First, because of their ignorance of our country; its history,
constitution and government. Some will think that this is a danger which
will soon pass away, as the older and more ignorant ones die. It is true
that the number of those who were advanced in years at the close of the
war is rapidly decreasing, but there is an astonishingly large number of
those who were young at that time and are now in the prime of life. They
are ignorant of our National history previous to the Civil War. What
they have learned since, has been politics rather than patriotism. They
look upon our nation as two great political parties, each struggling for
the mastery. One they regard as hostile, and the other friendly, to
them. This is the extent of their knowledge of United States history.
Although they have been told that we are a great nation under a
beneficent government, such a fact is difficult for them to comprehend,
since all they see is the by-play of party politicians. They know they
have a right to vote, but how can they respect a government that does
not always and everywhere protect them in the exercise of that right?

A second reason why patriotism is in danger among the colored people:
They are not surrounded by that intensely national spirit which prevails
in other parts of our country. By this, I would not take one iota from
the loyalty and patriotism of the Southern people. The fact cannot be
denied, however, that one in the South hears and reads but little about
the United States of America. Much is written and said about the State,
but little genuine enthusiasm for the whole country is displayed. A
general spirit of distrust of the Federal Government is constantly
coming to the surface. Newspapers and men talk as if they were
constantly afraid the government would overstep its bounds and encroach
upon the rights of the States. The Southern press is ever complaining of
the sectionalism of the North. And when confronted with the necessity of
teaching United States History in the public schools, it rejects the
current school histories. It is not the present object to remark further
upon this than to call attention to the fact that there is a state of
public sentiment which is not productive of warm patriotism. Two years
ago, the writer, while attending an anniversary in a Northern city,
witnessed a scene that will not soon be forgotten. Fifty thousand people
were gathered on a public square, and at a given signal a beautiful new
flag was unfurled, and the band struck up "America." Fifty thousand
voices took up the tune. Men cheered until they were hoarse. One
gray-haired Irishman with tears shouted, "Thank God I live under the
American flag." Such scenes develop patriotism. They are rare in the
South.

In the midst of indifference toward the national government, the colored
race is developing and multiplying, and that so rapidly that it is a
most important factor in the political affairs of the nation. Like
begets like. Indifference toward the government on the part of the
whites, breeds the same in the Negroes.

Now, true patriotism is a positive power. A new generation of colored
people is growing up. Upon these rests the future of the race. These two
defects, lack of education and unpatriotic surroundings, will best be
remedied by the education of this new generation.

United States History should be a prominent study, even in the primary
departments of our schools. The vast majority of the colored children
can remain in school only long enough to get a knowledge of the
elements, and among these should be American history. What if children
cannot pronounce the names of all the cities in Siberia? Teach them to
speak intelligently of Lexington, Bunker Hill and Yorktown. Hang the
walls of the school-room with pictures of great Americans. Let incidents
from their lives be used as illustrations of moral lessons. Explain the
principles and form of our government. Dwell upon the extent of its
domain and its vast resources. Define simply the privileges conferred,
and the duties imposed, upon the citizens of our government. Four things
should be taught them: the three Rs and American history. What is needed
among all our citizens, is a great lifting up where a broad view of our
great land can be had. Make the children feel that they dwell in a great
and goodly land, that they enjoy great privileges under its government,
and they will learn to love it.

When Independence Day arrives, arrange for public gatherings of the
people, and in short addresses explain to them the meaning of the day.
Let it be a day of opportunity for instructing them in the history of
our country and in the duties of citizenship. These are some of the ways
in which the colored people may be aroused from their apathy and
indifference toward their country, and inspired with a patriotism, not
blind and spasmodic, but intelligent and permanent.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEGRO GIRL'S PROSE POEM.

In attendance at one of the ward schools of Indianapolis is a little
colored girl nine years old. She is miserable, indeed, for at home she
is ill treated, and the shoes she wears, and often the clothes, are
supplied by the teachers or some of her classmates. There is a tender,
poetic vein in her make-up, and it found vent in a composition. The
teacher took a little pansy plant to school one day and told the pupils
of the flower. Two days after, she asked them to write a story of it,
and gave them the privilege of having the pansy talk and tell the story,
and this is what the little colored girl wrote, the word pansy in the
copy being the only one dignified with a capital:

"I am only a Pansy, my home is in a little brown house. I sleep in my
little brown house all winter, and I am now going to open my eyes and
look about. 'give me some rain sky, I want to look out of my window and
see what is going on,' I asked, so the sky gave me some water and I
began to clime to the window, at last I got up there and open my eyes,
oh what a wonderful world I seen when birds sang songs to me, and
grasshoppers kissed me, and dance with me, and creakets smiled at me,
and I had a pretty green dress. there was trees that grow over me and
the wind faned me. the sun smiled at me, and little children smelled me.
one bright morning me and the grasshoppers had a party he wood play with
me and a naughty boy pick me up and tore me up and I died and that was
the last of Pansy."--

_Exchange._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


ONE DAY'S MISSIONARY WORK.

REV. T.L. RIGGS, OAHE, DAKOTA.

Early in the winter, I had a pleasant day of work regarding which I want
to write you. It was the day appointed for the observance of the Lord's
Supper at the out-station about ten miles from home, and as the river
had not frozen over thoroughly, I thought it better to go down in the
saddle rather than drive the cart. This made it impossible for Mrs.
Riggs to accompany me as she sometimes does.

I brought out my saddle camp-pouches (small square cases that strap to
the horn of the saddle) and emptied them of their camp furniture, and in
these were placed the bread and wine and also the service for the
communion. My pouches are so small that I could take but one glass and a
little china pitcher for our service. Usually I am able to take a china
plate as well, but this time there was no room.

I went early in the day, and after some little difficulty the river was
safely crossed, though my poor horse, not being shod, fell upon the ice
more than once. He was not hurt, however, and I followed the river shore
down to the out-station which is on the west side of the river.

I found the people gathered, and we had a morning session of nearly two
hours. It was rather a preparatory service, and I talked familiarly with
those present, individually as well as collectively. There were three
men and their wives who wished to be married. Seven applied for
admission to church membership, and there were also several infants to
be baptized.

After dismissing the morning gathering, I arranged for communion
service. I had no plate, so I sent a boy to his home to get one. He
returned saying they had none, and I sent him to another house, from
which he returned saying he could not get in. Then I decided to use the
best I had, which was the card-board back broken from a hymn book. This
I covered with a napkin and it answered very nicely. I had not prepared
for any applications for baptism and had to send for a bowl, instead of
which a _tin cup_ was brought just as we were ready to begin service.

After the opening of service, I first married the three couples, (one of
these consisted of an old man and woman nearly seventy years old, both
of them gray-headed). The applicants for Christian fellowship were asked
to give some public expression of their faith and were received into
membership and baptized together with the infants. We, also, at the
close of the service elected a deacon, who holds office for two years,
and then I talked to them regarding the duties of another year. When
dismissed, all went to their homes. I, too, went to a house near by and
drank some coffee, for by this time I was quite faint. After this I rode
home, reaching there just as the family were separating from the
tea-table.

It seems odd to speak of men and their _wives_ coming to be married--it
is meant that they are husbands and wives _after the Dakota custom_.
When they come to understand Christian marriage, and especially if they
desire to unite with the church, they ask to have the marriage
solemnized in a Christian manner. Sometimes a man and woman who have
several children, perhaps a baby in arms, present themselves for
marriage.

It is required of married candidates for admission to the church, that
they be married in a Christian way. This sometimes seems hard, as in a
case which has been before our Oahe church for some time. A woman of
fine character whom we believe to be a sincere Christian, desires to
unite with the church. Her husband, who is a veritable heathen, refuses
to marry her. He says he never has had another wife and does not intend
to take one, but he is a Dakota and does not wish to adopt white
people's ways. They have a large family of children, and the wife does
not feel that it is best to separate from her husband, though she really
desires to do her whole Christian duty. In such cases, this regulation
seems hard, but in the early days of the Dakota Mission, anything else
brought confusion and trouble into the church, and this method of action
was decided upon.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?

MISS M.C. COLLINS, FORT YATES, DAK.

There is a time in our work, if it progresses as we would like, when it
seems to go beyond us. The work here now is at that point. When I came
here the people were beggars. Their acquaintance with the Agency people
and the Army people had been such as to cause them to think that white
people were all wealthy, and that one had only to ask for a thing to
receive it. I have labored diligently to induce them to earn what they
have. It is very seldom now that any one begs, but I am over-run with
applications for work. Each individual is jealous of another, if I give
one work and refuse another. If I hire a woman to wash, I must hire
another to iron, another to bring in my wood, another to wash the floor
and still another to clean up my yard. If I hire a man to make some
repairs, I must hire another to cut wood, another to haul water or ice,
and so it is. This is very expensive, and yet I see no way to avoid it.
I cannot say to a man, "It is a disgrace to beg bread for your hungry
child," and then refuse to give him work. Now, let some of your wise
people in the East who are friends of the Indian try to remedy this
great difficulty. Let a part of the Indian money be spent in educating
the Indian in his home to work and to earn something. The church or the
Government ought to devise some plan by which Indians at their homes can
earn money. I do all I can, but the expense is more than I can bear.
There is no market for the Indian, and no work to be done by which he
can earn anything, and no man can become self-supporting until he is
provided with a way to support himself. What can we do about it?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *


METHOD OF CONDUCTING CHINESE SUNDAY-SCHOOLS.

REV. W.C. POND, D.D.

I have been requested to give in the columns of the MISSIONARY, some
hints as to the opening and conducting of Chinese Sunday-schools. I
wonder that I have waited for such a request, and did not long ago take
this good method of replying to letters of inquiry, which, attempting to
answer one by one, I have been obliged to respond to briefly, hurriedly,
and unsatisfactorily.

1. First, "Catch your hare"--get the Chinese to come. This is less
difficult, I fancy, in our Eastern cities, than in those of California.
And yet, even there, it may require repeated and persistent invitations.
I would not despair even though the teachers came several times at the
hour appointed, and found that the expected pupils had broken their
promises and failed to appear. You will at length prove to them that you
are in earnest and have something for them worth their consideration.

2. When they come, _do not undertake any opening exercises_, but as soon
as the first one appears, let the teaching begin. They are generally so
situated, that to exact strict punctuality, is to require the
impossible. Give them a reading lesson in whatever book they bring; or,
if they bring none, in any primer you may have at hand, Chinese who have
made no beginning in English, need to have each one his own teacher.
This may not be possible always, but it is very desirable. It is
exceedingly important that as much as possible be learned of English in
the first few lessons, in order to prepossess the pupils favorably and
get them interested in the school. Those who have already learned to
read can, of course, be put into Bible classes, but beginners ought to
be at liberty to take, each one his own pace, and get on as fast as
possible; and for this a teacher for each pupil is needed.

3. From the beginning, let each class or each pupil have _one and the
same teacher_. This is of almost vital importance. The establishment of
a personal relationship and the development of a special personal
friendship, are almost indispensable, if we would lead such dark souls
into light. General exercises will not do this fast enough to meet the
emergency. It needs personal contact; careful "hand-picking."

4. That which seems to me the best _text-book_ for Chinese schools is
"Jacobs' Reader." It was prepared originally for the deaf and dumb; and
thus suits well those who are to us--as we to them--virtually deaf and
dumb. Its object words are all represented in pictures. Its lessons are
so arranged that the advance involves a perpetual review, and thus
fastens in the memory what has been acquired. This is particularly
desirable in the case of the Chinese, because the methods of teaching in
China are so utterly diverse from ours. Teaching that turns back is in
no favor with the average Chinaman. He wants you to pronounce the words
and let him pronounce them after you as fast as possible. Go over it two
or three times, very much as if you were teaching a parrot to speak, and
then let him try himself. He is impatient of protracted explanations.
What he wants is _sounds_; the more of them the better. After he has got
the sounds, he will be willing to take the meaning they convey. One
beauty of this book is, that it conveys the meaning through the eye, and
keeps pupils reviewing without their knowing it. The teacher is in
danger of becoming impatient with this Chinese method, for we _know_
that our way of teaching is better. But remember that the end you have
in view is not the most effective instruction in English, but the
leading of the soul to Christ; and you can be content with a poorer
method of doing the former, if thereby you can keep within reach that
lost, but blood-bought soul. Another good point in this little book is,
that there is just about enough in it concerning God and Christ to give
the teacher an occasional opportunity to preach Jesus, without
frightening the pupil away by too abrupt a "setting forth of strange
gods." And, finally, this one Reader well studied will place the pupil
where you can safely commend to him the New Testament as the cheapest
and the best book to take next.

5. Instead of opening exercises have _closing ones_, as extended and as
interesting as possible. Have pictures selected from the Sunday-school
rolls, and, at each session, make one of these the subject of a little
gospel-talk. Ask the pupil best versed in English to be your
interpreter, and use such English as he can understand. And, even though
you have no interpreter, five minutes given to a Bible story will not be
lost, if you have a picture that is apt and suggestive.

Then _sing_ the gospel to them, asking them to _read_ the verse after
you, word by word, and then sing it with you. I will gladly supply, at
bare cost, Song Rolls in Chinese, containing familiar gospel hymns
translated into Chinese and so conformed in metre to the English
original that the time remains unchanged, and the teachers can sing the
English words, if desirable, while the Chinese use their own. There is
no more effective preaching of the gospel than that in song.

6. The Sunday-school, at its best, needs to be supplemented by some sort
of week-day work. The Chinese Sunday-schools of California, though
started _with great √©clat_, would long ago have perished utterly, but
for the mission schools whose work knows no cessation. Our Christian
Chinese are now so widely scattered that it seems as though there could
scarcely be anywhere Eastward a city of considerable size without at
least one of them. If there is one, he will hear of your Sunday-school
and will be there. Utilize him to the utmost. Make a missionary out of
him. And it seems to me that the _evangelistic work_ which we have been
doing--imperfectly as yet--in California, ought to be extended to the
Eastern cities, and that among our Christian Chinese some ought to be
appointed to this work, spending (say) a month in each city where any
considerable number of Chinese are found, endeavoring to reap the
harvests that are ready, and to organize for Christian work whatever
converted Chinese he may find. Already, without any such special agency,
our "Congregational Association of Christian Chinese" reports one
"branch" with sixteen members, in Brooklyn. I am sure it would be well,
if the same thing, or something similar, were organized elsewhere.

7. Finally, I must caution the American workers against too ready an
acceptance of pious talk on the part of their Chinese pupils as an
evidence of real piety. Grievous disappointments, involving reproach to
Christ and to all missionary work, sometimes grow out of this. Herein
consists, in part, the benefit which would attend the visits of reliable
Chinese evangelists. They would "take forth the precious from the vile"
(Jer. 15:19), and would give to the American workers not only much
greater results of their labors, but a surer confidence in such as they
have.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A., Chairman of Committee,
  Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Ellen Osgood, Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford,
  Conn.

[1]MASS. and R.I.--Woman's Home Miss. Association,
  Secretary, Miss Natalie Lord, Boston, Mass.

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. William Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Union, Secretary,
  Miss. S.S. Evans, Birmingham, Ala.

MISS.--Woman's Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss
  Sarah J. Humphrey, Tougaloo, Miss.

TENN. and ARK.--Woman's Missionary Union of
  Central South Conference, Secretary, Miss
  Anna M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.

LA.--Woman's Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Jennie
  Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans, La.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs.
  C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Miss Katharine Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue,
  Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Miss Ella E. Marsh, Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society, Secretary,
  Mrs. G.L. Epps. Topeka, Kan.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. Mary B. Warren, Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead, Wis.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. L.F. Berry, 734 N Broad St., Fremont, Neb.

COLORADO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, Secretary,
  Mrs. S.M. Packard, Pueblo, Colo.

DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union, President,
  Mrs. T.M. Hills, Sioux Falls; Secretary, Mrs.
  W.R. Dawes, Redfield; Treasurer, Mrs. S.E.
  Fifield, Lake Preston.

     [Footnote 1: For the purpose of exact information, we note that
     while the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass.
     and R.I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association
be sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however,
should be taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary
Association, since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINAL NOTICE OF THE MEETING OF THE WOMAN'S STATE HOME MISSIONARY
ORGANIZATIONS.

This meeting, as previously announced, will be held Tuesday, June 4,
1889, in the Congregational Church, Saratoga, N.Y.

The following ladies will take part in the public afternoon session:
Mrs. H.S. Caswell, Editor of the _Home Missionary_, Mrs. F.K. Regal of
Ohio, Mrs. Smith Norton of Wisconsin, Mrs. W.E. De Reimer of Iowa, Mrs.
E.W. Williams of Minnesota, Mrs. A.J. Drake of Dakota, Mrs. A.B. Dascomb
of Vermont, Miss D.E. Emerson of the American Missionary Association and
Mrs. E.R. Drake of Kansas. The exercises will commence promptly at 2
o'clock. For information in regard to morning session, see AMERICAN
MISSIONARY for April, or address Mrs. J.A. Biddle, South Norwalk, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF ALABAMA.

BY MRS. H.S. DE FOREST.

Mobile welcomed the Woman's Missionary Association of Alabama at its
twelfth annual meeting, March 31st. A well arranged programme, with
reports from the eight auxiliaries, filled with interest a three hours'
session. Necessarily much of the work in these local societies must be
for building up the church, helping toward the minister's salary and
caring for the destitute in the immediate vicinity; but it was most
encouraging to note that aside from this, work had been done for the
foreign field through the American Board and for the Home Missionary
Society, while several societies had contributed toward the support of a
teacher at Fort Berthold, Dakota, under the American Missionary
Association. Organizations were reported among the women, young women
and girls, with one society of King's Sons, who are interested in the
foreign field. The Penny Plan had been tried with much success by one
society of girls. This band has given during the year forty-five dollars
for foreign, home and local work.

Interesting and practical papers were read upon "Africa and our duty to
it," "Systematic Work in our Local Societies," and "Prohibition: our
Relation to the Movement."

Miss Emerson, providentially present, brought the greetings of the
American Missionary Association, cheering and encouraging all with her
helpful and inspiring words. Changes in the Constitution seeming
desirable, they were suggested and adopted at this meeting. The name is
changed from Woman's Missionary Association to Woman's Missionary Union,
thus bringing the society into line with similar organizations in
Northern States.

Under the new wording, local societies may work for any branch of
missions, home or foreign, contributions being sent through the
established agencies of the Congregational churches. By thus broadening
the field, it is hoped that more and better work will be done, and that
an intelligent interest will be created in many branches of the Master's
work.

The Union adjourned to meet in Marion, one year hence.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR THE CHILDREN.


       *       *       *       *       *


A LETTER FROM A TEACHER IN GEORGIA.

DEAR CHILDREN:

Would you not like to hear about some of the little black children in
our mission Sunday-school down here in the Southland? One of our
scholars, a certain ragged boy, was for many weeks among the missing. A
few Sundays later, one of the first arrivals was master James, but he
was so decently clad that I did not recognize him, and was obliged to
inquire his name. A blue jacket, much too large for him, and ornamented
with brass buttons, gave him a very distinguished air, but we soon
learned that clothes do not always make the man, for time has proven him
not as worthy as we thought. O, such a little scamp as he is! and yet so
full of good nature in his mischief, that it is not easy to scold him
for naughtiness. Living only across the lane, he runs in and out as much
as he pleases, and if one starts after him, he is often found just
outside on the step, peeping through a crack, and grinning at authority.
He is simply irrepressible, as a little incident will show you. One day,
as the Superintendent was speaking of the collection, a little boy said
he had no money. "_Aw!_ ye've got yer pocket _cram_ full," was the
comment of the boy with brass buttons. It was said for the benefit of
all present, and in no modest tone.

You have not heard, I believe, about the three little boys I call "my
babies." They are yet in dresses, and as cunning as can be, very regular
in attendance. Harry, Eddie, and--well I must tell you about the other
name. Down here, many nick-names are used, such as son, bubba, or boysa
for the boys, and sister or missy for the little girls. When this little
fellow was asked his name, he very bashfully said, "Son." "But you have
some other name?" If he knew any other, he was afraid to speak, so I
asked whether anyone present knew his name. A little girl called out "He
is Son Anderson _Baby_ Boy," and now I always use the four words when
speaking to or of him. We are very good friends, but he has doubted my
sincerity since one time when I ventured to examine a small brown pipe
held tightly in his hand. It proved to be chocolate candy, and as he did
not choose to risk his treasure with me, he put down his little mouth,
and took in not only the candy, but my finger as well. He is quite shy
of me now, evidently fearing that some of his rights will be denied.

Mordecai is an unruly specimen, and then there is Simeon, who never
fails to have an answer ready. His favorite one is, "Be humble, and ever
mindful of death." I suppose he learned it in the catechism, for he
rarely fails to give it when any question is asked concerning duty to
God or man. When we had the lesson about "The Sick of the Palsy," his
class were asked what they would do if they had a sick friend who was
unable to walk to a physician, and had no horse. "I'd get some mare and
tote him," was Simeon's original thought, and he did not know the story
either. It always seems as if I had just begun to write when time and
space warn me to stop, so now good-by.

AN A.M.A. TEACHER.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1889.


MAINE, $362.69.

Augusta. "A Friend"                             11.21

Bangor. S.C. Carter                              5.00

Blue Hill. Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss C.B.
  Stevens, Treas.                                5.00

Brewer. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00

Calais. First Cong. Ch.                         30.00

Castine. Class No. 9 Trin. Sab. Sch., _for
  Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                      2.25

Eastport. "G.A.P." of Central Ch.
  "Thank Offering"                              10.00

Garland. Cong. Ch.                               8.00

Kittery Point. Cong. Ch.                         6.35

South Bridgton. Cong. Ch.                       10.88

Thomaston. "A Few Friends in Cong.
  Ch." _for Memphis, Tenn._                     12.00

Yarmouth. Chas. L. Marston,
  _for Mountain Work_                          180.00

Yarmouth. Cong. Ch. 42, and Sab. Sch. on
  True Blue Cards 30, _for Tougaloo U._         72.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $384.29.

Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    19.00

Barrington. W.B.M., Bbl. C., _for Talladega C._

Croydon. Mrs. D.W. Barton, _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                                5.00

Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.                        91.92

Francestown. Cong. Ch.                          17.52

Gorham. Cong. Ch.                                5.67

Haverhill. Cong. Ch.                            17.00

Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                              5.75

Hudson. Cong. Ch.                               14.00

Keene. Second Cong. Ch.                         27.04

Keene. Primary Class Second S.S.,
  _for Woman's Work_                             5.00

Londonderry. Mrs. Buxton                         5.00

Lyme. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                    10.00

Manchester. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.
  _for Fort Berthold, Indian M._                75.00

Marlboro. Cong. Ch.                             12.33

Meriden. "A Friend" $1.50. Cong. S.S.,
  Box Books, etc., _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                                1.50

Newport. S.S. of Cong. Ch., Box S.S.
  Books, _for Lexington, Ky._

Plainfield. Mrs. C.H. Lewis, 5, Cong.
  Ch., Box S.S. Books, _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                                5.00

Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                9.94

Salem. Mrs. Dean Emerson                         1.00

Sanbornton Square. Cong. Ch.                     8.41

Sunapee. Meth. S.S., Box of S.S. Books
  _for Lexington, Ky._

Swanzey. Cong. Ch.                               8.11

Tamworth. Mrs. Amanda M. Davis, to
  const. FRANKLIN W. DAVIS L.M.                 30.00

Winchester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.              10.10


VERMONT, $1,643.31.

Bennington. Mrs. Isaac Jennings,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                            5.00

Brandon. Cong. Ch.                              12.92

Brownington and Barton Landing. Cong. Ch.       23.75

Brownington. Mrs. M.S. Stone                    10.00

Burlington. Class in College St. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                        8.00

Burlington. Bbl. and Box C., Freight 2,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                            2.00

Cambridge. Madison Safford, in Memory
  of John Safford                            1,284.00

Cambridge. Madison Safford                      10.00

Clarendon. Cong. Ch.                             7.27

East Poultney. Mrs. A.D. Wilcox                 10.00

Fair Haven. Members Cong. Ch.                    9.45

Greensboro. Cong. Ch.                           15.85

Hartford. Cong. Ch., by J.G. Stimson of
  Norwich                                       50.00

Middlebury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 25,
  Cong. Sab. Sch., 2.25, _for Rosebud
  Indian M._                                    27.25

Montpelier. Box C., Freight 5,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                            5.00

Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      9.00

Orwell. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                           14.21

Peacham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     26.55

Randolph. Mrs. M.K. Nichols                      1.50

Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    20.00

Wallingford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                           13.49

Wells River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 34.57

Windham. Cong. Ch. (2. from Mr. and
  Mrs. H.N. Prentiss, _for Mountain White
  Work_, 5 from Rev. Geo. N. Beckwith _for
  Debt_) to const. BLISS B. PRENTISS L.M.       38.00


Vermont Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks,
  Treas., _for McIntosh, Ga._:

    Saint Albans. W.H.M.S.
      of First Cong. Ch.              5.50

                                     -----       5.50


MASSACHUSETTS, $10,670.72.

Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                        20.00

Amherst. First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Tillotson Inst._                         20.00

Andover. Mrs. Phebe A. Chandler, _for
  School Building, Lexington, Ky._           2,000.00

Andover. "A Friend," Box Magazines
  _for Lexington, Ky._

Ashfield. Mrs. Daniel Williams, _for
  Freight to McLeansville, N.C._                 1.30

Beverly. Sab. Sch. of Dane St. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                               36.27

Brimfield. Cong. Ch.                             5.12

Brockton. Miss Lavinia Bowen, _for Girl's
  Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                    5.00

Brookline. Harvard Ch.                          86.49

Boston. Central Cong. Ch.           883.64

    Old South Ch., ad'l             337.47

    "A Lady Friend," 100;
      Mrs. A.W.S. Wood, 10;
      Joseph C. Tyler, 5;
      Edward Sharpe, 3, _for
      Girl's Hall, Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._                        118.00

    W.H.M. Ass'n, by Ella
      A. Leland, Treas., _for
      Apache Indians,
      Ramona Sch._                   41.11

    Miss Mercy Whitcomb               3.00

Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch.,
    74.75; and Sab. Sch.
    21                               95.75

    Mrs. Sarah A. Carruth,
      25; Miss Ellen
      Carruth. 10., _for
      Girl's Hall,
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          35.00

    Miss Mary A. Tuttle,
      _for Marie Adolf Sch'p
      Fund_                          10.26

Roxbury. Y.P.S.C.E. of Walnut
    Av., _for Oahe Ind'l
    Sch, Boys' Building_             25.00

    Mrs. Woodbridge Odlin,
      _for Girls' Hall,
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._           5.00

South Boston, Phillips Ch. M.C.
    Coll                             15.76

West Roxbury. South Evan
    Cong. Ch.                        25.51

    Y.L. Miss. Circle
      Bbl. C., _for Talladega C._

                                 ---------   1,645.50

Cambridge. Mrs. Wm. P. Haynes, 25.;
  Friends in Shepard Ch., 18., _for Girls'
  Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                   43.00

Cambridgeport. Ladies of Pilgrim Ch.
  150.; E.D. Leavitt, 100.; Prospect St.
  Ch. Sew. Circle, 20.; Mrs. R.L. Snow, 5.;
  Sab. Sch. of Prospect St. Cong. Ch., 5.;
  D.S. Coolidge, 10.; Mrs. Geo. L, Merrill,
  5., _for Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._                                       305.00

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                        10.00

Chelsea. Miss Helen P. Shapleigh, _for
  Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._             5.00

Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch.                        16.86

Dalton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Santee Indian Sch._                      17.50

Dedham. First Cong. Ch., _for Girls' Hall,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          8.00

Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                   38.00

Fall River. Ladies' Sew. Soc. of Cong.
  Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._          50.00

Fall River. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            17.50

Framingham. "Friend," _for Girl's Hall,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          5.00

Franklin. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  METCALF E. POND L.M.                          45.52

Franklin. Primary Scholars of Cong.
  Sab. Sch., on True Blue Cards                 12.00

Greenfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.            15.50

Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                    38.95

Hadley. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.            11.06

Hardwick. Calvinistic Ch.                        6.33

Harvard. Cong. Ch.                              13.65

Haverhill. Dr. Crowell's S.S. Class,
  Center Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        30.00

Holbrook. Winthrop Ch.                          41.88

Holliston. "Bible Christians of Dist.
  No. 4."                                       50.00

Holyoke. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                               50.00

Holyoke. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
  _for Ballard High Sch., Macon, Ga._           50.00

Holyoke. Mrs. Paulina S. Munson, _for
  Jewett Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._          15.00

Hyde Park. Woman's H.M. Union, _for
  Boys' Hall, Oahe, Dak._                       15.00

Lawrence. Trinity Ch., _for Indians and
  Freedmen_                                     33.26

Lee. William J. Bartlett, _for Indian M._       15.00

Leominster. Miss Carrie Wood, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                            17.00

Lexington. Hancock Ch.                          14.00

Lowell. High St. Cong. Ch.                      90.40

Lowell. Eliot. Ch., to const. SARAH ISABELL
  WILLEY L.M.                                   32.31

Medway. Village Ch., _for Mountain Work_        40.00

Milford. Cong. Ch. _for Indian M_               25.00

Millbury. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., bal.
  to const. DAVID EDMUND MARCH L.M.              5.00

Mount Hermon. Prof. H.E. Sawyer,
  _for Indian M._                                4.00

Newton. Eliot Ch.                              105.00

Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.                  81.91

Newton Center. ----                             20.00

Newton Highlands. Miss E.H. Craft, _for
  Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._           100.00

Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                               4.00

North Abington. Mrs. H.N. Swan, 4.;
  Cong. Ch., 1                                   5.00

North Adams. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc.,
  _for Fort Berthold, Indian M._                25.00

North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.               66.51

North Brookfield. Mrs. M.H. Foster's S.S.
  Class, Box C., Freight 2., _for Jellico,
  Tenn._                                         2.00

North Cambridge. Y.L. Miss'y Soc., _for
  Oahe Ind'l Sch., Boys' Building_              12.00

Northfield. Miss A.F. Pettee, _for Indian M._   10.00

Northampton. First Ch., 246.96: Edwards
  Ch. Benev. Soc., 122.43                      369.39

Northampton. Jared Clark, deceased, by
  his daughter, to const. Miss F.A.
  CLARK L.M.                                    30.00

North Leominster. Ladies' Soc. of Cong.
  Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._

North Middleboro. "A Friend"                    25.00

Peabody. Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C., _for Storrs
  Sch., Atlanta, Ga._

Pittsfield. Miss E. Campbell, 12.; and
  Miss G. Campbell, 12.; "Three Friends,"
  8.; Mrs. H.M. Kurd, 5., _for Girls' Hall,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         37.00

Pittsfield. Mrs. Mary E. Sears, 5._for
  Freedmen_, 5. _for Mountain Work_             10.00

Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch., 115.; Sab. Sch.,
  10.; Children's Mission Band, 5.; Miss E.
  Hardwick's S.S. Class, 1                     131.00

Reading. Cong. Ch.                              18.00

Royalston. Cong. Ch.                            36.05

Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc.                 366.57

Scituate. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                 8.07

Somerville. First Orthodox Cong. Ch.,
  79.45, Broadway Cong. Ch., 21.15             100.60

Southbridge. "A Friend"                          0.50

South Hadley Falls. Mrs. Robert Laing
  and "Friends," Bbl. C.,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

South Weymouth. Sab. Sch. of Union
  Cong. Ch., 25, Second Cong. Ch., 22,
  _for Indian M._                               47.00

South Weymouth. Little Children of
  Union Cong. S.S., _for Rosebud Indian M._      5.00

Taunton. Winslow Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._     25.00

Templeton. Sab. Sch. of Trin. Ch.                6.00

Upton. Young Ladies' Miss'y Circle, by
  Bertha E. Claflin, _for Mountain Work_         2.00

Upton. Y.L.M. Circle, _for Indian M._            2.00

Ware. Sab. Sch. East Cong. Ch., _for Santee
  Home_, 25.; Miss S.R. Sage, 12.50; Miss
  Hitchcock's Class, East Cong. S.S., 7.50,
  _for Indian M._; Primary Class, East Cong.
  Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._, 6.50      51.50

West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.         16.83

Westfield. Miss Sadie Leonard,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                        1.00

Westhampton. Cong. Ch.                          20.00

West Hawley. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                               10.00

West Medway. Second Cong. Ch.                    3.35

West Newton. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong.
  Ch., 25; "Pax," 4.50                          29.50

Weymouth. First Ch. and Soc.                    19.17

Whitinsville. Mrs. Chas. P. Whitin, 30.;
  Wm. H. Whitin, 25.; Arthur F. Whitin,
  25.; Edward Whitin, 25., _for Girls' Hall,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                        105.00

Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                   18.53

Williamstown. Miss F. Bascom,
  _for Indian M._                                1.00

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                           13.18

Worcester. Union Ch., 205.86; Central
  Ch., 105.; Piedmont Cong. Ch., 60            370.36

Worcester. "Friends," _for Girls' Hall,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         20.00

Yarmouth. By E.D. Payne, _Freight to
  Marion, Ala._                                  2.00

----. "Friends in Worcester Co.," _for
  Rosebud Indian M._                           100.00

----. "Friends in Worcester Co.," _for
  Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._           100.00

----. "A Friend"                                50.00

----. "Cash"                                     0.30

                                            ---------

                                            $7,608.22

ESTATES.

Boston. Estate Of Jeremy Drake, in full.
  by L.D. Packard, M.D., Adm.                  $62.50

Buckland. Estate of Dea. Silas Trowbridge,
  to const. MRS. LUCY S.T. LEAVITT,
  MRS. ELECTA P.T. STRATTON,
  EXECUTORS, MRS. MART T. PALMER,
  JAMES TROWBRIDGE, SILAS T. HITE, GEO.
  E. STRATTON, MRS. MAY A. RICHMOND,
  JAMES A. NASH, MISS FANNIE L. TROWBRIDGE
  and Miss FRANCIE P.M. SHAIN L.M's            500.00

Ware. Estate of William Hyde, by W.S.
  Hyde, Ex.                                  2,500.00
                                           ----------

                                           $10,670.72

CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

South Berwick, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch.
  Bbl. _for Selma, Ala._

Ashfield, Mass. Mrs. Daniel Williams,
  Box Books, _for McLeansville, N.C._

Boston, Mass. Miss H.H. Stanwood, 2
  Vols. Choice Stories, _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._

Brockton, Mass. Ladies' Benev. Soc, of
  Porter Ch., 2 Bbls, _for Talladega C._

Somerville, Mass. Woman's Miss. Soc.,
  Day St. Ch., Box of Bedding, etc., Val.
  30., by Mrs. N.B. Wilder, Pres., _for Miss
  Collins' Hospital, Standing Rock Agency,
  Dak._


RHODE ISLAND, $534.81.

Bristol. Mrs. Hope P. Walker,
  _for Indian M._                                5.00

Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                        37.83

Cranston. Franklin Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
  Bell, Jellico, Tenn._                          3.00
Providence. Ladies' Home Miss'y Soc. of
  Union Cong. Ch., 100.; "Friend," 5.;
  James Coats, 200.; Mrs. F.W. Carpenter,
  10.: Mrs. A.C. Barstow, 5., _for Girls'
  Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                  320.00

Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch., (5.20
  of which _for Indian M_)                      96.87

Providence. Central Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    50.00

Providence. Cong. Ch.                           17.11

Slatersville. Y.P. Soc. of C.E., by Lottie
  M. Colwell                                     5.00


CONNECTICUT, $2,486.56.

Berlin. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. of Basted Work,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._, 6 _for Freight_        6.00

Branford. Cong. Ch. to const. REV.
  THOMAS BICKFORD L.M.                          50.00

Bridgeport. West End Cong. Ch.                   5.57

Bristol. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
  Ind'l Sch., Ga._                              55.00

Bristol. Cong. Ch.                              21.77

Burlington. Mrs. Delight Upson                   5.00

Coventry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.              39.70

Danielsonville. Thomas Backus                   10.00

Darien. Cong. Ch.                               25.00

East Hampton. Miss M. Grace Smith,
  _for Tougaloo, Miss._                          5.00

East Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               15.55

East Windsor. Mrs. S.L. Wells                    5.00

Fairfield. Mrs. Kippen, Bbl. C.,
  _for Lexington, Ky._

Franklin. Cong. Ch.                              6.07

Greenwich. "A."                                 20.00

Hampton. "A Friend"                              5.00

Hanover. Cong. Ch.                              25.00

Hartford. Edward F. Fleming, _for Girls'
  Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                    2.00

Hartford. Ladies' Soc. of Park Ch., B. of
  C., _for Thomasville, Ga._

Hartford. Parsonage Circle by Mrs. G.L.
  Walter, Basted Work, _for Thomasville, Ga._

Hebron. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                        12.00

Higganum. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., to
  const. ROBERT S. CRUTTENDEN L.M.              84.00

Killingworth. Mrs. R.S. Rutty                    5.00

Manchester. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                       32.00

Middletown. South Cong Ch.                      36.28

Nepaug. Cong. Ch.                               11.00

New Haven. First Ch.                           301.27

New Haven. Mrs. A.S. Farnum, _for Oahe
  Ind'l Sch., Boys' Building_                  100.00

New Haven. Young Ladies' Mission Circle
  of United Ch., _for Sch'p Santee Indian
  School_                                       50.00

New Haven. Mrs. Henry Farnum, 25.;
  Mrs. R.P. Bolles, 2.; Mrs. John F. Douglass,
  3; Mrs. Mallory, 1., _for Indian M._          31.00

New London. First Cong. Ch.                     62.09

New London. First Ch. of Christ, _for Indian
  Sch'p, for Rosebud Indian M._                 19.81

New London. Mrs. Betsey P. McEwen,
  _for Indian M._                               10.00

New London. Class of Chinese in First
  Ch. _for Chinese M._                           5.00

New Preston. Cong. Ch.                          46.00

Niantic. Cong. Ch.                               2.65

North Branford. Sab. Sch., by Elizabeth
  P. Wood, _for Oaks, N.C._                     20.00

Norwich Town. "The Other Girls," by
  Fannie I. Williams,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                   25.00

Plainville. "A Friend"                         100.00

Plainville. King's Daughters, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                             4.00

Plainville. Ladies' Soc., B. of C.,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                            34.47

Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                        15.11

Salisbury. Mr. Martin's Bible Class,
  Cong. Ch., _for Young Indian Students_         3.15

Salisbury. Bible Cards, _for Thomasville, Ga._

South Coventry. Mrs. Mary J. Bennett, _for
  Mountain Work_                                10.00

Southport. Mrs. E.B. Monroe, 15 Bound
  Vols. "Christian Weekly,"
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Terryville. Judah W. Clark                      50.00

Thomaston. Sab, Sch. First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian Sch'p._                           17.50

Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                            11.81

Tolland. Cong. Ch.                               9.50

Torrington. Ladies' Soc., _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 25.00

Torrington. "Valley Gleaners," _for Fort
  Berthold Indian M._                           25.00

Wapping. Sab. Sch. Cong. C.,
  _for Indian M._                                8.90

Wapping. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                        3.70

Washington. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mountain Work_                           17.00

Watertown. Mrs. Fred. Scott's S.S. Class,
  _for Fort Berthold Indian M._                 15.00

Wauregan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
  MISS MARY GENEVIEVE HUTCHINS L.M.             30.00

West Hartford. "S.H."                            5.00

Whitneyville. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN
  H. BURTON L.M.                                31.00

Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     24.30

----. "A Friend in Conn."                       62.11

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Conn., Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, Tress.,
  _for Woman's Work:_

    Huntington. Ladies' H.M.
      Soc., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
      Ga._                           10.00

    Huntington. Ladies' H.M.
      Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Williamsburg, Ky._              5.00

    Torringford. Ladies' H.M.
      Soc., _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
      Ga._                            5.00

                                     -----      20.00

                                            ---------

                                            $1,627.31

ESTATE.

New Haven. Estate of Lucy M. Bradley,
  W.W. Pardee, Ex., _for Tillotson C. and
  N. Inst._                                    859.25

                                            ---------

                                            $2,486.56


NEW YORK, $6,631.22.

Binghamton. Bible School, Cong Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Fisk U._                         25.00

Brasher Falls. "A Friend" to const. D.V.
  RICHARDSON L.M.                               25.00

Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch., 597.35; Ch. of
  the Pilgrims, 403.33; South Cong. Ch.,
  69.10; Sab. Sch. South Cong. Ch., 50.;
  "A Friend," 30. to const. MRS. CAROLINE
  L. HARRISON L.M.; Atlantic Ave. Mission
  Sab. Sch., 25.: Park Cong. Ch., 14.75      1,189.53

Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch.,
  _for Williamsburg, Ky._                      500.00

Brooklyn. "A Friend,"                            6.95

Brooklyn. The Misses Thurston,
  _for Indian M._                               50.00

Brooklyn. Mrs. Wardner, Large Pkg. of
  Mag's and Papers. Mrs. Sarah M. Kent,
  Scrap book and other reading matter

Cambridge. Cong. Ch.                             5.00

Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch., (of which
  75. _for Santee Indian M._ and 10.
  _for Chinese Indian M._)                     136.35

Chittenango. Mrs. Amelia L. Brown                7.00

Copaka Iron Works. Union Sab. Sch., by
  Mrs. W.A. Miles, _for Oahe Ind'l Sch_         10.00

Ellington. Mrs. Anson Crosby                     2.00

Fredonia. Presby. Ch.                           15.00

Gloversville. Cong. Ch.                        119.38

Hamilton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                10.00

Hobart. J.W. Blish                               2.00

Ithaca. E.P. Gilbert                            25.00

Jamestown. Miss Lydia Kay,
  _for Tillotson Inst._                         25.00

Lima. Mrs. Abby E. Miner                         3.00

Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                       75.00

Lockport. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., 25,
  Ladies' Miss. Soc., 25, _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 50.00

Maine. Cong. Ch.                                20.70

Marion. Cong. Ch.                               16.27

New York. Broadway Tabernacle                2,330.41

New York. Bethany Sab. Sch., 200, _for
  Bethany Annex, Fort Berthold Indian M._,
  Bethany Sewing Sch., 30., Broadway Tabernacle
  Sab. Sch., 50, Infant Class, 5,
  _for Fort Berthold Indian M._                285.00

New York. S.T. Gordon                          100.00

New York. Joseph Wild, 50, Mr. Meyer,
  20, Wm. A. Brown, 5, _for Conn. Ind'l Sch.,
  Ga._                                          75.00

New York. Mrs. Castello, _for Student Aid,
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga_                          3.00

New York. "M.C.H."                               2.00

New York. American Bible Soc., Grant
  of Scriptures, Val 21.60, _for Miss Collins'
  Indian Work_

Norwood. "Friends" _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                       5.00

Oneida. Edward Loomis                            5.00

Oxford. Dr. E.L. Enrigo, 30, to const.
  MRS. E.L. ENRIGO L.M. Cong. Ch., 25.          55.00

Port Richmond, S.I. Capt. S. Squire              5.00

Rochester. Mrs. E.A. Bosworth, _for Student
  Aid, Lexington, Ky._                           6.00

Spencerport. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 2 Boxes
  Quarterlies, etc., 30c. _for cartage_          0.30

Suspension Bridge. First Cong. Ch.              21.68

Syracuse. Plymouth Ch.                          26.00

Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, Annual
  birthday offering                              7.90

Thiells. J.H. Cassedy, _for Atlanta U._         20.00

Wading River. Cong. Ch.                         15.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. L.H. Cobb, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Albany. First Ch.                40.00

    Albany. Ladies' Aux. Clinton
      Av. Cong. Ch.                   5.00

    Berkshire. "Daisy Band."         20.00

    Binghamton. "The Helpers"        30.00

    Brooklyn. Puritan Ch., Willing
      Aid Soc., to const. MRS.
      DELIA E. SHERMAN and
      MRS. SARAH E. CURTISS L.M's    75.00

    Buffalo. Ladies' Aux.            25.00

    Buffalo. "Bancroft Mission
      Band"                           5.00

    Camden. "Mission Band."          25.00

    East Albany. Ladies' Aux.        10.00

    Gloversville. Ladies' Aux.       25.00

    Honeoye. Ladies' Aux.            19.00

    Norwich. "Pledges."               1.00

    Oswego. Ladies' Aux.             10.00

    Rutland. Ladies' Aux.             5.00

    Saratoga Springs. "Memorial
      to Miss Goodridge,"            20.00

    Syracuse. Primary Dept.
      Plym. S.S.                     20.00

    Walton. Ladies' Aux.             25.00

    Wading River. Ladies' Aux.        5.00

    Warsaw. Ladies' Aux.             16.25

    Woodville. Ladies' Aux.          14.50

                                    ------     395.75

                                            ---------

                                            $5,581.22

ESTATE.

Brooklyn. Estate of A.S. Barnes, _for
Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                     950.00

                                            ---------

                                            $6,631.22


NEW JERSEY, $62.74.

Arlington. Mission Band, _for Student Aid,
  Savannah, Ga._                                 0.75

Bound Brook. Cong. Ch.                          43.49

Closter. First Cong. Ch.                         4.00

East Orange. B. Van Wagenen,
  _for Marion, Ala._                             8.50

Lakewood. Rev. Geo. Langdon                      4.00

Orange. Miss G. Freeman, _for Conn. Ind'l
  Sch., Ga._                                     2.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $31.00.

Coudersport. John S. Mann                        5.00

Guy's Mills. Cong. Ch.                          18.00

Pittsburg. Mrs. H. Rea, _for Conn. Ind'l
  Sch., Ga._                                     3.00

Ridgway. Bible Class, by Minnie J. Kline,
  _for Oaks, N.C._                               5.00


OHIO, $510.77.

Andover. Cong. Mission Band, Box S.S.
  Papers, _for Jellico, Tenn._

Cincinnati. Miss Lucy Stickney, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                             5.00

Cleveland. "Macedonian Circle,"
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            35.00

Cleveland. Jennings Av. Cong. Ch.               25.00

Cleveland. Rev. H.M. Tenney, _for Student
  Aid, Talladega C._                             6.00

Donnelsville. Ella Purssell,
  _for Sherwood, Tenn._                          0.50

Huntsburg. M.E. Millard                          2.50

Kent. Cong. Ch.                                 15.55

Lexington. Cong. Ch.                             3.05

Madison. Mrs. E.A. Crocker                      30.00

Mansfield. First Cong. Ch. 138.93; Mary
  E. Runyan, 1                                 139.93

Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                       54.38

Oberlin. First Ch., 83.75; Sab. Sch. of
  Cong. Ch., 22.06; Mrs. R. Sturtevant, 2.     107.81

Oberlin. Rev. C.V. Spear, _for Jewett
  Mem. Hall, Grand View, Tenn._                 25.00

Wakeman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      8.00

Wakeman. Mable and Grace Todd, on
  True Blue Card                                 2.00

Willoughby. Florence A. Page                     5.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch.
      L.H.M.S. _for Miss Collins'
      Indian Work_                   20.00

    Columbus. Eastwood Ch. Y.L.M.S.   5.00

    Conneaut. Cong. Ch. W.H.M.S.,
      _for Miss Collins' Indian
      Work_                           9.00

    Hudson. L.H.M.S.                  5.00

    Wauseon. Mite Soc., _for Sch'p
    End., Fisk U._                    7.05

                                    ------      46.05


INDIANA, $35.00.

Michigan City. Mrs. Herbert Williams,
  to const. MISS CHARLOTTE S. RODGERS L.M.      30.00

New Corydon. Geo. Stolz                          5.00


ILLINOIS, $695.62.

Chebanse. Cong. Ch.                              9.13

Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 190.;
  Mrs. E.F. Rice, 5                            195.00

Chicago. L.C. Holman, _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                                4.00

Chicago. "Friends," Bbl. _for Home,
  Lexington, Ky._

Chillicothe. R.W. Gilliam                       10.00

Earlville. "J.A.D."                             25.00

Englewood. First Cong. Ch.                      21.35

Farmington. Cong. Ch.                           36.73

Hamilton. Charles Grubb, to const. MRS.
  MARY GRUBB, MRS. SARAH J. CRAWFORD,
  and MRS. MINNIE HARTLEY L.M's                100.00

Highland. Miss Balsigers' S.S. Class,
  _for Mobile, Ala._                             2.40

Hyde Park. M. Comstock, 1.; Pres. Sab.
  Sch., 75c., _for Marion, Ala._                 1.75

Morris. Box of Books, etc. _for Austin, Tex._

Pecatonica. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  Bbl. C., _for Mobile, Ala._

Peoria. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. J.T.
  ROGERS L.M., 40.; Rev. A.A. Stevens, 10.      50.00

Plymouth. Ladies' Mis'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  Box of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._

Princeton. Cong. Ch.                            14.40

Prophetstown. Sarah F. Sears                     1.50

Ridge Prairie. Saint John Ch.                    3.00

Thomasboro. H.M. Seymour                         5.00

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.E. Maltby, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_

    Ashkum.                           0.36

    Canton.                           0.50

    Champaign.                        5.00

    Central East Association.         4.00

    Galva.                           20.00

    Marseilles. _For Sch. Building,
      Yankton, Dak._                  5.00

    Morris. "Coral Workers"          10.00

    Neponset.                         5.00

    Oak Park.                        14.00

    Oak Park.                        38.50

    Rockford. Second Ch.              8.00

    Sheffield.                        3.00

    Toulon.                           8.00

    Toulon. "Lamp-lighters."          1.00

    Warrensburg.                      4.00

                                    ------    $126.36


MICHIGAN, $681.26.

Agricultural College. Rev. R.C. Kedzie           7.10

Alpena. "A Friend"                               3.00

Calumet. Cong Ch.                              259.16

Detroit. Trumbull Av. Cong. Ch., ad'l.          10.56

Flint. Sab. Sch. Cong Ch.                        5.00

Grand Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                   61.48

Hamilton. Henry Randolph                         2.00

Hart. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00

Laingsburg. S.H. Manzer                          5.00

Memphis. Bbl. C., _for Athens, Ala._

Northville. Daniel Pomeroy                       5.00

Olivet. Dea. Amasa Waters                       10.00

Saint Johns. Cong. Ch.                          10.00

Saline. Mrs. Maria Wood                          2.50

Sault St. Marie. Mrs. H.R. Floyd,
  _for Fort Berthold Indian M._                  5.00

----. "A Pastor"                                 5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan,
  by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Covert. L.M.S., _for Trinity
    Sch._                             6.75

    Detroit. Mount Hope S.S.,
    _for Trinity Sch._                5.02

    Douglas. W.M.S., _for Work
    in the South_                    11.50

    Litchfield. L.M.S., _for
    Trinity Sch._                    10.00

    Ypsilanti. W.H.M.S., _for
    Trinity Sch._                     5.00

                                     -----      38.27

                                              -------

                                              $439.02

ESTATE.

Birmingham. Estate of Mrs. Ann D. Stickney,
  by Albert S. Adams, Ex.                      242.24

                                              -------

                                              $681.26


IOWA, $190.55.

Alta. J.C. Heywood                               1.00

Cedar Rapids. "Busy Bees," _for Oahe
  Ind'l Sch. Boys' Building_                     5.00

Charles City. Cong. Ch., ad'l.                  40.60

Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                7.20

Decorah. Ladies' Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
  C., _for Tougaloo U._

Des Moines. Mrs. S.G. Otis, 2 Bbls. C.,
  _for Talladega C._

Fort Dodge. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Beach Inst._                              3.75

Humboldt. Cong. Ch.                             15.00

Keokuk. Cong. Ch., by S.W. Bancroft,
  _for Oahe Ind'l Sch. Boys' Building_         100.00

Oskaloosa. S.R. Pettitt                          2.00

Shenandoah. Christian Endeavor Soc.
  of Cong. Ch.                                   5.00

Tipton. Cong. Ch.                                6.00

Tipton. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Beach Inst._                              5.00


WISCONSIN, $209.37.

Clinton. John H. Cooper                          5.00

Eau Claire. "Cheerful Givers" of First
  Cong. Ch.                                     17.90

Green Bay. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc.,
  Basted Blocks for Quilts,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Lake Geneva. Mrs. Mary J. Barnard               25.00

Lake Geneva. Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    20.00

Madison. First Cong. Ch.                        21.87

River Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Fort Berthold Indian M._                 16.00

Sun Prairie. Cong. Ch.                           8.85

Viroqua. Woman's Miss'y Soc. Aux. to
  W.B.M.I., by Hettie M. Nichols, Sec.           5.00

Whitewater. First Cong. Ch.                     25.00

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, _for Woman's Work_:

    Clinton. W.U.M.S.                 2.00

    Clintonville. "A Friend,"         0.50

    Eau Claire. W.U.M.S.             12.55

    Janesville. W.U.M.S.              8.00

    Milwaukee. W.U.M.S.,
      Grand Av. C.C.                 25.00

    Milwaukee. "Helping
      Hands," Plymouth Ch            10.00

    Platteville. W.U.M.S.             5.25

    Stoughton. S.S. Birthday Box      2.35

                                    ------     $65.55


MINNESOTA, $258.82.

Ada. Sab. Sch., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._           1.02

Elmwood. Jessie Parlin and Madge Chapman,
  on True Blue Card, by Mrs. Wm. M. Jones        5.00

Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                              4.20

Grand Meadow. King's Messenger Soc.              2.00

Hawley. Union Ch.                                5.70

Litchfield. Ladies. _for Meridian, Miss._        2.50

Medford. Cong. Ch.                               5.00

Minneapolis. Vine Cong. Ch.                     31.00

Saint Charles. Orin Smith, Bdl. of Papers,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Saint Paul. S.S. Class, Cy Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                2.25

Sauk Center. Cong. Ch.                           5.10

Worthington. Union Cong. Ch.                     8.34

Minnesota Home Missionary Society, Mrs.
  M.W. Skinner, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Duluth. "Friends in Council,"     5.00

    Austin. L.M.S.                    1.15

    Elk River. W.H.M.S.               7.50

    Morris. Woman's Missionary
    Union                             6.00

    Minneapolis. Ladies' Soc. in
    Plym. Ch.                        32.33

    Minneapolis. Ladies' Soc. in
    Plym. Ch.                        30.00

    Minneapolis. Y.L.M.S.,
    Plym. Ch.                        13.46

    Minneapolis. L.M.S., Park
    Av. Ch.                           9.00

    Northfield. W.H.M.S.             40.00

    Owatonna. L.M.S.                  9.67

    Rochester. "Whatsoever Soc."      5.00

    Saint Cloud. W.H.M.S.             5.00

    Saint Paul. Sab. Sch.
    Plym. Ch.                        15.00

    Waseca. M.S.                      2.60

    Worthington. W.H.M.S.             5.00

                                   -------     186.71


MISSOURI, $201.00.

Garden City. F.P. Morelan.                       1.00

Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                 200.00


KANSAS, $29.23.

Paola. Cong. Ch.                                13.60

Meriden. J. Rutty.                              14.50

Plevna. Cong. Ch.                                1.13


NEBRASKA, $110.70.

Bradshaw. Cong. Ch.                              4.60

Clay Center. Cong. Ch.                           5.00

David City. Cong. Ch.                           10.55

Exeter. First Cong. Ch., 8;
  Sab, Sch. of Cong. Ch., 5                     13.00

Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                             4.60

Fairmont. Cong. Jr. Y.P.S.C.E.                   3.75

Greenwood. Cong. Ch.                             0.75

Hastings. Cong. Ch.                             16.50

Scribner. Cong. Ch.                              2.75

Wahoo. Cong. Ch.                                 6.20

West Point. Cong. Ch.                            5.00

York. Cong. Ch.                                 37.00


DAKOTA, $44.29.

Oahe. Oahe Ch.                                   5.00

Oahe. Woman's Native Miss'y Soc., 25.00;
  J.F. Cross, 2.50, _for Oahe Ind'l Sch.
  Boys' Building_                               27.50

Ree Heights. Cong. Ch.                           1.25

Templeton. First Cong. Ch.                       1.61

Vermillion. Mrs. E.C. Burchard                   1.00

Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union
  by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Lake Preston. W.M.S.              5.00

    Yankton. W.M.S.                   2.93

                                   -------       7.93


UTAH, $2.55.

Coal City. Cong. Ch.                             2.55


CALIFORNIA, $1,178.40.

San Francisco. The California Chinese
  Mission. (See items below.)                1,151.15

Poway. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00

Berkeley. Mrs. L.P. Huggins                      5.00

Belmont. Mrs. F.A. Blackburn and
  Mrs. E.L. Reed.                               17.25


COLORADO, $16.50.

Fort Lewis. Post. Sab. Sch., _for Oahe
  Ind'l Sch. Boy's Building_                    10.00

Denver. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
  Tillotson Inst._                               5.00

Denver. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Lexington, Ky._                                1.50


OREGON, $3.00.

Myrtle Point. C.C. Stoddard                      3.00


MONTANA, 25c.

Fort Keogh. Josie Cranin, _for Oahe
  Ind'l Sch._                                    0.25


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $160.00.

Washington. First Cong. Ch.                    160.00


TENNESSEE, $6.05.

Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch.                            4.00

Glenmary. Cong. Ch.                              2.05


NORTH CAROLINA, $79.92.

Hillsboro. Mrs. C.E. Jones                       2.00

Nalls. Cong. Ch., 75c.,
  "Missionary Hen," 15c.                         0.90

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                 2.00

Raleigh. Cong. Ch.                               5.05

Troy. S.D. Leak                                  4.25

Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                           59.40

Wilmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Rosebud Indian M._                        6.32


SOUTH CAROLINA, $15.00.

Charleston. Y.P.S.C.W., Circular Cong.
  Ch., _for Oahe Ind'l Sch._                    15.00


GEORGIA, $20.55.

McIntosh. Woman's Miss'y Soc., 12.05;
  Mission Sch., 1.50, _for Fort Berthold
  Indian Sch._                                  13.55

McIntosh. From Unknown Source, Bbl. C.

Thomasville. Conn. Ind'l Sch., _for Fort
  Berthold Indian Sch._                          7.00


ALABAMA, $5.00.

Selma. Woman's Miss'y Ass'n,
  _for Fort Berthold, Dak._                      5.00


FLORIDA, $2.50.

Winter Park. W.H.M.A., _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                  2.50


MISSISSIPPI, 15c.

Columbus. New Ruhamah Ch.                         .15


CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES IN THE SOUTH TOWARDS
EXPENSES OF REV. JAMES WHARTON,
EVANGELIST.

Louisville, Ky.                       3.50

Memphis, Tenn.                       19.40

Sherwood, Tenn.                      10.25

Nashville, Fisk U.                   25.00

Athens, Ala.                          5.15

Florence, Ala.                       11.50

Montgomery, Ala.                     28.25

                                   -------    $103.05


BULGARIA, $5.00.

Samokov. Rev. and Mrs. J.F. Clarke               5.00


TURKEY, $15.00.

Adana. Rev. and Mrs. Willis W. Mead              5.00

Van. Rev. and Mrs. Geo. C. Raynolds             10.00


JAPAN, $20.00.

Kyoto. Mission Ch.                              20.00


CHINA, $5.00.

Pang Chuang. Misses Grace and Gertrude
  Wyckoff                                        5.00

                                           ----------

Donations                                  $22,207.88

Estates                                      5,113.99

                                           ----------

                                           $27,321.87


TUITION, $3,938.31.

Lexington, Ky., Tuition             142.85

Genesis, Tenn., Tuition               2.00

Grand View, Tenn., Tuition           38.75

Jellico, Tenn., Tuition              44.75

Jonesboro, Tenn., County Fund        50.00

Jonesboro, Tenn., Tuition            27.25

Memphis, Tenn., Tuition             503.35

Nashville, Tenn., Tuition           615.10

Pleasant Hill, Tenn., Tuition        20.10

Sherwood, Tenn., Tuition             48.00

Wilmington, N.C., Tuition           138.45

Charleston, S.C., Tuition           217.75

Atlanta, Ga., Tuition,
  Storrs Sch.                       247.80

Macon, Ga., Tuition                 291.20

McIntosh, Ga., Tuition               39.85

Savannah. Ga., Tuition              183.75

Thomasville, Ga., Tuition            71.10

Athens, Ala., Tuition                86.90

Marion, Ala., Tuition                48.79

Mobile, Ala., Tuition               193.55

Talladega, Ala., Tuition            147.10

Meridian, Miss., Tuition             72.65

Tougaloo, Miss., Tuition            153.50

New Orleans, La., Tuition           335.00

Austin, Texas, Tuition              215.77

                                   -------   3,938.31

                                            ---------

Total for April                            $31,260.18

                                            =========


SUMMARY.

Donations                                 $118,051.25

Estates                                     20,308.09

                                          -----------

                                          $138,359.34

Income                                       4,629.21

Tuition                                     22,719.89

United States Government appropriation
  for Indians                                9,540.87

                                          -----------

Total from Oct. 1 to April 30             $175,449.31

                                          ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

Subscriptions for April                         46.16

Previously Acknowledged                        609.13

                                               ------

Total                                          655.29


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION
  from Oct. 1, 1888, to April 16, 1889, _for
  present fiscal year_, E. Palache, Treas.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS.--Los Angeles, Chinese
  Mon. Off's, 33.25; Anniversary Off's
  and Annual Mem's, 77.50.--Marysville,
  Chinese Mon's, 44.80; Christmas
  Gifts, 7.--Oakland, Chinese Mon's, 10.;
  Offerings at Dedication, 18.25--Oroville,
  Chinese Mon's, 27.20; Annual Mem's, 2.;
  Wong Tong, 3.--Petaluma, Chinese Mon's,
  22.85--Riverside, Chinese Mon's, 18,75.
  Mrs. J.C. Kyle, 4.75; Y.W.C.T.U., for
  Ann. Mem's, 2.; Chinese Ann. Mem's,
  4.; American Ann'l Mem's, 4,--Sacramento,
  Chinese Mon's, 48.70--San Buenaventura,
  Chinese Mon's, 31.40; Anniversary
  Coll., 6.25; Mrs. Ida White, 2.;
  Rev. E.W. Bartlett, 1.--San Diego, Chinese
  Mon's, 33.10; Chinese, special for
  Organ, etc., 34.30; Anniversary Coll., 10.;
  Chinese Ann'l Mem's, 4; American Ann'l
  Mem's, 10.--Santa Barbara, Chinese
  Mon's, 26.85; Anniversary Coll., 21.; Chinese
  Ann'l Mem's, 4; Woo Young, 5;
  American Ann'l Mem's. 6; "Friends,"
  9.90; "E.M.S." 1.75--Santa Cruz, Chinese
  Mon's, 48.20--Stockton, Chinese
  Mon's, 18.55--Tucson, A.T., Chinese
  Mon's, 34.90                                 641.05

FROM CHURCHES: Alameda, First Cong.
  Ch., 86.70--Alturas Cong. Ch., Rev. and
  Mrs. G. Griffiths, 4.--Clayton Ch. (2 of
  which from Rev. D. Hale) 8.10--Los
  Angeles, First, 69.80--Oakland, First,
  Mrs. E.P. Sanford, 12; Miss Mattie
  L. Sanford, 10.--San Francisco, First,
  (of which 20. from "A Friend" in
  part to const. REV. DR. C.D. BARROWS L.M.)
  58.55; Hon. Ira P. Rankin, 10; Rev.
  C.M. Blake, 5; Rev. W.N. Meserve, 5;
  G.R. Chambers, 5; Miss R.D. Gill, 2;
  Mrs. Spencer, 1.--San Francisco, Bethany,
  "W.C.P." 5.; bal. to const. REV.
  DR. C.D. BARROWS L.M.; Mrs. H.W.
  Lamont, 8.; Mrs. R.B. Hall, 1.--Central
  Mission Mon. Off's, 20.--Barnes Mission
  Mon. Off's 9.05--West Mission Mon. Off's
  26.45--S.F. Branch Ass'n of Christian
  Chinese, 28.45                               375.10

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS.

Belfast, Me. Miss E.M. Pond                      5.00

Marlboro, Mass. Miss H.J. Alexander              2.00

Stockbridge, Mass. Miss Alice Byington         100.00

New Haven, Conn. Mrs. J. Evarts Pond             3.00

Binghamton, N.Y. Mrs. H.G. Noyes                10.00

Bristol, Tenn. Miss M.C. Waterbury              15.00

                                              -------

Total                                       $1,151.15


DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND FOR COLORED PEOPLE.

Income for April, 1889, from investments    19,290.00

Previously acknowledged                      8,854.86

                                            ---------

Total                                      $28,144.86



H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
56 Reade St., N.Y.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ‚Äî VOLUME 43, NO. 06, JUNE, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one‚Äîthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG‚Ñ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away‚Äîyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‚Äúthe
Foundation‚Äù or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù appears, or with which the
phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work in a format
other than ‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‚ÄúPlain
Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    ‚Ä¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, ‚ÄúInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.‚Äù
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        works.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‚ÄúDefects,‚Äù such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‚ÄúRight
of Replacement or Refund‚Äù described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‚ÄòAS-IS‚Äô, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢‚Äôs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation‚Äôs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state‚Äôs laws.

The Foundation‚Äôs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation‚Äôs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.