Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

AUGUST, 1889.

VOL. XLIII. NO. 8.




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  ANNUAL MEETING
  FIGURES STILL IMPROVING
  PARAGRAPH
  EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS
  CIVIL RIGHTS IN COURT
  TIMHAKA TA IVANGELI


THE SOUTH.

  WHAT I FOUND IN THE CUMBERLAND MOUNTAINS, ILLUSTRATED WITH CUTS
    OF MOUNTAIN CABINS, A NATIVE MOUNTAIN CHURCH AND THE ACADEMY
    AT WILLIAMSBURG, KY.

 ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES:
    FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE, TALLADEGA, ALA.
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS, LA.
    LE MOYNE NORMAL SCHOOL, MEMPHIS, TENN.
    AVERY INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.
    NEW CHURCH AND SCHOOL AT ALCO, ALA.
    CHILDREN'S DAY AT CHATTANOOGA, TENN.


THE INDIANS.

  LETTER FROM MISS COLLINS
  THE RAMONA INDIAN SCHOOL


THE CHINESE.

  OROVILLE, MARYSVILLE, PETALUMA


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS
  THE LOCAL SOCIETY--ITS MEMBERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT


RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.

  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  J.E. RANKIN,
  WM. H. WARD,
  J.W. COOPER,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For Two Years._

  LYMAN ABBOTT,
  CHAS. A. HULL,
  CLINTON E. FISK,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN.

  _For One Year._

  S.B. HALLIDAY,
  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELBERT B. MONROE.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Sheet, Chicago._
  Rev. C.W. HIATT, _64 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Field Superintendents._

   Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS.
   Prof. EDWARD S. HALL.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. XLIII.       AUGUST, 1889.        No. 8.

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


The next Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association will be
held in Chicago, Ill., at the New England Church, commencing at three
o'clock Tuesday afternoon, October 29th. Rev. R.R. Meredith, D.D., of
Brooklyn, N.Y., will preach the sermon. Details regarding the reception
of delegates and their entertainment, together with rates at hotels, and
railroad and steamboat reductions, will appear later in the religious
press and in the next number of the MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FIGURES STILL IMPROVING.

Our receipts for nine months to June 30th are: From donations,
$147,213.31; from estates, $50,121.54; from income, $8,117.96; from
tuition, $30,239.62; from United States Government for Indians,
$15,219.37; total, $250,911.80. Our expenditures for nine months to June
30th are, $265,526.59. Debtor balance, $14,614.76.

The improvement is seen in the following figures: Debtor balance at the
close of April, $28,318.14; at the close of May, $25,795.07; June, as
above, $14,614.76. This improvement is due, in large part to legacies,
and yet there has been marked improvement in the donations as compared
with last year. We trust our friends will be encouraged to still further
increase their contributions, and enable us to rejoice in a triumphant
balance sheet.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR PRACTICAL, THOUGHTFUL FRIEND.

Nearly a year ago, we had the satisfaction of referring to a friend who
contributed regularly to all the Congregational Societies, and yet
reserved one hundred dollars for the society standing in need of special
help. We are glad to say that was not a transient purpose, for the
friend has appeared again this year and has doubled his special
contribution. We trust that he stands not alone in this thoughtful and
practical watchfulness over the missionary societies.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.

"Enclosed find my draft for ---- for the good work doing among the
Freedmen. For nothing do I give money more cheerfully than for the
advancement of that race."

"The earnest plea of Mr. Pond for help in his California Chinese work
was brought to the notice of our Chinese teachers yesterday. We would
hereby pledge you fifty dollars. His work must not stop. Would that we
could do more towards its support. Would, too, that we could have one of
his earnest Christian Chinese workers in our own city."

"I have just been reading the June number of the MISSIONARY, and do what
I can at this time toward paying the debt. I am specially impressed by
the extract from Mr. Pond's letter, and shall be pleased if you see fit
to assign the enclosed to his work. However, please to use it at your
discretion in any way."

"I have been able to do so little for your society of late that it has
been a grief to me, but as I am in receipt of a little money I send you
---- as a thank offering. May it do a little for the cause my husband
and myself have had so much at heart. With best wishes and prayers for
your _abundant_ success."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. C.J. Ryder writes:

After the work of the Association had been presented in a comparatively
small church near Boston, the pastor arose, and with earnestness and
deep feeling said, "What are _we_ going to do about it? Shall we let
this great work be delayed because of our inaction? Let us now take a
collection of one hundred dollars!" This seemed an impossible thing to
do to the visiting Secretary. They brought back in the bags one hundred
and ten dollars, the extra collection of this comparatively small
church!

It makes a heap of difference whether the pastor follows the Secretary's
address with such cordial and enthusiastic endorsement or not. I am glad
to testify that there is a good deal of this cordial co-operation on the
part of pastors in New England.

       *       *       *       *       *


CIVIL RIGHTS IN COURT.

During the National Council at Chicago, three years ago, Rev. S.P.
Smith, a delegate from Knoxville, Tenn., applying for a dinner at a
restaurant, was refused service. He prosecuted the proprietor. A jury in
Chicago has just given him a verdict of $125 damages. The defence asked
for a new trial on the ground that the judge had prejudiced the jury by
his instructions; the judge denied the motion, stating that if he had
been on the jury he would have made the fine $500. The defence is
seeking a compromise, with the threatened alternative of an appeal. Mr.
Smith, standing for the principle, will abide the final act of the
court.

       *       *       *       *       *


TIMHAKA TA IVANGELI.

We are very proud of this book as being the first literary production in
an African language of one of our graduates at the South, the Rev. B.F.
Ousley, now of the East Central Africa Mission. The missionaries there
have already reduced the language to writing, having formed a vocabulary
of over three thousand words, and from it have printed a few books.
Among them, is the one whose title appears above. It is a translation of
"The Story of the Gospel," in a little volume of two hundred and six
pages. We have read it with great interest so far as we have been able
to understand its dialect. Within our comprehension we find Jesu, the
one word in all languages for all people, Simone Petro, Johane, Marta,
Maria, and Lazaru and many other such proper names. We congratulate our
young people at the South that so soon they have a representative
performing such literary work for the people of Africa. Much of such
work seems drudgery, but it is necessary to opening the light of life to
the people who sit in darkness. A booklet in the same language gives a
catechism and some of the songs of the gospel, ten of which are
translations by Mr. Ousley of some of the dearest of the gospel songs.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SOUTH.


       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT I FOUND IN THE CUMBERLAND MOUNTAINS.

BY REV. C.W. SHELTON.

First. There are living in this mountain country two millions of white
people, until recently isolated from, and untouched by, the civilization
of which we are so proud. No centennial anniversary commemorates their
growth in wealth and intellect. As their fathers lived, so until
recently, have they. One hundred years have witnessed but little
progress, almost no change, in their condition. The open fire-place, the
spinning-wheel and the home-spun jeans are familiar sights. Forgotten by
the rest of the world, they, in turn, forget that beyond these mountain
peaks, marking the limit of view and generally the limit of interest, a
nation has pressed forward to take its place among the foremost of the
earth. And yet no color line has excluded, no reservation boundary
separated, this people from their fellow countrymen. Their lack of
energy and the stagnation of their minds, is the explanation of this
condition of things.

Secondly. I found this mountain people naturally American; in deepest
sympathy with our free government; loyal to the old flag in the hour of
its greatest danger; fighting, suffering, dying, that the Union might be
preserved. To one who has spent any length of time on our western
prairies settled so largely with an emigrant people, the great
difference between the American born and educated people of the
mountains, and the naturalized American of the prairie, constantly
emphasizes itself. Here no new language has to be acquired, no new form
of government understood. A common interest, a common sympathy, a mother
country, binds one at once to this people as it never can to the
American importation which is found at the West.

Thirdly. I found homes and a home life, or rather the want of it, which
one would hardly believe possible among a white population in this
country.

The following illustrations are correct representations of what I
found to be average mountain cabins. Seldom do they contain more than
two, often only one, room. A single window, an open fire-place, and a
few home-made articles of furniture, comprise the whole. The home is
begun when its founders are yet children. Ignorant and poor, the boy
has "took up" with the girl, and it may be they are legally married. A
building-bee is announced, a little cabin erected, a few pigs bought
or given, a few trees girdled, some corn planted, in so crude and
shiftless a way that even an Indian, in his first attempts at farming,
would be ashamed to own it, and home life is begun. Into this home of
poverty and ignorance come the children. The families are
large--eight, ten, twelve, and sometimes more. The mother is too
ignorant herself to instruct, and had she the ability, neither time
nor strength to accomplish it are at her command. Life to her is a
struggle. At twenty she looks thirty-five, at thirty-five she is old.
Always she has a tired, hopeless expression, which simply to look at
almost starts the tears. The children have something of the same
expression; the babies even seem to realize that it is a sober, sad
world they have come into. I do not remember seeing a laughing, cooing
baby in all the cabins I visited.

[Illustration: MOUNTAIN CABIN.]

[Illustration: MOUNTAIN CABIN.]

Educationally, I found this people far below the emigrant on the
prairie. Seventy per cent. of the whole two millions cannot read or
write. The schools are the poorest. The school houses are built of logs;
a hole is cut for the window; the ground serves for a floor, slabs for
seats, and the teacher is strictly in keeping with all. Bare-footed,
hair unkempt, snuff stick in her mouth, scarcely able to read herself,
she is the example--the ideal toward which her pupils are to strive.

Religiously, I found that these people, almost without exception, were
"professors," and "had jined" not a Christian church, but some one of
these native mountain pastors. The accompanying illustration gives a
good idea of the mountain church; it is built of logs, and is without
windows; the pulpit is an unpainted board; the seats slabs from the
nearest saw mill, turned flat side up, with pegs driven in for legs.
The ministry is in strict keeping with the church, and intellectually
little in advance of the people. They take pride in the fact that
"These yer home-spun jeans have never brushed no dust from off no
college walls," and exultantly declare that "The Lord taught me how to
preach: and when the Lord teaches a man how to preach, you may just
reckon he don't make no mistakes."

[Illustration: A NATIVE MOUNTAIN CHURCH.]

On every hand, I found indications that the day of isolation for this
people is rapidly passing away. Yankee inquisitiveness has discovered
that these mountains are full of the best coal and iron--Northern
capital has already begun to strip them of their rich forests of black
walnut, oak and pine. The rivers are carrying these logs by the
thousands to the immense mills, which in turn are making the large
towns, toward which already the railroad is hastening.

Engineering skill is bridging streams, crossing valleys, climbing
mountains or piercing them through. On every hand we see the change.
From their long sleep of a century, these valleys, these homes, this
whole people are awakening. A new life is beginning, a new future,
opening.

And as a result of all this, I found a field of missionary work, which
for opportunity and need has perhaps no equal in our country. Amidst all
this change, a people, startled from their long separation, find
themselves suddenly called to face, to compete with, to become a part
of, our life, our intellectual advancement; to move with our energy, and
work with our skill. Realizing their weakness, suddenly roused by their
necessity, they are sending across their valleys and over their
mountains the Macedonian cry, "Come over and help us!" Our duty to this
people, whether we look at it from the standpoint of the Christian or
the citizen, is beyond the measure of words.

Here, as everywhere in the South, I found that the American Missionary
Association, as representative of our Northern Christian sympathy, was
at work. Its normal schools, fitting teachers to go out and displace the
bare-footed, ignorant, snuff-stick-chewing school mistresses; its
churches, fitting mothers and fathers to enter upon their duties
conscious of their responsibility; and its missionaries, bringing
in an intelligent Christian life, and driving the curse of the
country--intemperance--out of the home, community and the county, are
thus meeting the need, and answering the cry, and fulfilling the
obligations. Below is a cut of one of the buildings of the Academy
at Williamsburg, Ky., recently erected among these people.

[Illustration: WILLIAMSBURG ACADEMY, KY.]

I found one worker where the field called for a dozen; one school where
we should have twenty; one church where we should have a hundred; one
scholar received into an over-crowded school house, when its doors
should open to scores. I found one missionary with nine organized
churches on his hands, and he the only pastor; the extremes of his
parish being seventy-five miles apart.

And lastly, on returning to New York, I found an empty, a worse than
empty, a debt-burdened treasury, forbidding all advancement in this
field.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Anniversary Exercises._

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY C.J. RYDER.

Fisk University fills a large place in the educational institutions of
the South, and commencement week occupies an important place in the
college year at Fisk.

When the inhuman caste prejudice passes away, the Congregationalists of
the North will discover the encouraging fact that the American
Missionary Association has planted Congregationalism in the South to
stay. Fisk University and other such institutions, filled as they will
be by young men of every class and color, will be strongholds of our New
Testament faith and polity. Such a Commencement as was observed at Fisk
this year does much to bring about that blessed day. This Commencement
week, beginning Thursday, June sixth, and closing the evening of June
twelfth, was crowded with literary and musical exercises of high order.
President E.M. Cravath, D.D., delivered the baccalaureate sermon, taking
for his subject, "Building on the Rock." It was a sermon of great power.
Rev. Dr. Gray, a Southern Episcopal clergyman, preached the missionary
sermon. On Thursday evening, came "The Senior Preparatory Exhibition."
On June seventh, tenth and eleventh, the various class examinations were
held, and in the evening of Friday the seventh, the anniversary
exercises of the Literary Societies were given. There are three healthy
and vigorous societies at Fisk, and it was difficult to tell which of
the three gave the best evidence of the superior quality of its drill,
in the exercises presented.

The Normal Department graduated a class of four, each presenting an
essay. Rev. C.W. Hiatt, of Cleveland, Ohio, delivered the address at the
close of the exercises of the normal department, taking for his subject
"Earnest Living," and the address was spoken of with high appreciation
by those who heard it.

The graduating exercises of the Collegiate Department were of unusual
interest. There was not a poor oration or essay presented. The breadth
of training given to the students at Fisk was especially noticeable in
the wide range of subjects selected.

The anniversary of the Alumni Association gave evidence that the
graduates of Fisk are true to the instruction of that institution, when
they take up their work in the world. Sixty-seven have graduated from
this institution; forty-two are teachers; eight, ministers; three,
doctors; two, editors; two, foreign missionaries; eight, lawyers; one is
a student; and one a real estate agent. Pretty good showing for Fisk!

The annual oration was delivered by the writer, subject, "The Student's
Workshop, Tools and Work."

The rendering of the Hallelujah Chorus by the full choir of trained
singers was especially fine, and reflected great credit upon the
director.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE, TALLADEGA, ALA.

BY MRS. H.S. DEFOREST.

Talladega College observed its nineteenth anniversary June 9th to 13th.
The large gathering of students, alumni and friends, the enthusiasm and
interest manifested, and the report of what has been accomplished during
the past decade, showed the hold it has obtained on the hearts of the
people.

The exhibitions of Cassady School, which is the feeder for the higher
grades, were held the week previous. Large and delighted audiences
listened to the creditable performances of the young people, who showed
in their parts the faithful work of teachers.

On Sabbath morning, the baccalaureate sermon was preached by Secretary
C.J. Ryder, of Boston. Many valuable and practical lessons for the
graduating class were drawn from his somewhat unique text, "And falling
into a place where two seas met," Acts 27:41. Various currents in life
will bear us hither and thither unless we are founded upon the rock and
there abide. The closing words telling of the inscription upon an
ancient cross, _teneo et tenior_, will long abide as an inspiration and
help with those who heard.

At 4 P.M. the Sabbath-school prayer meeting gathered together students
and teachers in a tender farewell, and at night the missionary sermon
was preached by Rev. E.J. Penney, of Selma.

The examinations of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday gave evidence of
thorough work and of painstaking study.

On Wednesday night, four young men, graduates of the Theological
Department, were ordained. The sermon was preached by Rev. A.F. Beard,
D.D., the ordaining prayer offered by the President, a most appropriate
charge given by Pastor Snell of Birmingham, and the right hand by the
Moderator, Rev. J.R. Sims, of Shelby Iron Works.

The graduating exercises were held on Thursday morning. Six students
received diplomas from the Normal Course, and five were graduated from
the Theological Department. Essays and orations showed thought and
originality, and were well delivered. If all the noble sentiments
expressed are carried out in the lives of the speakers, a class has gone
out from our walls who will make a stand for truth and righteousness,
manly men and faithful womanly women.

After the conferring of diplomas and the awarding of prizes, President
DeForest gave a _resumé_ of the growth of the college during the ten
years of his connection with it. The number of students has increased
from 203 to 427, instructors from 9 to 18. In this time, theological
graduates have passed from 7 to 28, and normal from 18 to 64.

The alumni dinner was partaken of with relish by graduates and invited
guests, and after the physical man had been refreshed an intellectual
feast was spread. Older graduates testified to their indebtedness to the
College which by one, quoting the words of another, was said to be "de
main spring ob de fly wheel ob de whole conjunction." Visiting friends
spoke of their interest and satisfaction in the work of the school, and
Drs. Beard and Haygood, with appreciative and hopeful words, fittingly
closed the festivities.

On Thursday night, Dr. A.G. Haygood, Secretary of the Slater Fund, the
steadfast friend of the black man, gave an address. His eloquence, wit
and earnestness held a large audience in close attention for more than
an hour, and he left with them much matter for thought.

Teachers and pupils have now said good-bye and college halls are vacant,
but the work of the year will bear fruit as scores of students go out to
the labors of vacation in the dark and needy districts of the South.

       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS, LA.

BY PRESIDENT R.C. HITCHCOCK.

The interest shown by the public in the annual exercises of this school
increases each year, and for those of more general nature it is quite
impossible to obtain a room large enough to accommodate the audience
that assembles.

The baccalaureate sermon was preached on Sunday night by President
Hitchcock at Central Church. On Monday night, the Sumner and
Philomathean Literary Societies and the Band of Mercy held their
anniversary meeting, and listened to a very interesting lecture on "Life
at a German University," by Rev. G.W. Henderson. Wednesday night, came
the annual concert and exhibition. This has for two or three years
gradually taken more and more the character of an exhibit of the
gymnastic exercises, singing, etc., from each grade, and with so large a
school, gives a long programme; but since people here have learned that
at Straight University, when the appointed time comes the exercises
begin, every spot where a chair could be put in an aisle, or a foot
stand, besides all the pews both below and in the spacious galleries of
Central, one of the largest churches in the city, was occupied at the
moment assigned for opening, and the attention was grand until the very
last.

On Thursday night, the Alumni Association met at the University Chapel
for election of officers, adjourning later to the parlors for a social
meeting. These Alumni meetings grow each year in numbers, interest and
importance. Papers were read by several members, the usual history,
prophecy and poem were given, remarks were made by others and some good
music was rendered. Many who could not come sent interesting letters.
Friday night was the _great_ occasion. The crowd was no less than on
Wednesday night, and that such an audience should sit, giving close
attention, from 7:30 to 11:30, to the orations and essays of the
graduates, with no sign of weariness, was to me a wonderful thing and
showed a deep and heart-felt interest, in the community, for Christian
education, which is grandly encouraging.

Two of the graduates were from Mexico, one from Mississippi, one from
Plaquemines Parish, one from Baton Rouge and five from this city, the
proportion from the city being larger than usual.

Members of the Trustee Board and others who have heard these exercises
for many years, without hesitation pronounce them as a whole far better
than those of any previous year. It is certain that each year there is
shown a marked advancement in general intelligence and culture, and in
the depth and arrangement of thought. The venerable Judge Whittaker, who
seldom leaves his home at night, was on the platform, and at the close
of the valedictory, which was given by Leonidas Burbridge, of
Greenville, Miss., he jumped from his chair, seized the young man by the
hand and expressed his wonder and gratification at all he had heard and
seen, saying that in all his fifty years of life in New Orleans he had
seen nothing that so filled his heart with emotions of astonishment and
joy.

I neglected to speak of the meeting on Sunday morning, May 26th, of the
College Y.M.C.A., which has had a very prosperous year. The Association
was addressed by Mr. Fred S. Hitchcock on Y.M.C.A. work in the great
cities, and by Mr. Perry on College Y.M.C.A. work. The year has been a
good one, notwithstanding many adverse circumstances. The establishment
of a regular graded course of study, from the lowest primary grades to
the college, and close adherence to such course are being felt more and
more each year. More than half the graduates of this year began their
education in the school, and all interested are proud of them. There is
all along a marked difference between those who have come through our
own primary schools and others equally capable who have had no
systematic early training. For the first time since the course of study
was adopted, every class this year has thoroughly completed the work
assigned, and in most cases reviewed it.

The State has been in a condition of great excitement during most of the
year, nearly one-half the parishes being under a complete reign of
terror, and it has been a frequent thing to see one of our students from
the country, especially from the southern parishes, in tears in
consequence of the intelligence of some friend, father or brother
perhaps, having been the victim of some dastardly outrage from the
"regulators." Tales of sorrow and suffering could easily be gathered to
fill volumes. Iberia, Terrebonne and Lafayette parishes have been
especially noted as under this reign of terror, and from these we have
many pupils. Three sisters of Sammy Wakefield, who was shot at New
Iberia, are in our school, and many others closely connected with
suffering families. It has been very difficult for the colored people to
get a living, and the sacrifices they make to keep the children in
school are wonderful.

       *       *       *       *       *


LE MOYNE NORMAL INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN.

BY PROF. A.J. STEELE.

Another year has passed in the history of our work at Le Moyne
Institute, and its eighteenth anniversary has been celebrated with the
graduation of a class of eleven, and the tenth reunion of an alumni
association numbering some seventy five members. Recalling sixteen years
of experience in connection with this work, I can fix upon scarcely a
single event or circumstance that has not been made to conduce to the
advancement of our work and influence in the community, and looking over
results in all directions, they have surpassed the dreams and
expectations of the most hopeful.

The year past has been a remarkable one in our history. Our attendance
has varied little from four hundred pupils in all grades of the twelve
years' course, while our enrollment for the year has reached five
hundred and twenty different pupils.

Every interest of the school has been prospered and greatly blessed and
strengthened. The utmost harmony and earnestness has marked the work of
the year, both among teachers and pupils. During the past session, as
many as sixty of our pupils have started out in the Christian life,
giving evidence of change of heart and an earnest purpose to live for
Christ and His work in the world. We rejoice over this more than over
all other results of our year's work.

The whole spirit and tone of our work has been such that even our trials
and losses, from fire and from breaks in our working force, have seemed
to be turned to means of blessing and sources of strength. Our trials
and difficulties have been to us opportunities. We look forward
hopefully to the future, as we look thankfully back to the past.

Our partially destroyed building, from the fire of March 3d, is rebuilt
and greatly improved. We hope our corps of instructors, so uniformly
faithful in the discharge of duty, may remain unbroken, the same for the
coming year.

At the close of the term, the promotions were made in all grades by the
principal, and the pupils given the "forms" they are to occupy the
coming year. In truth, the formal "Commencement" for the year was made
at the close of this session. Every pupil knows exactly his grade and
place, and few will be absent at the opening, October first.

       *       *       *       *       *


AVERY INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.

Anniversary week of this Institute is always an occasion of the deepest
interest to the colored people of Charleston and vicinity; and those who
succeed in obtaining tickets of admission to Avery Hall consider
themselves most fortunate. This year proved no exception, and the demand
for tickets, and the enthusiasm of those in attendance, have never been
surpassed in the history of the school.

The exercises throughout the week were of a high order. The Sub-Normal
Exhibition and the Prize-Speaking Contest by the normal classes were
unanimously declared to be the best ever given in Avery. At the
commencement on Wednesday, every foot of space within sight or hearing
of the platform was filled by intelligent and appreciative listeners.
Eleven graduates--ten ladies and one gentleman--received the diploma of
the Institute and joined the hundreds who have preceded them in the
grand work of elevating their race.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW CHURCH AND SCHOOL AT ALCO, ALA.

BY REV. R.C. BEDFORD.

Brewton is the county seat of Escambia County, Alabama. It is on the
Louisville & Nashville Railroad, one hundred and six miles north of
Montgomery, and seventy-four north of Mobile. It has a population of
about two thousand five hundred, and is quite thrifty. Alco is a mile
and a half further south, on the same road, and is a nice little village
of five or six hundred people, that has grown up within the last three
years, and almost wholly out of the Peters Lumber Company. The property
of the Company consists of one of the largest and finest mills in the
South, with nearly 200,000 acres of yellow pine surrounding it. Some
three hundred colored men, most of them with families, are employed in
the various operations of the mills. Mr. Peters is engaged most of the
time in his large lumber and salt interests at Manistee, Mich., but
comes South two or three times a year to look after the business at
Alco. From the first, it was the purpose of the Company to do something
to improve the church and school facilities of the colored people, and
last spring, while Mrs. Peters was spending a few weeks at Alco, she had
a building 35x60 erected, and nicely arranged for church and school
purposes. This she turned over to the American Missionary Association,
and they at once sent down Rev. W.P. Hamilton, of Talladega, to open a
school and begin preaching. The second Sunday in June, he was joined by
Prof. G.W. Andrews, of Talladega, Rev. R.C. Bedford, of Montgomery, and
Rev. F.G. Ragland and Deacon Godbold of Mobile, to assist him in
dedicating the building.

Though but little was known of Congregationalism in that part of the
country, the services were entered into most heartily by all classes of
the people. Most of the ministers at Brewton, in charge of colored
churches, closed their places of worship and joined with us, partaking
in the services, and speaking with great delight of the coming of an
educated preacher and teacher among them.

Mr. Hamilton starts off with over fifty pupils in Sunday and day school,
and hopes soon to have members enough so that he can take steps to call
a council and organize a church. The brethren of Alabama are greatly
encouraged by this movement. Heretofore we have had no church or school
between Montgomery and Mobile, one hundred and eighty miles. Now the
distance is divided, Alco standing about half way between the two
places.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHILDREN'S DAY.

BY REV. J.E. SMITH.

The 9th of June last was a grand day for the young people in the First
Congregational Church at Chattanooga. The church was tastefully
decorated with appropriate Scripture mottoes, choice evergreens,
beautiful flowers and sweet singing canaries. There was present a large
number of adults and a larger number of clean, sweet, hopeful children,
and many laughing, cooing babes in the arms of their Christian parents,
who like faithful Hannah and good Mary of old, had brought their babes
to the house of God to present them to the Lord. After the rendering of
a beautiful voluntary by the organist, the whole congregation joined in
singing that grand hymn, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty!" The
pastor then read a few passages of Scripture selected for the occasion,
giving a short comment on the same, and prayed for God's blessing on the
young. While the congregation joined heartily in singing, "Heavenly
Father, send Thy blessing, On Thy children gathered here," Christian
parents who desired to present their offspring to the Lord, having been
invited, came forward and stood before the altar with their little ones
in their arms. Six bright-eyed, innocent babes were, on the faith of
their believing parents, consecrated to God in the Christian ordinance
of infant baptism. It was a most beautiful, pleasing and impressive
service.

After singing, "Take my life and let it be, Consecrated, Lord, to Thee,"
the pastor invited all children, calling them by name, who were ten
years of age and had been baptized in the church when infants, to come
forward. The church, then, through its pastor, at a cost of twenty-three
dollars, presented to each child, (nineteen in number) a beautiful,
well-bound copy of the Bible, with the following written on the fly
leaf: "This Bible was presented to ---- by the First Congregational
Church at Chattanooga, in commemoration of his infant consecration to
God at her sacred altar, by his Christian parents. John 5:39."

After taking a collection of ten dollars and twenty-four cents for the
Congregational Sunday-school and Publishing Society, we sang "God be
with you till we meet again," and the benediction was pronounced. Thus,
a very interesting and we trust profitable service of an hour and twenty
minutes was ended.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM MISS COLLINS.

No facts in this field can be of more interest to the readers of the
MISSIONARY than those contained in the following thrilling account of
the conversion of three young Indians in Miss Collins' mission field. We
give the facts as written by this self-sacrificing missionary.

Last Sabbath, Mr. Riggs came up from Oahe and we had communion, and
there were five children baptized and seven grown people, and seven more
were examined and advised to wait till the next communion. It was a most
interesting season.

Three of the young men were the leaders in the Indian dance. They have
always been the head ones in all Indian customs. A year ago, one of them
said in the dance that he should follow the Indian customs a year
longer--give himself up to them wholly and try to be satisfied, and if
he had in his heart the same unsatisfied feeling, the same longing, that
he then had, he should throw it all away.

On last New Year's day, the same young man, "Huntington Wolcott," came
to me and said--"Last night I arose in the dance and told them that I
had given the old customs and the old Indians a fair trial, and that
they did not satisfy, now I should leave them forever and give myself to
God, and if any others were ready to follow to arise and so make it
known. The other two leaders arose, stood silently a moment, and walked
out." From that time they have given themselves up to singing, praying
and studying the Bible. They had, for two years, been halting between
two opinions, attending the school, church, etc., and the Indian feasts
and dances, too. These three having come out so boldly on God's side,
has made a great change in our work here.

Poor old Running-Antelope feels very sad. It is his desire to keep the
young men from learning Christianity and civilization as long as he can.
He wants them to have everything in common, and to feel that for an
individual to accumulate anything is a disgrace. As long as they feel
so, of course squalor and suffering will be the natural consequences.

The young men are working hard to build up homes and to accumulate
something for their families during the winter. One young man has cut
logs and is building a house. I try to teach them that long prayers and
loud singing is not all of Christianity--that however regularly a man
attends to his church duties, if he fails to provide for his family, his
religion is vain; and if he gives all his goods to his friends and lets
his wife and children cry for bread, that their cries will reach the
ears of God, and his prayers and hymns will be lost in this round of
wailing of the hungry. All this is very different from their old Indian
doctrine and hard to understand.

Elias, our native teacher, has formed a class of young men who meet
every Tuesday night and talk and pray and sing together, and he directs
their thought. I think it will prove very helpful. Then on Thursday
night I have my Bible class, which now numbers about twenty. It is
formed of the young men and women who wish to follow Christ's example,
and band themselves together to learn of him. It has been the _training
school_ of the young Christians.

       *       *       *       *       *

What could be more encouraging than such facts as these? An Indian
unattended by any white person, dissatisfied with the religion of his
fathers, walks out of heathenism; out of sympathy and connection with
his tribe; out of the religion and customs of his fathers and into the
customs of civilized life, into the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ! In
the words of that quaint old Negro hymn, let those who so earnestly
desire the conversion of the Pagans in America exhort one another to
"Pray on: Pray on."

C.J.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RAMONA INDIAN SCHOOL.

BY DISTRICT SECRETARY JOS. E. ROY.

This is a department of the University of New Mexico at Santa Fé,
occupying separate buildings and a separate locality, and managed by the
American Missionary Association. A recent visit to the school it may be
worth while to report. It is for the Apache Indians and the youth who
are gathered into it are of the Jiccarrilla band. Their reservation is
about two hundred miles west, and is reached by railroad or by pony
transportation. The teachers deem it better to have the school some
distance from the people so as to make its impression the more positive,
and yet near enough for the parents to visit their children occasionally
while at school. This keeps up the interest and prevents the children
from being educated away from their elders. Two good sized buildings are
used. In one there are the school rooms, the accommodations for the
teachers, and the lodgings for the boys. In the other, under a matron,
there are lodgings for the girls, work rooms for the same, and the
boarding department for all. The Indian girls do the cooking for the
establishment. I saw them getting dinner and I saw many loaves of
beautiful white bread made by them. In their work shop they make their
own clothes. The boys, under the lead of the principal, Prof. Elmore
Chase, work at cobbling, making ditches and cultivating the soil, and
also do something with carpenter's tools. The Government pays over a
hundred dollars a year for each student toward the expense of board,
clothes, etc. The American Missionary Association appoints the teachers
and directs the school. The scholars, thirty in all, have made very
creditable progress in their studies, considering the short time the
school has been in operation, from three to four years. Prof. Whipple,
now of Wheaton College, who for a time was principal of the Ramona,
testifies: "I never saw on an average such aptness, docility and
faithfulness in school and industrial work." The religious influence
of the school has not been interfered with by the Government. I heard
the scholars recite with promptness and evident understanding the
Twenty third Psalm, the Beatitudes, the Commandments, the Lord's
Prayer, and portions of a catechism introductory to the Westminster
Shorter. Daily worship is maintained among them, the Sunday-school
lesson is thoroughly taught, while the Bible is freely used in the
school. The Professor thought that several of the youth gave such
evidence of an experience of grace as would satisfy us concerning
white children. I was permitted to see half a dozen letters written by
the scholars to be sent to their parents and brothers and sisters,
without the supervision of their teachers, in which were many
expressions of love for the Saviour and the Bible, and of a desire
that their friends at home should be made acquainted with the same,
and the purpose, when they should go home, to communicate those good
things.

The following are four of those letters:


     RAMONA INDIAN SCHOOL, SANTA FÉ, NEW MEXICO.
     June 16, 1889.

     _My Dear Father:_

     I am very well and happy all the time. I am very sorry that my
     step Mother was dead. I want you to come after me in July. And
     come early. I had such a lovely time on our picnic. I want you
     to learn about Jesus and His love. So when you die you will go
     to Him. Where you shall be happy evermore.

     From your loving daughter, MARY ARMSTRONG.


     RAMONA SCHOOL, SANTA FÉ, NEW MEXICO.
     June 10, 1889.

     _My Dear Father:_

     I was very glad to get your letter, and I am going to answer it
     right away. I am so anxious to go home this Summer. I love you
     all very much, and I love my Father in Heaven too. I love my
     Saviour very much. He is your Saviour too. Jesus is a Saviour
     of all the people in this world. I am glad that you are all
     working. I am working too but I am in school now. I am reading
     in the Third Reader. Give my love to all of my folks and Miss
     Moore and Miss Clegg[1].

     From your loving daughter, MARY GRIMES.


     SANTA FÉ, NEW MEXICO.
     June 15, 1889.

     _My Dear Brother A.G.:_

     I would like to see you very much. We have a nice time here.
     The children are all well and happy. How is my little cousin?
     Is he well and happy? We are all writing a letter this morning.
     We are all going home in July, so you know I am very happy
     every day. How are all my brothers. I would like to see them
     too. How is my father. Is he well and happy? I have not seen my
     father for a long time. Why don't he come to see me? I wish you
     knew about our dear Saviour. I wish some one will come and tell
     all the people about Jesus. God is our Father in Heaven who
     loves us very much. He loves all the people in the world. He
     wants them to love Him. I will tell you about him when I go
     home. I wish you would read the Bible so you would know about
     Him. Our corn is beginning to grow. Some children are going to
     speak in the church to-morrow. Please give my love to all my
     people. I am going to say good-bye.

     From your loving sister, IRENE BANCROFT.


     RAMONA SCHOOL, SANTA FÉ, NEW MEXICO.
     April 12, 1889.

     _Dear Father Monarcha:_

     I am very glad that you are working; that is just what I want
     you to do. You must build a house for your children, and you
     will have a place to stay when the weather gets cold. And every
     body must build houses for themselves; that is just what the
     Government wants all of you to do, because that is right and
     everybody thinks that it is right, and they were very much
     pleased when you do so. I am very glad that all my folks are
     well and happy if all of you are happy then I am happy too.
     Your letter pleases me very much. And you must do just what Mr.
     Bishop asks you to do. You must not do like other men do that
     don't build houses; they just run off from the Reservation and
     go hunting and sell all the things that the Government gives
     them. You must not do that because that is wrong, not right.
     Miss Moore will tell you what I say to you. Write another
     letter if you have time, if you don't have time, why just go on
     and finish all your spring work then you come after me when
     school is out; if you don't want to come then you send somebody
     after me.

     Your loving son, JESSE GREENLEAF.

The writer of this letter has attended school two and a half years,
spending one-half day in school each day and working half a day. He is
now fourteen years old.

     [Footnote 1: These were former teachers at the Ramona, who are
     now doing mission work among the Indians. They read these
     letters to the parents and in turn write back for them.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *


OROVILLE, MARYSVILLE, PETALUMA.

BY REV. W.C. POND, D.D.

Early on Monday morning, June 17th, I left home for a visit to our
missions at Oroville and Marysville. I reached Oroville at about 7:30
P.M. As soon as possible I was at the Mission House, where warmest
greetings from teacher and pupils awaited me. The lessons of the evening
received our first attention, for it is a principle with us that each
scholar shall have the English lesson promised him, whoever may be
present and whatever else we may desire to do. This is the demand of
good faith, and not less of good policy. It is the English lesson that
holds them where the gospel can reach them, so that this we must never
forego.

When all this was accomplished, those who could read with comparative
ease were gathered about a table for a sort of Bible reading, which I
proposed to give them, in the fifteenth chapter of Luke. This was the
manner of it: One of them read the first verse, being helped over the
hard words, then I explained it in as simple English as I could command;
then the reader translated both it and my explanation into Chinese, each
other pupil keeping watch to see whether what was said expressed the
ideas which he had received from me. At this time, we were much aided by
the co-operation of Yong Jin, our missionary helper, whose translations
I could depend upon quite confidently, but I often give these readings
without such help, feeling quite sure that if six or eight have received
the _same_ idea, they have received the one I meant to give. When we had
finished the first verse, a second pupil read the second verse with the
same method, and so on. Some felt unequal to the task of translating,
but most were willing to try, and most who tried succeeded strangely
well. I had intended to follow this with a few words of exhortation, but
just as we read the last verse, Yong Ack arrived. This is a brother who
was converted about a year ago. His daily work is that of a cook in a
way-side inn, about six (some said eight) miles from Oroville. He has
been accustomed to walk this distance, over a rough and dusty road, to
attend, not often the school, but the religious services of our mission.
He can seldom reach the Mission House before nine, but the meetings
begin when he arrives and continue till he is ready to start away. As
this brother was to be baptized on the following evening, the Bible
reading was suspended with a promise from me that I would speak from
these words the next evening, and we all addressed ourselves to a study
of the Confession and Covenant of our little Chinese Church at Oroville.
It was taken up clause by clause, read in English, explained, translated
into Chinese, and still further explained, till Yong Ack in particular,
and in a general way all the rest of them, professed to understand and
believe it all. When this was finished, we were well on towards 11 P.M.,
and we closed the meeting with song and prayer.

The day following was variously occupied, but in the evening we were all
at the Mission House again. The lessons were given, and then the table
was spread for the celebration of the Lord's Supper. Then came the
preaching, with Yong Jin interpreting, sentence by sentence. The
topic--the Shepherd seeking his lost sheep, followed by the story of the
prodigal son. One could not have asked a more attentive audience. The
presence and work of the Spirit were unmistakable. At length, a little
after nine, Yong Ack appeared. He had been over that road three times
that day, and expected, before morning to go over it again. But he
confessed no weariness either by word or by manner. He was bright,
wakeful, joyous. He confessed Christ, was baptized, and was welcomed
with gladness to the church, after which we gathered round the table of
the Lord.

Wednesday and Thursday were spent in and about Marysville. Both Oroville
and Marysville are "hard fields." In both of them good work has been
done in days past, but the fruits from the seed sown have been widely
scattered, so that in each place but few Christians remain. Our Chinese
Church in Marysville, some years ago was reported--truthfully, I am
sure--as in proportion to its numbers and its means, the Banner Church
of the country for its contribution to Foreign Missions. But now only
one member, a deacon, resides in the place. He is a cook at one of the
hotels, and is unable to leave his work till about 8:30 P.M., but he
"holds the fort" sturdily, bravely. He is an athletic man, full of
energy and courage, with, doubtless, some of the defects which usually
attend these qualities, but honest, earnest, consistent, determined.

The first evening was a reproduction of that at Oroville, there being
also one believer to be baptized. On the second evening, in view of the
Lord's Supper and the baptism, our good deacon, as soon as his work was
done, was "all abroad" in Chinatown. Squad after squad he brought, and
seeing them seated, went out after more. When about 9:15 P.M., I
commenced my discourse, the room was packed. Oh, what joy it was, what
inspiration, to look into those eyes fixed closely upon me, and tell
them of the love of God in Christ! Yong Jin's quick, animated
interpretations of my sentences were not interruptions, but seemed to
urge me on. I am sure that the Spirit spoke through me to some hearts,
and that I shall see the fruits of that seed-sowing in the better world.
After the most careful and repeated statements as to what a partaking of
the bread and wine would mean, and as to the guilt of those who should
partake _without_ meaning what they did, a goodly number, eight or nine,
I think, who had never before consented to be recognized as Christians,
did thus profess that they received Christ as Saviour and Lord. They did
it in the sight and in the midst of others who did not do it--did it
with a painstaking and an apparent determination which encourages my
hope that they will hold fast and be led on to clearer light and the
full day.

Reaching home on Friday noon, I started for Petaluma on Saturday
morning. That evening was spent partly at the Mission House preaching
the word, and partly at the church preparing our pupils for the parts
they were to take in the anniversary exercises on the following evening.
Our brothers, Jee Gam and Lem Chung, were with me. I see that I have
already exhausted my space and venture only to add, that this
anniversary service was one of deep interest. The Congregational Church
at which it was held was crowded, auditors standing in the doors. All
the exercises by the pupils were well rendered. The address by Jee Gam
and the songs by Lem Chung seemed to win all hearts. The report of the
year's work at the school was more cheering than any we have been able
to make for years; the collection amounted to about sixty-five dollars,
and last and best of all, the gospel work done by our Chinese brethren
at the Mission House was the means of leading at least two, heretofore
undecided, to take their stand clearly and decisively as followers of
Christ.

In a later letter, Dr. Pond adds:

It seems that _three_ instead of _two_, as I have it in my article, were
led to confess Christ at Petaluma last Sunday. One other was almost
persuaded, but said he must first send home to China the bones of his
father. (Matt. 8:21). Jee Gam explained to him that he could do that as
a _Christian_, without _worshiping_ his father. But he could not be
persuaded. He is a very bright and promising young man, and I hope and
pray that this wrong decision may not cost him his salvation.

Jee Gam and Lum Chung were so wrought upon by what they saw and by what
God wrought by them at Petaluma, that they came back fired with a desire
to do something like it at our Central Mission House. This is what I
have long wished for, but could never seem to inspire the brethren with
courage to undertake. On Tuesday evening the first of a series of
meetings was held there. The room was crowded. Some scoffed, some tried
to seem indifferent, but _all heard_ the word, and one took a stand
for Christ. The brethren take hold well, each one contriving to make
himself the center of a group of heathen, so as to go right to work in
the after-meeting. Pray for them.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D.E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

ME.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A.,
  Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C.A. Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

VT.--Woman's Aid to A.M.A.,
  Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

VT.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. Ellen Osgood, Montpelier, Vt.

CONN.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

MASS. and R.I.--Woman's Home Miss. Association,
  Secretary, Miss Natalie Lord, Boston, Mass.[2]

N.Y.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. William Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

ALA.--Woman's Missionary Union,
  Secretary, Miss S.S. Evans, Birmingham, Ala.

MISS.--Woman's Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Miss Sarah J. Humphrey. Tougaloo, Miss.

TENN. and ARK.--Woman's Missionary Union of Central South Conference,
  Secretary, Miss Anna M. Cahill, Nashville, Tenn.

LA.--Woman's Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Miss Jennie Fyfe, 490 Canal St., New Orleans, La.

FLA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park, Fla.

OHIO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin, Ohio.

IND.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne, Ind.

ILL.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St, Chicago, Ill.

MINN.--Woman's Home Miss. Society,
  Secretary, Miss Katharine Plant, 2651 Portland Avenue,
    Minneapolis, Minn.

IOWA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Miss Ella E. Marsh, Grinnell, Iowa.

KANSAS.--Woman's Home Miss. Society,
  Secretary, Mrs. G.L. Epps, Topeka, Kan.

MICH.--Woman's Home Miss, Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren, Lansing, Mich.

WIS.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter, Brodhead, Wis.

NEB.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. L.F. Berry, 724 N Broad St., Fremont, Neb.

COLORADO.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  Secretary, Mrs. S.M. Packard, Pueblo, Colo.

DAKOTA.--Woman's Home Miss. Union,
  President, Mrs. T.M. Hills, Sioux Falls;
  Secretary, Mrs. W.B. Dawes, Redfield;
  Treasurer, Mrs. S.E. Fifield, Lake Preston.

     [Footnote 2: For the purpose of exact information, we note that
     while the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass.
     and R.I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

We would suggest to all ladies connected with the auxiliaries of State
Missionary Unions, that funds for the American Missionary Association
be sent to us through the treasurers of the Union. Care, however,
should be taken to designate the money as for the American Missionary
Association, since _undesignated funds will not reach us_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ladies upon whom the duty devolves to plan and lead missionary meetings,
will welcome the suggestions in the following paper by Mrs. Regal,
Secretary of the Woman's Home Missionary Union of Ohio, which paper was
read at the recent Annual Meeting of the Officers of Woman's State
Organizations.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LOCAL SOCIETY--ITS MEMBERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT.

BY MRS. FLORA K. REGAL, OBERLIN, OHIO.

The local society will always have its active and its passive
membership. How to increase the latter from without, and how to transfer
recruits from the passive to the active list, are problems that have
taxed the ingenuity of not a few and have not infrequently been
abandoned as insoluble. It has so long been said, "This missionary work
always has to be carried on by a few," that the expression has come to
have something of the force of axiomatic truth which, of course, no one
dares assail. And so the missionary society lives on, decade after
decade, with less than a quarter of the women of the church on its list,
and of that quarter not more than one-fourth active members. How to
change these conditions, is the problem which confronts us.

I.--It has not always been clear who should be included in the
membership, but with the broad scope given to our Home Missionary
Unions, its auxiliaries should include:

_First._--Every woman who thinks that if she were living on some lonely
frontier and had for years heard no sermon, no public prayer, no songs
of praise, had no communion service, no Christian fellowship, she would
welcome the home missionary and all the sweet influences of the Gospel.

_Second._--Every woman who thinks we owe it to the Freedwoman to put
into her life and home something of the sweetness and purity of our own;
to the Indian woman a sympathetic effort for her uplifting, in atonement
for a "Century of Dishonor."

_Third._--Every woman who thinks that if she, or her sister or daughter,
were heroic enough to share the labors and sacrifices of a home
missionary, she ought to have some better place to live in than an old
grocery, a room over a saloon or the basement of a church.

_Fourth._--Every woman who thinks that if she were an inmate of a Mormon
home she might not have grace to welcome the companionship of the
second, third or tenth woman who might be sealed by celestial marriage
to her husband.

_Fifth._--Every woman who thinks there are worthy young men trying to
prepare themselves for ministerial or missionary work whose struggle
with poverty ought to be relieved.

_Sixth._--Every woman who would welcome for her own children, if she
were living in some Godless community, the Sunday-school missionary and
the books, papers, lesson helps, prayers and Christian songs which make
the Sunday-school a place of blessed influences.

If there be in any Christian church a woman who will respond to none of
these calls for service to the extent of a moderate annual membership
fee, say twenty-five cents, she has missed the true import of the Gospel
and has never entered into its most blessed privileges. Let us assume
that there is no such, but that rightly approached, every woman worthy a
place in the church will be willing to enroll herself into at least the
passive membership of the local society.

II.--The management of this new membership, presumably uninformed,
indifferent, possibly prejudiced, will require familiar acquaintance
with our six benevolences, sympathy with them all, much practical
wisdom, good courage, and the spirit of I Corinthians, 13th chapter.

The _President_ must do more than preside at the meetings. She must plan
every detail; must know beforehand what hymns, what Scripture lesson,
who shall lead in singing and in prayer, what reports, what letters,
what original papers, what selections, what business. Everything must be
carefully planned and written down, yet there must be withal a certain
amount of elasticity of management, so that the timid question may be
answered, the objection removed, the enthusiasm expressed. The President
will welcome strangers and greet the diffident and neglected. She will
not be _surprised_ at seeing anybody at the meeting. It was reasonably
to be expected.

The _Secretary_ will do more than keep the minutes of the meetings. She
will not forget the proper public announcement of the meetings and will
add special invitations to such as may not feel themselves included in
the general. She will send for such printed helps as are needed for use.
She will fill out distinctly and promptly such blanks as are needed for
Conference, State or other Reports, and her quarterly and annual
reports will be helpful from their information and their inspiration.

The _Treasurer_ will do more than passively receive what is brought to
her hands. She will see that no one is overlooked when a canvass is made
for any object; that pledges are redeemed; that the way is made easy for
the poor to give without embarrassment and the rich without ostentation.
She will see that all moneys are forwarded as designated and that _they
go through the State Treasury_.

But the highest qualification any local officer can possess, is the
ability to transfer members from the passive to the active list. Some
practical hints toward this result maybe gathered from the following
suggestions:

Aim at unity of effect for each meeting. Make some one of the six
benevolences the subject, and center everything--Scripture, hymn,
prayer, letter, paper, leaflet, about the single topic. Suppose it be
"Missions on our Western frontier." Ask some lady to prepare a fifteen
minutes' paper. Give out in addition six back numbers of the _Home
Missionary_ to as many ladies, asking each to select a paragraph or
short article bearing directly on the subject and which she thinks
will, or ought to, interest the meeting. Let several of these ladies
be chosen from the passive list--the diffident or even the
indifferent. In making their selections, they will perhaps have made
their first acquaintance with missionary magazines and will have
learned something about the heroism of our home missionaries.
Moreover, they will have participated in the exercises. This, repeated
with variations, will give them courage to speak, and intelligent
thoughts to express. _They are on the way to active participation._
Crown the exercises with a collection. The leader must know how to
kindle enthusiasm and put it to the tangible proof.

The subject for the next meeting may be some branch of the work of the
American Missionary Association, as "Indian Missions in Dakota." Assign
to some one a paper, an historical sketch. She will need books from the
missionary library. "Ten years among the Dakotas," and "Mary and I; or,
Life among the Sioux," (to which she would never think of going for help
unless informed that the Dakotas and Sioux are one.) She may also send
to Miss Emerson for further helps. Then, in addition, give out back
numbers of the _American Missionary_ to two or three passive ladies,
asking them to make short selections concerning Indian missions--or let
one read Prof. G.F. Wright's leaflet--"Indian Missions as seen upon the
ground"--and another some missionary's letter. Call out expressions of
interest in the work--proofs of its success--etc., and ask if we ought
not to do something for its support. Give to everyone present a small
envelope with the request that it be brought to the next meeting with a
free will offering for Indian missions.

The next meeting may be devoted to "Christian work among the Mormons,"
using the "New West Reports," "The Gleaner," newspaper extracts,
missionary letters and, if possible, have the experience of some one who
has visited the schools and the homes of sin-cursed Utah. Having
awakened deep interest, the proposition to procure a lecture or a
musical entertainment and devote the proceeds to the New West Commission
will probably find favor and be carried on to success.

For the next meeting, choose another object, as "Parsonage Building."
Distribute copies of the _Church Building Quarterly_ and again the
indispensable back numbers of _The Home Missionary_, and have extracts
read which show the discomfort, and even distress, which come to the
family of the home missionary. Propose aid in the form of a birthday
offering, in which every member brings in an envelope as many cents as
she is years old. The result may be surprising.

For other objects other plans, but in every case the way should be
prepared for _intelligent giving_.

It has sometimes resulted favorably to secure, at the beginning of the
year, pledges for some definite, well understood object, as a teacher's
or missionary's salary, or a share in one, which should apparently but
not really exhaust the resources of the society, and have the payments
made as early in the year as practicable. Then pursue intelligent study
of the other fields until the time is ripe for proposing generous aid to
the one which appeals most strongly to the combined judgment and
sympathy. And so on through the year, in which time the six benevolences
can all be reached. This somewhat irregular method of procedure has
perhaps no better defence than that it has been known to produce good
results. A society the intelligence and consecration of whose members
could be relied upon would doubtless find the plan of monthly pledges,
to be divided according to some accepted schedule, much easier. No
special labor would have to be expended to make the need apparent, or to
awaken sympathy for the object, or to choose the best means of attaining
it. Gifts would be systematic and uniform throughout the year and could
be counted upon.

The machinery, well oiled at the start, would run smoothly and quietly,
and woman's work would not be made unpleasantly prominent. But it seems
doubtful whether as many gifts would flow into the treasury and whether
the gifts would be accompanied by as much interest, sympathy and prayer.

The hints concerning management thus far presuppose a Home Missionary
Society organized on the modern basis of a programme of devotional
exercises and various mission studies, and do not apply to those cases
in which such exercises have been engrafted upon a sewing society with a
long line of Dorcases as Presidents, and antecedents too respectable to
be ruthlessly set aside. How shall a sewing society be so modified as to
best subserve the present home missionary needs? Do not create friction
by attempting a sudden and complete revolution. Propose that the brief
devotional exercises with which such gatherings sometimes close be
placed a little earlier than usual, that there may be time for some
interesting missionary letter or some inspiring leaflet, or other
selection, or better still, an original paper on some live topic. When
about the usual season for beginning the missionary box arrives, prepare
a symposium on the subject of boxes. Select and distribute brief
paragraphs from the magazines concerning missionary debts, from
missionary letters concerning unpaid salaries, and lead gradually up to
the question whether if we were missionaries we would rather receive a
box or a check for an unpaid salary. Which would best enable a minister
to look his creditors, who are also his parishioners, in the face--the
new pulpit suit or cash to pay off accumulated bills? In trying to
decide between box and salary, the society may decide for _both_, and a
point is gained. When box preparations begin, assign them a proper place
in the meeting. Do not permit papers and addresses to be sandwiched
between rolling quilt frames and turning down refractory hems, or
punctuated by requests or signals for scissors, thread, and bits of
gingham; and do not spoil garments by working with divided attention.
Give each its hour or its day. Best of all, when a box is in
preparation, sew early, late, and often, till it is despatched. Then
resume the studies, being especially careful to have their first
resumption provided with an attractive programme. In all cases when
studies have been grafted upon sewing, _encourage the graft_. It ought
to yield better fruit than the original stock.

It should be the constant aim of those in charge of local societies to
inspire in the membership intelligent interest in the six branches of
our work--to cultivate a spirit of liberality toward them all--to create
in every member a desire to aid them all. Only with such an aim can the
local society achieve its highest usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1889.


MAINE, $123.20.

Augusta. Joel Spalding, to const. MISS
  NETTIE R. SPALDING L.M.                      $30.00

Bangor. Central Ch. Sewing Circle, _for
  Freight to Pleasant Hill, Tenn._               1.53

Bethel. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.            5.00

Castine. "Rainbow Band,"
  _for Tougaloo U._                              5.80

Castine. Trin. Cong. Sab. Sch.                   5.00

Gorham. J.H. Hinckley, Papers and
  Cards, _for Meridian, Miss._

Hiram. Mrs. Moore. S.S. Papers,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

Limerick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     8.00

Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch.                    7.87

Portland. Second Parish Chinese Class,
  by H. Mabel Leach, Sec.,
  _for Chinese M. in Cal._                      50.00

Rockland. "The King's Daughters," by
  Mrs. D.P. Hatch, _for Woman's Work_           10.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,169.97.

Brookline. Cong. Ch.                             6.05

Concord. "Friend"                                5.00

Derry. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.             16.00

Dover. First Ch.                               140.65

Exeter. Second Cong. Ch. 10. _for Chinese
  M. in Cal._, 10. _for Miss Collin's Work_     20.00

Great Falls. First Cong. Ch.                    15.00

Henniker. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.50,
  L.W. Preston, 3                               33.50

Jaffrey. "Lillies of the Field,"
  _for Storrs Sch._                              9.00

Keene. "S." 20; Primary Dep't Second
  Cong. Sab. Sch., 5                            25.00

Keene. Mrs. M.E. DeBevoise's S.S. Class,
  _for Oaks, N.C._                              20.00

Keene. P'k'g Papers. _for Savannah, Ga._

Littleton. "Mrs. B.W.K."                         5.00

Nashua. Ladies' Circle of Pilgrim Ch.,
  Bbl. and Box C., _for Storrs Sch._

Penacook. Cong. Ch.                             23.00

Plaiston and North Haverhill, Mass.
  Cong. Ch. 130.88; Mrs. Eliza W.
  Merrill, 50.                                 180.88

Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                              6.10

Portsmouth. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.           134.79

Rye. Cong. Ch.                                  30.00

                                            ---------

                                              $669.97

ESTATE.

Allenstown. Estate of Jabez Green, by
  Mrs. Elsie G. Green, _for Green
  Memorial Ch., Bending Oaks, Ala._            500.00

                                            ---------

                                            $1,169.97


VERMONT, $498.33.

Burlington. "Tithes"                             1.00

Barton Landing. Children's Miss'y Soc.,
  by Kate B. Joslyn, Treas., _for
  Indian Sch'p._                                10.00

Chester. Cong. Ch.                               2.75

Coventry. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._                           12.70

Fair Haven. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Storrs Sch._                              6.00

Manchester. Miss E.J. Kellogg                   10.00

Middlebury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    19.53

Montpelier. Bethany Cong. Ch.                   37.65

New Haven. Cong. Ch. ad'l to const. REV.
  W.B. HAGUE L.M.                               25.50

Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.00

Putney. "A few members Cong. Ch." by
  Mrs. A.C. Shattuck, _for McIntosh, Ga._        9.00

----. "A Friend"                                20.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vermont,
  by Mrs. W.P. Fairbanks, Treas.,
  _for McIntosh, Ga._:

    Bridport. Ladies                 10.00

    Brookfield. Ladles' H.M. Soc.
      of Second Ch.                   6.20

    Burlington. Ladies' H.M.S.
      of College St. Ch.             20.00

    Charlotte. Ladies.               13.75

    East Burke. W.H.M.U. Aux.         5.00

    Enosburg. Ladies of Cong. Ch.     9.00

    Fairlee. Ladies.                  5.25

    Franklin. Ladies.                 2.30

    Greensboro. Ladies of
    Cong. Ch.                        13.28

    McIndoes Falls. Mrs. W.R.
    Monteith                          1.00

    Middlebury. Ladies.              20.25

    Montpelier. W.H.M.S.              5.00

    Saint Johnsbury. Ladies.        100.00

    Waitefield. Ladies of Cong. Ch.   8.22

    Woodstock. Ladies.               20.00

                                   -------     239.25

                                            ---------

                                              $398.38

ESTATE.

Post Mill. Estate of Eliza R. (Heaton)
  Dodge, by Edward N. Heaton, Ex.              100.00

                                            ---------

                                              $498.38


MASSACHUSETTS, $11,766.85.

Andover. "A Friend," by Stephen Ballard,
  _for Girls' Dormitory, Macon, Ga._         1,581.75

Andover. "A Friend," by Stephen Ballard,
  _for School Building, Lexington, Ky._        425.00

Ashfield. Cong. Ch.                             27.90

Auburndale. Rev. Horace Dutton,
  _for Athens, Ga._                              5.00

Ayer. First Cong. Ch.                            7.16

Boston. Old South Ch. bal.                     250.00

    Sab. Sch., of Old South Ch.,
      _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                       25.00

    Mrs. Susan C. Warren,
      56; Henry Woods, 50,
      _for Missionary horse,
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._         106.00

    A.W. Stetson, _for Girls' Hall,
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          10.00

    "A Lady Friend"                  10.00

Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch.,
    B.C. Hardwick                   100.00

    Village Ch.                      45.37

    Harvard Cong. Ch.                 5.45

    Mrs. Torray,
      _for Marion, Ala._              5.00

Jamaica Plain. Cen. Cong. Ch., ad'l   4.00

                                    ------    $560.82

Boxford. First Cong. Ch.                        41.83

Cambridge. Miss M.F. Aiken, _for Girl's
  Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                  100.00

Cambridge. Albert Bushnell Hart                  5.00

Chelsea. Central Ch.                           114.27

Chelsea. Y.P.S.C.E. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Girls' Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._       25.00

Clinton. C.L. Swan                             100.00

Colerain. Mrs. P.B. Smith                        5.00

Cummington. Village Ch. 24.75; "Friends"
  4.25; Mrs. S.R. Wilbur, 1., to const REV.
  WILBUR RAND L.M.                              30.00

Dalton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.
  _for Indian Sch'p_                            17.50

Easthampton. Sab. Sch. of Payson Ch.,
  _for Indian M._, and to const CHARLES H.
  JOHNSON and MISS ELEANOR J. MAYHER
  L.M's                                         80.31

Easthampton. Sab. Sch. of Payson Ch.,
  _for Grand View, Tenn._                       19.02

Enfield. Cong. Ch.                              50.00

Franklin. Mrs. Stephen Kenrich                  25.00

Groton. Box Books, _for Theo. Dept.,
  Talladega C._

Harrison. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Mobile, Ala._                             5.60

Harwich (Cape Cod). Miss Tamesin
  Brooks, 100; Miss S.G. Brooks, 50,
  _for Girl's Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._      150.00

Holliston. Bible Christians of Dist. No.
  4, 50; "A Friend" 50.                        100.00

Hyannis. Cong. Ch.                               2.00

Hyde Park. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.         26.71

Hyde Park. Ladies' Home M. Soc., Bbl. C.,
  _for Tougaloo U._

Lawrence. Sab. Sch. Class Lawrence St. Ch.      10.00

Lawrence. Fred Eaton, _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                  5.00

Leominster. Ortho Cong. Ch.                    180.00

Lee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                     75.00

Linden. Mrs. Sarah A. Dowse, _for Chinese
  M. in Cal._, and to const MRS. SARAH F.
  MAXWELL L.M.                                  30.00

Malden. First Cong. Ch.                         60.00

Maplewood. Mrs. Crombie's Class,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._                         4.00

Mapleton. Ladies' M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
  Box Books, 1 _for Freight, Jonesboro, Tenn._   1.00

Marblehead. Hon. J.J.H. Gregory, 25;
  Ladies of Cong. Ch. 23,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                    48.00

Marlboro. Union Ch. and Soc., to const.
  WILLIAM STETSON and MISS HATTIE L.
  OUTHANK L.M's                                 70.50

Melrose. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. material,
  _for Sew. Dept., Talladega, C._

Millbury. First Cong. Ch.                       47.25

Newburyport. Belleville Cong. Ch.               77.45

Newton Center. Mrs. Sarah C. Davis,
  _for Indian M._                              200.00

Northampton. A.L. Williston,
  _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                    23.00

North Adams. Ladies' H.M.S. of Cong. Ch.,
  Miss Harriet N. Adams, _for Chinese
  M. in Cal._                                   80.00

North Weymouth. Edith M. Bates                   2.00

Oakham. Cong. Ch.                               18.00

Pittsfield. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.            12.87

Rockland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    25.00

Royalston. First Cong. Ch. Easter
  Offering.                                      9.00

Salem. L.M. Soc. of South Church.,
  Pkg. of C., _for Tougaloo U._

South Hadley. First Cong. Ch.                   20.25

South Hadley Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.      20.30

Somerville. Franklin St. Cong. Ch.              73.05

Somerville. Y.P.S.C.E. of Day St. Ch.,
  _for Missionary horse, Pleasant
  Hill, Tenn._                                  15.00

Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  19.04

Taunton. United Cong. Ch.                       16.81

Templeton. Trinitarian Soc.                     22.10

Upton. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student Aid,
Fisk U._                                        25.00

Warren. Mrs. Mary B. Carpenter, 5 _for Indian
M._, and 5 _for Mountain Work_                  10.00

Wellesley. College Christian Ass'n,
_for Mountain Work_                             30.00

Wellesley. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Work_         10.00

West Boylston. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
_for Freight to McLeansville, N.C._              5.17

West Medford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
_for Boys' Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          30.00

West Medway. Mrs. L.S. Thayer,
_for Student Aid, Talladega C._                  2.00

West Yarmouth. Cong. Ch.                         3.00

Winchendon. Cong. Ch. and Parish               113.61

Winchendon. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Freight
  to Talladega, Ala._                            1.03

Woburn. Cong. Ch., Bbl. material,
  _for Sewing Dep't., Talladega C._

Worcester. "Friend."                             5.00

Worcester. ----, _for Chinese M. in Cal._        5.00

----. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 50.00

----. "A Friend," _for Student Aid_,
  _Fisk U._                                     25.00

Hampden Benevolent Association, by
  Charles Marsh, Treas.:

    East Longmeadow                  23.15

    Longmeadow. Ladies' Benev.
    Soc.                             20.85

    Longmeadow. Gent's Benev. Soc.   19.25

    Monson.                          32.93

    Westfield. Second.               24.47

    West Springfield. Park St.       11.60

                                    -------    132.25

                                           ----------

                                            $5,066.55

ESTATES.

North Chelmsford. Estate of Mrs. Julia
  A. Clark, by John H. Clark, Executor       6,000.00

Reading. Estate of Mrs. Sarah G. Temple,
  by Arthur W. Temple, Ex.                     200.00

Worcester. Estate of Dwight Reed, by
  E.J. Whittemore, Adm'r                       500.00

                                           ----------

                                           $11,766.55


CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE

Belchertown, Mass. "Friends," by Mrs.
  D.B. Bruce, Box and Bbl., _for Sherwood,
  Tenn._

Malden, Mass. M. Kent, Bbl.,
  _for Kittrell, N.C._


RHODE ISLAND, $281.59.

Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                        52.12

Pawtucket. Cong. Ch.                            79.47

Providence. James Coats, _for Student
  Missionary, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._            100.00

Providence. Aux. North Cong. Ch., by
  Miss Mary E. Eastwood,
  _for Dakota Indian M._                        50.00


CONNECTICUT, $2,872.97.

Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      4.00

Bethel. Ladies' M. Circle, Bbl. bedding,
  etc., _for Talladega C._

Berlin. Mrs. Harriet N. Wilcox                  10.00

Berlin. C. Dunham, 5; W.H. Upson, 4;
  "A Friend," 1, _for Tougaloo U._              10.00

Clinton. Cong. Ch.                               2.00

Colchester. First Ch. of Christ                 71.00

Cornwall Hollow. "Thanksgiving Workers,"
  1.50, also package Patchwork, _for
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                         1.50

East Hartford. First Ch.                        34.00

East Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              20.00

Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch., (30 of which
to const MRS. EMMA L. McINTOSH L.M.)            68.58

Hartford. Fourth Cong. Ch., (of which
  18.31, _for Indian M._,) to const
  H.G.O. MILLER L.M. .                          36.25

Hartford. Windsor Av. Cong. Ch.                  6.06

Hebron. First Cong. Ch., 21.25; Benj. A.
  Bissell 10; Miss C. Eliza White,
  _for Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._, 5                36.25

Kent. First Cong. Ch.                           13.19

Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                     42.68

Lyme. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Meriden. Center Ch.                             22.00

Mystic Bridge. Mrs. Wm. Clift,
_for Chinese Work in Ca._                        2.00

New Britain. Missionary Soc., Bbl. C.
  and Table Furniture, _for Williamsburg, Ky._

New Haven. Howard Av. Ch., 11.75; College
  St. Ch., 10; Dixwell Av. Ch., 5; Ch.
  of Redeemer, 5; Davenport Ch., 4.85;
  Ferry St. Ch., 3; United Ch., 8.75; "H."
  15; "A Friend," 5                             68.35

New Haven. Dwight Place Sab. Sch., 50;
  Sab. Sch. of College St. Cong. Ch., 15,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    65.00

New Haven. M.E. Baldwin,
  _for Chinese M. in Cal._                      10.00

New London. Trust Estate of Henry P.
  Haven, 150, _for Talladega C., and 100
  for Tougaloo U._                             250.00

New London. Henry R. Bond, _for Tillotson
  C. and N. Inst._                             200.00

North Coventry. Cong. Ch.                       27.46

North Haven. Elihu Dickerman                     3.00

Norwich. S.B. Bishop                           200.00

Old Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                       25.00

Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 44;
  Mrs. Geo. Dibble, 10                          54.00

Plainfield. First Cong. Ch.                     27.10

Plainville. "King's Daughters,"
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                4.00

Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M._                               20.05

South Norwalk. Cong. Ch.                        12.00

Stamford. Dea. Philip H. Brown                   5.00

Terryville. "Soldiers of Christ."               10.00

Wallingford. Cong. Ch.                           7.47

Waterbury. Mrs. Mary L. Mitchell, 50;
  Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 43.24,
  _for Tougaloo U._                             93.24

Waterbury. "A Friend,"
  _for Chinese M. in Cal._                       5.00

Waterbury. "Sunshine Circle" of Second
  Cong. Ch., _for Woman's Work_                  5.00

Westminster. Mrs. S.B. Carter, _for
  Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._                         5.00

Westville. Cong. Ch.                            18.23

Willington. Cong. Ch.                            1.50

Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                       23.06

----. "A Friend."                              200.00

----. "A Friend."                              104.00

----. "A Friend."                               30.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Conn., by Mrs. S.M. Hotchkiss. Sec.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Ellington. Ladies' Soc., _for
      Conn. Ind'l Sch., Ga._         20.00

                                    ------      20.00
                                            ---------

                                            $1,872.97

ESTATE.

North Stonington. Estate of Dudley R.
  Wheeler, by Jennie Wheeler, Executrix      1,000.00

                                            ---------

                                            $2,872.97


NEW YORK, $15,858.76.

Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for Chandler
  Sch. Building, Lexington, Ky._               375.00

Brooklyn. Puritan Cong. Ch.                     45.89

Brooklyn, E.D. New England Cong. Ch.            20.00

Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch.                    11.30

Crown Point. "A Friend," to const
  ELMER J BARKER L.M.                           30.00

Fairport. Cong. Ch., to const A. WORTH
  PALMER L.M.                                   47.40

Jamaica. "S.G.A." _for Chinese Work in Cal_      5.00

Marion. "A Life Member."                         1.00

New Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                          22.50

New York. Gen'l Clinton B. Fisk, to
  const. Miss ALMIRA MARSHALL L.M.              30.00

New York. John Gibb, _for Talladega C._         25.00

Owasco. Anice Stewart                            2.00

Sherburne. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                  20.83

Troy. "Cash," _for Indian Work_                  0.10

Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                               24.29

Warwick. "A Friend," _for Chinese
  M. in Cal._                                    2.00

Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, _for
  Chinese M. in Cal._                            5.00

                                            ---------

                                              $667.31

ESTATES.

Homer. Estate of Elias Root, by
  Vernon F. Stone, Ex.                         841.45

New York. Trust Estate of W.E. Dodge,
  _for Theo. Dep't, Talladega C._              100.00

Shushan. Estate of William Law,
  by John F. Day, Ex.                       14,250.00

                                           ----------

                                           $15,858.78


NEW JERSEY, $243.25.

Arlington. Herbert Overacre, on True
  Blue Card                                      5.00

Arlington. Mission Band, _for Savannah, Ga._     0.75

Bound Brook. M.H. Roundey and G.A.
  Roundey, _for Chinese M. in Cal._             10.00

East Orange. B. Van Wagenen, _for Student Aid,
  Marion, Ala._                                  8.00

Plainfield. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, bal. to
  const. MARY KNOWLTON WHITON L.M.               5.00

Upper Montclair. Cong. Ch.                     214.50


PENNSYLVANIA, $20.00.

Marshalfield Valley. Geo. A. Marsh's S.S.
  Class for Boys, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    15.00

Scranton. "F.T.," _for Chinese M. in Cal._       5.00


OHIO, $645.84.

Andover. Cong. S.S. Mission Band, _for
  Student Aid, Jellico, Tenn._                  22.00

Akron. West Hill Cong. Ch.                      47.88

Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad'l to
  const. ELGIN H. HINMAN L.M.                   20.43

Claridon. Pkg. Papers, _for Savannah, Ga._

Cleveland. Bethlehem Bohemian Cong. Ch.         32.06

Cleveland. M.L. Berger, D.D.,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                6.00

Cincinnati. Columbia Cong. Sab. Sch.            25.00

Cincinnati. Walnut Hills Cong. S.S. 10;
  Ladies' M. Soc. of W.H. Cong. Ch., 2.50;
  and Bbl. C., _for Student Aid,
  Talladega C._                                 12.50

Elyria. First Cong. Ch., (40 of which from
  Sab. Sch.) to const JOHN A. TOPLIFF and
  ARTHUR L. GARFORD L.M.                       172.42

Fremont. C.T. Rogers                             5.00

Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                         18.15

Grafton. Mrs. Sally Tuttle                       4.00

Hudson. Cong. Ch.                               14.50

Tallmadge. Cong. Ch.                            62.25

Warren. Mite Soc., _for Sch'p End't Fund,
  Fisk U._                                       7.05

Wellington. Cong. Sab. Sch., and Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    15.00

Youngstown. J.D. Whitney                         1.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. Phebe A. Crafts, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Bellevue. Cong Ch. L.M.S.,
     _for Miss Collins' Work_         5.60

    Cincinnati. Center Ch., W.H.M.S.,
      _for Miss Collins' Work_        4.00

    Columbus. Eastwood Ch.,
      Y.L.M.S, _for Miss Collins'
      Work_                           5.00

    Cuyahoga Falls. L.M.S.,
      _for Miss Collins' Work_        8.00

    Kelly's Island. Aux.,
      _for Miss Collins' Work_        3.00

    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., L.A.S.,
      _for Miss Collins' Work_        9.00

    Willoughby. Miss M.P. Hastings,
      _for Miss Collins' Work_        1.00

    Willoughby. Miss M.P. Hastings   25.00

                                   -------      60.60

                                              -------

                                              $545.84

ESTATE.

Oberlin. Estate of Maria L. Root               100.00

                                              -------

                                              $645.84


INDIANA, $30.00.

Bloomington. Mrs. A.B. Woodford,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                    30.00


ILLINOIS, $1,012.83.

Camp Point. Mrs. S.B. McKinney                  15.00

Chicago. Union Park Cong. Ch., 272.63;
  New England Cong. Ch., 49.62;
  Plymouth Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN R.
  LAING L.M., 30.36; Leavitt St. Cong.
  Ch., 3.36                                    355.97

Earlville. "J.A.D."                             25.00

Elgin. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Athens, Ala._                            15.21

Glencoe. Cong. Ch., to const OTIS McGAW
  HOWARD, U.B. KLETZING, BENJ. F. NEWHALL,
  JAMES K. CALHOUN and MISS LAURA STAR
  L.M.'s                                       150.00

Hyde Park. South Park Cong. Ch.                 10.00

Hyde Park. "Olin Family," 2; A.W. Cole,
1--Bbl. C., _for Student Aid, Marion, Ala._      3.00

Ivanhoe. Fremont Cong. Ch.                      23.00

Lewistown. Mrs. Myron Phelps                    50.00

Mendon. Cong. Ch.                               18.00

Oak Park. Cong. Ch.                            178.38

Peoria. Miss Ruthford's S.S. Class,
  Cong. Ch., _for Mobile, Ala._                  5.00

Princeton. Mrs. Polly B. Corss                  10.00

Quincy. Joshua Perry                            10.00

Rockford. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch.            30.00

Rockland. Y.L.M. Soc. Second Cong. Ch.,
  _for Sch'p End't Fund, Fisk U._               17.68

Sycamore. First Cong. Ch.                       68.59

Wilmette. Cong. Ch.                             27.00

----. "A Friend."                                1.00


MICHIGAN, $283.81.

Calumet Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               50.00

Detroit. First Cong. Ch., 131.89;
  Woodward Ave. Cong. Ch., 75.27               207.16

East Gilead. Rev. L. Curtiss                     2.65

Kalamazoo. Mrs. J.A. Kent                       10.00

Richmond. First Cong. Ch.                       14.00


WISCONSIN, $90.82.

Delevan. Cong. Ch.                              23.20

Grand Rapids. Cong. Ch.                         27.22

Milwaukee. Grand Ave. Cong. Ch.                 30.40

Sheboygan. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for
  Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                    10.00


IOWA, $282.60.

Bear Grove. Cong. Ch.                           10.00

Clear Lake. Christian Endeavor Soc., by
  Miss Mary Thompson, _for Woman's Work_         4.00

Council Bluffs. _For Tillotson
  C. and N. Inst._                               3.00

Davenport. Edwards Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV JULIUS A. REED and REV. CARL
  HESS L.M's                                    70.00

East Des Moines. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.               7.65

Eldora. First Cong. Ch.                          2.60

Garwin. Talman Dewey                             3.25

Genoa Bluffs. Rev. James Rowe,
  _for Ch. Building, Nat, Ala._                  1.00

Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                             18.39

Iowa City. Cong. Ch.                            40.00

Kelley. Rev. and Mrs. S.A. Arnold                4.00

McGregor. J.H. Ellsworth                        10.00

Olds. Jason H. Martin                            5.00

Sawyer. Francis Sawyer                          20.00

Tipton. Woman's M. Soc., Bbl. C.,
  _for Savannah, Ga._

Victor. Mrs. C.L. McDermid, 3; Friends, 1.,
  _for Church Building, "Nat," Ala._             4.00

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Ames. L.A. Soc.                   5.00

    Charles City. L.M.S.             25.00

    Chester Center. W.H.M.U.          4.75

    Durant. Mrs. S.M. Dutton.         3.00

    Grinnell W.H.M.U.                 9.96

    Marion. "Busy Gleaners,"
      _for Santee Sch._              20.00

    Osage. Y.P.S.C.E.                 4.25

    Sheldon. W.H.M.U.                 4.00

    Sioux City. L.M.S.                1.00

    Webster City. Y.P.S.C.E.          2.75

                                    ------      79.71


MINNESOTA, $185.91.

Saint Paul. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                  23.20

Saint Charles. First Cong. Ch.                   1.50

Waseca. I.L. Claghorn, Box Papers,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Winona. Second Cong. Ch., 3.81,
  and Sab. Sch., .71                             4.52

Zumbrota. Cong. Ch.                             17.67

Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary Society,
  by Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Alexandria. L.M.S.               20.00

    Austin. W.M.S.                    6.27

    Duluth. Friends in Council       13.74

    Elk River. W.M.S.                 7.00

    Marshall. W.M.S.                  5.00

    Minneapolis. Plymouth L.M.S.     28.19

    Minneapolis. Park Ave. L.M.S.    15.00

    Minneapolis. Lyndale W.M.S.      13.30

    Minneapolis. Open Door Mission
    Band                              3.00

    Northfield. Special               2.00

    Rochester. Sab. Sch., _for
    Santee Agency_                    3.51

    Saint Paul. Plymouth L.M.S.      20.00

    Saint Paul. Plymouth Y.L.M.S.     5.00

    Springfield. "Cheerful Givers."   3.00

                                  --------

                                   $145.01

Less for Expenses                     5.99

                                  --------     139.02


MISSOURI, $56.00.

Kansas City. M. Marty                           10.00

Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                       46.00


KANSAS, $42.01.

Alma. Cong. Ch.                                  3.30

Kirwin. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00

Manhattan. Cong. Ch.                            28.71


DAKOTA, $14.00.

Castlewood. Mrs. Geo. Allen                      5.00

Vermillion. First Cong. Ch.                      9.00


NEBRASKA, $20.25.

Beatrice. Mrs. B.F. Hotchkiss                   10.00

Franklin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                10.25


COLORADO, $2.50.

Denver. Miss Clark's S.S. Class, First
  Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._     2.50


CALIFORNIA, $25.00.

Los Gatos. Mrs. H.G. Noyes and
  L.E. Agard                                    20.00

Saratoga. Sarah Brown, _for Student Aid,
  Fisk U._                                       5.00


OREGON, $13.00.

East Portland. Mrs. Anna M. Bancroft             3.00

Forest Grove. Cong. Ch.                         10.00


WASHINGTON, $2.50.

Skokomish. "Little Workers,"
  by Rev. M. Eells                               2.50


KENTUCKY, $1.66.

Woodbine. Rev. E.H. Bullock                      1.66


NORTH CAROLINA, $54.25.

Chapel Hill. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.        5.00

McLeansville. Rev. A. Connet,
  _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               12.50

Nalls. "Friends," 2.50; Cong. Ch., 50c.          3.00

Oaks. Miss E.W. Douglas                         30.00

Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                 1.00

Troy. "Friends," 2; Y.P.S.C.E., 50c.;
  Ch., 25c.                                      2.75


TENNESSEE, $10.99.

Glenmary. Cong. Ch.                              0.64

Sunbright. Cong. Ch.                             0.35

Nashville. W.R. Morris of Fist University,
  _for Sch'p End't Fund, Fisk U._               10.00


ALABAMA, $3.00

Mobile. First Cong. Ch., _for Mobile, Ala._      3.00


TEXAS, $3.00.

Austin. W.M.S. of Tillotson Inst.,
  _for Fort Berthold Indian M._                  3.00

                                           ----------

Donations                                  $12,023.19

Estates                                     23,591.45

                                           ----------

                                           $35,614.64


INCOME, $1,835.50.

Avery Fund. _for Mendi M._          196.75

DeForest Fund, _for President's
  Chair, Talladega C._              481.25

Graves Sch'p Fund, _for
  Talladega C._                     125.00

Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._      50.00

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._      62.50

Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for
  Atlanta U._                        12.50

Howard Theo. Fund, _for
  Howard U._                        650.00

Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis,
  Tenn._                             75.00

Luke Memorial Sch'p Fund,
  _for Talladega C._                 10.00

Stone Fund, _for Talladega C._       25.00

Straight University Sch'p Fund,
  _for Straight U._                  47.50

Tuthill King Fund, _for
  Berea C._                          50.00

Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._      50.00

                                  --------   1,885.50


TUITION, $4,155.41.

Lexington, Ky., Tuition             257.13

Williamsburg, Ky., Tuition           70.65

Woodbine, Ky., Tuition                7.00

Beaufort, N.C., Public Fund         154.60

Wilmington, N.C., Tuition           166.60

Charleston, S.C., Tuition           216.00

Deer Lodge, Tenn., Tuition           37.75

Grand View, Tenn., Tuition           35.25

Jellico, Tenn., Tuition              41.40

Jonesboro, Tenn., Tuition            12.70

Nashville, Tenn., Tuition           510.54

Pleasant Hill, Tenn., Tuition        24.20

Sherwood, Tenn., Tuition            400.00

Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch.,
  Tuition                           222.69

Macon, Ga., Tuition                 233.45

Savannah, Ga., Tuition              170.50

Thomasville, Ga., Tuition            65.00

Athens, Ala., Tuition                79.55

Marion, Ala., Tuition                76.78

Mobile, Ala., Tuition               210.20

Talladega, Ala., Tuition            283.86

New Orleans, La., Tuition           652.75

Meridian, Miss., Tuition             79.20

Tougaloo, Miss., Tuition             24.05

Austin, Texas, Tuition              183.56

                                  --------   4,155.41

United States Government Appropriation
  for Indians                                5,678.50

                                            ---------

Total for June                             $47,284.05


SUMMARY.

Donations                                 $147,213.31

Estates                                     50,121.54

                                          -----------

                                          $197,334.85

Income                                       8,117.96

Tuition                                     30,289.62

United States Government appropriation
  for Indians                               15,219.37

                                          -----------

Total from Oct. 1 to June 30              $250,911.80

                                          ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for June                          25.05

Previously acknowledged                        687.57

                                              -------

Total                                         $712.62


ENDOWMENT FUND.

Rockford, Ill. Estate of Rev. Benjamin
  Foltz, by Charles G. Foltz, Ex.             $500.00


DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND FOR COLORED PEOPLE.

Income for June, 1889, from investments     $2,325.00

Previously acknowledged                     28,144.86

                                           ----------

Total                                      $30,469.86

                                           ==========


  H.W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  56 Reade St, N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 43, NO. 08, AUGUST, 1889 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.