Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Norma
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





The American Missionary

AUGUST, 1896

VOL. L.   No. 8.



CONTENTS

EDITORIAL.

  THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND, 241
  SHARES--LEADERS, 242
  HARRIET BEECHER STOWE, 244

THE SOUTH.

  THE HISTORIES OF OUR CHURCHES, 245
  DEER LODGE, TENN., 245

ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES.

  COMMENCEMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY, 247
  HOWARD UNIVERSITY, 249
  LINCOLN ACADEMY, 249
  ALLEN NORMAL SCHOOL, 251
  SALUDA SEMINARY, 253
  BURRELL SCHOOL, 253
  BLOWING ROCK, N.C., 254
  ENFIELD--LINCOLN SCHOOL, MERIDIAN, 255
  A LESSON IN HOME BUILDING, 256
  ITEM, 256

THE INDIANS.

  CLOSING EXERCISES AT SANTEE NORMAL SCHOOL, 257

THE CHINESE.

  SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, 259

SHARES JUBILEE YEAR FUND, 260

WOMEN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS, 262

RECEIPTS, 264



NEW YORK: PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

          Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class mail matter.


       *       *       *       *       *


_American Missionary Association._


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  REV. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D.
  Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. C.J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  EAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A.J.F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. Jos. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._



COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.



DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on label
to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made afterward
the change on the label will appear a month later. Please send early
notice of change in post-office address, giving the former address and
the new address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers may
be correctly mailed.



FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I give and bequeath the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American Missionary
Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the State of New
York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L. AUGUST, 1896. No. 8.


       *       *       *       *       *


The Jubilee Year Fund.

Extract from the appeal of the Executive Committee of the American
Missionary Association:


Fifty Dollars a Share.

It is proposed to raise during the next six months a special Jubilee
Year Fund of $100,000 in shares of $50 each, with the hope and
expectation that these shares will be taken by the friends of missions
without lessening those regular contributions which must be depended
upon to sustain the current work.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                           FORM OF A PLEDGE.                        |
  |                                                                    |
  |                 Share, $50.               $100,000.                |
  |                                                                    |
  | THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND                                              |
  | OF THE                                                             |
  | AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.                                   |
  |                                                                    |
  | I hereby take .... shares (Fifty Dollars each) in the              |
  | Jubilee Year Fund of the American Missionary Association,          |
  | to be paid before the close of the fiscal year, Sept. 30, 1896.    |
  |                                                                    |
  |                          Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  |
  |                                                                    |
  |                          P.O. Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+


JUBILEE SHARES.

Our readers will notice that our jubilee share list is increasing in
numbers. We have reason to be grateful to God in that he has moved the
hearts of so many and led them to help our Lord's needy ones. We would
that those who have responded to our appeals could see the things that
we see, and hear the things which we hear. We have nothing but gratitude
for the fact that in this time of financial distress and uncertainty,
when money is so hard to get, the cause which we bring to the Christian
love and patriotism of good people is not losing, but gaining in their
sympathies and help. This trying year--trying to so many, therefore
trying to us--brings a jubilee thanksgiving to us, in that we are not
sinking deeper into the horrible pit and miry clay of debt, but are
little by little being pulled out of the slough. We know not how long
the pull may be, but if those who love the Lord Jesus Christ will pull
all together we shall not fail, and we need not be discouraged. Our feet
will get upon a rock and our goings be established; for which we pray.


LEADERS.

The _Home Mission Monthly_ of the American Baptist Home Mission Society,
in an article upon "Leaders," agrees with us in saying: "A different
style of men is needed as leaders of the colored people to-day from that
of those who aspired to leadership twenty-five years ago; the race has
made great progress; there are multitudes now of Negro men and women who
have had the advantages of the common schools, many who have a college
education, and some who have university culture; to wisely influence
them in their thought and action is more difficult than to control the
masses of the illiterate and untrained. It is especially worthy of
consideration that among the Negroes of the South to-day are some men of
power and of education who are leaders; but whose leadership,
unfortunately, is in the wrong direction. This renders it all the more
urgent that the Mission Society and kindred organizations should seek to
supply them with a class of leaders who, by reason of their godly
character, their knowledge, their training, their consecration, will be
able to counteract the evil influences now at work, and to lead their
people into paths of righteousness.

"The Mission Society does not attempt to provide a college education
for the multitudes of Negroes; even this would be a task beyond its
resources. What it does aim to do is simply to secure, if possible,
the education of a comparatively few young men and young women, who
shall become leaders among their people; men and women who by their
knowledge, training, culture, power, will be able to organize and
direct the energies of the masses of the people. Leaders are needed,
and these should be thoroughly competent for leadership; it is a hard
task to influence successfully the development of a race of eight
million people, and those who attempt the work require natural
qualities of a high order and also unusual attainments."

What is to prevent these people who have been enfranchised from
becoming the prey of demagogues and designing men who wish to use
them for unchristian purposes and in unchristian ways, unless they have
large minded, thoroughly educated leaders with knowledge of history
and of life who can lead their own people in the ways of righteousness?
Events now transpiring give significance to this question.


       *       *       *       *       *


The University of Pennsylvania has conferred the degree of Doctor
of Philosophy on Mr. Lewis B. Moore, who graduated from Fisk University
a few years ago. We listened to his "graduating address" at
the close of his college years at Fisk, whence he went to Philadelphia
to take charge of a branch of the Y.M.C.A. While attending to the
laborious duties of this position he has, during four years of earnest,
patient, and thorough study, earned his degree of Ph.D. in Greek
and Latin and Ethics, in one of the severest graduate schools in the
country. Dr. Moore is one of "our boys"; and there are many of
them who are preparing themselves, by their vision of a larger life
and their attainment of larger possessions, to be wise leaders among
their people. Dr. Moore is now an instructor in Howard University,
Washington, D.C.


       *       *       *       *       *


There are those who object to the constitutional rights of the Negro,
and some who object to his Christian privileges, lest his recognition as
a man shall lead to "social equality," whatever this may mean. The
following from a leading Negro paper, _i.e._, edited by a Negro for a
Negro constituency, is a testimony as to what is and what is not the
Negro's idea of "recognition":

"That the Negroes in recognizing constitutional rights are at the same
time seeking an arbitrary social equality with any other race is
erroneous. From the time of emancipation, the colored people have had no
disposition to force a social alliance with the whites. The colored
citizens have all their civil and political rights, and these rights
they demand. When honored colored men or women enter a first-class
hotel or restaurant, or seek a decent stateroom on a steamer, they do
not enter these places because they are seeking social contact with the
whites, but because they demand their just privileges for their personal
protection and comfort."


       *       *       *       *       *


HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.

Of the illustrious ones who laid the foundations for the liberation of
the slave, the name of Harriet Beecher Stowe leads all the rest.

What America's greatest woman did towards making freedom possible, our
devoted and consecrated women teachers have been carrying out these
thirty years to the full Christian conclusion. Those who read the
records of the closing days of our schools in this present August number
of THE MISSIONARY will be reminded how these faithful teachers are still
engaged completing the unfinished work of their greater sister.

Next to "Uncle Tom's Cabin," perhaps the book which has the truest stamp
of the genius of Mrs. Stowe is her "Old Town Folks." In her incomparable
description of "School Days in Cloudland," in which she shows how her
sympathies went out to the people of every nation and tongue who are
oppressed, she compares the influences of education in New England with
a country without schoolhouses, saying: "Look at Spain at this hour and
look back at New England at the time of which I write, and compare the
Spanish peasantry with the yeomen of New England. If Spain had had not a
single cathedral, if her Murillos had all been sunk in the sea, and if
she had had, for a hundred years past, a set of schoolmasters and
ministers working together as I have described Mr. Avery and Mr.
Rossiter as working, would not Spain be infinitely better off for this
life at least? That is the point that I humbly present to the
consideration of the public."

This point which Mrs. Stowe presents to the consideration of the public,
is the one to which her younger sisters are faithfully directing their
faith and their works among a people who up to Mrs. Stowe's day never
saw a schoolhouse.

We make our tribute to the gracious memory of her whose words went out
into all the world and extended to the ends of the earth: and we ask
remembrance of those who under the same inspiration are living among the
children of these liberated ones and are taking with them the love and
wisdom of Him who was "anointed to preach the gospel to the poor, the
recovery of sight to the blind, and to proclaim the acceptable year of
the Lord."

We are sometimes asked how this work of education, which Mrs. Stowe did
more than any other person to inaugurate, is regarded by the intelligent
white people of the South. We can gladly say that we have too much
recognition and appreciation of our work among good people of the South
to be otherwise than thankful for it, and for the fact that these good
people are increasing every year in numbers and in readiness to
encourage us. We have never united in more earnest prayers for our work,
and for those who carry it on, even in our annual meetings than in our
worship in the South with many Southern pastors, and nowhere have we
heard more appreciative words respecting our work than from good people
of the South who have acquainted themselves with what we are doing and
how we are doing it. That multitudes are still unable to see and unready
to prophesy does not count. The day of appreciative recognition has not
fully come, but it has dawned, and will come by and by.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE HISTORIES OF OUR CHURCHES.

We have asked the pastors of some of our churches to give to us
sketches of the histories of those churches--their location, pastors
and membership, the condition of their members financially and otherwise,
how many have homes of their own, and what are their employments.
The details are truthful and are of value as showing the people
in their church, home, and business life.


       *       *       *       *       *


DEER LODGE, TENN.

By Mrs. Ella Gill Sedgwick.

Deer Lodge, on the Cumberland Plateau in east Tennessee, is delightfully
located. The adjacent country is highly picturesque--rocky cliffs, deep
ravines, winding wooded streams, giving beauty to the landscape. To the
eastward, stretching far in undulating lines, are the mountains, seen
through a purple mist of great beauty. We often repeat the words, "As
the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people." We are nearly 2,000 feet above the level of the sea, so the air
is pure and healthful. A spicy fragrance fills the air, blown down from
the pines that crown the hills.

Deer Lodge has been settled mostly by Northern people. In a religious
point of view we are divided into Congregationalists, Methodists, and
Baptists, with a few Episcopalians. There is only one church building,
however, the Congregationalists'. This is a beautiful little edifice
worthy of the growing importance of this interesting field on the
Cumberland Plateau. The church has a choice location on Ross Avenue.

On April 13, 1889, the corner-stone was laid, and on August 4 of the
same year the church was dedicated. The church has good officers and
earnest working members. The present membership is forty-one. No
hostility is shown toward our church by the members of other churches,
but all are united and recognize in every one who loves the Master a
fellow-worker in the vineyard of Christ.

The present pastor, Rev. G. Lusty, during his residence among us has
endeared himself to all. A promising work is being done in the
Sabbath-school, and we believe that from it constantly go forth many
little rills of influence that are entering the homes and bringing the
people a higher and purer life. The Christian Endeavor society is doing
a good work among the young people. The prayer-meetings held on Thursday
evenings are well attended. The growth of the church has not been rapid,
but is steady, and during its history has enjoyed some revivals of
religion.

Under the direction of the pastor's loyal wife the young people have
been gathered into a sewing-school at her home every Saturday afternoon,
and everything is done to encourage the little fingers in their attempts
to guide the needle; and we feel that here, too, is a work being done
that will bring forth fruit in the homes.

The barrels of supplies, sent to us by friends in other States, have
enabled us to assist many needy ones. While packing these missionary
boxes, if you could only see "the other end of the line" you would feel
rewarded for your gifts. The kindness done for Christ's sake will not be
forgotten.

The country around Deer Lodge is sparsely settled. One can travel miles
without meeting any one. The people are somewhere--where, we are unable
to tell; yet when they have an opportunity to hear preaching you will
always find many people gathered in the schoolhouse where the "meeting"
is to be held. In traveling through the surrounding country you will see
many rough log houses, with only one room and often without windows, two
doors opposite each other, one door always kept open winter and summer.
A huge fire-place is in one end of the room. If you would have a view of
humanity in its simplicity, visit one of these mountain homes. You will
find everything of the most primitive kind. The hum of the
spinning-wheel and the heavy thud of the loom will greet your ears. In
one room you will very often see several beds, while the rest of the
furniture will consist of a few wooden chairs, a table and perhaps a
cupboard, and into this one room will be gathered the whole family, the
women with old shawls over their heads, sitting by the fire chewing
tobacco, or with the invariable snuff-stick in their mouth. But
everywhere you will be treated with kindness and invariable civility.
"Come and see us," they say; "we are mighty poor folks, but we will do
the best we can." These mountaineers take life in a slow and easy way;
you cannot make them "step to Yankee time."

Last Sabbath we attended one of the afternoon services. Our road passed
for several miles through a lovely forest, with its soft shadows and
calm repose. The only sound to break the stillness was the song of the
birds. After a while we heard ringing out through the pine woods the
echo of gospel hymns. Following the sound, and wending our way a little
farther through the woods, in a quiet glen we came to the school house
where the services were to be held. Here we found an earnest, attentive
audience. In one place an outdoor meeting was held. It was a rare,
perfect day. The people came in twos and threes, finding places wherever
they could. One could almost fancy that other scene of centuries ago,
beneath the blue skies of Palestine, where, when the multitude were
gathered upon the mountain, the Master "opened His mouth and taught
them."

Among these mountaineers are young men and women eager in their desire
for knowledge, and anxious for an opportunity to learn of a better way
of life. We believe that to the question, "What of the night?" the
answer can be given, "The morning cometh."


       *       *       *       *       *


COMMENCEMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY.

By Miss Alice M. Garsden.

I cannot promise you a sketch of our commencement abounding in local
color, for, if one were afflicted with color-blindness, he would
probably be unable to discover many points of difference between
commencement at Fisk and the same exercises at an Eastern college of
about the same size.

As a mere reprint of the programs of the various anniversary exercises,
which continued for three or four days, would occupy more space than is
allowed for this article, it is evident that many things of interest
must be crowded out.

_The Department of Music_ gave a characteristic performance. Every
selection on the program was well rendered. No music but the best is
ever studied at Fisk, and the productions of the great composers are not
only well played, but also well appreciated by our students.

The exhibition given by the _Gymnastic Department_ showed that Fisk has
athletes as well as musicians. The young men went through a series of
feats which showed both agility and strength. If they fail in the work
of life, it will not be for lack of hard, well-trained muscles. This
department has been under the direction of a student for the past two
years.

Rev. Ira Landrith, D.D., of Nashville, preached the annual "missionary
sermon." Dr. Landrith possesses true Southern eloquence, and was
listened to with marked attention. During the year he has, on several
occasions, expressed himself as heartily in sympathy with our work. Such
friendliness on the part of an influential Southerner is pleasant to
note.

Dr. Beard, our secretary, preached the "baccalaureate sermon." He
presented in a very vivid manner the blessings to be won by those who
conquer the hindrances of life. He showed how the law of struggle is the
law of strength and of possession. The duty and necessity of overcoming
evil, as well as the rewards, were illustrated and urged.

The various alumni associations are now endeavoring to raise a fund of
one thousand dollars for the university. They are faithful to their alma
mater.

The graduating exercises of the Normal Department were largely attended,
and the thirteen young women of the class would have been listened to on
any Northern commencement platform with earnest and thoughtful
attention. President Cravath's address to them was on "The New Woman."
"The educated young colored woman of to-day," he said, "is, in a
peculiar sense, the new woman of her race." He contrasted the
opportunities of the young women before him with those which their
mothers had, and besought them to consider their peculiar
responsibilities linked with their opportunities.

For the regular college graduation exercises every seat in the spacious
chapel was filled. Plants and wild-flowers had been used to decorate the
platform, while large flags were artistically draped on either side. The
class, numbering fifteen, occupied the front seats. President Cravath,
Dr. Beard, and other guests were on the platform. The orations were,
without exception, highly creditable. The speakers chose subjects of
current interest instead of recounting the exploits of the ancient
Greeks and Romans or making Napoleon fight his battles over again for
us. They bore the marks of thoughtful and accurate study. After the
conferring of the degrees, the audience rose while the Mozart Society
rendered the Hallelujah Chorus. What a debt of gratitude we owe to
Handel for giving us that Chorus! General Fisk used to say that there
were glories and hallelujahs and amens enough in it to make several
rousing Methodist camp-meetings.

After the commencement exercises a collation was served to which all
the alumni and the parents of the students present were invited. After
the refreshments the speeches followed. These were not of the
time-honored sort. Fathers and mothers rose and told of the struggles
they had made to get their boy or girl through school. Many were the
expressions of gladness and of hope, and when President Cravath
announced that the school year was ended, all of those who had taught
felt rewarded for the toils and anxieties of a fruitful college year.


       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD UNIVERSITY, THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C.

By Prof. J.H. Ewell, D.D.

The American Missionary Association was obliged to reduce the
appropriation for our work by one-fourth this year. This has occasioned
so much extra work, care, and anxiety, but the good hand of our Heavenly
Father has been upon us, and the teachers have increased their hours in
the classroom, and kind friends and churches have lent a helping hand.
Grateful mention should be made of large assistance from the First
Congregational Church, of Washington, and of aid from young churches
with heavy burdens upon them. One devoted and steadfast friend who gave
according to her power, yea, gave beyond her power; whose means were
small, but whose charities were large, because she spent so little upon
herself, Miss Mary F. Andrews, of Millbury, has been called home during
the year. Who will take her place? I wish there were space to speak of
all who have co-operated with us by giving. Almost every gift has some
association that has made it specially cheering.

Our Anniversary Exercises received the heartiest commendation. The class
numbered eight more than four years previously. We are greatly
encouraged by the good work that our graduates are doing. May the Lord
reward all of our beloved supporters! We always pray for them and for
the Association, and for all our varied workers under its auspices, and
we ask especially that all who are interested in our work will pray for
us that Charles Wesley's petition may be fulfilled in us,

  "Write Thy new name upon my heart,
  Thy best new name of Love."


       *       *       *       *       *


LINCOLN ACADEMY, KING'S MOUNTAIN, N.C.

By Rev. A.W. Curtis.

Lincoln Academy is beautiful for situation, in the midst of groves of
young pine, on a considerable plateau sloping southward, overlooking
the valley of a little creek with the grand old mountain towering above
them on the farther side. A quiet restful spot removed from the
temptations of town life, four miles from the village station; just the
place for the great family home school which I found on this occasion,
Wednesday night, busy as bees preparing for the great event of the year.
The boys had put up a brush arbor in the grove near by, and provided
plenty of plank seats beneath.

We had a rousing Christian Endeavor meeting that night, the last of the
session. All of the students belong to the Senior or Junior branch, and
with the schedule topic, "The Widening of Christ's Kingdom," brought
home and made personal, "What can I do to extend Christ's Kingdom during
this vacation?" Many very practical talks were given, and many pledges
of best endeavor to this end in the home life or where they were
expecting to teach through the summer. Strange noises were heard during
the night, which the morning light explained by the covered wagons,
prairie schooners we would call them at the West, which had come in and
camped out near the spring. As the hour approached a perfect string of
nondescript vehicles bringing the whole family, and many others on
muleback or on foot, came pouring in from near and far, until by 10 A.M.
nearly one thousand people had gathered in and around the arbor; some of
them coming from thirty to fifty miles overland.

"Old Glory" had been floating from the flagstaff above the central
school building all the morning, and now the scholars, neatly dressed,
came marching up the hill and crowded the platform to sing their welcome
song. Prayer was offered by one of the first graduates, now a minister.
Then the principal, and lady general, gave out the orders for the day in
such a womanly and winning way as showed her fully mistress of the
situation.

"No _smoking_ anywhere on the school-grounds; no changing of seats
during any exercise; no selling of liquors or even ice cream, lemonade,
or other refreshments--not because these latter were not good in
themselves, but because of the temptation to spend money which they
could not afford in these hard times, and while complaining that they
could not raise money for the schooling of their children, they must not
spend their nickels in such ways. Take care of their nickels and they
would soon count up to dollars."

Several hucksters and peddlers, who had come with their wares, the
principal succeeded in driving off, and in a region where whisky has
flowed freely and smoking is almost their vital breath, she that day had
an orderly assemblage of nearly a thousand, on uncomfortable seats,
quiet and interested for four and a half hours without any intermission!

It was a very carefully prepared program; speeches, essays, recitals,
dialogues, and such splendid singing as only these trained voices of
colored students can give. It was no easy matter to speak so as to be
heard by such a crowd in the open air, but every girl as well as boy
succeeded admirably, and all showed most careful training and drill. The
themes chosen were very practical and fitted to the occasion.

Tobacco got rough and fearless handling, and liquor-drinking was rebuked
in almost every conceivable way and rubbed in repeatedly. The old and
the modern ways of teaching were compared and illustrated; indeed, every
recitation was evidently selected with reference to its moral effect.

Certainly these huge commencement gatherings are themselves educators
for the fathers and mothers and kinsfolk of these young people, whom
they are proud to see doing so well. The words of all the songs were
thoroughly learned, so they will do service in many another gathering
wherever these students may be. It was the writer's privilege to give
the commencement address on "Making the best use of life as God's plan
for our highest good."

Thursday night we held a parting communion service with the
Congregational Church, which is mainly composed of students. The maps
shown me and many of their examination papers were exceptionally good.
Last winter mumps and measles successively swept through the school, and
at one time made the home almost a hospital, but the brave teachers went
through all, kept up recitations with the well ones, and nursed the sick
and brought them all safely through without the expense of a doctor. Now
all were well and evidently thriving on good food, though it is marvel
to me how good board can be afforded with tuition, and all expenses
covered for $4.50 per month, and yet work be furnished to most of them
for one-third of that, bringing the cash outlay to _ten cents a day!_
but they do it, and a happier household I have never seen than those who
gather at Lincoln Academy.

A white man with whom I was talking at the station said, "Those lady
teachers are doing a great work for this whole region."

So the leaven works.


       *       *       *       *       *


ALLEN NORMAL SCHOOL, THOMASVILLE, GA.

By Miss Amelia Merriam.

The fact that with the graduation of the class of '96 our school would
complete its first decade, added interest to the occasion.

One member of the class has been in the school from its organization. In
the class history she gave quite a vivid description of those trying
days when the building at Quitman, Ga., where the school was first
gathered, was burned to the ground, as the result of hostile feeling on
the part of the citizens of the place. Certainly there has been progress
toward a just appreciation of the work of the American Missionary
Association in the communities where its work has been done, as seen in
the kindly feeling toward the school manifested in various ways by the
people of Thomasville.

Of the six graduates, five are young women; three of these begin their
work of teaching in country schools immediately. One, the valedictorian
of the class, has already written something in regard to her
surroundings. At the place, which is the best in the neighborhood, where
she was to board--if the word may be used in connection with such a
state of things--she writes that there is almost nothing in the way of
necessities for decent living. There is not a lamp in the house; not
even a tallow candle, the room in which the family eat and sleep being
lighted only by building a fire upon the hearth. Of such an article as a
towel they apparently do not know the use; and the one basin in which
she washed her hands serves for various other domestic purposes. Almost
the only household appliances are two ovens, as they are called--two
flat-bottomed, shallow iron kettles, with iron covers, and legs a few
inches long. Under these kettles, out of doors, the fire is made, and
coals put upon the flat covers. In this way the hoe-cake is baked in
one, while the bacon is fried in the other. These two viands, with an
occasional mess of greens or potatoes, constitute the bill of fare month
in and month out. No wonder the poor girl lost her appetite. She was
supplied from the Home with what she needed to make herself comfortable
in the one very small room which she is fortunate enough to have to
herself.

It is from country places like these that we wish to bring scholars into
the school. The truth is that the young people in these communities are
too ignorant to have any desire for anything different from what they
now have. Here is an almost limitless home missionary field, to be
worked by the graduates of our schools. These teachers are good
object-lessons, showing what an education, including a knowledge of
homemaking, as well as what is learned from books, can do for boys and
girls like themselves.

We rejoice in the fact that when the school closed, all of the girls in
the Hall were professedly disciples of Christ, and will, we believe, go
back to their homes to be better daughters and more helpful members of
the communities so much in need of the influences which we trust they
will exert.

Five of our scholars connected themselves with our church at the last
communion service.


       *       *       *       *       *


SALUDA SEMINARY, N.C.

By Rev. E.W. Hollies.

The closing exercises at Saluda Seminary took place on Friday evening,
May 1. Visitors overflowed the schoolrooms before the appointed hour.
After the introductory march had been rendered by one of the music
pupils on the beautiful Estey piano which adorned the platform, there
was not a standing place left for seeing nor hearing. The young people
kept everybody interested and pleased for three hours, by readings,
recitations, instrumental music, and songs. "The Delsarte Children," a
drill by eight little girls, whose motions were accompanied with strains
of music, was prettily and accurately presented, and was much
appreciated.

A cantata, "THE VOICES OF NATURE," was presented by the Juniors, and was
an interesting and pleasing feature of the evening, and showed that
careful instruction had been given by the teacher of music. Two well
prepared essays were read by their authors; one for, and the other
against, "Woman Suffrage."

The "SALUDA HERALD," a paper of thirty-two pages, published by the
pupils of the school, was read by four of its editors. This paper
contained many good things in the form of prose, poems, puns, and
puzzles. It abounded in wit and good humor. Its production was a credit
to the young people and added much to the enjoyment of the visitors; and
it was also unmistakable evidence that the young people attending this
school are taught to think and to write their thoughts with grammatical
accuracy, and also to give intelligent vocal expression to the same.
Saluda is highly favored in having this excellent school within its
borders.


       *       *       *       *       *


BURRELL SCHOOL, SELMA, ALA.

By Prof. A.T. Burnell.

The year 1895-6 will be long remembered by all connected with Burrell
School, Selma, Ala., for the widespread religious interest gathering in
nearly half of those attending in March; for the continued increase of
enrolment, especially in the grammar and normal grades; and the closing
of this year will be remembered as a great and successful financial
endeavor, which netted for the school fifty dollars--"one jubilee
share." It is to be said that Selma is a generous town, when
entertainments come as at this season for the colored schools here.
Burrell presented one for the primaries, in which an entire grade
appeared upon the stage, some children impersonating trees planted by
other children and growing as by magic, while still others played "hide
and seek" about the trees or built nests therein.

On the second programme, intermingled with the usual dialogues and
"speeches" so loudly demanded by all pupils, there were the essays of
three who had completed the tenth grade, and some excellent music, with
shadow pictures, etc.

But the chief interest centered in the drama, that brought a crowded
house on Wednesday evening, and was repeated the next week.

Public examinations were held for three days, beginning Friday the 22d,
when a good number of friends visited the different rooms, noted the
work of the pupils, and shared with the teachers the quizzing of the
pupils, who seemed to enjoy their part. Not the least interesting
because thoroughly practical was the display of garments, stitching and
mending in the sewing-room; and, in the blacksmith and the carpenter
shops, articles manufactured by the boys. The school ground gives
evidence of workmen--attending to fences, repairs on buildings, a shop,
and two pump-shelters erected.

The catalogue just issued lists 287 students, a gain of twenty-four per
cent. in two years; gives a history of Burrell from its start in 1869,
and among former students names all the lady teachers of the city
school, besides five on other faculties in Selma.


       *       *       *       *       *


BLOWING ROCK, N.C.

By Mrs. Ellen R. Dorsett.

Skyland Institute at Blowing Rock, N.C., has during the year continually
had in mind the saying, "Children should be seen and not heard," and so
has not lifted up her voice to report her work. But the child is now six
years old, is growing in beauty and strength, and needs some attention.

The year has been one of good things. Our pupils have been of a better
class than in previous years, and better adapted to go out and teach.
Our attendance has been more regular, our tuition has been paid as a
rule, and, although epidemics have prevailed all about us, we have lived
under the banner of the ninety-first Psalm and "no evil has befallen
us."

Our closing exercises consisted of reports from our different
organizations by a representative from each; class histories, and an
industrial exhibit on Tuesday afternoon, June 2. The following morning
Rev. J.L. Murphy gave us an address on the topic, "Wanted--A Man." It
was able, interesting, and inspiring. Mr. Murphy has for several years
been president of a girls' college in Hickory, N.C., and we were
fortunate in securing his services.

We have more applications for places in our home and school next year
than we have places, and just as soon as _that debt_ is paid, the North
will hear a lusty cry from this child for _room, more room_.


       *       *       *       *       *


ENFIELD, N.C.

By Rev. T.S. Inborden.

The Joseph K. Brick Agricultural, Industrial and Normal School, located
at Enfield, N.C., celebrated its first anniversary May 29. It was a
noteworthy occasion for many who had not before visited the old
plantation under the new regime.

The exercises began at eight o'clock p.m., but as early as three o'clock
the people began to gather. They came on foot, in ox carts, wagons and
on bicycles. They were plain farmers, young teachers, politicians and
merchants. All were enthusiastic in their interest in the school. The
exercises were full of interest and the outlook for another year never
seemed brighter. Another year, God willing, we will show a great
advance.


       *       *       *       *       *


LINCOLN SCHOOL, MERIDIAN, MISS.

By Mrs. H.I. Miller.

Our school closed its doors on the night of the 26th of May. All went
away saying "It was the best commencement Lincoln has ever had." I
heartily endorse the opinion. There were seven graduates--six young men
and one young woman. There were six orations, and all were so good that
a higher institution might well be proud of them. At our Social meeting
on the morning of the 26th, we had pleasant talks and addresses, after
which the industrial work, papers on nursing and examination papers were
exhibited. There were dresses, aprons, undergarments, sets of
button-holes, quilts, skirts, cushions, specimens of darning and
patching, and various fancy articles, some of them exceedingly well
done. We also had delicate work from the kindergarten and primary rooms;
paper folding and card sewing, showing great neatness of little fingers.

Among other papers of interest were those from the general history
class. Each pupil selected some country or character for review, and so
our work extended from old China and Egypt to modern Africa. One young
man writing on the last named country was induced to give the article to
the State through the newspapers and it has been published.

Some of our young people are teaching, and others are at other work.
There are very few summer schools here now, and those opened are only
for primary grades.

The Lincoln school is reaping honors at Tougaloo University. Two
scholarships this year were won by two of our ex-graduates, and this
gives Lincoln the honor of five such prizes won in that institution.

We shall greatly rejoice when the pulpits and places of great
responsibility are filled with intelligent leaders. We cannot but feel
amused, yet distressed, at the mis-read Scriptures. One brother in his
morning lesson from the pulpit said: "Brothers, we should be of the same
mind--_one body_ and mind, for it says here, 'the twins shall be one
flesh.'" A young man came to us, and asked help in writing his sermons.
He had no Bible; I urged his purchasing one, as he could read. One day
he came and said his text was the 14th of John. I inquired the passage.
"Oh," he said, "I takes the whole chapter, and so I don' have to say
much." It surely was the best way for his audience.

Our class motto was "The Future needs us," and I trust all the class
will fully realize how much they are needed.


       *       *       *       *       *


ITEM.

There is an old colored man in Wilkes county who has never had his
membership changed from the white people's church at Independence. He
belonged to it when a slave and has held on to it. He attends services
regularly and does not intrude upon the congregation, but sits quietly
on the steps and listens to the sermon.--_Atlanta Constitution._


       *       *       *       *       *


A LESSON IN HOME BUILDING.

By a Teacher.
Andersonville, Ga.

A woman came in this evening to sell strawberries which were neatly
covered with a bit of white cloth. She looked around our sitting-room
and shook her turbaned head, saying, "I sure would be afraid to live in
this house." "Why," I asked, curious to know what fearful thing she saw
in her glance. "Oh, it's so big, and has so many rooms." Our cozy home,
so snug, with not an inch of unused room, that we call our "Bird's
Nest!" Alas for the people that do not feel at home save in a one-roomed
cabin, and do not feel the necessity of work unless they are hungry. I
long so, sometimes, for something that will make this people hungry and
thirsty for better things, that will make them dissatisfied with the
things that content them now. The longing is _sure_ to come, if we can
have patience to wait.

A woman a short distance away lives in a house whose roof lets in the
water in streams during a heavy rain. She called on us in the spring so
hoarse that she could hardly speak. A few questions brought out the
trouble, and revealed the fact that she owned a pile of lumber near by.
I asked her why they did not repair it. She thought it too old, and the
reason she gave for not building a new one was that she was waiting for
her "old man" to begin. I found that her daughter was teaching school in
the country, and had $25 already due her that she could use for the
work. I told her to have one room put up at once, and build others as
she had money. She thought a little, then said, "Tell me all about it,
and I'll do just as you say." Now the room is nearly finished (not
ceiled or plastered, for such extras are almost unknown), and a prouder
woman would be hard to find. All are not so willing to be taught, but I
rejoice over every improvement.


       *       *       *       *       *


AMONG THE INDIANS.

CLOSING EXERCISES AT SANTEE NORMAL SCHOOL.

By Miss Edith Leonard.

The last busy days of the school year are over. We have gathered the
first fruits of our work; we hope there will be a greater harvest in
years to come.

At the communion service, on June 7, three of our pupils were received
into the church. The next Thursday came the evening of declamations,
recitations, and music, for which the pupils had been preparing. During
the last four weeks it was a common thing to find a boy declaiming to an
imaginary audience in the schoolroom, or to find a girl reciting in
some secluded spot in the yard, or on the hills in the pasture. In most
schools that is nothing worthy of remark, but to us it shows that the
young people are beginning to feel that their success depends on their
own efforts.

When the evening came we had an enjoyable entertainment. The house was
decorated with the tall, graceful stems of the Solomon's Seal, and the
platform had a rug and potted plants upon it, and our two beautiful
flags draped behind it.

Among the recitations, "Betty, the Bound Girl," and "The Peril of a
Passenger Train," were well rendered. Lowell's "A Day in June" was given
with a pleasant voice and manner that fitted the poem. There was an
organ solo, an organ duet, and a sprightly little song by a quartet,
"All Among the Barley." Among the best things were part of an address by
Channing on "Distinction of Mind and Material Forms," and one by
Mitchell on "The First View of the Heavens." The thoughts were noble and
nobly expressed, and the young men delivered them with thoughtfulness
and appreciation, which made us glad, especially as these addresses were
their own choice.

Immediately after these exercises we all adjourned to the dining room
to see what the girls had done in their little missionary society. Here
was a table gay with pretty articles they had made. Among them were a
nice comfortable, some embroidered doilies, chair pillows, handkerchief
cases, and other things. Most of them were quickly sold. There was also
ice-cream and cake for sale. The girls took about seventeen dollars by
their fair, and the proceeds are to go to the A.M.A.

The next day was the last. We planned to have an exhibition of school
and industrial work during the forenoon, and parade of cadets in the
afternoon. And, in order to give the pupils a little uplift of
enthusiasm in a good cause, we arranged to have a Christian Endeavor
rally of societies from five neighboring towns, and also to invite the
members of two Sunday-schools that are bravely "lifting the gospel
banner," each in a scattered community near by, where there is no
church.

The people began to arrive about half-past ten. One party came in a
large farm wagon made gay with flags.

We hastened to take them about. In the blacksmith shop, two young men
who had been in school only a year, were making some steel nut-crackers.
A table covered with hooks, bolts, chains, towels, ice-picks, etc.,
represented the work done during the year. In the printing office, the
boys were turning the press, and printing our Indian paper. The
carpenter-shop exhibit contained some neat boxes, tables, and cabinets,
and here some small boys were at work making joints. In the cooking
school, the girls were making biscuits, coffee, and corn-bread, while
the table was covered with nice loaves of bread, cake, rolls, and
cookies, made the day before. Here, also, the girls' sewing was
displayed. There was a neat set of doll's clothing, a doll's mattress,
pillows, sheets, and pillow-cases, a number of boys' shirts ready for
use in the school, beside other clothing for the girls.

The primary schoolroom contained clay animals, weaving and sewing done
by the kindergarten class, and some neat language and number work by the
older pupils. The other schoolrooms also had illustrated language work,
examination papers, maps on paper and in sand, and a collection of
botanical specimens.

About seventy-five visitors came from neighboring towns. They enjoyed
looking at the school work, and they enjoyed their lunch under the
trees, and the marching and drilling of the boys with their wooden guns.

But the best thing in the day was the meeting in the afternoon. Our
Christian Endeavor guests, with the school and some of the agency people
and neighboring Indians, filled the chapel full. Several of the
societies had pretty banners, and it was inspiring to see them come
marching in. The meeting was just a warm-hearted Christian Endeavor
meeting. Each society responded by a verse of Scripture recited in
concert, or a song, or by the words of some member chosen to represent
them. There was also time for volunteer prayers and testimonies, and a
number of songs. We were all glad to be there--glad to belong to a great
army of Christian workers--and we believe our boys and girls will not
forget it, but that the thoughts of that hour will help to make them
strong.

After these guests went home, there yet remained the principal's
reception in the evening, where the school gathered with our Agency and
Indian friends, to talk a little while and say goodbye. There was one
delightful little surprise when Dr. Riggs called up thirteen of the
Indian girls and gave to each, as a reward for faithful, successful work
in bread-making, a copy of a cook-book to take home with her. The pupils
enjoyed all these last days, but especially the Christian Endeavor
rally, and we shall remember this year's close as our Christian Endeavor
commencement.


       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE.

The following letter was written by a young man who was converted in our
Chinese school in Salt Lake City. It is a notification to his teacher of
his arrival in China. It is interesting as a suggestion of the
far-reaching influences of our Chinese work:

     HONG KONG, China, April 5, 1896.

     DEAR FRIEND MRS. M.E. JONES:

     I have arrived here on Sunday 5th of this month, and was very fine
     trip. This ship is very swistest [sic], because it is large and
     strong.

     I throught [sic] I am going to study on my journey, but I have not
     study any at all. Because I was seasick most every day when I
     started from San Francisco to Hong Kong.

     I have always remember your kindness and never forget. I hope you
     are all well and God would bless you.

     I will write to you sometimes when I get home.

     I have been see Mr. Gee Gam and asked for Rev. Mr. Pond, and he
     said Mr. Pond did not come and so I did not see him before I got on
     ship. Goodbye,                      Yours friend,
                                                     HARRY FORNEY.
     Excuse for my writing.


       *       *       *       *       *


Jubilee Year Fund, Additional Shares.

  Mrs. J.B. BITTINGER and Miss LUCY BITTINGER, Sewickley, Pa.
  E.W. PEIRCE and H.F. GOFFE, in memory of E.W. GOFFE, Millbury, Mass.
  EAST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Ware, Mass.
  FROM A FRIEND, Santa Barbara, Cal.
  Miss MARY P. LORD, Wellesley, Mass.
  A FRIEND, New Haven, Vt.
  MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., Amherst, Mass.
  Mrs. MARY C. GATES, Amherst, Mass.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Auburndale, Mass., ad'l.
  LADIES OF FIRST CHURCH, Woburn, Mass., two shares.
  Misses M.E. and F.G. THAYER, Boston, Mass., two shares.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY, Barre, Mass.
  SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Dorchester, Mass.
  FACULTY AND STUDENTS OF MT. HOLYOKE COLLEGE, So. Hadley, Mass.
  W.H. RICHARDSON, W. Springfield, Mass.
  Two S.S. CLASSES and Mr. C.S. TOLMAN, of Rollstone Congregational
    Church, Fitchburg, Mass.
  CHURCH MEMBER, Plainville, Conn.
  Mr. and Mrs. M.W. SKINNER, in memory of Rev. AUSTIN WILLEY,
    Northfield, Minn.
  Mrs. DWIGHT R. TYLER, of First Congregational Church, Griswold, Conn.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Middletown, Conn.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Janesville, Wis.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Bozrah, Conn.
  FIRST CHURCH WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION, Akron, O.
  Mrs. HULDAH I. GAGE, Providence, R.I.
  J.L.A., Crow Agency, Mont.
  A FRIEND, Newton Highlands, Mass.
  OLD SOUTH CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Hallowell, Me.
  Mrs. P.A. CASE, Kenduskeag, Me.
  IN MEMORIAM OF Z.W., St. Johnsbury, Vt.
  The LADIES' BENEFICENT SOCIETY and the Y.L. AUXILIARY OF CENTRAL
    CHURCH, Fall River, Mass.
  Mrs. ANSON PHELPS STOKES, Lenox, Mass.
  Mrs. GEO. WESTINGHOUSE, Lenox, Mass.
  GEO. HIGGINSON, Lenox, Mass.
  WM. H. STRONG, Detroit, Mich.
  BARAK MAXWELL, Wells, Me.
  UNION SERVICE, New Britain, Conn.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL S.S., Germantown, Pa.
  CLASS OF YOUNG GIRLS, S.S., Franklin Street. CONGREGATIONAL
    CHURCH, Manchester, N.H.
  B.B. BROWN, Prospect, Conn.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, South Norwalk, Conn., three shares.
  Rev. W.H. THRALL, in memory of Mrs. W.H. THRALL, Huron, S. Dak.
  Miss M.H. MILLIARD, Manchester, Conn.
  Mrs. ANN V. BAILEY, Beverly, Mass.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Beloit, Wis., ad'l.
  Mrs. M.C. TOWN, Elgin, Ill.
  Miss CLARA I. SAGE, Guilford, Conn., two shares.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Colorado Springs, Col.
  ABBOTT ACADEMY, Andover, Mass.
  Mrs. E.B. RIPLEY, Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
  CENT. UNION OF FIRST CHURCH, Concord, N.H.
  FRIEND IN FIRST CHURCH, Concord, N.H.
  Mrs. MARY K. GANNETT, Tamworth, N.H., two shares.
  WOMAN'S CONGREGATIONAL HOME MISSIONARY UNION AUXILIARY,
    Kensington, Conn.

  Previously reported,             179
  Subscriptions reported above,     59
                                   ---
  Total number of shares reported, 238


Subscriptions for Jubilee Shares may be sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer,
Bible House, New York, or to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill.


       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


  MAINE.
  WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.
  _State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords;
  Mrs. A.T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
  Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


  NEW HAMPSHIRE.
  FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.
  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N.W. Nims, 16 Rumford St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland. Concord.


  VERMONT.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W.J. Van Patten, 386 Pearl St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. M.K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


  MASS. AND R.I.
  [1]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, 9 Massachusetts Ave., Boston, Mass.
  Secretary--Miss Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.

      [Footnote 1: While the W.H.M.A appears in this list as a State
      body for Mass. and R.I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]


  CONNECTICUT.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


  NEW YORK.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


  NEW JERSEY.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N.J. ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. A.H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. R.J. Hegeman, 32 Forest Street, Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


  PENNSYLVANIA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.W. Thomas, Lansford.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T.W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


  OHIO.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


  INDIANA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W.A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.H. Ball, Dewhurst.


  ILLINOIS.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Tamtor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.A. Field, Wilmette.


  MISSOURI.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K.L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


  IOWA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.


  MICHIGAN.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.M. Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.C. Denison, 179 Lyon St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


  WISCONSIN.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E.G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A.O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.M. Blackman, Whitewater.


  MINNESOTA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St, Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A.P. Lyon, 910 Sixth Ave. S., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


  NORTH DAKOTA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W.H. Boals, Fargo.
  Secretary--Miss Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


  SOUTH DAKOTA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C.E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. B.H. Bunt, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F.M. Wilcox, Huron.


  BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.H. Gilchrist, Hot Springs.
  Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.


  NEBRASKA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. D.B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Second Street, Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. James W. Dawes, Crete.


  KANSAS.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F.E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.C. Read, Parsons.


  COLORADO.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E.R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B.C. Valantine, Highlands.


  WYOMING.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. P.F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H.N. Smith, Rock Springs.


  MONTANA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. O.C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


  IDAHO.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. R.B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.A. Paddock, Weiser.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.L. Travis, Pocatello.


  WASHINGTON.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A.J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.C. Wheeler, 424 South K Street, Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.W. George, 620 Fourth Street, Seattle.


  OREGON.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.D. Palmer, 546 Third Street, Portland.


  CALIFORNIA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland.
  Secretary--Mrs. L.M. Howard, 911 Grove Street, Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Haven, 1329 Harrison Street, Oakland.


  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


  NEVADA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L.J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


  UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


  NEW MEXICO.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C.E. Window, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.A. McClosky, Albuquerque.


  OKLAHOMA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L.E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.S. Childs, Choctaw City.


  INDIAN TERRITORY.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurt, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R.M. Swain, Vinita.


  NORTH CAROLINA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S.S. Sevier, McLeansville.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A.E. Farrington, Oaks.


  GEORGIA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. H.B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.


  FLORIDA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.D. Brown, Interlachen.


  ALABAMA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. M.A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.S. Jackson, Montgomery.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.C. Silsby, Talladega.


  TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. G.W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Miss Mary L. Corpier, Florence, Ala.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.E. Moreland, 216 N. McNairy Street, Nashville.


  MISSISSIPPI.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C.L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Mrs. Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


  LOUISIANA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C.M. Crawford, Hammond.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. St.J. Hitchcock, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


  TEXAS.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J.M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.I. Scofield, Dallas.


       *       *       *       *       *


RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1896.



THE DANIEL HAND FUND
_For the Education of Colored People._


Income for June   ...$255.74

Previously acknowledged   ...47,307.35

---------

$47,663.09



CURRENT RECEIPTS.



MAINE, $989.63.

Alfred. Cong. Ch. ...4.72

Bar Mills. Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Belfast. First Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E.,
  by Harold T. Sibley, Treas. ...10.00

Castine. Misses Richardson and Miss Russell,
  _for Student Aid, McIntosh, Ga._ ...4.00

Cornish. Y.P.S.C.E., by Rev. J.B. Saer ...8.16

Cumberland Centre. Cong. Ch., _for Freight_, 2.50;
  Helping Hand Soc., 1, _for Student Aid, McIntosh, Ga._ ...3.50

Ellsworth, Cong. Ch., Mrs. Phelps's S.S. Class ...15.79

Fort Farfield. L.M. Soc., by Mrs. A.S. Knight,
  _Lincoln Memorial Offering_ ...6.00

Gardiner. First Cong. Ch. ...13.93

Hallowell. Old South Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Mechanic Falls. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Parsonsfield. Daniel Smith
  (50 of which _for Share Jubilee Fund_) ...56.53

Portland. "Sunbeam Club." 10;
  St. Lawrence St. Cong. Ch., S.S. Infant Class,
  5, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...15.00

Portland. "A Friend," _for Chinese Women in California_,
  by Rev. J.G. Wilson ...2.00

Portland. High St. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Andersonville, Ga._

Pownal. "A few Friends," to const. JOSEPH LORING L.M. ...47.00

South Paris. First Cong. Ch., Rally Coll. ...23.87

Turner. Cong. Ch. ...7.00

Waterford. First Cong. Ch. ...14.00

Waterville. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 37.05;
  Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., 10 ...47.05

Westbrook. King's Messengers, Bbl. C. _for Skyland Inst., N.C._

Yarmouth. "Friends," by Rev. B.P. Snow,
  _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...10.00

Maine Woman's Aid to A.M.A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas.:

Alfred ...6.50

Amherst and Aurora ...2.00

Andover ...5.00

Bangor. First Ch., 14.75;
Central. Ch., 12.50;
Hammond St., 7.75 ... 35.00

Belfast ...17.00

Bethel ...20.58

Bluehill ...3.00

Brewer. First Ch. ...18.00

Brunswick ...61.75

Buxton. "In memory of Mrs. Jane Wentworth Patten,"
  _for Mountain Work_ ...5.00

Calais ...25.00

Castine ...9.00

Deer Isle ...8.71

Dennysville ...5.00

Dennysville. Dea. P.E. Vose, 5;
  Mrs. P.E. Vose, 1 ...6.00

Dixmont ...1.00

Farmington ...15.00

East Orrington. Y.L. Mission Band ...4.15

Ellsworth ...28.10

Ellsworth Falls ...2.00

Freedom ...2.25

Hampden ...21.00

Hampden. Bbl. C., Val. 15, _for Grand View, Tenn._

Hancock. Conference Coll. ...3.13

Harrison ...1.25

Jackson ...4.00

Jonesboro ...1.65

Kenduskeag. Mrs. P.A. Case, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Kennebunk ...17.50

Lebanon ...8.50

Limerick ...10.00

Machias. Adl. ...0.50

New Gloucester ...13.00

North Ellsworth ...4.50

Norridgewock ...7.00

Orland ...8.56

Orono ...1.00

Oxford ...2.00

Rumford ...0.50

Saco. To const. MISS CARRO H. GOODALE L.M. ...56.00

Sandy Point ...6.00

Searsport. First Ch. ...25.15

Searsport. Second Ch. ...8.75

South Freeport ...62.10

South Paris. Cong. Ch. ...9.00

South Paris. Y.P.S.C.E. ...5.00

South West Harbor ...2.50

Steuben ...4.00

Sumner ...2.55

Tremont ...1.00

West Brooksville ...2.50

Woodfords. Bal. to const. MRS. CHARLES H. BLAKE L.M. ...25.40

------ 644.08



NEW HAMPSHIRE, $606.39.

Atkinson. Cong. Ch., _for debt_ ...12.00

Concord. Granite Mission Band, _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...10.00

Durham. W.M. Soc., by Miss C.E. Buzzell, Treas. ...10.00

Franklin. Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.C.E. ...4.70

Henniker. Cong. Ch. ...38.75

Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc. adl. ...1.00

Keene. First Cong. Soc., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Kingston. C.E. Soc. of Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Lisbon. Mrs. A. Betsey Taft, _for the Debt_ ...5.00

Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...22.58

Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Pembroke. "In memory of a precious Mother by her Daughters" ...35.00

Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...41.50

Winchester. Cong. Ch. ...7.55

Winchester. S.S. Class Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._ ...5.50

New Hampshire Female Cent. Inst. and Home M. Union,
by Miss Annie A. McFarland, Treas.:

Tamworth. "A Friend," _for Share Jubilee Fund_
and to const. GRACE RICHARDSON L.M. ...50.00

Tilton and Northfield. Aux. ...5.00

------   55.00

------ $358.58



ESTATE.

Manchester. Estate of Chester B. Southworth,
  by Mrs. Hattie I. Southworth, Executrix ...247.81

------ $606.39



VERMONT, $863.84.

Brattleboro. Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._ ...10.00

Cornwall. Cong. Ch. ...20.78

Hartford. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Manchester. Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.E., adl.,
  _for Knox Inst., Athens, Ga._ ...15.00

New Haven. "A Friend," _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

New Haven. Cong. Ch. ...14.47

North Pomfret. Cong. Soc. ...5.00

Pittsford. Cong. Ch. ...22.00

Randolph. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Straight U._ ...10.00

Saint Johnsbury. W.M. Union ...3.50

Waitsfield. Mrs. S.P. Prindle ...2.00

West Barnet. Y.P.S.C.W., by Marion Bole, Treas. ...7.00

West Rutland. Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Wilmington. Cong. Ch. ...4.85

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vermont,
  by Mrs. Rebecca P. Fairbanks, Treasurer:

Barre. Jun. C.E. Soc., _for Indian Schp_ ...10.00

Barton. W.H.M.S. ...15.50

Barton. Jun. C.E.S., 5;
  Children's M. Soc., adl., 52c., _for Indian Schp_ ...5.52

Barton Landing. Jun. C.E., _for Indian Schp_ ...5.00

Bellows Falls. Jun. C.E. ...10.00

Bennington, North. Y.P.S.C.E. ...5.00

Brattleboro, West. Jun. C.E. ...3.00

Brookfield. W.H.M.S. ...10.25

Burlington. First Ch. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...25.00

Burlington. First Ch. Y.L.M.S. ...6.49

Cambridgeport. W.H.M.S. ...1.00

Charleston, West. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...2.00

Coventry. W.H.M.S., _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...20.00

Enosburgh. W.H.M.S. ...7.80

Fairlee. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...20.00

Fairlee. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...3.00

Glover, West. W.H.M.S. ...11.25

Guildhall. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

Greensboro. W.H.M.S. ...6.00

Hyde Park, North. Jun. C.E., _for Indian Schp_ ...1.00

Johnson. W.H.M.S. ...14.00

Lyndon. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...3.00

McIndoe's Falls. W.H.M.S. ...5.50

Milton. W.H.M.S. ...1.00

Newbury. W.H.M.S. ...16.00

Newbury. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...5.00

Newfane. Jun. C.E.S. ...1.25

Norwich. Jun. C.E.S. ...3.64

Newbury, West. W.H.M.S. ...6.00

Orwell. Jun. C.E., _for Indian Schp_ ...7.00

Peacham. W.H.M.S., _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...15.00

Pittsford. W.H.M.S. ...40.00

Putney. Jun. C.E., _for Indian Schp_ ...2.00

Randolph. W.H.M.S. ...15.25

Rutland. W.H.M.S., _for Mountain Work_ ...25.00

Rutland, West. Jun. C.E.S., _for Indian Schp_ ...5.00

Richmond. Primary S.S. Class, _for Indian Schp_ ...3.00

Saint Albans. Jun. C.E., _for Indian Schp_ ...5.00

Saint Johnsbury. North Ch. W.H.M.S.,
by Mrs. Horace Fairbanks, _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...20.00

Saint Johnsbury. North Ch., W.H.M.S. ...74.52

Saint Johnsbury. So. Ch. Jun. C.E.S. ...5.00

Saxton's River. Ladies' Benev. Soc. ...6.00

Sheldon. W.H.M.S. ...7.00

Sheldon. Mrs. Jennison's S.S. Class, _for Indian Schp_ ...5.00

Shoreham. W.H.M.S. ...6.00

Springfield. W.H.M.S. ...15.00

Stowe. Primary S.S. Class, _for Indian Schp_ ...5.26

Waitsfield. Home Circle, _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...10.00

Wells River. Jun. C.E.S. ...10.00

Weybridge. Ladies' Aid Soc., _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...8.00

Williamstown. W.H.M.S. ...5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Finance Com. ...110.11

------ 637.21



MASSACHUSETTS, $5,526.07.

Abington. Y.P.S.C.E., First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Amesbury. Main St. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...6.68

Amesbury, B. Washington, Coll., _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...5.00

Andover. Chapel Ch. and Cong. ...80.00

Andover. Y.P.S.C.E., of South Ch.,
  _for School, Grand View, Tenn._ ...25.00

Ashburnham. M. Wetherbee ...2.00

Ashland. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...20.00

Athol. Amos Blanchard ...10.00

Athol Centre. Y.P.S.C.E., of Cong.
  Ch., _Jubilee Offering_ ...18.00

Auburndale. Cong. Ch, _for Share Jubilee
  Fund_ ...50.00

Boston, Misses M.E. and F.G.
      Thayer, _for Two Shares
      Jubilee Fund_ ...100.00

    Mrs. J.N. Fiske, 50;
      Miss E.S. Fiske, 50, _for
      Marshallville, Ga_ ...100.00

    Ladies' Aux., Old South
      Ch., _for Schp., Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._ ...75.00

    Ladies' Aux. and Young
      Ladies of Old South Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._ ...26.00

    Sab. Sch. Old South Ch.,
      _for Fisk U._ ...25.00

    Mrs. J.H. Wolcott, 25;
      Mrs. Rodgers Wolcott, 10, _for
      Hospital, Fort Yates, N.D._ ...35.00

    C.P. Hutchins ...30.00

    "A Friend," _for Debt_ ...20.00

    "X" ...5.00

  Dorchester. Second Cong.
      Ch., _for Share Jubilee
      Fund_ ...50.00

    Pilgrim Ch. ...46.13

  Jamaica Plain. Central Cong.
      Ch. ...142.11

  Roxbury, Walnut Ave. Cong.
      Ch. ...60.75

    Mrs. S.E. Parker, Bbl.C.;
      1, _for Freight to Marshallville, Ga._ ...1.00

    Mrs. L. Whitcomb, Pkg. _for
      the Home, Thomasville, Ga._

------ 715.99


Brockton. John W. Hunt ...1.00

Buckland. Cong. Ch., 22.97;
  Mrs. E.D. Bement, 5 ...27.97

Cambridgeport. Wood Memorial, Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...3.00

Chelsea. First Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E. ...10.00

Chelsea. Women Workers, Central Ch.,
  _for Fort Yates Hospital, N.D._ ...10.00

Clinton. Cong Ch. ...53.90

Danvers Center. First Cong. Ch. ...43.47

Douglass. Jun. C.E. Soc. by Myra A.
  Proctor, Supt., _for Evarts, Ky._ ...9.00

Edgartown. Cong. Ch. ...8.24

Fall River. Y.P.S.C.E., of Central
  Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...25.00

Fitchburg. Rollstone Ch., Two Classes
  in Sab. Sch., 31; C.S. Tolman, 19, _for
  Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Fitchburg. Mrs. Sidney Bishop, _for Library,
  Tougaloo U._ ...5.00

Foxboro. Tracy Y.P.S.C.E., of Bethany
  Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Framingham. "A Friend," _for Indian
  Schp._ ...17.50

Gilbertville. Women's Miss'y Soc., by
  Mrs. Susan E. Goodfield, _for Alaska M._ ...5.10

Gloucester. Sab. Sch., Trinity Ch., _for
  S.S. work, McIntosh, Ga._ ...15.00

Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. ...26.40

Groton. "A Friend," to const. MRS.
  WILLIAM S. PALMER L.M. ...100.00

Hadley. First Cong. Ch. ...5.76

Hamilton. Mrs. Enoch F. Knowlton, _for
  Alaska M._ ...2.00

Haverhill. North Ch., Bethany Ass'n.,
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Haverhill. "A Friend," _for Indian M._ ...25.00

Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch. (150 of
  which _for Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch., Neb._) ...175.00

Holyoke. "I'll Try Mission Band," of
  Second Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._ ...6.50

Holyoke. Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for Wilmington,
  N.C._ ...3.00

Housatonic. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...29.04

Housatonic. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
  Dorchester Academy, McIntosh, Ga._ ...20.00

Hudson. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Hyannis. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. ...45.00

Lawrence. South Cong. Ch. ...8.65

Lawrence. Y.L. Mission Band, _for
  Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch., Neb._ ...5.00

Lowell. High St. Cong. Ch. ...154.26

Malden. Miss Annie McDonald, Coll.,
  7.90; S. James, 2, _for Gloucester Sch.,
  Cappahosic, Va._ ...9.90

Malden. Miss M.F. Aiken, _for Share
  Jubilee Fund, in part_ ...10.00

Marlboro. Union Ch. Girls' Missionary
  Club, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold,
  N.D._ ...25.00

Maynard. Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._ ...25.00

Medway. Village Cong. Ch. (50 of which
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_) ...75.00

Melrose Highlands. Cong. Ch., _for
  Jubilee Offering_ ...10.00

Middleboro. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch. ...6.81

Millbury. "In memory of E.W. Goffe,"
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Millbury. First Cong. Ch., to const. DR.
  A.G. HUNT L.M. ...42.60

Neponset. Miss S.J. Elder, _for the Debt_ ...10.00

Newton Center. Y.P.S.C.E. ...5.00

Newton Highlands "A Friend," _for
  Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

North Amherst. F.S. Cooley, 5; Miss
  N.D. Cooley, 2; Mrs. G.S. Fisher, 6;
  Miss M.E. Harrington, 2; Mrs.
  Stevens, 1, _for Student Aid, King's
  Mountain, N.C._ ...16.00

Northampton. First Ch., 249.92; Edwards
  Ch. Benev. Soc., 226.07 ...475.99

Northampton. Mrs. F.A. Clark, 10;
  Mrs. F.A. Kneeland, 5, _for Lexington,
  Ky._ ...15.00

North Billerica. Mrs. E.R. Gould ...12.00

Northboro. Cong. Ch. (5 of which from
  Sab. Sch.) ...18.75

North Carver. Y.P.S.C.E. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Student Aid, Enfield, N.C._, 8.33;
  Cong. Ch., adl., 1. ...9.33

Northfield. Northfield Seminary Y.W.C.A.,
  15, _for Mountain Work_, and 10,
  _for Indian M._ by Augusta McGuffin,
  Treas. ...25.00

Peabody. South Cong. Ch., 100; South
  Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.C.E., 10 ...110.00

Pepperell. Cong. Ch. ...31.13

Pittsfield. South Cong. Ch. ...12.87

Plympton. Y.P.S.C.E. ...1.75

Salem. Tabernacle Ch. S.S., adl., _Lincoln
  Day Offering_ ...20.00

Scotland. Cong. Soc. ...5.25

Somerville. Highland Cong. Ch., 16.75;
  Winter Hill Cong. Ch., adl., 2 ...18.75

South Hadley. Faculty and Students of
  Mt. Holyoke College, 100, _for Indian
  Schp._, 51 _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...151.00

Southfield. Cong. Ch. ...4.00

South Framingham. Sab. Sch. Grace
  Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_ ...10.89

South Weymouth. Old South Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Springfield. South Cong. Ch., 90; North
  Cong. Ch., 67.06; Hope Ch., 27.35 ...184.41

Springfield. "King's Daughters of Ruth,"
  6; Miss F.A. Harrison, 50c., _for Gloucester
  Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...6.50

Sterling. Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., by Miss
  Mabel L. Kingsbury ...5.00

Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, 150;
Miss Adele Brewer, 2, _for Hospital, Fort Yates, N.D._ ...152.00

Stockbridge. Miss Virginia Butler,
_for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...50.00

Stoneham. "Sunshine Circle,"
by Carrie B. Worthen, _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...10.00

Wakefield. By Mrs. A.C. Braxton,
_for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...25.00

Wakefield. Cong. Ch., _for Alaska M._, by W.P. Preston, Treas. ...5.00

Ware. East Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for Share Jubilee Fund_)
to const. EVERETT HOEHLER, ETHEL CONEY, MISS ADELE COVILL,
and HATTIE G. MONCK L.M's ...316.35

Ware. "French Canadian" ...2.00

Warren. "M.A.B." ...10.00

Watertown. Ladies' Sew. Circle
of Philips Cong. Ch., _Jubilee Offering_ ...25.00

Wellesley. Cong. Ch. ...95.71

Wellesley. Miss Mary P. Lord, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Wellesley. Wellesley College, Y.W.C.A.,
_for Hospital, Fort Yates, N.D._ ...20.00

Wenham. Cong. Ch. ...13.62

Westboro. Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E., 4;
  "A Friend," _for Student Aid_,
  5, _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ ...9.00

West Newton. Second Cong. Soc. ...218.03

West Somerville. Woman's H.M. Soc., _Jubilee Offering_ ...5.00

West Medford. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...14.57

West Springfield. W.H. Richardson, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Whitman. Cong. Ch. ...37.00

Wilbraham. "A Friend" ...36.00

Williamstown. Rev. John H. Denison, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. ...25.00

Woods Holl. Cong. Ch. ...3.60

Worcester. Mrs. Abby B. Smith, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Worcester. Old South Ch., 89;
  Plymouth Cong. Ch., 40.78;
  Park Cong. Ch., 8.50 ...138.28

Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and R.I.,
  Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas.:

_For Salaries_ ...340.00

Barre. H.M. Soc., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ (in part) ...33.00

Foxboro. Ladies' Aux., _for Chinese M._ ...10.00

Roxbury. Y.P.S.C.E. of Walnut Av. Ch.,
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Roxbury. Sab. Sch Primary Dept. Immanuel Ch.,
  _for Indian M._ ...7.52

Woburn. Ladies' First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_ ...100.00

Woburn. Ladies' First Cong. Ch. ...10.00

------ 550.52



RHODE ISLAND, $109.21.

Narragansett Pier. M.H. Giddings ...3.00

Newport. Mrs. E.D.W. Thayer ...45.00

Newport. Miss Ida Madison, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...5.00

Providence. Mrs. Huldah I. Gage, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Providence. Y.P.S.C.E. North Cong. Ch. ...1.21

Woonsocket. Mrs. L.E. Taylor, Bbl. C., etc.,
_for Wilmington, N.C._
-----. "A Friend" ...5.00



CONNECTICUT, $2,044.52.

Berlin. T.M. Warren, _for Moorhead, Miss._ ...2.00

Branford. Mrs. Highmore, 10; Mrs. Dean, 1; _Jubilee Offering_ ...11.00

Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch., 1; Geo. W. Fairchild, 1 ...12.00

Bristol. G.L. Goodrich, 25;
  Mrs. C.B. Norton, 5;
  W.H. Nettleton, 5;
  "A Friend," 5;
  Mrs. M.B. Brownell, 1;
  Miss M. Jennie Atwood, 1;
  N.L. Brewster, 1 ...43.00

Chester. Cong. Ch., S.S. Class of Dea. E.C. Hungerford,
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Colchester. Cong. Ch., C.E. Soc. ...3.00

Columbia. Cong. Ch. ...34.43

Cornwall Hollow. C.E. Soc., by Clara B. Sedgwick,
  _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...3.00

Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. ...25.66

Darien. Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Thomasville, Ga._ ...10.00

East Hartford. South Cong. Ch. ...10.27

East Haven. Cong. Ch., L.H.M. Soc.,
  Pkg. Bedding _for Thomasville, Ga._

Fairfield. Cong. Ch. (75 of which _Jubilee Offering_),
  to const. J. ELTING DEVO, L.G. SMITH, MRS. HENRY S. BURR,
  and MRS. JOSEPH H. STURGES L.M's ...138.61

Farmington. Cong. Ch., Circle of the King's Daughters,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...10.00

Gilead. Cong. Ch. ...24.00

Goshen. Cong. Ch. ...35.21

Griswold. First Cong. Ch.,
Mrs. Dwight R. Tyler, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Hartford. Students' Association Hartford Seminary, 18.30;
  Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., Mrs. H.A. Stillman, 5;
  Rev. J.A.R. Rogers, 1 ...24.30

Harwinton. Cong. Ch. ...9.78

Harwinton. Mrs. Milo Watson ...5.00

Ivoryton. Mrs. A.H. Snow, _for Mountain Work_ ...20.00

Kensington. Mrs. Edward Cowles ...2.00

Litchfield. First Cong. Ch. ...72.00

Manchester. Second Cong. Ch. ...50.64

Middletown. First Ch., toward _Share Jubilee Fund_ ...27.21

Middletown. South Cong. Ch., W.W. Wilcox, _Jubilee Offering_ ...15.00

New Britain. Lucy J. Pease, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

New Britain. Sab. Sch. South Ch., _for Alaska M._ ...22.85

New Haven. Dwight Place Ch. ...113.39

New Haven. Mrs. Henry Farnam, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

New Haven. Mrs. S.C. Colburn ...1.00

New London. Sab. Sch. First Ch. of Christ,
  _for Library, Tougaloo U._ ...9.94

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. ...47.51

Norwich. "In memory of S.P.C." ...25.00

Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch. ...25.91

Putnam. Second Cong. Ch. ...27.34

Scotland. Y.P.S.C.E., by F.E. Allen ...4.00

Seymour. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Marshallville, Ga._ ...30.00

Southbury. First Cong. Ch. ...12.00

Southington. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch. ...22.16

Stamford. Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.C.E., Chas. A. Berry, Treas. ...15.48

Terryville. Mission Band, Pkg. C. _for Tougaloo, Miss._

Thomaston. First Cong. Ch. ...7.22

Thompsonville. Dennis Pease, _for Indian M., North Dakota_ ...100.00

Wallingford. Cong. Ch. ...28.50

Waterbury. Union Meeting, Second Cong. Ch.
  (50 of which _for Share Jubilee Fund_) ...62.90

Waterbury. Woman's Benevolent Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
  by Lucy H. Wilcox, Treas., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Wauregan. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ...17.00

Westville. Cong. Ch. ...12.90

Windham. Rev. Frederick Means, 5; Miss Baker, 2; Chas. Abbe, 1 ...8.00

------ $1,431.21



ESTATES.

Avon. Estate of Sarepta Andrews, by
  William H. Andrews ...50.00

Brooklyn. Estate of Mary E. Ensworth,
  by P.B. Sibley, Executor ...150.00

Jewett City. Estate of H.L. Johnson,
  by H.L. Johnson, Executor ...413.31

------ $2,044.52



NEW YORK, $1,600.63.

Binghamton. First Cong. Ch. Bible Sch.,
  _for Fisk U._ ...25.00

Brooklyn. "A Friend,"
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Brooklyn. George H. Shirley,
  _for Orange Park, Fla._ ...10.00

Brooklyn. Miss M.D. Halliday, Bbl. C.,
  _for Enfield, N.C._

Brooklyn. Mrs. Spelman, Bbl. C.,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._

Corona. Rev. W.J. Peck, Pkg. Literature
  _for Beach Institute_

East Oxford. Y.P.S.C.E., 75c.;
  Three Members of the Cent-a-Week Band for Missions,
  1.56, by Loyal I. Dodge, Ch. M.C. ...2.51

Fairport. Cong. Ch. ...17.43

Groton. S.A. Barrows ...25.00

Ithaca. Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...15.00

Lima. Wm. H. Day, 1;
  Miss C.M. Janes, 1, _Jubilee Offering_ ...2.00

Lysander. Jun. C.E. Soc., by Rev. J.L. Keedy ...2.00

Massena. Cong. Ch. ...13.10

Middletown. Marion E. Hulbert,
  _for Tougaloo U._ ...1.00

Mount Sinai. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong Ch. ...2.00

New York. "Friends" ...1,000.00

New York. Rev. M.E. Strieby, D.D.,
  _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_ ...100.00

New York. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 35;
  Forest Av. Cong. Ch., 25.85;
  Whatsoever Circle of K.D. of Forest Av.
  Cong. Ch., 10. ...70.85

New York. Mrs. Mary Billings,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._ ...35.00

New York. "The Virginia Lend-a-Hand Club,"
  _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...20.00

New York. Chas. L. Mead, _for Fisk U._ ...15.00

Paris. Cong. Ch. ...5.25

Patchogue. "A Friend" ...5.20

Perry Center, Ladies' Benevolent Soc.,
  Bbl C., and freight, 1.25, _for Tougaloo, Miss._ ...1.25

Port Chester. First Cong. Ch. ...3.20

Portland. Mr. and Mrs. J.S. Coon ...30.00

Poughkeepsie. A.E. Cleveland,
  _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...20.00

Spencerport. Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...8.00

Syracuse. Charles A. Beach,
  _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Walworth. Mrs. J.C. Cobb,
  _for Indian M._ ...5.00

Warsaw. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...15.74

Woodhaven. First Cong. Ch. ...16.60

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. J.J. Pearsall, Treas.:

  Brooklyn. Lewis Av. C.E.,
      _for Salary_, and to const.
      MISS ANNA WHITLOCK L.M. ...30.00

  New York. Broadway Tab. S.W.W. ...4.50

------ 34.50



NEW JERSEY, $190.12.

Bound Brook. Cong. Ch. ...48.99

Chatham. Stanley Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Cal. Chinese M._ ...5.00

East Orange. Trinity Cong. Ch. "Pilgrim Band,"
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...10.00

East Orange. Willing Workers,
  _for Athens Ala._ ...6.00

Elizabeth. First Cong. Ch. ...8.00

Montclair. Misses Ryerson, Bbl. C.
  _for Skyland Inst., N.C._

Upper Montclair. Christian Union Cong. Ch. ...36.67

Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch., Jun. Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...5.00

Westfield. Ministering Children's League,
  by C. Taggart, 20. _For Indian Schp._;
  15, _for Children's Missionary_ ...35.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of the N.J. Ass'n.,
  Mrs. J.H. Denison, Treas.:

    Bound Brook, N.J. Cong. Ch. W.H.M.S. ...17.00

    Washington, D.C. Mt. Pleasant Cong. Ch. Jr. C.E. Soc.,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._ ...10.00

    Philadelphia, Pa. Central Cong. Ch., W.H.M. Soc. ...8.46

------ 35.46



PENNSYLVANIA, $443.45.

Allegheny. Sidney M. Youngs ...5.00

Bryn Mawr. Stokes Smith and Other Friends,
  _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...28.00

Meadville. Park Av. Cong. Ch.
  (5.78 _Lincoln Mem. Day Offering_) ...14.63

Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch. ...338.92

Philadelphia. R.S. Jackson, 2.70;
  Miss M. Elsey, 2; F.V. Vann, 1;
  W.H. Washington, 1.20,
  _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...6.90

Sewickley. Mrs. J.B. Bittinger and
  Miss Lucy Bittinger, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00



OHIO, $1,591.67.

Cincinnati. Columbus Cong. Ch. ...7.25

Cleveland. Lake View Ch., Ladies'
  _Jubilee Offering_ ...5.50

Cleveland. Mrs. F.W. Low
  (2.50 of which _for Mountain Work_) ...10.00

Cleveland. Mrs. A.J. Smith, _for Moorhead, Miss._,
  freight, 1.80; Lake View Cong. Ch., Ladies,
  _for Jubilee Offering_, adl., 1;
  Hough Ave. Cong. Ch., Pkg. Lit., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...2.80

Conneaut. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Elyria. Cong. Ch. (1.50 of which from Boys' Mission Club) ...43.64

Gallia Co. Siloam Ch. ...2.35

Gomer. Cong. Ch., by Henry Williams, Treas. ...29.00

Marion. Mrs. Mary B. Vose,
  _for Wilmington, N.C._ ...1.00

New Lyme Station. Aaron J. Holman, deceased ...1,200.00

Painesville. Cong. Ch., S.S. Classes of
  Mr. Childs and Miss Cummings, _for Straight U._ ...6.00

Tallmadge. "Cheerful Workers," _for Indian M._ ...5.00

Toledo. Central Cong. Ch. ...9.57

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. G.B. Brown, Treas.:

    Akron. First, _for Share Jubilee Fund_
      and to const. MRS. CHARLES LYMAN L.M. ...50.00

    Akron. West, W.M.S., _for Salary_ ...4.00

    Alexis. "Willing Workers," _for Debt_ ...5.00

    Cincinnati. Vine, W.H.M.S.,
      _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Cleveland. First, W.H.M.S., 25;
  Euclid Ave. L.H.M.S., 10;
  Hough Ave. W.H.M.S., 3.25, _for Salaries_ ...38.25

Cleveland. East Mad. Ave. Jun. C.E., 3;
  Hough Ave. L.M.S., 5; _for Salaries_ ...8.00

Cuyahoga Falls. W.M.S., _for Salary_ ...3.06

Elyria. W.H.M.S., _for Salaries_ ...40.00

Lodi. W.H.M.S., _for Salary_ ...4.00

Lorain. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Salary_ ...2.00

Lyme. W.H.M.S., _for Salary_ ...3.25

Mount Vernon. Coral Workers, _for Salary_ ...5.00

Norwalk. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Salary_ ...4.00

Oberlin. First, L.A.S., _for Salary_ ...15.00

Rootstown. W.H.M.S., _for Salaries_ ...10.00

Tallmadge. Y.L.M.S., _for Salary_ ...10.00

West Williamsfield. W.H.M.S., _for Salary_ ...8.00

------ 259.56



INDIANA, $5.00.

Dunkirk. Plymouth Willing Workers,
by Jennie Moreland, _Jubilee Offering_ ...5.00



ILLINOIS, $842.23.

Abingdon. Mrs. M.C. Harris ...6.25

Blue Island. Jun. C.E. Soc., _for Student Aid, Skyland Inst._ ...4.00

Bunker Hill. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., 27;
  Cong. Ch. Y.P.S.C.E., 2.50 ...29.50

Chicago. First Cong. Ch., _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_ ...100.00

Chicago. South Cong. Ch., 34.80; Mrs. T.H. Tuthill, 1 ...35.80

Cobden. Union Cong. Ch. ...5.00

Des Plaines. Y.P.S.C.E. ...2.78

Earlville. "J.A.D." ...25.00

Elmwood. Cong. Ch. ...14.56

Evanston. First Cong. Ch. ...43.00

Geneseo. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Geneseo. Mrs. A.E. Steel ...10.00

Hamilton. Mrs. H.D. Grubb ...2.00

Hinsdale. Mrs. M.S. Holcomb ...20.00

Lawn Ridge. Cong. Ch. ...10.75

Moline. Alfred Williams, _for Orange Park, Fla._ ...25.00

Morrison. William Wallace ...5.00

Oak Park. Cong. Ch., _for Three Shares Jubilee Fund_ ...153.64

Oneida. Cong. Ch., 12.95; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 1.63 ...14.58

Ottawa. T.D. Catlin, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Ottawa. Cong. Ch., 26.59; Mrs. Ruth Bascom, 10 ...36.59

Peoria. Primary Class First Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ ...12.00

Rockford. Mrs. M.H. Penfield and Miss M.F. Penfield,
  _for Fisk U._ ...15.00

Seward. Sab. Sch., by R.S. Neely ...0.87

Sterling. Cong. Ch., 14; Mrs. M.E. McKinney, 10 ...24.00

Sycamore. First Cong. Ch, 47.04;
  Mrs. Sturtevant, 2;
  Miss S.L. West, _for Jubilee Offering_, 2 ...51.04

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Illinois, Mrs. L.A. Field, Treas.:

Chicago. California Av. W.M.S. ...4.00

Evanston. W.M.S. ...8.74

Granville. W.M.S., _Jubilee Offering_ ...13.00

Millburn. W.M.S. ...28.00

Morgan Park. W.M.S. ...9.00

Oak Park. W.M.S. ...14.20

Oneida. W.M.S. ...3.93

Ravenswood. W.M.S. ...15.00

------ 95.87



MICHIGAN, $337.75.

Adrian. Miss Julia A. Condict ...2.00

Agricultural College. R.C.K. ...1.00

Alamo. Julius Hackley ...40.00

Almond. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Almont. Gertrude O. Coddington ...2.00

Benzonia. Young People of Cong. Ch.,
  by Miss Bessie Pettitt, _for Lexington, Ky._ ...2.50

Blissfield. J.E. Soc., Box Papers _for Athens, Ala._

Bridgman. Cong. Ch. ...2.66

Coldwater. Sarah A. Dunn ...5.00

Detroit. Wood Av. Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._ ...58.47

Detroit. Bryant Walker, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...5.00

Eaton Rapids. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._ ...10.00

Frankfort. "A Friend," _for Joppa, Ala._ ...5.00

Kenton. Cong. Ch. ...3.27

Leland. Dea. John Porter and Wife, _for Debt_ ...10.00

Muskegon. Cong. Ch., Ladies, Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N.C._

Northport. William Gill ...20.00

Olivet. Y.W.C.A., _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._ ...4.00

Red Jacket. Miss'y Soc., _for Athens, Ala._ ...20.00

Trout Creek. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan,
Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.:

Chelsea. W.H.M.S., _for Salary_ ...10.20

Detroit. First Ch., W.A., _for Salary_ ...70.00

Grand Blanc. W.M.S.,
_for Student Aid, Indian Sch., Santee, Neb._ ...8.00

Leslie. First Ch., W.M.S., _for Salary_ ...0.15

Olivet. L.B.S., _for Salary_ ...10.00

------ 98.35

------ $302.75



ESTATE.

Benzonia. Estate of Dea. Amasa Waters by L.B. Judson,
Administrator ...35.00

------ $337.75



IOWA, $831.78.

Atlantic. Cong. Ch., _for Debt_ ...35.00

Avoca. Ger. Cong. Sab. Sch. ...2.00

Blencoe. C.E., by Nannie McIntyre ...1.00

Creston. Cong. Ch. L.H.M. Circle, _for Fisk U._ ...40.00

Cromwell. Woman's Miss. Soc.,
  by Edith Alvord, _for Savannah, Ga._ ...5.00

Doon. Cong. Ch. ...3.27

Dubuque. Cong. Ch., 43.17; Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., 4.13 ...47.30

Franklin. D.P. McConaughey ...1.00

Grinnell. Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E. ...1.00

Hawarden. Cong. Ch. ...20.36

Ionia. Senior C.E. Soc., 4;
Junior C.E. Soc., _for Beach Inst._ ...9.00

Iowa City. Cong. Ch. ...87.54

Mason City. Cong. Ch., _for Book Cases_, 20;
  _for Student Aid_, 4.50, _Thomasville, Ga._ ...24.50

Muscatine. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Nashua. Cong. Ch., _for Beach Inst._ ...1.50

Reinbeck. Cong. Ch. ...5.37

Shell Rock. Sab. Sch., by S.W. Remington ...1.00

Stuart. Cong. Ch. ...16.44

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Iowa,
Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.:

Charles City. L.M.S. ...3.00

Clinton. Mrs. V.H. Mullett ...1.50

Des Moines. Pilgrim Ch., W.M.S. (5 of which _for Chinese M._) ...10.00

Old Man's Creek. W.H. & F.M.S. ...1.00

Wayne. Mission Band ...5.00

------- 20.50

------- $331.78



ESTATE.

Dubuque. Estate of Dr. Benjamin McCluer, by D.E. Lyon, Executor ...500.00

------ $831.78



WISCONSIN, $616.17.

Beloit. First Cong. Ch. (of which Rev. George R. Leavitt, D.D.,
  50, and First Cong. Ch., 50, _for 2 Shares Jubilee Fund_) ...134.11

Beloit. Second Cong. Ch. ...14.32

Boscobel. Cong. Ch. ...8.50

Clinton. Cong. Ch. ...5.90

Columbus. Mrs. C.E. Chadbourn, _for Share Jubilee Fund_, 50;
  Rev. H.J. Ferris, _for Share Jubilee Fund_, 50 ...100.00

Columbus. Cong. Ch. ...41.00

Delavan. Cong. Ch. ...11.82

Fort Atkinson. Joseph F. Morrison ...2.00

Fox Lake. Cong. Ch. ...10.00

Hartford. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. MARY E. FORBES L.M. ...56.00

Hillsboro. Cong. Ch. ...2.00

Janesville. First Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Leeds Center. Cong. Ch. ...4.50

Milwaukee. Grand Ave. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...69.93

Milwaukee. Plymouth Cong. Ch., at Jubilee Memorial Service ...22.10

Milwaukee. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 34;
  Miss'y Soc of Downer and Milwaukee College, by Mabel Hopkins,
  Sec., 5.65; North Side Ch., 2.34; Hanover St. Ch., "Friend," 1 ...42.99

Prentice. Sab. Sch. Cong Ch. ...2.50

Ripon. Mrs. C.H. Upham, _for Dodge Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...10.00

Rosendale. W.H.M.S., _for Jubilee Fund_ ...5.00

Stevens Point. Children of Frame Mem. Presb. Ch.,
  _for Joppa, Ala._ ...10.00

Sumpter. Y.L.C.E., 2 Boxes Reading Matter _for Meridian, Miss._

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Wisconsin,
Mrs. C.M. Blackman, Treas.:

Beloit. First, W.H.M.U. ...1.00

Brandon. W.H.M.U., _for Mountain Work_ ...5.00

Plattville. W.H.M.U. ...0.50

Wauwatosa. W.H.M.U. ...2.00

Whitewater. Y.P.S.C.E. ...5.00

------ 13.50



MINNESOTA, $761.71.

Brainerd. C.E. Soc., by Leila P. Johnson, Pres. ...5.06

Crookston. First Cong. Ch. ...2.75

Faribault. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Skyland Inst., N.C._

Groveland. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

Lake Park. Ladies' Aid Soc., by Miss Ella E. Higby. Treas. ...5.00

Litchfield, Bbl. C. _for Meridian, Miss._

Minneapolis. Rev. and Mrs. Henry L. Chase, 100;
  "A Friend," 400, _for King's Mountain, N.C._ ...500.00

Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 39.37; Wm. H. Norris, 15 ...54.37

Minneapolis. Cong. Ch., _for Fort Yates, N.D._ ...2.15

Moorhead. Ladies' Union of First Cong. Ch., _for Woman's Work_ ...3.62

Saint Paul. Pacific Cong. Ch. ...5.97

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Minnesota, by
Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Treas.:

Minneapolis. Park, 13.08;
  Lyndale, 13.23;
  Lora Hollister, 5;
  Plymouth, 4.50 ...35.81

Minneapolis. Plymouth, 15.09; Vine, 8 ...23.09

Minneapolis. Maple Hill, Jr. C.E.S., 8;
  Beth Fay. 2.28, _for Student Aid, Warner Inst._ ...10.28

New Richland ...3.00

Northfield. Mr. and Mrs. M.W. Skinner, in Memory of
  Rev. Austin Willey, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Northfield ...40.00

Saint Paul. Plymouth C.E. Soc.,
  _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._ ...25.00

Sauk Centre ...2.11

West Dora ...0.50

------ 189.79

Less Expenses ...10.00

------ 175.79



KANSAS, $1.50.

Topeka. First Cong. Ch. ...1.50



MISSOURI, $48.44.

Cole Camp. First Cong. Ch. ...4.40

Holden. Mrs. S.E. Hawes ...2.00

Kansas City. Plymouth Cong. Ch. ...2.86

Missouri Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. K.L. Mills, Treas.:

Aurora. Cong. Ch., L.H.M.S. ...2.00

Meadville. Cong. Ch., L.H.M.S. ...1.50

Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., L.H.M.S. ...25.00

Saint Louis. Third Ch., L.H.M.S. ...4.20

Webster Groves. Cong. Ch., L.H.M.S. ...8.55

------ 41.25

Less Expenses ...2.07

------ 39.18



NEBRASKA, $44.03.

Aten. Cong. Ch. ...4.40

Beatrice. First Cong Ch., 14.71; Mrs. D.B. Hotchkiss, 10 ...24.71

Crete. F.E. Craig ...5.00

Lincoln. Cong. Ch. ...9.92



NORTH DAKOTA, $35.00.

Caledonia. Caledonia C.E., by Vic Sargeant, Treas. ...3.00

Eldridge. Cong. Ch. ...1.00

Jamestown. Cong. Ch. ...6.00

Woyansport. John Cooper ...25.00



SOUTH DAKOTA, $37.00

Oahe. Council of Indian Missionaries ...27.00

Oahe. "A Friend," _Jubilee Offering_ ...10.00



COLORADO, $3.30.

White Water. Union Cong. Ch. ...3.30



MONTANA, $55.00.

----- "J.L.A.," _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Woman's Missionary Union of Montana,
  Mrs. H.E. Jones, Treas.:
    Helena. L.M. Soc. ...5.00



WYOMING, $50.00.

Wyoming Woman's Missionary Union,
  Mrs. H.N. Smith, Treas.:

    Cheyenne. W.M. Soc.,
      by Mrs. F.H. Cutler, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00



ARKANSAS, $1.50.

Rogers. First Cong. Ch., 75c;
  C.E. of Cong. Ch., 75c ...1.50



NEW MEXICO, $1.50.

Woman's Missionary Union of New Mexico,
  by Mrs. W.A. McClaskey, Treas.:
    Albuquerque. Aux. ...1.50



CALIFORNIA, $1,431.95.

Santa Barbara. "A Friend," _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

San Francisco. Receipts of the California
  Chinese Mission, William Johnstone
  Treas. (See items below) ...1,361.45

Snelling. Stewart Steele, _for Student
  Aid, Lexington, Ky._ ...8.00

Pomona. "A Friend" ...12.50



OREGON, $5.58.

Forest Grove. First Cong. Ch. ...5.58



VIRGINIA, $826.00.

Cappahosic. The Educational Club, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...820.00

Gloucester. Mrs. C. Anderson, 1.50;
  Miss R. Scott, 1.50; N.B. Jones, 1;
  S.A. Robinson, 1, _for Gloucester Sch.,
  Cappahosic, Va._ ...5.00

King and Queen. O. Harris, _for Gloucester
  Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...1.00



MARYLAND, $2.00.

Baltimore. Mrs. P.H. Taylor, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...2.00



KENTUCKY, $29.00.

Campton. Bethel Cong. Ch., _Jubilee
  Offering_ ...5.00

Covington. Lawrence St. Welsh Cong.
  Ch. Y.P.S.C.E. ...5.00

Newport. York St. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Campton, Ky._ ...11.00

Pioneer. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

Williamsburg. Rev. Samuel Sutton ...5.00



TENNESSEE $241.95.

Bon Air. Cong. Ch. ...3.00

Knoxville. Slater School, Jubilee Bell
  Bank, by Miss Ida F. Hubbard ...16.55

Knoxville. Slater Sch. Entertainment,
  2; Miss I.F. Hubbard, _for Piano Rent_,
  5, _for Knoxville Tenn._ ...7.00

Lansing. M.W. Buxton, 50c.; Lucinda
  Buxton, 50c., Lincoln Mem. Offering ...1.00

Mont Eagle. Rev. M.J. Smith, Lincoln
  Mem. Offering ...0.50

Nashville. Miss Joanna P. Moore, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...1.00

Nashville. Union Ch., Fisk U., _for Two
  Shares Jubilee Fund_ ...100.00

Nashville. Y.M.C.A. of Fisk U. ...2.90

Pleasant Hill. Rev. W.E. Wheeler and
  wife, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ ...50.00

Pleasant Hill. Miss Emma F. Dodge,
  _for Dodge Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ ...20.00

Woman's Missionary Union of the Tennessee
  Ass'n, by Mrs. J.E. Moorland,
  Treas.:

    _For Salary_, 27.50; _for general work_,
      3; _for Jubilee Offering_, 9.50 ...40.00



GEORGIA, $12.71.

Macon. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Macon, Ga._ ...1.50

Savannah. A Worker at Beach Inst. ...10.46

Woodville. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 50c;
  Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke, 25c ...0.75



ALABAMA, $125.18.

Athens. Rally, _for Athens, Ala._ ...11.00

Athens. Mrs. Mahala Malone and Mrs.
  Hobbs, 10.85; unknown sources Bdl.
  Papers, _for Athens, Ala._ ...10.85

Joppa. Rev. and Mrs. John C. Campbell,
  13.50; Miss Hattie M. Fairchild
  and Rev. John C. Campbell, 7.18 _for
  Joppa, Ala._ ...20.68

Selma. Burrell Sch. (50 of which _for
  Share Jubilee Fund_), 53; Mrs. A.T.
  Burnell, _for Jubilee Offering_, 25; and
  bal. to const. BERNICE IMOGENE BURNELL
  L.M. ...78.00

Talladega. Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., 2.65;
  Mt. Cleveland Mission S.S., 1 ...3.65

Tuskegee. M.T. Driver, _for Gloucester
  Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ ...1.00



FLORIDA, $21.02.

Key West. Extra Cent a Day Band, 2.50;
  "Self Denial" Box, 1.50, by Rev. C.W. Frazier ...4.00

Melbourne. First Cong. Ch. ...9.27

Orange Park. Ladies, by Mrs. T.S.
  Perry, 1.75; Lincoln Memorial Day
  Offering, adl., Sab. Sch., 1 ...2.75

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Florida, by Mrs. M.D. Brown. Treas.:

    Winter Park. Mrs. Clark, _for Debt_ ...5.00



LOUISIANA, $16.82.

Hammond. Cong. Ch. ...6.82

Roseland. Union Y.P.S.C.E., by Mrs.
  T.J. Beecher, _for Debt_ ...10.00



MISSISSIPPI, $33.92.

Tougaloo. Miss Lillian Woolson, _for
  Library, Tougaloo U._ ...14.00

Tougaloo. Mrs. L.M. Sisson, 14.17; Miss
  M.P. Roberts, 4.05; Frank H. Ball,
  1.70, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._ ...19.92



TEXAS, $16.50.

Austin. Sab. Sch. Tillotson Cong. Ch.,
  _Jubilee Offering_ ...12.00

Austin. W.M. Soc., Tillotson Inst., _Jubilee
  Offering_ ...4.50

Donations ...$19,003.95

Estates ...1,396.12

------ $20,400.07



INCOME, $3,653.75.

Atterbury Endowment Fund ...101.52

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._ ...1,413.50

E.A. Brown Schp. Fund, _for
  Talladega C._ ...15.75

De Forest Fund, _for President's
  Chair, Talladega C._ ...364.06

C.B. Fisk Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...11.25

General Endowment Fund ...22.50

Graves Schp. Fund, _for Talladega
  C._ ...125.00

Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta
  U._ ...112.50

Haley Schp. Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...47.50

Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._ ...77.63

Hastings Schp. Fund, _for Atlanta
  U._ ...811.66

Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis,
  Tenn._ ...167.63

Lincoln Schp. Fund, _for Talladega
  C._ ...22.50

Luke Memorial Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...10.00

Rice Memorial Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...5.63

Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._ ...71.25

Stone Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...25.00

Theological Fund, _for Fisk U._ ...1.12

Tuthill King Fund, _for Atlanta U._ ...147.50

Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._ ...62.50

Seth Wadham's Theo. Schp. Fund ...22.50

Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._ ...9.00

------ $3,653.75



TUITION, $4,354.76.

Cappahosic, Va. Tuition ...17.75

Lexington, Ky. Tuition ...217.05

Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition ...198.85

Grand View. Tenn. Tuition ...101.00

Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition ...42.25

Memphis, Tenn. Tuition ...504.00

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition ...491.23

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition ...92.92

Blowing Rock, N.C. Tuition ...27.74

Chapel Hill, N.C. Tuition ...8.60

Enfield, N.C. Tuition ...15.80

Hillsboro, N.C. Tuition ...19.03

King's Mountain, N.C. Pub. Sch. Fund ...121.83

King's Mountain, N.C. Tuition ...30.00

Saluda, N.C. Tuition ...6.00

Troy, N.C. Tuition ...0.35

Whittier, N.C. Pub. Fund ...13.25

Whittier, N.C. Tuition ...2.58

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition ...146.05

Charleston, S.C. Tuition ...306.65

Albany, Ga. Tuition ...100.42

Andersonville, Ga. Tuition ...9.38

Atlanta, Ga. Tuition ...144.70

McIntosh, Ga. Tuition ...100.84

Marshallville, Ga. Tuition ...2.00

Marietta, Ga. Tuition ...6.00

Savannah Ga. Tuition ...157.59

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition ...56.86

Woodville, Ga. Tuition ...1.50

Athens, Ala. Tuition ...69.76

Marion, Ala. Tuition ...6.50

Mobile, Ala. Tuition ...88.05

Selma, Ala. Tuition ...102.70

Jackson, Miss. Tuition ...153.37

Meridian, Miss. Tuition ...75.80

Moorhead, Miss. Tuition ...17.75

Mound Bayou, Miss. Tuition ...132.25

Mound Bayou, Miss. Pub. Fund ...14.65

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition ...63.85

New Orleans, La. Tuition ...427.15

Helera, Ark. Tuition ...64.65

------ 4,354.76

Total for June ...$28,408.58




SUMMARY.

Donations ...137,882.73

Estates ...79,050.54

------ $216,933.27

Income ...11,051.51

Tuition ...37,220.22

Total from Oct. 1 to June 30 ...$265,205.00



FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for June ...$18.51

Previously acknowledged ...423.59

Total ...$442.10



RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,
William Johnstone, Treasurer, From March 20 to June 10, 1896.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS:

Fresno. Chinese Mon. Offs., 13.25;
  Anniversary Offs., 4.10 ...17.35

Los Angeles. Chinese Mon. Offs., 13.90;
  Anniversary Offs., 28.05 ...41.95

Marysville. Chinese Mon. Offs., 22.20;
  Anniversary Offs., 6.65 ...28.85

Oakland. Chinese Mon. Offs., 6;
  Anniversary Offs., 5 ...11.00

Oroville. Chinese Mon. Offs., 7.55;
  Anniversary, Offs. 9.70 ...17.25

Petaluma. Chinese Mon. Offs. ...6.50

Riverside. Chinese Mon Offs., 10.85;
  Anniversary Offs., 33.05 ...43.90

Sacramento. Chinese Mon. Offs. ...19.10

San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs., 11.35;
  Anniversary Offs., 34.20 ...45.55

San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs., 4.75;
  Anniversary Offs., 42.45 ...47.20

San Francisco. Central Chinese Mon. Offs., 18.10;
  West Chinese Mon. Offs., 3.10;
  Barnes Chinese Mon. Offs., 1.75;
  Bethany Ch. Anniversary Offs., 36 ...58.95

Santa Barbara. Chinese Mon. Offs., 16.25;
  Anniversary Offs., 28.85 ...45.10

Santa Cruz. Chinese Mon. Offs. ...18.75

Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs. 7.30;
  Anniversary Offs., 13.55 ...20.85

Vernondale. Anniversary Offs. ...3.55

Watsonville. Chinese Mon. Offs., 7;
  Mrs. Ellis, 2;
  Joe Queen, 2 ...11.00

------ 436.85



FROM INDIVIDUALS:

Messrs. Balfour, Guthrie & Co. ...250.00

"A Steadfast Friend" ...100.00

Charles Weiser ...50.00

John Stevenson ...30.00

Mrs. G.T. Hawley ...25.00

C.L. Merritt ...5.00

Hop Wah, by Mrs. J.T. Ford ...0.60

------ 460.60



FROM EASTERN FRIENDS:

Bangor, Me. Hon. E.R. Burpee ...100.00

Massachusetts. "S." ...224.00

Stockbridge, Mass. Miss Alice Byington, 100;
Miss Adele Brewer, 3 ...103.00

------ 427.00



FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN:

Bangor, Me. Prof. John S. Sewall's S.S. Class ...15.00

Marlboro, Mass. Miss H.J. Alexander ...1.00

Albany, N.Y. "Friends of Chinese," by Miss Janet McNaughton ...15.00

Santa Barbara, Cal. Mrs. Kern, 5; Mrs. Bacon, 1 ...6.00

------ 37.00

Total ...$1,361.45




H.W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
Bible House, N.Y.


       *       *       *       *       *







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 08, AUGUST, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.