Produced by Joshua Hutchinson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by Cornell
University Digital Collections)






The American Missionary

APRIL, 1895

VOL. XLIX

No. 4




CONTENTS

EDITORIAL.

  OUR FINANCIAL OUTLOOK--DEATH OF FREDERICK DOUGLASS,            121

  ITEMS,                                                         122

  THE PROSPERITY OF THE SOUTH,                                   123

  NOTES-BY-THE-WAY, SEC. A. F. BEARD,                            124


THE SOUTH.

  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISSISSIPPI (Illustrated),                125

  LINCOLN MEMORIAL, SPECIAL METHOD,                              133

  LINCOLN MEMORIAL DAY IN THE SOUTH,                             134

  THE LOUISIANA ASSOCIATION,                                     135

  FIELD ITEMS,                                                   136

  MISS AMY WILLIAMS,                                             137


THE INDIANS.

  COLLECTION FOR THE DEBT AT SANTEE AGENCY,                      138

  LETTER FROM AN INDIAN,                                         139


THE CHINESE.

  GLEANINGS FROM ANNUAL REPORT OF CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,    139


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  THANK-OFFERING DAY,                                            141


RECEIPTS,                                                      142

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. ALEX McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  HENRY W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER MCCARTEE.
  JAMES MITCHELL.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.

  _For Two Years._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.

  _For One Year._

  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass_.
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill_.
  Rev. W. E. C. WRIGHT, D.D., _Cong'l Rooms, Y. M. C. A. Building,
    Cleveland, Ohio_.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,"
to the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the
finances, to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work,
to the Secretary of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or Congregational
Rooms, Y. M. C. A. Building, Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars
constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. XLIX.    APRIL, 1895.    No. 4.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR FINANCIAL OUTLOOK.


Our debt is large, but we rejoice to say that during the last three
months it has been slowly diminishing. It reached its highest point
November 30--$82,425.58. December 31 it was $82,032.07; January 31,
$79,502.77; February 28, $76,431.49. The cause of this decrease varies
in the different months. Sometimes the legacies are in advance, and
sometimes the donations. The expenses have been largely reduced in all
departments.

While these figures are somewhat encouraging, yet the size of the debt
is ominous. The winter months, usually most fruitful in collections,
have passed away, and the time for the annual appropriations is near
at hand. Unless the debt can be greatly reduced, the cutting down of
the appropriations for the next year must be disastrous to this great
work. We do not lose our trust in God, nor our hope that the friends
of these ignorant and yet struggling people will not suffer the work
to be seriously hindered. We respectfully invoke pastors to secure for
us as liberal contributions as possible, and we ask individual donors
to remember the work with special gifts.




DEATH OF FREDERICK DOUGLASS.


The unexpected and sudden death of Mr. Douglass has awakened a sense
of profound sympathy never before expressed toward a person identified
with the negro race, and seldom toward one of the white race. We are
not surprised at the manifestations of profound respect and sorrow of
the colored people, and we rejoice, too, that the white race has shown
almost equal regard for his memory, by their attendance when he lay in
state in Washington, and when his body was interred in Rochester. The
press has voiced the sentiment of the nation in the full and
eulogistic notices of his life. Frederick Douglass deserved it all.

No man, perhaps, in this country has broken through so heavy a crust
of ignorance, poverty and race prejudice as was done by this boy born
on a slave plantation, stealing his education, fleeing from his slave
home and then achieving for himself a rank among the foremost men of
the nation in intelligence, eloquence and of personal influence in the
great anti-slavery struggle of this country. He has achieved honors in
the public service of the nation, and has faithfully and honorably
fulfilled every trust laid upon him.

Mr. Douglass is among the last survivors of that band of Abolitionists
that were so potent in their influence in arousing the nation to the
evils of slavery. The recent death of Theodore D. Weld, in his
ninety-first year, recalls a name now almost forgotten, but that two
generations ago indicated the foremost orator in the anti-slavery
ranks. The poet of anti-slavery, Whittier, has gone recently, and now
the most conspicuous name left of that noble band is that of Mrs.
Harriet Beecher Stowe.

The American Missionary Association has reason to congratulate itself
that its last annual meeting was made memorable by the presence of Mr.
Douglass, and its vast audience stirred most deeply by his eloquent
address. In that address he expressed his gratitude for himself and
his people for the work done by the Association in their behalf. And
in a letter subsequently addressed to the senior secretary of the
Association, he says, in speaking of that address: "I am very glad to
have been able thus publicly to record my sense of the value of the
great work of the Association in saving my people. I am a friend of
free thought and free inquiry, but I find them to be no substitute for
the work of educating the ignorant and lifting up the lowly. Time and
toil have nearly taken me from the lecture field, but I still have a
good word to say in the cause to which the American Missionary
Association is devoted."




ITEMS.


Of the twelve millions of families now in the United States, it is
said that one million cannot secure the needed work to procure the
luxuries and comforts of life. On this basis the one and a half
millions of colored families are at a special disadvantage. They have
to contend not only against the hard times, but against the immense
disadvantages of race prejudice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The appointment of Bishop Whipple, of Minnesota, to be a member of the
Board of Indian Commissioners was an appointment eminently fit to be
made. Few men in this country stand higher in their knowledge of the
Indians and their wants, or have shown a more intelligent and
self-sacrificing interest in their behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Indian Territory, occupied by what has been regarded as the
Civilized Tribes, is in a precarious position. The recent
investigation by the Committee under ex-Senator Dawes has brought out
the facts in startling distinctness. The recommendations of the
Senator are very clear and radical, but it is feared that delay in the
settlement of the question will only protract and aggravate the
difficulty.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "Missing Link" has been discovered. It was found, we are told, in
some fragments of skeletons dug up somewhere in Java. What an
attraction this will be to lead scientific doctors to neglect living
beings and wrangle over these old bones. In this country the real
"Missing Link" is that charity on the part of the white people that
recognizes the colored man as a fellow-citizen and a fellow Christian.
Let that link be found and burnished up and a good many serious
problems will be solved.




THE PROSPERITY OF THE SOUTH.


From time to time there loom up prospects of great advancement in the
Southern States. Iron and coal are found in close proximity and in
unlimited quantity. At once the boom starts and great cities spring
into existence with busy foundries and added railway facilities. But
somehow or other the boom loses its fervor and the bright hopes are
delayed. Yet the South _has_ vast resources, though they can only be
developed gradually, and as capital shall become assured that the
labor problem in the South is satisfactorily adjusted.

We are told again that cotton mills are to be transferred from the
North to the South. Hitherto cheap cottons have been the product of
these Southern cotton mills. But now the promise is that the finest
grades of cotton will be produced. Labor is cheap in the South, but
skilled labor is very scarce, and no cheaper than at the North, and to
transfer such labor from the North will be at the additional cost of
transportation.

Great efforts are made from time to time to induce immigrants to
settle in the South, and high hopes have been built on such endeavors.
But immigrants continue to go to the North and West, and do not go
South. This is not because the South is not rich in minerals, in a
productive soil and a beautiful climate. Why is it? Capital in the
hands of the whites in the South continues to crush labor in the
person of the black man under the heel of prejudice. Perhaps the
laborer from Europe may dread the same thing.

In spite of all drawbacks, the South _is_ improving, and will
continue to improve, and the process will be hastened as the white
man lays aside his race prejudice and the black man lifts himself
above it by acquiring property, intelligence and character. Whatever
helps this consummation does more for the future good of the South
than can be done in any other way.




NOTES-BY-THE-WAY.

SECRETARY A. F. BEARD.


Among places of greatest interest which I visited in my late Southern
tour one was Tougaloo University. Its location is unique, and its work
is also. In the very heart of the black belt of Mississippi, it is
sending out its light among thousands who are in darkness. It would
quite repay one who would study the problem of saving these children
of the rural districts of the black belt to go far out of his way to
visit Tougaloo. He should take time for it, to ride over its broad
acres of cultivated land, its cotton fields, its fields of sugar cane
and corn, its hay fields, all under the care of those who are being
educated. They should see its shops for iron working, for wood
working, and its varied other industries. They should see those who
work by day, diligent students at the books all the long evenings
until late. They should see the self help of all. They should go
through the grades and notice the quality of the work done and its
character, its classes in mathematics and in languages, and its work
in the physical sciences. It is a great school--Tougaloo--and if
people could see it, they would quote it more for its economy and
efficiency. Not always are efficiency and economy found pulling
equally in the same harness.

A little incident in Tougaloo interested me. A discussion of the
topic, "How can we improve our homes," called from one student these
words: "I find the negro lacks race pride. He despises his own makeup.
Who of you ever heard any negro say that he thought the general
characteristics of his race were as becoming as those of other races?
Nor are they. The Anglo-Saxon is proud of his race characteristics.
The Indian is, also, but the negro despises himself and would be
anything else than what God has made him. But how can we escape hell
if we hate ourselves because we are negroes, when this is the divine
wisdom of a just God? We may talk about improving our homes by getting
an education as much as we please, but we will never be anything until
we have a race pride and try to carry out the great plan of God who
made us and knew what is best for us. Let us be genuine negroes, pure
and good, and not desire a drop of other blood in our veins."

This seems to be the spirit of Tougaloo. Its graduates whom I have met
are manly and womanly, self-respecting and self-helping.




TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISSISSIPPI.

BY PRES. F. G. WOODWORTH, D.D.


[Illustration: MANSION.]

[Illustration: GIRLS' DORMITORY.]

The chartered schools of the American Missionary Association, though
doing an essentially similar work, are yet strongly individualized.
Tougaloo University is emphatically the black belt plantation school
of the Association, located in the country, in the midst of America's
darkest Africa, touching that by far most numerous and important class
on which the future of the negroes mainly rests--the plantation
negroes. Forming the bulk of the colored population, least tinged with
white blood, they are at once the most ignorant and the most hopeful
class. Within seven miles of Jackson, the State capital, on the
Illinois Central road, easily accessible, not only from Mississippi,
but from large regions of Louisiana and Arkansas, it draws pupils from
a wide area and sends its trained teachers and graduates to a region
still wider. Its location is healthful and one of beauty, and, removed
from town distractions and temptations, it is admirably situated for
efficient work. The school was established in the autumn of 1869, and
the early reports show a surrounding region which in its drunkenness,
fighting and iniquity, is quite in contrast with the present
condition of affairs. Five hundred acres of land were purchased and
with them a fine mansion (page 125), then not many years old, intended
for the finest plantation house of the State and built for a bride who
came not. As the illustration shows, it is a handsome structure--the
only one with any decided architectural pretensions in the place. It
served at first for school rooms and dormitory purposes, and has been
thus used during most of the life of the school. Now it contains the
offices of president and treasurer, the main library--which greatly
needs more books--music rooms, the doctor's office, teachers' rooms,
and the president's home. There are now nine large buildings for
school use, with several smaller ones. The next oldest of the large
buildings is the girls' dormitory, just south of the mansion, where is
the common dining room, with the necessary kitchen, laundry and bake
house appliances, and dormitory room for several teachers and eighty
to ninety girls.

[Illustration: BALLARD HALL.]

[Illustration: BOYS' DORMITORY, STRIEBY HALL.]

[Illustration: THE PLANTATION BARN.]

[Illustration: BIBLE HALL.]

Washington Hall, built just north of the mansion about the time of the
girls' dormitory, was burned some years ago, and now on its site
stands the Ballard Building, containing the study and recitation rooms
of the grammar and intermediate departments, which lead up to the
normal and the chapel, where all general exercises and Sabbath
services are held. One of the greatest needs of the school is a church
building, that can be specially devoted to religious purposes. There
is a grand chance for a memorial building. A little northeast of
Ballard is the boys' dormitory, Strieby Hall, erected in 1882, a
brick structure 112 x 40 feet, and three stories high, with a basement
which has a laundry and bathrooms. In this building the normal and
higher work is carried on, with a fairly good physical and chemical
laboratory and reference library, but needing great enlargement and
additional facilities. The normal work is of chief importance, for the
future of the race lies largely with the trained teachers of the
common schools. Those who have gone from Tougaloo have won golden
opinions from both races and do a work which in its scope and
missionary character multiplies greatly the influence of the
supporters of the school. Strieby has, by crowding, dormitory room for
seventy to eighty boys. A separate building for normal work is greatly
needed, one having a library, reading room, recitation room, museums
and laboratories. Just northwest of Strieby is the large barn, which,
with the picture of the cattle, will suggest the large agricultural
department of the school with its stock, garden, fruit raising, etc.
Here, too, a building is greatly needed for the farm boys and a
foreman, where a special course of instruction can be given in fitting
out good farmers. Not a few graduates and former students have been
successful in the conduct of farms and market gardens, some of them in
connection with teaching. Back of the mansion is a little and not at
all beautiful building that has been a slave pen, day nursery for
slave children; then, under the American Missionary Association, a
dormitory known as Boston Hall, then a carpentry class room, then
girls' "Industrial Cottage" and is now dignified as Bible Hall, and
houses the theological department, which was established two years
ago. This department has the beginning of a library, but needs books
and maps very greatly, and has two courses based on the English Bible,
one of two and one of four years. Though having this year but few
pupils in the regular course, it is doing very thorough work. The
evening class for outside preachers has been for some years a power
for good. A glance at the picture will convince anyone that theology
should have better quarters. Who will give them? Berkshire Cottage, of
which a picture is given, accommodates the industrial training work
of the girls. Here are classrooms for needlework and cookery, with
courses extending over four years, and which all girls in the grammar
grades are as much obliged to take as they are the English branches.
To the normal girls special instruction in dressmaking is given.
Berkshire, besides accommodating several teachers, has a kitchen,
dining and sitting room, and several bedrooms, devoted to practical
housekeeping, where, at present, four girls at a time keep house
practically for six weeks at a time, so becoming competent for
homemakers. Not far from this cottage is the Ballard shop building,
where the manual training of the boys is carried on. Here to the small
boys of the Hand school instruction in knifework is given, and to the
boys of all higher grades careful instruction, in accordance with the
best manual training methods, in wood-working, with excellent
accommodations for more than twenty boys at a time. Forging, at which
eight at a time can work, and mechanical and architectural drawing,
with tables and tools for two dozen. The outcome of this work and of
the girls' industries, teachers of which are supported by the Slater
Fund, which has done, and is doing, so grand a work, has been most
satisfactory and encouraging in the skill manifested, the increased
earning capacity imparted, the greater ability to gain and maintain
homes, and the development of character.

[Illustration: BERKSHIRE COTTAGE.]

[Illustration: BALLARD MANUAL TRAINING SHOP.]

[Illustration: CARPENTRY.]

[Illustration: FORGING.]

One other picture, the Hand Primary building, suggests the practical
work of the Normal department, for here the Normal students have
practice during the two closing years of their course, gathering
pupils from surrounding cabins.

Underneath all the work of the school is the dominating thought of the
development of Christian character. The preaching, the Sabbath school,
with its class prayer meetings directed by the Sabbath school
teachers, the religious societies, the Covenant for Christian service,
the personal influence of teachers and older pupils, all tend in that
direction with most blessed results. Upon the surrounding region
growing influence is exerted through the four Sabbath schools from two
to four miles away, in which teachers and students from the University
assist. A picture of one of the schools, McCharity, is given here.
Mention should also be made of the "Tougaloo University Addition to
Tougaloo." One hundred and twenty acres of land have been divided into
five-acre house lots, which are being sold at $100 each to former
students and those who wish to educate children at the University. In
a few years it is expected that a fine community will be there.

[Illustration: DANIEL HAND KINDERGARTEN AND PRIMARY SCHOOL.]

Around three great fundamental ideas the work of Tougaloo, with its
nearly 400 students and 23 instructors, with its theological, college
preparatory, normal, agricultural, industrial, musical, and nurse
training departments, its religious work, is grouped and carried on
with notable success. These are the development of the family and
home, leadership, and pure religious life. Who will endow a chair? Who
will endow the University, and perpetuate one's influence in a most
fruitful way? Successful as Tougaloo has been, its largest, widest
work is yet to come.




LINCOLN MEMORIAL--SPECIAL METHOD.

MRS. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA, ALA.


[Illustration: McCHARITY SUNDAY-SCHOOL MISSION.]

There has been much enthusiasm here since Sabbath morning in starting
an "Abraham Lincoln Cent Association" in order to give the _poorest_
among our people an opportunity to do something toward helping to lift
the debt of the American Missionary Association. There will be four
departments of giving, one cent per day, one per week, one per month,
and five dollars will constitute one a memorial member of the
Association. The collection from those who pay a cent a day will be
taken at the time of devotional exercise in the schools in the
morning; the cent per week every Tuesday morning, the cent per month
on the twelfth day of each month. Every quarter the treasurer will
gather the different sums and send to the American Missionary
Association treasury. The twelfth day of February each _year_ will be
a rallying day, when we trust much more will be realized. It is hoped
by those who have this plan in hand, and we are all working in unison
here in it, to extend it throughout all of our schools and churches in
the South, that the present debt of the American Missionary
Association may be brought close to their hearts, and kept there, as
the proposition is that this association shall continue until the debt
is lifted.




LINCOLN MEMORIAL DAY IN THE SOUTH.

BY REV. W. J. LARKIN.


On Lincoln's birthday most of the churches connected with the American
Missionary Association in the South took occasion to make a
contribution to it, and many gifts not large in themselves, but
representing a great deal of sacrifice, have been received by our
treasurer in New York. The pastor of our church in Marion, Alabama,
sends a contribution of over $16 from his church, which amount
represents more sacrifices than thousands of dollars would represent
from many of our more favored churches. He writes: "We had a Lincoln's
exercise on Lord's day, 10th, by the school at the church. It was a
very cold, dark night, but our offering was $16.09. You will consider
the hard times here--and they are hard, indeed, this year--we have had
intense cold now nearly two months with the mercury nearly to zero.
When ice is six inches thick in this part of Alabama it means intense
suffering for the half-clad and half-fed negroes. We add to this
$16.09, $11.26, which we have collected at our missionary prayer
meetings, making in all $27.35."

"I called on a few of the old ex-slaves for some experiences of bygone
days. Among others here is one: 'When I was a boy about twelve years
of age there were several boys together telling what we would do when
we became men. I said, "I am going to be free and keep a store, and
perhaps employ some of you boys as my clerks." Among these boys
standing there was a white boy, who, when he went home, told his
father what I had been saying. Shortly after a lady, when I was
passing her house one day called me in and said, "Steve, is that you?"
"Yes, marm." "I want to see you; I hear you have been talking some bad
talk with other boys." I said, "What is it, marm?" "You said that you
were going to be free some day. Now let me tell you, if you do not
stop talking such talk you will be hung and nobody can possibly save
you. Let me tell you, you were ordained from the foundation of the
world to be a slave; that is your destiny."' He continued, 'Although I
never employed any of those boys as clerks, yet from that white boy,
who reported my conversation, I have bought thousands of dollars'
worth of goods since. I began by selling cakes on the railway cars. I
remember down in Tennessee about the year 1852 a man came and
preached, and was said to have abolition ideas. The white people took
him and hung him. Oh! children, if I only had had the privileges you
now have! I thank God for the American Missionary Association. It took
my children and made men of them. When I was a boy a good Christian
man taught me to read a little. The white people discovered it and
said, "You stop teaching niggers," and cut off his forefinger for
teaching us to write.'"




THE LOUISIANA ASSOCIATION.

BY REV. G. W. MOORE, FIELD MISSIONARY.


The Louisiana State Association held its twenty-sixth annual meeting
with the church at Thibodeaux, February 1-4. It was one of the best
meetings in interest and attendance in the history of the association.

The reports from the churches showed a steady growth and hopeful
outlook, in spite of the hard times. These churches of Southern
Louisiana are in the black belt of the State on plantations and in
towns adjacent to the large sugar plantations. Many of the planters
have become bankrupt by the changed conditions of giving up the sugar
bounty, while the poor colored laborers have been the greatest
sufferers.

The stories of their hardships and struggles in their efforts to live
and carry forward their church work are full of pathos, heroism and
self-sacrifice. Laborers have had to take fifty cents a day and board
themselves, to keep the wolf of starvation from their door, and many
of them are unable to get work at any price.

It was a revelation to the brethren to hear the report of Rev. James
Herod, of the American Missionary Association meeting at Lowell,
Mass., and of Mr. E. H. Phillips, of the Cleveland Christian Endeavor
meeting. It was the first time these colored men had been North or
East, and had come in contact with Northern civilization. First-class
trains, hotels and Christian hospitality from "our brother in white"
were all new to them.

Mr. Herod is a graduate of Straight University, and is our pastor at
Abbeville, La. His face beamed with grateful joy as he told the story
of the meeting and the wonders of the North, and of the warm welcome
of Northern friends, while the brethren of the Association were held
spell-bound by his graphic recital. It is hard to tell which was the
happier, the speaker or the audience.

Mr. Phillips, of Morris-Brown Church, New Orleans, is a zealous
Christian Endeavor worker. The State of Louisiana was represented at
the Cleveland Christian Endeavor Convention by two colored delegates,
Mr. Phillips and Dr. Nelson. The reception these colored Endeavorers
received at Cleveland made all of our hearts glad. It was so
refreshing to see this star of hope rising in the hearts of our long
oppressed brethren, and to have them realize somewhere in the land the
meaning and sweetness of the words of our Lord, and the Christian
Endeavor motto: "One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are
brethren."

The report made by our field missionary of the Sunday-school
Convention held in London, Eng., also inspired the brethren with the
hope that the good time coming will come ere long, when they will be
measured by their worth and _work_, and not always be despised and
oppressed because of the accident of birth and condition. The Woman's
Missionary State Union, with Miss Bella Hume as president, held an
interesting meeting. They are assisting in the support of a missionary
at our Indian Mission at Santee, Neb. The Sunday-school State
Association, Rev. J. W. Whittaker, moderator, also held an inspiring
meeting. Mr. Alfred Lawless, Jr., was appointed general Sunday-school
superintendent to visit needy Sunday-schools in the State, and
especially to assist in organizing Sunday-schools on the sugar
plantations.

The neat little chapel built a year ago by the American Missionary
Association at Thibodeaux was dedicated Sunday, February 3. An
impressive and helpful sermon was preached by Rev. Prof. G. W.
Henderson, of Straight University, followed by addresses by the
pastor, Rev. J. E. Smith, Trustee Matthew Dickerson and the field
missionary.

As the train left the little town the delegates sang, "God be with you
till we meet again." The coach was curtained off, to separate the
white and colored passengers, but as this song of benediction rang out
on the train the curtain was lifted by the white passengers, and for a
season we were all one company. May the angelic song of the Nativity
of "peace on earth and good will toward men" so abound that the
curtains that separate men will be raised and its refrain of "peace
and good will" extend to our common humanity, that we may all be bound
together and united to Christ.




FIELD ITEMS.


The organization of Young People's Societies of Christian Endeavor
among the young people in the mountains is being carried on very
successfully by the missionaries and superintendents of the American
Missionary Association in that region. A recent report from one of the
superintendents gives a list of nine places at which Endeavor
Societies have been recently organized. The American Missionary
Association has been especially active in this work of spreading the
Endeavor movement among our young Highlanders of the South. The
Endeavor Society meets just their need, and furnishes opportunities
for development and growth which are greatly appreciated.

       *       *       *       *       *

Extract from a letter, Andersonville, Ga.: It is pitiful to see the
children come so regularly four or five miles to school, their feet
protruding from their broken shoes, bringing their baskets of tuition
in the way of chickens, eggs, etc., to pay their school bills. One
longs to cook up the things brought and give food to the poor children
and wrap them in warm clothing, but I know the only way to make them
self-reliant and keep them from the spirit of mendicancy is to require
them to pay.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW ORLEANS, LA.--Rev. Geo. W. Moore writes: About thirty of
the boarding students and fifty of the day students have avowed their
faith in Christ since Friday evening, when I first began the Gospel
exercises in their behalf. All of the boarders of Straight University
are now in the Christian household of faith.




MISS AMY WILLIAMS.


On Sunday, February 24, at Rochester, N. Y., another of our valued
missionaries passed on beyond the work and opportunities of this life
to her blessed reward.

Miss Amy Williams entered the service of the Association in 1868 as
missionary teacher at Augusta, Ga. The next year she was transferred
to Atlanta, Ga., where she was for many years the principal of the
Storrs School. Retiring from this principalship in 1885, she spent a
few years North, but her heart continually turned to her loved people,
and in 1893 she accepted appointment as principal of the Slater Normal
School, at Knoxville, Tenn., where her work was characterized by the
same thoroughness and ability as that at Atlanta. Finding that her
health would not permit her to return the second year, she wrote in
December: "My heart just aches to go back South. Every other work
seems insignificant."

Mrs. T. N. Chase, of Atlanta, Ga., writes as follows:

"Nearly twenty-five years ago, in the beauty of her young womanhood,
she took charge of Storrs School, shaping it through those plastic
years, and leaving the impress of her grand life upon it. At supper
table to-night I ventured to ask one of the older girls who sits
beside me if she remembered Miss Williams. How her face lighted up as
she said: "Oh yes; she gave me my first Bible." Hundreds of boys and
girls have entered the college preparatory class at Atlanta University
who, but for her, would never have gone beyond the grammar school. In
the early days, before electric cars, she often walked out here,
nearly two miles, to see how her Storrs children were getting on. One
day I wanted to walk back with her a little way, but she said: "I must
go on a mile further to the home of a poor boy who ran away and has
been sleeping in my schoolroom two nights, because his father beats
him so he does not dare to go home." That boy is now Rev. John W.
Whittaker, class of '84, and pastor of First Congregational Church,
New Orleans, La. I think of hosts of others who will rise up to call
her blessed. So, as much as I loved her, I cannot grieve for her, but
only sit and wonder how that one crown can contain all the stars that
must be circling round her brow."




The Indians.




COLLECTION FOR THE DEBT AT SANTEE AGENCY.


The response of an Indian church to the appeal for help in view of the
financial distress upon the Association, is certainly worthy of any
Christian church anywhere. In reporting their collection, Dr. A. L.
Riggs writes as follows:

"On February 10, our mission people and Pilgrim Church responded to
the call of the American Missionary Association, and made a
subscription of two hundred and sixteen dollars. This subscription
will be paid in before the first of April, and it will likely be
increased some. Of course the larger part is the gift of the
missionaries, but the Indians did well, a number contributing five
dollars apiece."

In giving an account of a service the day this large collection was
taken at this Indian church, Mr. F. B. Riggs writes:

"Two of the mission people started the pledge with twenty dollars
each. That rather startled the people, but several soon ventured ten
dollars each. Then one pledged ten dollars on condition that nine
others pledged the same. The nine were found. One Indian woman pledged
ten dollars. Several Indians put down four, five, six and seven
dollars each. We would sing and then call for pledges; speak and sing
again, and then pledges again. The committee was instructed to canvass
the matter farther immediately. The work is now going on outside. In
the meanwhile the pledges are being paid very fast, and I expect to be
able to remit to you soon. This contribution from Pilgrim Church means
much from the hearts of our members. They have gone right down to the
suffering point in this giving. The pupils in the school have done
well in helping, too. I have been astonished that many members of
America's great churches think that missionaries and people in our
mission fields are only recipients. I wonder if the good people in all
our large churches did as much to lift the debt of the American
Missionary Association on Lincoln Memorial Sabbath as did the members
of this Indian Mission Church on the prairie. If so, the debt is wiped
out."




LETTER FROM AN INDIAN.


David Tatankaota recently wrote the following letter to Miss M. C.
Collins. David is the missionary in Thunder Hawk's village, a new
mission recently opened by the American Missionary Association. Miss
Collins writes that David sent his report together with this letter
and a collection of $5.50 from the Indians in his mission:

     "January 26, 1895.

     "WINONA, MY FRIEND:

     "I will give you a letter. My children and wife we are all well.
     Every Sunday brings praying. Some are beginning to understand the
     Bible. At the second service on Sunday I ask some to pray and
     some to talk. Also at the Wednesday prayer meeting these are
     ready to respond. Chasinghorse, Flyinghorse and Whiteagle.

     "Thunderhawk is growing a little stronger (spiritually). He and
     his family are always at church. I have said enough.


     "Your friend,

     "DAVID TATANKAOTA.

     "This is written with my own hand. Amen."

Translated by Miss Collins.




The Chinese.




GLEANINGS FROM THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION FOR
THE YEAR ENDING AUGUST 31, 1894.

BY REV. W. C. POND, D.D.


This is old news. But the report has been delayed in order that the
treasurer might keep his books open till the very last offering
pledged to us in aid of the work for that year could be collected, and
thus, as much as possible be paid of the salaries which remained
unpaid at the end of the year. We had no deficit. The mission does not
run in debt. It never uses the resources of a new year to pay the
arrears of the one preceding. Consequently there was only one thing to
do when it became apparent that our resources would not be equal to
our needs, viz., to authorize our workers to cease work and close the
schools, and to say that should they continue in the work, we could
promise them only this, that we would do for them all that was
possible to us. The final result was that our workers--steadfast and
faithful--after having given their usual donations, squared accounts
in January by extra gifts amounting to $374.90.

And while we are on this matter of the finances, we will give an
abstract of the treasurer's final statement respecting current
expenses in our general work:


    I. RESOURCES:

    On hand last Report                                     $49.95
    Appropriation American Missionary Association         7,499.90
    Receipts at Treasury California Chinese Mission       4,973.80
    Transferred from Permanent Prop. Account                 24.55
    Sale of Tracts and Books                                  4.40


    II. DISBURSEMENTS:

    Salaries of Superintendent, Teachers
      and Helpers                          $8,480.25
    Rents of Mission Houses                 3,013.85
    Incidental Expenses                     1,058.50
                                            --------      --------
                                          $12,552.60    $12,552.60


In addition to this, the work for Chinese mothers and children cost us
$557.70, a little less than one-half of what we could have used with
rigid economy and good results.

The statistics of the work show twenty-one missions in which schools
have been maintained, as follows: Fourteen during the entire year,
except as recesses were taken at Chinese and American holidays; four
with but one month's vacation; two during the four months that the
fruit men have comparative leisure, and one--that at Watsonville--a
new mission which commenced work four months before the fiscal year
closed.

The total number of months of labor was 431.

The aggregate enrollment of Christian Chinese connected with our
missions, so far as reported, is 596. The number concerning whom we
may hope that they have been led to Christ during the past year is 60,
making the total number of whom this hope has been cherished, and who
have given "credible evidence of faith in Christ" from the first more
than 1,100. How many of these will appear in the church of the
first-born "clothed in white robes" it is not for human judgment to
decide. Sometimes the human, the frail, we may almost say the
_devilish_ crops out in a way to put hope and courage to a test that
is terribly severe, but never anything to compare with that which Paul
had to confront in those at Corinth, whom he nevertheless denominates
"the sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints." The Good Shepherd
knows his sheep, and those thus given to him by the Father shall
_never perish_, neither shall anyone pluck them out of his Father's
hands.

The limits of our space forbid that we follow the report into its
accounts of the year's work in each one of these missions. Two points
deserve special notice. One of these has been referred to in a
previous number of THE MISSIONARY. More attention must be
given to preaching in the street and in our schoolrooms, which make
very comfortable little chapels. The other is that many Chinese
children--native-born Americans--are growing up not only in the great
centers, but also in interior villages, and we must open the doors of
our schools to these; make such arrangements as will secure their
attendance, and so bring it about by the grace of God that they grow
up not in darkness, but under the healing beams of Him who said, "I am
the light of the world."

       *       *       *       *       *

OFFERINGS OF OUR BRETHREN.--It is not possible to segregate
their gifts to our treasury with perfect accuracy, but we are within
the truth when we place them at $1,905.40. In addition to this they
have given for the local expenses of their several Associations
$1,134.10, for Missionary Work in China $675.65, for their Worldwide
Missionary Society (through the American Board) $63.60, and for relief
to needy brethren and others $358, making an aggregate of $5,136.75 as
their offerings for the year; and this, be it understood when the
pressure of the times cannot but be felt by them, on the average, more
severely than by any others. The goods a Chinaman has to sell are
likely to be those that in hard times we dispense with. If wages are
to be reduced, the reduction begins with the Chinaman. It is no great
sin in the view of many to steer clear of paying a Chinaman. If
anybody is to be dismissed from service when economy begins it is the
Chinaman. We cannot but think that under the circumstances the
financial showing at this point is highly creditable.




Bureau of Woman's Work.




WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNIONS.

THANK-OFFERING DAY, APRIL 12.


It is heart cheering that the Women's Unions have planned for thought,
prayer and special offerings on Friday, April 12, or Easter Sunday,
the 14th, the day which, in the words of the resolution adopted by the
State organizations at their annual meeting, "commemorates Christ's
gift of Himself to the world."

Surely liberal offerings must follow sober thought and earnest prayer
for the redemption of those whom God seems to have given into our
special charge here in our own country. Our Lord Himself said, "Ye
have done it unto Me." What if it does cost self-denial? Shall we not
plan more liberally for Christ than for self?

    "How much owest thou my Lord? That is the question which the giver
    has to face. Sometimes in commercial circles a man will assign a
    debt that is owing to him to someone else out of friendship that
    he may take it when he has collected and use it for himself. Much
    in the same way, I think, the Lord Jesus has assigned a large
    portion of the debt which we owe to Him to those who are around
    us, to the unconverted at our doors, to these races among whom we
    labor. Let us see in those for whom appeal is made to us through
    this Association the representatives of Christ."

    DR. WILLIAM M. TAYLOR.


    "When men know the grace of Christ they will never feel that they
    have given Him enough. Until they know it they will never give
    _Him_ anything. They may contribute to keep up appearances so as
    to be like other people or to gain a reputation, but they will
    never give to _Him_ until they know His grace. Before men give to
    Christ they must receive from Him, and when they have received
    Christ Himself into their hearts they will be impelled to give,
    _im_pelled not _com_pelled; for the delight and the duty will
    co-exist, or rather the duty will be merged in the delight."

    DR. WILLIAM M. TAYLOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTED, to supply demands for libraries, copies of THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY for January, February, March and April, 1862, January,
1866, January, 1867, and January and August, 1875. Also, copies of The
Annual Report for 1860, 1861, 1862, 1863.




RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1895.

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

  Income for February                           $4,197.35
  Previously acknowledged                       18,322.50
                                               ----------
                                               $22,519.85
                                               ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $524,10.

  Alfred. Cong. Ch., 10.50; Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., 2.22      12.72
  Andover. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
  Auburn. Samuel J. M. Perkins                                     10.00
  Augusta. "A Friend"                                              30.00
  Bangor. Hammond St. Cong. Ch.                                   100.00
  Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch., L. M. Circle, Bbl. C.
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Boothbay Harbor. Mrs. M. Alice Beal, _for Gospel Work_            8.00
  Brewer. Jun. C. E. S., 2 boxes Christmas Gifts, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._
  Freeport. Miss G. B. Lewis                                        1.00
  Gardiner. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill
    Acad., Tenn_                                                   24.00
  Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                118.29
  Gorham. H. H. Soc., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._              20.00
  Harpswell Center. Bbl. C., by Mrs. E. R. Morse, _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Harrison, Cong. Ch.                                               3.37
  Litchfield Corners. Y. P. S. C. E., by Walter T.
    Earle, Treas.                                                   2.50
  Litchfield Corners. Bbl. C., by Mrs. D. F. Smith,
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  North Bridgton. Cong. Ch.                                         5.50
  Phippsburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    6.27
  Portland. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._            40.00
  Portland. W. M. Soc., _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._            8.00
  Portland. Second Parish Cong. Ch., Ladies' Soc., Bbl.
    C. _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Robinston. Ladies' Aid Soc., of Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding,
    Freight 1.85, _for Talladega, Ala._                             1.85
  Rockland. Woman's Aid Soc., of Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding,
    etc., Freight 2, _for Talladega, Ala._                          2.00
  Searsport. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., 5; Jun. C. E. S., 4,
    _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._                           9.00
  Wells. Barak Maxwell, 20; "A Friend," 1                          21.00
  West Cornville. Addie Bicknell                                     .50
  West Paris. Miss Mary L. Dana, "Youth's Companion"
    for one year, _for Macon, Ga._
  Woodfords. Carl Coffin, S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   2.10
  Woodfords. Bbl. C. and Bedding, _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._
  Woodfords. 2 Bbls. C., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Sec.,
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Woodfords. Bbl. C., _for Marion, Ala._
  Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. (5 of which from Mrs. E. D.
    Freeman, Memorial Miss Sophia Carleton)                        40.00

  Maine Woman's Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cumberland Center                      22.00
      Lewiston, Pine St. Ch.                 25.00
      Turner. Mrs. S. L. Bird                 1.00
      Pownal                                  5.00
                                            ------                 53.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,098.04

  Amherst. Edward D. Boylston, 100; Cong. Ch., 80; Sab. Sch.,
    Cong. Ch., 11.46                                              191.46
  Boscawen. Mrs. Mattie P. Webster, Freight, _to Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                                    1.00
  Claremont. Y. W. Soc., Bbl. C., etc., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  East Brentwood. Rev. H. H. Colburn                               10.00
  East Jaffrey. Cong. Ch., 14.50; Christian Endeavor Soc., 5.42    19.92
  Farmington. First Cong. Ch. (30 of which from Y. P. S. C. E.)
    _for Student Aid, Nat, Ala._                                   35.40
  Greenville. Cong. Ch. (of which F. W. Ely 25).                   40.00
  Jaffrey. "Lilies of the Field," by Miss L. S. Adams,
    _for Storrs Sch._                                              10.00
  Littleton. First Cong. Ch.                                       24.83
  Londonderry. Chas. S. Pillsbury                                   1.00
  Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. L.
    GOODRICH, MRS. J. B. ESTEY  and MRS. J. G. JONES L. M.'s      102.12
  Merrimac. Geo. S. Parkhurst, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     10.00
  Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 60.00
  New Castle. Willing Workers, _for Straight U._                   10.00
  Pembroke. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                    15.34
  Peterboro. Union Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.                       10.00
  South New Market. Miss H. L. Fitts, _for Student Aid,
    Gregory Inst._                                                 32.40
  Stratham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     12.00
  South New Market. Miss H. L. Fitts, _for Freight_,
    1.71 Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._      1.71
  Troy. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                            10.86
                                                                --------
                                                                 $598.04
  ESTATES.

  Lyndeboro. Estate of Jotham Hildreth, _for benevolent
    and charitable purposes of the A. M. A., among the Colored
    People of the South_, by William R. Putnam, Trustee           500.00
                                                                --------
                                                               $1,098.04


VERMONT, $388.00.

   Barnet. Sab. Sch, Cong Ch.                                       4.83
   Barre. Cong. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Williamsburg,  Ky._
   Burlington. Mary C. Wheeler, _for Straight U._                  20.00
   Cambridge. M. and C. Safford                                    15.00
   Damon's Crossing. Geo. A. Appleton                              10.00
   Dorset. Y. P. S. C. E., by Marcia K. Gray, Ch. M. C.,
     _for Student Aid, Blowing Rock. N. C._                        10.00
   Dorset. Mrs. H. M. Johnson                                       1.00
   Essex. A. A. Slater, Box and Bbl. C., _for Columbia, S. C._
   Greensboro. Cong. Ch.                                            4.20
   Jeffersonville. Second Cong. Ch. of Cambridge                    5.50
   Johnson. A. J. Grant, _for Straight U._                          5.00
   Milton. Y. P. S. C. E., Cong. Ch., _for C. E. Hall,
     McIntosh, Ga._                                                 1.85
   Montpelier. Bethany Sab. Sch., by D. S. Wheatley, Treas.        16.78
   Newfane. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     15.55
   New Haven. Cong. Ch., Y. L. Working Club, Bbl. C.,
     _for Grand View. Tenn._
   North Bennington. Cong. Ch., Ladies, Bbl. C., _for
     Grand View, Tenn._
   Rupert. Cong. Ch.                                               24.40
   Saint Johnsbury. South Cong., Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.,
     _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                           40.00
   Sheldon. Cong. Ch.                                              21.00
   Strafford. Cong. Ch., 17: Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong.
     Ch., _for Mountain Work_, 8                                   25.00
   Westford. "A Friend"                                             5.00
   Westminster. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., End-Day Off.,
     _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            5.00
   Whiting. Cong. Ch.                                               6.31
   Woodstock. W. H. M. S., 25; Mrs. Fred. Merrill, 3,
     _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._                                28.00
   _Received for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga.:_
     Barton Landing and Brownington, Bbl. C.
     Chelsea. By Mrs. C. D. Comstock, 4; Mrs.
       Sarah W. Sherman, Freight, 2.65        6.65
     Coventry. Busy Bees, Bbl. C.,
       Freight, 2.                            2.00
     Essex Junction. By Mrs. F. D. Bacon,
       Bbl. C., Freight, 2                    2.00
     North Craftsbury. Vermont H. M. S.       5.00
     Montpelier. Bethany Ch., L. M. S., 2
       Bbls C.
     Saint Johnsbury. Ladies of South Ch.,
       Box C.
     West Glover. Ladies. Bbl. B.
                                            ------                 15.65

   Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vermont, by Mrs.
     William P. Fairbanks, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
     Berlin. L. H. M. S.                      5.00
     Brattleboro West. Jun. C. E., _for
       Indian Sch'p._                         5.00
     Burlington. First Ch., W. H. M. S.      20.00
     Northfield. W. H. M. S.                  5.00
     Norwich. Sab. Sch., _for Indian Sch'p_   6.00
     Saint Johnsbury. So. Ch. W. H. M. S.,
       26.93; So. Ch. Sab. Sch., 30; Center
       Ch., W. H. M. S., 5                   61.93
     Waterbury. Jun. C. E. Soc., _for
       Indian Sch'p._                         5.00
                                            ------                107.93


MASSACHUSETTS, $8,422.71.

  Amesbury. Ladies H. M. Soc. of Main St. Ch., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                                      6.50
  Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                                         90.00
  Amherst. North Ch., 7.50; T. S. Cooley, Box S. S. Papers,
    _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._                                      7.50
  Amherst. Colored Bible Class, Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Andover. Rev. C. C. Starbuck, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     3.00
  Andover. Theo. Sem., _for Mountain Work_                          1.25
  Ashfield. Cong. Ch.                                              14.00
  Bedford. Cong. Ch.                                                9.51
  Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                                14.25
  Beverly. Wash. St. Cong Ch.                                      50.37
  Beverly Farms. A Day                                              1.00
  Billerica. Mrs. Daniel W. Hardy, Bbl. C., _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Blue Hill. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Pleasant  Hill Acad.,
    Tenn._                                                         10.00
  Blue Hill. Mrs. Lizzie A. Tucker, 30, to const. herself L. M.
    Incorrectly ack. in February number, from Blue Hill, Maine.
  Brimfield. Union Cong. Ch. Ladies, Bbl. C., _for Greenwood,
    S. C._
  Brookline. Geo. P. Davis, _for Tuition, Little Mary,
    Gregory Inst._                                                  5.00
  Buckland. "Life Member"                                           2.00
  Blanford. Miss H. M. Hinsdale, _for Student Aid,  Straight U._   50.00
  Boston. Ladies' Aux., _for Student Aid,
        Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._          75.00
      Old South Ch. Mrs. Clapp, _for Sch'p,
        Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._          40.00
      Miss E. S. Fiske, _for Marshallville,
        Ga._                                 25.00
      Whatsoever Band, _for Student Aid,
        Gregory Inst._                        6.00
      Union Ch. Y. P. Miss. Soc.              5.00
      "Girls' Refuge," _for Student Aid,
        Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._           5.00
      Perry, Mason & Co., "Youth's
        Companion," one year, _for Macon,
        Ga._
      Mrs. M. H. Hitchcock, Bbl. C. _for
        Columbia, S. C._
      Mrs. T. H. Kendall, 2 Bbls. C., etc.,
        _for Marshallville, Ga._
  Dorchester. Mrs. N. P. Livermore, 35;
      Mrs. Wm. Jenks, 8, _for Student Aid,
      Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._            43.00
    Second Cong. Ch., by B. C. Hardwick      25.00
    Rev. H. Houston, _for Student Aid_,
      5.33; Freight, 1.67; "Friends," by
      Mrs. Mary Houston, Bbl. C., _for
      Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._        7.00
  Jamaica Plain. Mrs. Cheney, _for Le Moyne
      Inst._                                 25.00
    Indian Association, by Miss Manning,
      Treas., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold,
      N. D., Out-station Work for Women_     10.00
  Roxbury. Eliot Cong. Ch.                   50.00
    "A Friend," _for Tuition, Little Mary,
      Gregory Inst._                          8.00
    L. H. M. S. Bbl. C., _for Blowing Rock,
      N. C._
                                            ------                324.00

  Brookfield. Mrs. R. B. Montague                                   5.00
  Cambridge. Henry White, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               25.00
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Coll.             19.48
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. Woman's Miss. Soc., _for
    Work Among Chinese Women in Cal._                              10.00
  Carlisle. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Saluda Sem., N.C._                25.00
  Centreville. Cong. Ch.                                            3.00
  Charlton. Cong. Ch.                                              12.97
  Chester. 2 Bbls. C., _for Meridian, Miss._
  Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                         44.50
  Cummington. Mrs. H. M. Porter, _for Mountain  Work_              10.00
  Curtisville. Y. P. S. C. E., by Minnie Ford, Treas.,
    _for Santee Indian Sch._                                       10.00
  Dalton. First Cong. Ch., to const. LILLIAN F. MITCHELL,
    CAMILLA B. PERREY, WILLIAM D. YEATS, WALTER H. SEARS
    and LILLIAN TOOLEY L. M.'s                                    165.15
  Dalton. W. M. Crane, 100; Mrs. Z. M. Crane, 100; Miss
    Clara L. Crane, 100; to const. MRS. GEORGE MAYNARD,
    MRS. M. D. PELTON, MISS LILLIAN E. SIMMONS, JAMES
    BARDIN, HERBERT R. MESSENGER and CHARLES SLATER L. M.'s       300.00
  Dalton. Mrs. Z. M. Crane 12; Mrs. Zenas Crane, 12; Mrs.
    J. B. Crane, 12; Miss Clara L. Crane, 12; and Miss Mary
    Crane, 12, _for Student Aid, Talladega, C._                    60.00
  Douglass. "A Friend," 5; "Friends," 3, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   8.00
  Dunstable. Y. P. S. C. E., "Thank Off."  5.00
  Everett. Mrs. G. W. Fitz, Bbl. C., _for Albany,  Ga._
  Fall River. Mrs. R. K. Remington, _for Wilmington, N.  C._       10.00
  Fall River. Miss Robertson, _for Indian M., Fort  Berthold,
    N. D._                                                          5.00
  Framingham. Plym. Ch.                                            45.75
  Framingham. Plym. Ch., Ladies, _for Williamsburg  Acad. Ky._     12.00
  Franklin. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C., _for Pleasant Hill,  Tenn._
  Gill. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Church,  New
    Orleans, La._                                                   6.30
  Greenfield. Mrs. Dwight R. Tyler                                 12.00
  Halifax. C. E. Day, Off., by Nellie T. Bain,  Treas.              2.65
  Hamilton. E. M. Knowlton  2.00
  Hatfield. Sab. Sch. Classes and Friends, by David  Billings,
    Treas.                                                         12.12
  Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for Theo. Student  Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  50.00
  Haverhill. ----, 25; Y. P. S. C. E., Union Cong. Ch.,  2.62      27.62
  Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for  Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                              50.00
  Hopkinton. Mrs. A. M. Crooks, _for Little Mary,  Wilmington,
     N. C._                                                        10.00
  Hyde Park. Infant S. S., of Cong. Ch., _for Student  Aid,
     Talladega C._                                                  8.00
  Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                        9.28
  Leominster. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                     40.00
  Lee. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., 19; Mrs. Kibbon, 1;
    Miss Ames, 1, _for Avery Home, Charleston, S. C._              21.00
  Lowell. John St. Sab. Sch., 4; John St. Primary S. S., 15,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            19.00
  Lowell. G. H. Candee, _for Library, Straight U._                 10.00
  Lunenburg. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00
  Marlboro Washburn C. E. Union                                     2.50
  Milton. Hon. Edward L. Pierce, 19 Vols. "Memoirs and Works
    of Charles Sumner," _for Straight U._
  Milford. Rev. W. Woodbury, Pkgs. S. S. Literature; Mrs.
    Woodbury, 2 fine Lamps for Students' Rooms, _for Grand
    View, Tenn._
  Monson. E. F. Morris, 100; Cong. Ch., 22.74                     122.74
  Montvale. Mrs. S. T. Greenough                                    5.00
  New Bedford. Y. P. S. C. E., _for A. N. and I. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._                                               5.00
  Neponset. Mrs. S. L. Winsor, _for Library, Straight U._           5.00
  Newburyport. Mrs. S. Kimball, _for Le Moyne Inst., Memphis,
    Tenn._                                                          3.00
  Newton. Mrs. George S. Trowbridge's S. S. Class, Elliot Ch.,
    _for Little Indian Girl, Santee, Neb._                          5.00
  Northampton. Miss Bates and Miss Fisk, _for Student Aid,
    Lincoln Acad., N. C._                                           4.41
  North Amherst. Ladies' M. S., Bbl. C., _for Lincoln Acad.,
    N. C._
  North Chelmsford. "A Friend"                                      5.00
  North Falmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
  North Leominster. Cong. Ch. of Christ                            13.07
  North Weymouth. Cong. Ch., "Wide Awakes," _for Indian M.,
    Fort Berthold, N. D._                                           5.00
  Oakham. Cong. Ch.                                                20.00
  Palmer. Second Cong. Ch., _for Theo. Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                            75.00
  Pittsfield. Mary A. Bissell, Copies of "American Teacher,"
    _for Talladega, Ala._
  Plymouth. Church of the Pilgrimage                               36.42
  Randolph. Miss Abbie Turner, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold,
    N. D._                                                          5.00
  Reading. "A Friend"                                               5.00
  Royalston. D. P. Foster, _for Mountain Work_                      5.00
  Salem. Y. L. M. S., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._         5.00
  Sharon. Cong. Ch. S. S. Class, _for Williamsburg Acad., Ky._     17.33
  Sharon. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Somerville. Winter Hill Cong Ch., 31.61; Franklin St. O. C.
    Sab. Sch., 10                                                  41.61
  Somerville. Prospect Hill Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for Macon,
    Ga._
  South Framingham. Grace Cong. Ch.                               170.41
  South Framingham. R. L. Day, _for Special Mountain Work._       100.00
  South Framingham. Grace Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Mountain
    Work_                                                          19.65
  South Haley Falls. "Friends"                                     10.00
  Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. SHERMAN W.
    BROWN L. M.                                                   187.32
  Spencer. Three S. S. Classes, by C. E. Green, 13; Through
    Miss Fitts, 12.50, _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._            25.50
  Springfield. Robert H. Clizbe, by Mrs. E. B. Merriam             15.00
  Springfield. King's Daughters, Circle of Ruth, _for Gloucester
    Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                                          3.00
  Springfield. By Mrs. Thompson, Bbl. C., Freight, 1.30, _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._                                            1.30
  Springfield. L. M. Soc., _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._        1.20
  Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00
  Sturbridge. Firs. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              7.36
  Turners Falls. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., 8; Mrs. Mayo's
    S. S. Class, 5.50, _for Central Church, New Orleans, La._      13.50
  Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                                             65.02
  Ware. Miss Sage, 5; Mr. Cutler, 5; Jun. Y. P. S. C. E., 5,
    _for Meridian, Miss._                                          15.00
  Warren. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid_, 8; Bbl. C., By
    Miss Ellen L. Pixley, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._     8.00
  Wellesley. "A Friend"                                            20.00
  Wellesley. Wellesley College, Indian Ass'n.                       3.00
  Westboro. Y. L. B. Soc., Evan. Cong. Ch., _for Saluda, N. C._    25.00
  Westboro. Miss Kate Harrington, _for Student Aid, A. N. and
    I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                                     10.00
  Westfield. ----, 2 Bbls C.; Mrs. O. W. Sanford, Bbl. C.,
    _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
  West Hatfield. Aid Soc., Bbl. C. _for Moorhead, Miss._
  West Medway. Second Cong. Ch., _for Evarts, Ky._, and to
    const. REV. FRED HOVEY ALLEN L. M.                             30.00
  West Medway. Third Cong. Ch.                                     30.00
  West Newton. "Pax"                                                2.00
  Weymouth. Rev. J. M. Lord. 2 Boxes Books, _for Straight U.
    Library_
  Wilbraham. Mrs. P. S. Horner                                      2.00
  Williamstown. Church of Christ, White Oaks, by Rev. W. Morse      3.00
  Williamstown. Mrs. L. D. White, Bbl. C., _for Williamsburg,
    Ky._
  Winchester. Cong. Ch, Children, _for Student Aid, Pleasant
    Hill Acad., Tenn._                                             40.00
  Whitinsville. A. F. Whitin, Books, _for Library, Talladega C._
  Worcester. Old South Ch., 100.25; Central Cong. Ch., 96.74;
    Park Cong. Ch., Ladies' Missy Soc., bal. to const. REV.
    INNAN L. WILCOX L. M. 13; A. L. Smith, 5                      214.99
  Worcester. F. D. and D. N. Dixon Memorial Fund, _for Student
    Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._                               20.00
  Hampden Benevolent Association, by George R. Bond, Treas.:
    Chicopee. First                           6.20
    North Wilbraham. Grace Union              7.80
    Palmer. Second                           15.00
    Springfield. First                       20.43
    Springfield. South                       65.60
    Westfield. Second                        56.98
    Westfield. Second Sab. Sch., _for
      Indian M._                             37.76
    ----. "A Friend"                         10.00
                                            ------                219.77

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and R. I.,
    Annie C. Bridgman, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      W. H. M. A., _for Salaries of
        Teachers._                          338.47
    Roxbury. Walnut Av. Ch., Ladies' Aux.,
      adl., to const. MISS HELEN M.
      ATWOOD L. M.                            2.94
                                            ------                341.41
                                                                --------
                                                               $3,672.71

  ESTATE.

  Walpole. Estate Mary B. Johnson, 5,000, less State
    Tax, 250, by Frederic Guild, Executor                       4,750.00
                                                                --------
                                                               $8,422.71

  CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON  OFFICE:

  South Berwick, Me. Mrs. K. B. Lewis, Bbl. Mdse., _for
    High Point, N. C._
  Billerica, Mass. H. A. King, Overcoat, _for Nat, Ala._
  Lanesville, Mass. W. L. Saunders, Pkg. Men's C., _for Nat,
    Ala._
  Westford, Mass. Mrs. A. S. Wright, Bbl. and Box C., etc.,
    _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  West Newton, Mass. Miss Alice Williston Bbl. C. _for Nat,
    Ala._


RHODE ISLAND, $90.80.

  Newport. Mrs. T. Thayer, 10; Wm. Andrews, 4.50                   14.50
  Providence. Centre Cong. Ch., 50; Ministering Children, 12,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                                62.00
  Providence. Centre Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                 10.00
  Providence. Cong. Ch., Jun. C. E. Union, _for Student Aid,
    Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._                                     3.00
  Providence. Y. P. S. C. E., North Cong. Ch.                       1.30
  Providence. Wm. H. Waite, Bbl. C., _for Thomasville, Ga._


CONNECTICUT, $2,905.19.

  Branford Cong. Ch. and Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  25.00
  Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                                     116.18
  Bristol. Miss E. J. Peck, Bbl. C., etc., _for Talladega, Ala._
  Chaplin. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. REV. EUGENE M. FRARY L. M.    20.00
  Collinsville. "Friends," _for Theo. Student Aid, Talladega C._   30.00
  Cornwall Hollow, Union End. Soc., by Mrs. Katherine M.
    Sedgwick, _for Mountain Work_                                   2.00
  Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                              97.42
  Cromwell. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Danbury. Y. P. S. C. E. of First Cong. Ch.                        6.66
  East Haddam. "A Friend"                                           5.00
  East Hampton. Dea. Samuel Skinner, 37; Mrs. Jno. Star, 5;
    E. C. Barton, 3; A. Conklin, 3; L. S. Carpenter, 2, _for
    Theo. Student Aid, Talladega C._                               50.00
  East Hartford. Miss Gilman's S. S. Class, _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               7.50
  East Hartford. S. S. Class, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._       4.00
  Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                           25.00
  Farmington. Sab Sch., First Cong. Ch., 16.56 _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._, 12.35 _for Indian M._                       28.91
  Glastonbury. "A Friend," by Rev. John Barstow, _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                          5.00
  Greenfield. C. A. Blakeman, _for Wilmington, N. C._               8.00
  Greenwich. Cong. Ch., Mrs. Geo. P. Sheldon, 5; Miriam F. and
    Helen A. Choate, by Rev. W. Choate, D.D., 5; Miss Agnes W.
    Hubbard, 5                                                     15.00
  Guilford. Miss Seward, Bbl. C. and Literature, _for Storrs
    Sch._
  Guilford. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Hartford. Second Ch. of Christ                                  100.00
  Hartford. Mrs. W. P. Williams _for Industrial Work, Fisk U._     15.00
  Hartford. I. J. Steane, _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._      10.00
  Hartford. Fourth Cong. Ch., Ladies' Aid Soc., Bbl. C., Freight
    paid; South Ch. Sewing Soc., Box C., _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Harwinton. Cong. Ch., 10.72; Mrs. Milo Watson, 5                 15.72
  Lebanon. First Cong. Ch., 52.16, to const. LUTHER H. RANDALL
    L. M.; C. E. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., 5                        57.16
  Littleton. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                      18.00
  Lyme. L. M. S., Bbl. C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
  Mansfield Centre. Mrs. L. M. Swift, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   2.00
  Middletown. First Ch.                                            27.40
  Millington. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
  Montville Center. C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                         4.00
  New Britain. First Ch. of Christ, "A Friend," to const. MISS
    JENNIE M. BURNHAM L. M.                                        30.00
  New Britain. Cong. Ch., Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. C., _for
    Grand View, Tenn._
  New Canaan. King's Daughters, Box C., _for Williamsburg. Ky._
  New Canaan. Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Grand View, Tenn._
  New Hartford. Ladies' Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for
    Talladega Ala._
  New Haven. Edwin B. Bowditch, 15; Samuel A. Stevens, 5, _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                                     20.00
  New Haven. United Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  10.00
  New London. Mrs. B. P. McEwen                                    10.00
  Newtown. Cong. Ch.                                                6.20
  Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                         30.48
  Norwalk. Cong. Ch., King's Daughters, 2 Bbls. C., _for Grand
    View, Tenn._
  North Woodstock. Cong. Ch, Sab. School, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  16.00
  Norwich. Mrs. Lucy A. Forbes S. S. Class, Second Cong. Ch.,
    _for Columbia, S. C._                                           4.00
  Norwich. L. H. M. S, Greeneville Ch., Freight, 2.30, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                  2.30
  Norwich. Y. P. S. C. E. of Park Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Plainfield. Y. P. S. C. E., by Albert Phillips. Sec.              5.54
  Plainville. "A Friend"                                            1.00
  Pomfret. Cong. S. S., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 25.00
  Prospect. B. B. Brown                                            20.00
  Putnam. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                3.00
  Salisbury. S. S. Class, Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._        3.00
  Salisbury. S. S. Class, Mrs. M. Clark, Bbl. C., _for
    Thomasville, Ga._
  Somers. "A Friend," _for Little Mary, Wilmington, N. C._          1.00
  Somersville. Cong. Ch.                                            9.57
  Sound Beach. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Talladega C._, 6; Opportunity Seekers of Pilgram Cong.
    Ch., 1.30                                                       7.30
  South Glastonbury. Sab Sch., Cong. Ch.                            6.56
  Southport, Miss Eliza A. Bulkley and Miss Georgie A. Bulkley     80.00
  Stamford. First Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. C.. _for
    Grand View, Tenn._
  Stratford. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_             10.00
  Suffield. Mr. and Mrs. A. R. Pierce, _for Meridian, Miss._       40.00
  Suffield. ----, _for Student Aid, Skyland Ins., Blowing Rock,
    N. C._                                                         10.00
  Suffield. First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_                    6.23
  Taftville. Cong. Ch.                                             10.78
  Talcottville. Y. P. S. C. E., Cong. Ch.                          10.00
  Terryville. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._           33.25
  Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                                       12.20
  Thomson. Cong. Ch., Ladies' Soc., Bbl., C., _for Grand View,
    Tenn._
  Torrington. Two Sab. Sch. Classes, by Mrs. Burr Lyon, _for
    Indian Sch'p, Santee, Neb._                                    17.00
  Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      6.57
  Wapping. Sab. Sch., Second Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  15.00
  Waterbury. Infant Class, Sab. Sch., Second Cong. Ch., 10,
    _for Colored Children_; 10 _for Indian Children's Sch._        20.00
  Watertown. Alert Boys' Class, of Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
    M., Fort Berthold, N. D._                                       3.00
  Watertown. Cong. Ch., Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. C., Freight
    paid, _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Westchester. "Christian Bees." Freight, _for A. G. Sch.,
    Moorhead, Miss._                                                1.31
  Westminster. Cong. Ch.                                            3.00
  West Torrington. Ladies' Miss. Circle, 4.25, _for A. I. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._, and 4.25, _for Grand View Acad., Tenn._      8.50
  West Winsted. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                        10.00
  Winthrop. "A Friend"                                              3.00
  ----. "Friends," _for Theo. Student Aid, Talladega, C._          43.00

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn. Mrs. W. W.
    Jacobs, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Bridgeport. Ladies' Union, Park St.
        Ch. (15 of which _for Student Aid,
        Fisk U._), 30, to const. MRS. LOUISA
        LINCOLN L. M.; Y. P. S. C. E.,
        Park St. Ch., 6                      36.00
      Fairfield. Miss E. A. Lyon              5.20
      Hartford. First Ch., Prim. Dept. of
        Sab. Sch.                             5.00
      Poquonock. Aux.                        30.00
      Torringford. L. H. M. S.                5.00
      Wallingford. Cong. Ch., L. B. S.       25.00
      West Winsted. Second Ch., Mrs. Henry
        Gay                                  23.00
                                            ------                129.20
                                                                --------
                                                               $1,469.19

  ESTATES.

  Cornwall. Estate of Silas C. Beers                              680.35
  Groton. Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt                           119.10
  New Haven. Estate Lorinda M. Hall, by A. M. Blakesley,
    Executor                                                      636.55
                                                                --------
                                                               $2,905.19


NEW YORK, $6,259.18.

  Albany. "A Friend"                                               35.00
  Albany. W. H. M. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Box Bedding, etc.,
    _for Talladega, Ala._
  Angola. Miss A. H. Ames, _for Chinese M._                         5.00
  Batavia. F. E. Rice, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._           10.00
  Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch.                                         22.00
  Brooklyn. Bethany Sab. Sch., Prim. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Williamsburg Acad., Ky._                                        4.00
  Brooklyn. W. H. M. Soc. of Pilgrim Ch., Box Bedding, Freight,
    1.41, _for Talladega, Ala._                                     1.41
  Brooklyn. Ladies' Miss. Soc., T. T. Circle of King's Daughters,
    Bundle Table Covers, _for Talladega, Ala._
  Brooklyn. Violet A. Johnson, _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._     1.00
  Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._
  Buffalo. People's Cong. Ch., Box Bedding and Towels, _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Canandaigua. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Box Bedding and Towels,
    _for Talladega, Ala._
  Cazenovia. Ladies' Christian Assn., _for Black Mt. Acad., Ky._   35.00
  Clayton. Church Society, Box Bedding and Towels, Freight 1,
    _for Talladega, Ala._                                           1.00
  Clifton Springs. Ned and Roy Merritt, by Rev. C. P. W. Merritt    5.00
  Corona. Rev. W. J. Peck, Freight _to Savannah, Ga._               1.00
  Derby. Birthday Box Offering, by Mrs. Fanny C. Squier             5.00
  Eagle Harbor. M. P. Lyman                                          .50
  Ellington. Cong Ch., W. H. M. S., Mrs. H. B. Rice, _for Woman's
    Work_                                                           5.00
  Elmira. Glines Miss. Soc., Box C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Flushing. Cong. Ch.                                              26.69
  Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                              32.00
  Himrods. Mrs. Helen B. Ayres                                      5.00
  Ithaca. Rev. O. B. Hitchcock                                     10.00
  Ithaca. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding, etc., Freight
    2, _for Talladega, Ala._                                        2.00
  Jamesport. Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  LeRoy. Mrs. Margaret McEwen, 5; "A Friend to the Cause," 5;
    Mrs. Margaret McEwen, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ 3             13.00
  LeRoy. W. H. M. S. of Presb. Ch., Bbl. C., Freight 1, _for
    Fisk U._                                                        1.00
  Little Valley. W. H. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bedding, _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Lockport. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Box Bedding, etc., _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Lysander. Y. P. S. C. E., Cong. Ch.                               5.75
  Middletown. W. H. M. S. of Cong. Ch., Box Bedding and Towels,
    _for Talladega, Ala._
  Morristown. First Cong. Ch.                                       8.63
  Mount Morris. Sab. Sch. Presb. Ch., _for A. G. Sch.,
    Moorhead, Miss._                                               10.75
  Mount Vernon. Mrs. L. F. Buell, 2 Bbls. C., etc., _for
    Columbia, S. C._
  Newburg. W. M. Circle, Bbl. C., _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._
  New York. W. E. Dodge, Educational Fund, 250; Bleeker Van
    Wagenen, 50, _for Student Aid, Talladega, Ala._               300.00
  New York. Broadway Tab. Ch., "A Friend," Stamford, Conn.
    (25 of which _for Thomasville, Ga._)                           50.00
  New York. Miss D. E. Emerson, to const. MRS. A. ELIZABETH
    DAVENPORT L. M., _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._             35.00
  New York. Broadway Tab. Ch., C. E. Soc., _for C. E. Hall,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                  8.40
  New York. C. T. Dillingham & Co., Harper Bros., Fords, Howard
    & Hulbert, A. S. Barnes & Co., Books for Library; Ginn & Co.,
    Books and Maps, _for Talladega C._
  New York. Mrs. A. C. Hickok, Box Papers, etc., _for Greenwood,
    S. C._
  New York. American Bible Soc., Grant of Scriptures. Val. 205.
  New York. Forest Av., Morrisania, Cong. Ch., C. E. Soc., 25.
    Incorrectly ack. in March number from Fourth Av., Morrisania.
  Norwood. Miss. Soc., Box Bedding, etc., _for Talladega, Ala._
  Ogdensburg. First Cong. Ch.                                      13.10
  Ogdensburg. "Home Land Circle" of Cong. Ch., Box Aprons and
    Towels, _for Talladega, Ala._
  Orient. Cong. Ch.                                                12.38
  Owego. First Cong. Ch.                                           10.00
  Owego. Ladies' Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Paris. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.00
  Philadelphia. Cong. Ch.                                           3.75
  Philadelphia. Bbl. C., by Mrs. D. H. Scofield, _for Blowing
    Rock, N. C._
  Pleasantville. G. L. Perry, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold,
    N. D._                                                          2.00
  Port Leyden. Junior C. E. Soc., Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_    1.00
  Phoenix. Ladies' Miss. Soc., Box Bedding and Sundries, Freight
    1.39, _for Talladega, Ala._                                     1.39
  Phoenix. Mrs. Carter and S. S. Class, S. S. Papers, _for
    Marion, Ala._
  River Head. Bbl. C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Rochester. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                    23.75
  Rochester. Mrs. E. M. Sayne, Bbl., Books, etc., Freight Pd.,
    _for Talladega, Ala._
  Rushville. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., Freight 1, _for Greenwood,
    S. C._                                                          1.00
  Saratoga. G. F. Harvey. Bbl. and Box Hardware, etc., _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Schenectady. Ladies' Miss. Soc., Cong. Ch., _for Evarts, Ky._    25.00
  Schenectady. Ladies' Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Box and Bbl.
    Bedding, etc., _for Talladega, Ala._
  Seneca Falls. W. H. M. S. of Cong. Ch., Box Bedding, _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Sherburne. Mrs. C. S. Gorton, 25, _for Cooking School_; "Little
    Lights," 10, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._ 35.00
  Tarrytown. Mrs. Elbert B. Monroe (10 of which _for Little Mary,
    Wilmington, N. C._)                                           110.00
  Utica. D. H. Williams                                             5.00
  Walton. Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_          17.18
  Walton. Ladies' Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding, _for
    Talladega, Ala._
  Walworth. Mrs. J. C. Cobb                                         5.00
  Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
  West Winfield. George C. Wadell                                   5.00
  Woodhaven. Mrs. Catharine McNicol, 5; Woman's Miss. Soc. of
    Cong. Ch., 5                                                   10.00
  Woodville. W. H. M. S., Box Bedding, _for Talladega, Ala._
  Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, _for Indian M._                  5.00
  ----. "Friends"                                                  10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. Y., by Mrs. J. J.
    Pearsall, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Albany. Home Circle                     5.00
      Bristol Center. H. M. S.                5.50
      Corning.                               17.00
      Hancock. M. B.                          5.00
      Homer. Miss Ellen Phillips              1.00
      New Haven. Willing Workers             10.00
      New York. Broadway Tab. Ch., Soc. for
        Woman's Work                        250.00
      New York. Silver Circle, Mrs. H. S.
        Caswell                               5.00
                                            ------                298.50
                                                                --------
                                                               $1,259.18

  ESTATE.

  Warsaw. Estate of Silas B. Sturdevant, Memorial Milton
    Whipple, late of Riga, N. Y., by Mrs. Louise A.
    Sturdevant, Executrix                                       5,000.00
                                                                --------
                                                               $6,259.18


NEW JERSEY, $119.76.

  Bridgeton. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Lincoln Acad., N. C._     7.50
  East Orange. Mrs. Lucy H. Everest                                 5.00
  Glen Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                            60.66
  Plainfield. Trinity Ref. Ch., by Miss Mabel A. Woodruff, Bbl.
    C. and Toys, _for Selma, Ala._
  Westfield. Ladies' Benev. Assn., Bbl. C., _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Woodbridge. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                           6.60

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of the N. J. Assn., by Mrs.
    J. H. Denison, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Paterson Helping Hand Soc. of Auburn
        St. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
        Santee Indian Sch._                  40.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $41.15.

  Allegheny City. Mrs. Claflin, _for Le Moyne Inst., Memphis,
    Tenn._                                                          3.50
  Cambridgeboro. Cong. Ch.                                          6.15
  Germantown. Mrs. E. B. Stork, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            5.00
  Lander. First Cong. Ch.                                           2.50
  Le Raysville. Cong. Ch.                                           4.00
  Ogontz, Box C., by Miss M. J. Gates, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Philadelphia. Rebecca White                                      20.00
  West Mill Creek. Presb. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. Papers,
    _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._


OHIO, $458.29.

  Brecksville. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                          7.67
  Burton. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               12.24
  Claridon. Cong. Ch. S. S. Class, _for Student Aid, Pleasant
    Hill Acad., Tenn._                                             16.00
  Cleveland. Lake View Cong. Ch.                                    7.50
  Cleveland. Mrs. L. V. Tolvert, _for Student Aid, Albany, Ga._     1.00
  Columbus. Plymouth Ch.                                           15.60
  Cuyahoga Falls. J. L. Longshore                                   2.50
  Hudson. Cong. Ch. L. B. Soc., Bbl. C., Mrs. C. S. Drake,
    Freight 1.40, _for Macon, Ga._                                  1.40
  Huntsburg. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._             5.00
  Monroe. First Cong. Ch.                                           2.45
  Newton Falls. Cong. Ch.                                           7.86
  North Fairfield. Cong. Ch. Ladies, _for Student Aid, Pleasant
    Hill Acad., Tenn._                                              8.00
  Norwalk. Cong. Ch.                                                8.23
  Oberlin. Sab. Sch., First Ch., 16; Mrs. E. B. Clark, 10          26.00
  Oberlin. Chauncey Pond, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._         5.00
  Painesville. Junior Soc. of C. E., First Cong. Ch., _for
    Indian M._                                                      1.00
  Portsmouth. J. Q. Weaver, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            1.00
  Saybrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     14.48
  South Newbury. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._         2.76
  South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer                                     5.00
  Sylvania. Cong. Ch.                                               4.50
  Wakeman. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
  Walnut Hills. Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._                 15.00
  West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                           7.10
  Willoughby. F. A. Page                                            5.00
  Youngstown. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. G. B. Brown,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Coolville. Mrs. M. B. Bartlett        200.00
      Oberlin. First, L. A. S.                5.00
      Springfield. W. M. S.                   6.00
                                            ------                211.00
                                                                --------
                                                                 $406.29

  ESTATE.

  Oberlin. Estate of Amanda Porter                                 52.00
                                                                --------
                                                                  458.29


INDIANA, 50c.

  Brimfield. Miss Huston, Bbl. C., Freight 50c., _for Blowing
    Rock, N. C._                                                     .50


ILLINOIS, $950.55.

  Abingdon. Busy Bees, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._             10.00
  Albion. Mrs. Jos. Green, 3; Cong. Ch., Colored, 1.60              4.60
  Aurora. First Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E, _for Lincoln Acad.,
    N. C._                                                         17.00
  Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                               61.29
  Champaign. Cong. Ch.                                             42.62
  Champaign. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._            15.00
  Chicago. "Hapland," 100; Sab. Sch., N. E. Cong. Ch., 15;
    Tabernacle C. E., 10; Mary R. Blackburn, 5; Mrs. M. W.
    Mabbs, 5                                                      135.00
  Chicago. Mrs. Ben Frees, _for Le Moyne Inst._                    25.00
  Chicago. "Friends," Box C. and Sundries, _for Talladega, Ala._
  Dallas City. Mrs. M. H. Smith                                     2.00
  Dwight. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.50
  Englewood. Plym. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid,
    Williamsburg Acad., Ky._                                       10.00
  Elgin. Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Straight
    U._                                                            12.00
  Elgin. Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch., _for Native Teacher, Indian
    M., Grand River, N. D._                                         5.00
  Elmhurst. Cong. Ch.                                               6.71
  Englewood. Pilgrim Ch., Pkg. Books, _for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
    Tenn._
  Galena, Mrs. A. Bean                                              2.50
  Galesburg, C. E. Soc., by Mrs. E. E. Day, _for Indian M._         4.50
  Geneseo. "A Birthday Memorial"                                   10.00
  Geneva. Y. P. S. C. E.                                            3.24
  Greenville. Cong. Ch., Bbl. Books and C., Freight 1.20, _for
    Talladega, Ala._                                                1.20
  Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                                3.00
  Manteno. Box S. S. Papers, _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._
  Melvin. First Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
  Moline. Alfred Williams                                          10.00
  Nora. Cong. Ch.                                                  12.00
  Ottawa. Mrs. Ruth P. Bascom                                      10.00
  Peoria. Mrs. John L. Griswold, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       100.00
  Peoria. Mrs. Sarah P. Howe, S. S. Class, 10; Miss Anna
    Kinney, S. S. Class, 1.50; Miss Nora Mankers, S. S. Class,
    1; Howe Y. P. S. C. E., 5, and Individual Members, 2.50,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                     20.00
  Plano. Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._                             1.00
  Providence. Cong. Ch.                                            15.00
  Roseville. Cong. Ch.                                             27.71
  Shabbona. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Sheridan. Mrs. C. J. O. Heavenhill                                1.50
  Somonauk. Y. P. S. C. E.                                          3.06
  Toulon. Miss A. M. Smith, S. S. Class, 1, _for Student Aid_;
    Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., Box Bedding, _for Talladega,
    Ala._                                                           1.00
  Winnebago. Cong. Ch., Miss. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._
  Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                             10.18

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A. Field,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Chicago. New Eng. W. M. S.             18.60
      Chicago. Covenant, W. M. S.             1.20
      McLean, W. M. S.                        5.00
      Oak Park. Y. L. M. S.                  50.00
      Odell. S. S.                            1.70
      Rockford. W. M. S.                     12.00
      Winnetka. W. M. S.                      7.54
                                            ------                 96.04
                                                                --------
                                                                 $686.65

  ESTATE.

  Galesburg. Estate of Miss Mary J. Browning, by Wm. H.
    Browning, Executor                                            263.90
                                                                --------
                                                                 $950.55


MICHIGAN, $1,275.15.

  Adrian. A. J. Hood                                               10.00
  Agricultural College. Prof. R. C. Kedzie, to const. MRS.
    ELLA M. KEDZIE L. M.                                           30.00
  Detroit. Westminster Pres. Ch., Jun. Y. P. S. C. E., Box
    Papers, etc.; Plymouth Cong. Ch., Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C.,
    _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Grand Rapids. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 6.75; Smith Memorial Ch., 2     8.75
  Kalamazoo. Mrs. J. A. Kent                                        5.00
  Lansing. Ch. at Trout Creek                                       4.25
  Manistee. First Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
  Marshall. Mrs. J. S. Stout                                        5.00
  Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00
  Romeo. Miss E. B. Dickinson                                      50.00
  Saugatuck. C. E. Assn., Christmas Box, _for Lexington, Ky._
  Travers City. C. A. Hammond, _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill
    Acad., Tenn._                                                   1.00
  West Bay City. John Bourn, _for Alaska M._                      100.00
  Ypsilanti. Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Grand Blanc. Willing Workers, _for
        Indian Student Aid, Santee, Neb._    12.20
      Grand Rapids. W. H. M. S., Park Ch.    13.20
      Grass Lake. W. H. M. S.                 3.00
      Saint Johns. Women's Assn.               .75
      South Haven. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
        Student Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad.,
        Tenn._                                5.00
      Stockbridge. Mrs. E. W. Woodward, _for
        Student Aid, A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
        Miss._                               10.00
                                            ------                 44.15
                                                                --------
                                                                 $275.15

  ESTATE.

  Ann Arbor. Estate of Dr. C. L. Ford, by Bryant Walker,
    Adm'r.                                                      1,000.00
                                                                --------
                                                               $1,275.15


IOWA, $485.76.

  Algona. A. Zahlten                                               10.00
  Alton. First Cong. Ch.                                            4.00
  Belmond. S. S. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        15.00
  Blencoe. Cong. Ch.                                                3.70
  Charles City. Miss Clara Lumbeck, _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                             5.00
  Decorah. Cong. Ch.                                               35.00
  Des Moines. Plymouth Ch., 118.47; North Park Cong.,
    Y. P. S. C. E., 5                                             123.47
  Eagle Grove. S. S. of Cong. Ch., _for Talladega, Ala._            5.00
  Eagle Grove. Cong. Ch.                                            4.00
  Eldora. Cong. Ch., 24.15; "Japan," 5                             29.15
  Fairfax. Cong. Ch.                                                6.00
  Forest City. Miss Grace Mason, Box Literature, _for Beach
    Inst., Savannah, Ga._
  Glenwood. Cong. S. S., by Mrs. John Hanson, Box Toys, etc.,
    _for Beach Inst._
  Grand View. Cong. Ch., Miss. Soc., Box C., _for Grand View,
    Tenn._
  Grinnell. First Cong. Ch., _for Grand View, Tenn._              10.00
  Grinnell. Mrs. J. B. Grinnell, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._  10.00
  Grinnell. Miss E. H. Brewer, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                           3.00
  Harlan. Mission Band, _for Talladega, Ala._                      4.00
  Hawarden. Cong, Ch.                                             13.47
  Independence. Mrs. E. M. Potwin, Pkg. Cards and Papers, _for
    Beach Inst._
  Lakeside. Cong. Ch.                                              8.69
  Lewis. Cong. Ch.                                                 9.00
  Manchester. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C., _for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
    Tenn._
  Marshalltown. L. M. Soc., by Mrs. Anna M. Brown, Box Literature,
    etc., _for Beach Inst._
  Maquoketa. Miss Mary C. Shaw                                     5.00
  McGregor. King's Daughters, "St. Nicholas" for one year, _for
    Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._
  Muscatine. Junior C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                 10.00
  Newton. Wittemberg Cong. Sab. Sch.                               6.37
  Newell. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
  Osage. Cong. Ch., 18.38; Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., 5.10             23.48
  Osceola. Miss Jennie M. Baird                                    5.00
  Red Oak. W. H. M. U., 15. Incorrectly ack. in February number
    from Mrs. M. A. Clark, Afton, Iowa.
  Rockford. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, A. N.
    and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                                 9.50
  Salem. Cong. Ch.                                                 4.00

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Algona. L. M. S.                        2.14
      Bear Grove. L. M. S.                    7.15
      Chester Center. L. M. S.                 .50
      Creston. L. M. S.                       5.00
      Des Moines. Plymouth, L. M. S.         12.04
      Grinnell. L. M. S.                      6.90
      Keokuk. L. M. S.                       15.00
      Le Mars. L. M. S.                       1.00
      McGregor. L. M. S.                      8.70
      Marion. Y. P. M. S.                    15.00
      Muscatine. S. S., First Cong. Ch.      20.00
      Newell. L. M. S.                        5.00
      Newton. L. M. S.                        3.00
      Old Man's Creek. H. and F. M. S.        1.82                103.25
                                                                --------
                                                                  470.08

  ESTATE.

  Fontanelle. Estate, A. M. Gow, Colored                           15.68
                                                                --------
                                                                  485.76


WISCONSIN, $392.57.

  Clear Lake. Swedish Cong. Ch.                                     1.24
  Eau Claire. First Cong. Ch.                                      25.06
  Hayward. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
  Ironton. O. C. Blanchard                                          5.00
  Koshkonong. Cong. Ch.                                             7.85
  Lake Geneva. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._          12.00
  La Grange. Miss Greening, _for Le Moyne Inst._                   10.00
  Madison. Cong. C. E., 12 Cop. No. 5 Hymn Books, _for
    Marion, Ala._
  Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. CHARLES C.
    DIMOCK and JOSEPH J. HOLDEN L. M.'s                            42.00
  Platteville. Cong. Ch.                                            6.00
  Ripon. First Cong, Ch., 43; Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch, 10.86           53.86
  Spring Green. L. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                             5.00
  Springvale. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Nat, Ala._               3.30
  Whitewater. Cong. Ch., Special                                   10.26
  Whitewater. Faculty and Students, State Normal College, 50;
    Mrs. Crandall's S. S., Cong. Ch., 10; C. M. Blackman, 10;
    Geo. S. Marsh, 10; The Homeland Circle, 5; Frank W. Trott,
    5; T. W. Denison, 5; Other Citizens, 15, _for Le Moyne
    Inst._                                                        110.00

  Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union. Mrs. C. M.
    Blackman, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Beloit. First Cong. Ch., W. M. U.      10.00
      Eau Claire. W. M. U.                    5.00
      Green Bay. W. M. U.                    20.00
      Milwaukee. Grand Av. W. M. U.          25.00
      Milwaukee. Hanover St. W. M. S.        10.00
      Prairie du Chien. "Mrs. F. P. B."      10.00
      Wauwatosa. W. M. S.                    11.00
                                            ------                 91.00


MINNESOTA, $129.21.

  Anoka. Christmas Box, _for Lincoln Acad., N. C._
  Barnesville. Cong. Ch.                                            2.50
  Chowen. Rev. E. E. Rogers, _for Storrs Sch._, 1.64; Box Sch.
    Supplies, Freight 1.40, _for Macon, Ga._; Box Ed. Material,
    Freight 1.34, _for Cabin Teachers, Beach Inst._                 4.38
  Crookston. Cong. Ch. 3.00
  Faribault. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., by Rev. A. Willey, _for
    Theo. Student Aid, Talladega C._                               15.00
  Fairmont. Bbl. C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
  Graceville. Cong. Ch.                                             3.00
  Madison. Cong. Ch.                                                3.00
  Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                                7.15
  Minneapolis. Gentlemen of Park Av. Cong. Ch.                      7.15
  Minneapolis. Saint Louis Park. Union Ch., _for Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                          2.00
  Montevideo. L. M. S., Bbl. C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Northfield. S. S. Cong. Ch., 35.22; Other Friends, 14.78,
    by Rev. A. Willey; Mrs. Skinner, Bbl. C., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  50.00
  Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                                      24.50
  Northfield. Prof. G. Huntington, "Anti-Slavery History," by
    Rev. A. Willey (Price 1.50), _for Talladega, Ala._
  Rochester. L. M. S., Bbl. C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
  Saint Paul. Miss Brooks and Miss Miller, "Saint Nicholas"
    one year, _for Macon, Ga._
  Spring Valley. L. M. S., 2 Bbls. C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
  Tivoli. Lyman Humiston                                            1.00
  West Duluth. Cong. Ch.                                            3.10


MISSOURI, $79.05.

  Clyde. Cong. Ch.                                                 15.00
  Dawn. Cong. Ch.                                                   1.30
  Eldon. Henry Phillips                                             2.50
  St. Louis. L. A. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., by Mrs. G. S.
    Anderson, 2 Boxes C., Val. 15, _for Fort Berthold, N. D._

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mo., by Mrs. K. L.
    Mills, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Kansas City. So. West Tab. L. M. S.    13.25
      Kansas City. Olivet Ch., L. M. S.       2.50
      Lamar. L. H. M. S.                      5.00
      Springfield. First Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.  5.00
      St. Louis. Plym. Ch., L. M. S. 17.70;
        Campton Hill, Y. P. S. C. E. 6;
        Auburt Place. L. M. S., 5.80; First
        Ch., L. H. M. S., 5                  34.50
                                            ------                 60.25


KANSAS, $28.13.

  Burlingame. "A Friend"                                            5.00
  Hiawatha. S. S. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                            10.00
  Kensington. Cong. Ch.                                             5.13
  Linwood. Cong. Ch.                                                3.00
  Topeka. Mrs. R. Gaw, First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Meridian,
    Miss._                                                          5.00


ARKANSAS, 50c.

  Little Rock. Cong. Ch.                                             .50


NEBRASKA, $10.00.

  Beatrice. Mrs. B. F. Hotchkiss                                   10.00


NEVADA, $5.50.

  Reno. Cong. Ch.                                                   5.50


NORTH DAKOTA, $72.53.

  Cando. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                                       1.05
  Dwight. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.15
  Fort Berthold. Miss Elizabeth Kehoe, _for Indian M., Fort B._    33.33
  Fort Berthold. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
  Mayville. First Cong. Ch.                                        12.50

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. D., by Mrs. J. M. Fisher,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cummings. Christian Soldiers            2.50


SOUTH DAKOTA, $13.04.

  Mission Hill. Cong. Ch.                                           3.27
  Redfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                         2.77
  Sioux Falls. First Cong. Ch.                                      5.70
  Wessington Springs, Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.                     1.30


COLORADO, $12.72.

  Denver. Caroline Danielson, _for Indian M._                       1.00
  Montrose. Cong. Ch.                                               3.00
  Otis. Cong. Ch.                                                   3.50
  Pueblo. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                         4.07
  Pueblo. Woman's Aux. Soc., Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Mrs. E. B.
    Coleman, Treas.                                                 1.15


CALIFORNIA, $502.89.

  Campbell. Mrs. E. E. White, S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   7.00
  East Highlands. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                              5.59
  San Francisco. Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see
    items below)                                                  485.30

  Cong. Woman's State Home Missionary Society of California,
    by Mrs. J. M. Haven, Treas.:
      Campbell. Ladies, _for Indian M._       5.00


OREGON, $8.50.

  Portland. Y. M. Bible Class of Cong. S. S., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   8.50


WASHINGTON, $14.90.

  Port Angeles. Cong. Ch.                                           2.90
  Puyallup. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
  New Whatcom. Rev. and Mrs. J. W. Savage, "A Thank Offering,"
    _for Talladega, Ala._                                          10.00


OKLAHOMA, $1.00.

  Alva. Cong. Ch.                                                   1.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $20.00.

  Washington. Rev. I. G. Craighead, _for Mountain Work_            20.00


KENTUCKY, $5.85.

  Lexington. Chandler Sab. Sch., _for Lexington, Ky._               1.85
  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                                4.00


VIRGINIA, $16.54.

  _Receipts for Gloucester School, Cappahosic, Va._:
    Cappahosic. Students' Concert, 3.95;
      H. P. Smith, 50c                        4.45
    Hampton. Miss C. W. Fields                1.00
    Mathews Co. J. R. Brooks                  2.00
    Middlesex. Miss M. A. Burrill             1.00
    Morning Glory. Sab. Sch.                  1.50
    Wareneck. Public School.                  6.59
                                            ------                 16.54


TENNESSEE, $106.00.

  Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch.                                            11.50
  Grand View. From Unknown Sources, 2 Bbls. C.
  Memphis. "Friends," _for Le Moyne Inst._                         79.50
  Nashville. "Friend"                                              10.00
  Nashville. Mrs. M. M. Somers, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._          5.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $40.05.

  Carter Mills. S. A. Stanford                                      1.00
  Dry Creek. W. D. Newkirk                                          5.00
  High Point. Rev. Z. Simmons                                       3.00
  Oaks. Cong. Ch.                                                   1.05
  Troy. Hon. E. A. Morse                                           10.00
  Wilmington. Mrs. V. C. Logie, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._    20.00


GEORGIA, $42.37.

  Atlanta. Miss A. Clarke, _for Storrs Sch._                        7.00
  Marietta. Cong. Ch.                                               5.25
  McIntosh, Cong. Ch., 9.75, and Sab. Sch., 3.25; Medway
    Ch., 3.32                                                      16.32
  McIntosh. C. E. Soc., by Carrie E. Leadbetter, _for C. E.
    Hall, McIntosh_                                                 7.15
  McIntosh. Emma J. Rosecrans, _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad._  5.00
  Savannah. Pkg. Cards and Pkg. Materials for Sewing Dept., from
    Unknown Sources, _for Beach Inst._
  Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 75c.; Rev. J. Loyd, 25c.;
    Pilgrim Ch., 65c.                                               1.65


FLORIDA, $747.71.

  Daytona. First Cong. Ch.                                         22.14
  Fernandina. "A Friend"                                          500.00
  Jacksonville. Chas. H. Smith, _for Student Aid, Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                          8.00
  Orange Park. C. E. Soc. and Sab. Sch., by Carrie Parrott,
    Pres.                                                           4.30
                                                                --------
                                                                  534.44

  ESTATE.

  Tangerine. Estate of Thomas Jewett, by Alfred Williams,
    Administrator                                                 213.27
                                                                --------
                                                                  747.71


ALABAMA, $85.20.

  Anniston. Rev. James Brown, _for Theo. Dept._, 5; _Student
    Aid_, 5, _for Talladega C._                                    10.00
  Athens. Cong. Ch.                                                 4.29
  Montgomery. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Beaufort, N. C._         4.01
  Selma. "H. N.," _for Blacksmith Shop, Selma_                     25.00
  Selma. Cong. Ch.                                                  6.05
  Shelby. Covenant Cong. Ch.                                        3.10
  Talladega. Pres. H. S. DeForest, _for Repairs, Talladega, Ala._  32.75


MISSISSIPPI, $20.00.

  Moorhead. Miss S. L. Emerson, _for A. G. Sch._                   20.00


LOUISIANA, $9.71.

  Woman's Missionary Union of Louisiana, by Mrs. C. M.
    Crawford, Treas., _for Indian M._:
      Belle Place. Aux.                       1.48
      Hammond. Aux.                           1.25
      New Iberia. Aux.                        1.80
      New Orleans. Central Ch., Aux., 1.32;
        Morris Brown Ch., Aux., 1.08          2.40
      Roseland. Aux.                           .25
      Welsh. Aux.                             2.53
                                            ------                  9.71


TEXAS, $32.00.

  Austin. Miss E. Meek, 15; Miss M. Portune, 10, _for Student
    Aid, Tillotson Inst._; Tillotson Church of Christ, 5;
    Tillotson C. E. Soc., _for Indian M._, 2; "A Doctor,"
    Drugs, Val. 6, _for Tillotson Inst._                           32.00


FROM UNKNOWN SOURCES, $17.00.

  ---- Miss Emily Hartwell, _for Student Aid, Indian M., Fort
    Berthold, N. D._                                                7.00
  ---- "A Friend," _for Talladega, Ala._                            5.00
  ---- "A Friend,"                                                  5.00


CANADA, $13.00.

  Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                         5.00
  Ottawa. Mrs. Livingstone, _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._          3.00
  Sherbrooke. Mrs. H. J. Morey                                      5.00


ENGLAND, $200.00.

  London. Mrs. Allen, _for Le Moyne Inst._                        200.00
                                                                --------

Donations                                                     $12,414.30

Estates                                                        13,230.85
                                                              ----------

                                                              $25,645.15


TUITION, $6,675.69.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                     3.00
  Evarts, Ky. Tuition                       106.15
  Lexington, Ky. Tuition                     85.73
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                 265.35
  Big Creek Gap, Tenn. Tuition               15.20
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                    7.33
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                   35.23
  Grand View, Tenn. Tuition                 165.00
  Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                  1,508.80
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                  797.10
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition              108.49
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                    16.60
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                13.10
  Kings Mountain, N. C. Tuition              32.00
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                   30.20
  Troy, N. C. Tuition                        13.60
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                    10.85
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                 195.50
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                      22.15
  Charleston. S. C. Tuition                 324.00
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                  100.61
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                       126.95
  Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch., Tuition         154.90
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                        246.01
  McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                      80.66
  Marshallville, Ga. Tuition                  4.00
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                     181.28
  Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                   56.15
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                      4.60
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuition                 122.50
  Athens, Ala. Tuition                       50.15
  Florence, Ala. Tuition                      7.50
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                       50.22
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                          83.75
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                       113.80
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                   684.34
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                    60.75
  Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                    17.00
  Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                    72.75
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                  550.29
  Helena, Ark. Tuition                       39.35
  Austin, Tex. Tuition                      112.75
                                            ------              6,675.69
                                                              ----------

Total for February                                            $32,320.84
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                                   $74,789.61
  Estates                                                      36,131.81
                                                              ----------
                                                             $110,921.42

  Income                                                        4,370.00
  Tuition                                                      18,330.70
                                                              ----------

  Total from Oct. 1 to Feb. 28                               $133,622.12
                                                              ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for February                                      $83.95
  Previously acknowledged                                         275.00
                                                                --------
  Total                                                           358.95
                                                                ========


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

  William Johnstone, Treas., from December 2, 1894,
    to February 21, 1895:
      Fresno. (Chinese.) N. Y. Gifts to
        Jesus, 18.60; Mon. Offs., 3          21.60
      Hanford. Annual Memberships             6.00
      Los Angeles. Mon. Offs., 6.55; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 33.10                39.65
      Marysville. Mon. Offs., 11.75; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 9                    20.75
      Oakland. Mon. Offs.                    40.00
      Oakland. Pilgrim Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.    4.65
      Oroville. Mon. Offs., 3; N. Y. Gifts
        to Jesus, 10 (of which Miss Chase,
        5; Miss Leggett, 1)                  13.00
      Petaluma. Mon. Offs., 2.25; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 9                    11.25
      Sacramento. Mon. Offs., 14; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 17.45                31.45
      San Bernardino. Mon. Offs., 6.95;
        Gin Koo King, 1                       7.95
      San Diego. Mon. Offs., 4.75; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 12                   16.75
      San Francisco. Central Ch., Mon.
        Offs., 10.90; Annual Membership, 6   16.90
      San Francisco. West Ch., Mon. Offs.     6.50
      San Francisco. N. Y. Gifts to Jesus
        (of which Jee Gam, 11; Mrs. Jee
        Gam, 2; Children, 2.60; Supt., 9)    24.60
      San Francisco. Charles Hanna 0.50
      Santa Barbara. Mon. Offs., 7.60;
        N. Y. Gifts to Jesus (of which
        American Friends, by Mrs. M. J.
        Southwick, 6.65), 10.65              18.25
      Santa Cruz. Mon Offs., 1.85; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 14                   15.85
      Stockton. Mon. Offs., 5.40; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 15.25                20.65
      Ventura. Mon. Offs., 3.25; N. Y.
        Gifts to Jesus, 11                   14.25
      Vernondale. N. Y. Gifts to Jesus        3.00
      Watsonville. Mon. Offs., 3.75;
        Pastoral Union, 4                     7.75
                                            ------                341.20

FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN:

  Bangor, Me. Prof. J. S. Sewall's
    S. S. Class                              15.00
  Belfast, Me. Miss E. M. Pond                5.00
  Boston, Mass. Mount Vernon Ch., Chinese
    S. S.                                    20.00
  New Haven, Conn. Mrs. J. E. Pond            5.00
  Albany, N. Y. "Friends"                    75.00
  Oakland, Cal. "A Friend," by Mrs. L. C.
    Agard, 15; Woman's H. M. Soc., 3         18.00
  California Woman's State Home Miss.
    Soc., by Mrs. J. M. Haven                 6.00
                                            ------                144.00
                                                                --------

Total                                                            $485.30
                                                                ========

  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

EXTRACT FROM AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

BY HON. FREDERICK DOUGLASS.


I esteem it an honor to have been invited to speak a word in this
presence upon this very interesting occasion. I am here, however, not
so much to deliver an address, or to make a speech, as to put myself
on record. I am here to pay a debt long due. I have wished, by my
presence here, to emphasize my gratitude to the members and friends of
this Association for the beneficent work which they have done, and
which they are still doing, for the people with whom I am identified.
I would not disparage the labors of any other organization in this
direction inside of the church. I am thankful to all such, but I know
of none to which the colored people of the Southern States are more
indebted for effective service than to this American Missionary
Association.

Long before the abolition of slavery, this organization bore a
consistent and faithful testimony against that stupendous wrong. When
it was abolished this Association did not disband nor discontinue its
work, but went forward as earnestly as ever to advance, enlighten and
elevate the colored people of the South.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a beautiful story told about a little child in the orphanage
of John Falk at Weimar. They were having supper in the dining hall,
and the teacher gave thanks in the ordinary way before the children
began their meals, saying, "Come, Lord Jesus, and be our guest
to-night, and bless the mercies which Thou hast provided." One little
boy looked up and said, "Teacher, you always ask the Lord Jesus to
come, but He never comes. Will He ever come?" "Oh, yes, if you will
only hold on in faith, He will be sure to come." "Very well," said the
little boy, "I will set a chair beside me here to-night to be ready
when He comes." And so the meal proceeded. By-and-by there came a rap
at the door, and there was ushered in a poor, half-frozen apprentice.
He was taken to the fire and his hands warmed. Then he was asked to
partake of the meal, and where should he go but to the chair which the
little boy had provided? As he sat down there the little boy looked up
with a light in his eye and said, "Teacher, I see it now. The Lord
Jesus was not able to come Himself, and He sent the poor man in His
place. Isn't that it?"

Aye, that is just it. And so, brethren, the Lord Jesus isn't able,
according to his plans for this world, to come personally yet among
us, but He has sent these colored people, Chinese, Indians and
heathen, to make appeal in His behalf to us, and who among us will set
a chair for Him? There are many friends with whom I hardly agree who
are very anxiously waiting for the appearance of the personal Christ
among us, and they are wondering what they shall do to welcome Him.
Would that the eyes of these brethren, and our own, too, were opened
to the perception of the Christ that is already here, in the persons
of those needing to be helped and educated and elevated, and that
their ears could hear His words, "Inasmuch as ye do it unto one of the
least of these his brethren ye do it unto Christ." That is the
Christian philosophy of giving, and if a man does not feel the force
of these considerations, I should be disposed to say he has not yet
begun to be a Christian.

REV. WILLIAM M. TAYLOR, D.D.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 49, NO. 04, APRIL, 1895 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.