The American Missionary - Volume 50, No. 6, June 1896


by Various




Edition 1, (November 21,  2006)





CONTENTS


Editorial
   The Jubilee Year Fund.
   FIFTY-DOLLAR JUBILEE SHARES.
   THE ACCEPTABLE MITES.
   NO COLOR-LINE IN CLEVELAND.
   ORANGE PARK NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL IN FLORIDA CLOSED BY THE
   SHERIFF.
   OUR CHURCHES.
   THE TALENTED TENTH.
   ALASKA MISSION.
The South.
   HISTORY OF A CHURCH IN ALABAMA.
   MEETINGS AMONG THE HILLS AND AT A CONVICT CAMP.
   A BRIGHT AND CANDID VIEW OF OUR MOUNTAIN WORK.
   REVIVALS.
   ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.
The Indians.
   REVIVAL--LIBERAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Crow Agency, Montana
The Chinese.
   Jubilee Year Fund, Additional Shares.
   RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1896.
   WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS





NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York N. Y., as second-class mail matter.






AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.

_Vice-presidents._

REV. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
REV. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
REV. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
REV. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.

_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Corresponding Secretaries._

REV. A. F. BEARD, D.D., REV. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
REV. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Recording Secretary._

REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Treasurer._

H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Auditors._

GEORGE S. HICKOK.
JAMES H. OLIPHANT.

_Executive Committee._

CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

_For Three Years._

SAMUEL HOLMES
SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
CHARLES L. MEAD,
WILLIAM H. STRONG,
ELIJAH HORR.

_For Two Years._

WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
JAMES W. COOPER,
LUCIEN C. WARNER,
JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
CHARLES P. PIERCE.

_For One Year._

CHARLES A. HULL,
ADDISON P. FOSTER,
ALBERT J. LYMAN,
NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
A. J. F. BEHRENDS.

_District Secretaries._

REV. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._

_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

MISS D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._




COMMUNICATIONS


Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.




DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS


In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be sent
to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the time
to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on label to
the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made afterward the
change on the label will appear a month later. Please send early notice of
change in post-office address, giving the former address and the new
address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers may be
correctly mailed.




FORM OF A BEQUEST.


"I give and bequeath the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American Missionary
Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the State of New
York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.





THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY


VOL. L.
JUNE, 1896.
No. 6.




The Jubilee Year Fund.


Extract from the appeal of the Executive Committee of the American
Missionary Association:

                         *Fifty Dollars a Share.*

It is proposed to raise during the next six months a special Jubilee Year
Fund of $100,000 in shares of $50 each, with the hope and expectation that
these shares will be taken by the friends of missions without lessening
those regular contributions which must be depended upon to sustain the
current work.

                            FORM OF A PLEDGE.

                               Share, $50.
                                $100,000.

                          THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND
                                 OF THE
                     AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

I hereby take ..... shares (Fifty Dollars each) in the Jubilee Year Fund
of the American Missionary Association, to be paid before the close of the
fiscal year, Sept. 30, 1896.

                                                      _Name_ . . . . . . .

                                           _P. O. Address_ . . . . . . . .




FIFTY-DOLLAR JUBILEE SHARES.


In the last number of THE MISSIONARY we gave the gratifying report of 34
shares taken for this fund, and in the present number we have the pleasure
of adding 75 more. We are fully aware of the difficulties under which we
send forth the call for responses to this much-needed fund. Other appeals
have been made, and are still pressed upon the churches, all of them
worthy of the generosity with which they are met.

But the ability of the churches to meet the demands of their varied
mission work is not exhausted, and the spirit of consecration among the
followers of Christ, even when self-denial must be practiced, has not
reached its limit. We therefore urge our appeal with strong confidence
that we shall not be felt to be intruders, but that we are simply trying
to fulfill the duty imposed upon us in carrying the Gospel to the most
needy and destitute in our land.

We must repeat the plea made by our Executive Committee that in giving to
this Jubilee Fund, the contributions for our regular work, to which we are
committed and whose claims we cannot repudiate, may not be neglected.




THE ACCEPTABLE MITES.


ANDERSONVILLE, GA.--"Please find inclosed $2.31, which is a contribution
from our church toward paying the debt of the American Missionary
Association. It is very little, but more than I supposed the people would
raise, there is so little money in the place."

GREENWOOD, S. C.--"It is a great pleasure to me to hand you herewith bank
draft for $11, which is the amount of our collection for the Lincoln
Memorial Day. I have delayed the remitting of this amount somewhat to give
others an opportunity who wished to contribute, but were not quite ready.
The amount is not large, but it is from the people and expresses in a
measure their interest in the work of the American Missionary Association.
The collection represents offerings of the young and old from a cent to a
dollar. What was done was done with a free heart."




NO COLOR-LINE IN CLEVELAND.


The Methodist General Conference and the hotels in Cleveland, O., deserve
great credit--the hotels for according to all delegates, regardless of
color, equal accommodations, and the Conference for its hearty indorsement
of their action. If this greatest gathering of the largest Protestant
church in America had nothing else to do, it might go with its grand
meeting from city to city securing this recognition of the brotherhood of
man. It is ardently hoped that the generous and liberal-minded hotel
keepers in Cleveland may not "backslide," and that if any single colored
delegate, clerical or lay, should come alone to Cleveland, even before the
close of the "six months' probation," he might not find the door closed
against him.

The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church may be equally useful at
its meeting in Saratoga in preaching this same gospel of the brotherhood
of man, and in this case, too, permanency is very desirable, and it is
hoped, therefore, that in this event there may be the illustration of the
good old Presbyterian doctrine of the "perseverance of the saints."




ORANGE PARK NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL IN FLORIDA CLOSED BY THE SHERIFF.


It will be remembered that on Friday, the 10th of April, seven teachers
and two patrons of the Orange Park School, at Orange Park, Fla., were
arrested for violation of an enactment legalized a year ago by the State
Legislature under the instigation of William H. Sheats, the State
superintendent of education.

The enactment, which we protest is in no just sense a law, forbids not
only white and colored persons to be instructed within the same building
at the same time, but it also forbids a white principal or matron or
guardians of the school rooming or living within the same building where
their pupils are.

This enactment against the personal rights of education in a private
Christian school not supported or aided by the State, if sustained, would
destroy nearly all of the institutions carried on by Northern benevolence
in all of our Southern States. It would take the guardianship of manners
and morals out of the hands of those who have planted and sustained the
institutions until now, and who, in view of the millions yet uneducated
and untrained, are now needed as much as ever. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the National Council of Congregational Churches at
Syracuse in October requested the Association to take this question to the
highest courts, nor that the General Conference of the Methodist Church in
Cleveland has just passed a resolution denouncing this iniquitous
enactment, or that we are receiving constantly from our State and local
associations assurances of sympathy and support in our contest against
this reversion to barbarism. We quote a few of the opinions which have
come under our observation.

From the _Congregationalist_:


    "The ethics of Christ, Pilgrim traditions, and the U. S.
    Constitution seemed paramount to the opinions of Florida
    legislators, and the highest officials of the American Missionary
    Association decided to defy and test the law. That the
    denomination stands back of them may be reasonably inferred from
    the resolution passed by the last Triennial National Council. Let
    the American Missionary Association have the sinews of war with
    which to employ the ablest counsel."


From the _Outlook_:


    "The State of Florida not long ago took action which is a disgrace
    to itself and a blot on the fair fame of our republic. Let our
    people squarely face this issue. While we are protesting against
    the treatment of missionaries in Turkey and calling upon the
    Government to use all its power in their protection, Christian
    teachers widely known and honored in one of the great States of
    this republic are arrested simply because they presumed to
    instruct a few white children under the same roof with colored
    children.  It is hard to speak of such conduct in mild words. The
    question as to whether this is in reality a free republic is once
    more at issue. The action of the State of Florida is as barbaric
    as the persecutions of the Middle Ages."


From the _Independent_:


    "Let the reader observe that this is not a law applying merely to
    the public schools of the State. Such a law we condemn, but we
    could not be surprised at it. This law is directed at this
    particular institution, which is not a public school but a private
    academy supported by the American Missionary Association. We have
    been amazed that in this nineteenth century Christians could be
    massacred by the thousands for not accepting the Moslem faith and
    no hand raised to defend them. But that was in Turkey. Here in the
    United States more than thirty years after the Proclamation of
    Emancipation in one of the sovereign States of the Union, half a
    dozen men and women are arrested for the crime of treating black
    children and white children alike, for not drawing a caste line in
    their own private grounds in a school they conduct at no expense
    to the State. It is a curious humiliating occurrence for this
    Jubilee year of the American Missionary Association."


From the _Advance_:


    "Florida's disgraceful Sheats law, specially designed for the
    teachers and supporters of Orange Park Academy, has at last been
    put in force. The teachers of the Academy, the pastor of the
    church, and the parents of the white pupils have been arrested for
    violation of this law, which forbids any one to maintain or
    patronize a school in which white persons and Negroes shall be
    taught or boarded within the same building.

    And this is the State of Senator Call, who is declaiming so
    eloquently in behalf of the Cuban insurgents, more than half of
    whom are of Negro blood."


From the _Boston Standard_:


    "A year ago the unconstitutional and vile Sheats law was passed by
    the legislature of Florida. It was understood that this law was
    particularly aimed at the Orange Park School, of the American
    Missionary Association, whose fiftieth anniversary is to be
    celebrated in this city next fall. This villainous statute was
    enforced in the case of the Orange Park School on the entire body
    of teachers, white men and women of spotless character and
    self-sacrificing devotion to the mission, because of educating
    teachers for the elevation of American citizenship. The normal
    school is one of the best and most useful of the educational
    agencies at work in the South, but had dared to ignore the
    outrageous statute which makes it a crime for any school, public
    or private, to teach black and white scholars in the same building
    or have any white teachers to eat and sleep in the same house with
    their Negro pupils. If these discretionary rights are not
    guaranteed by our national Constitution to American citizens, then
    the professed abolition of slavery and of the color line in
    citizenship is a wretched farce. Nobody can question the intent of
    the proclamation of emancipation of the constitutional amendment
    that places the Negro on the same legal plane with the white
    citizen of this country. We do not doubt the supreme and binding
    authority of this legislature. We mistake the temper of the
    American people if a blaze of indignation is not kindled by this
    outrage from the Atlantic to the Pacific."


From _Frank Leslie's Weekly_:


    "Under these provisions no citizen of Florida, it will be noted,
    can under certain conditions educate his child. He is excluded
    absolutely from the best educational institutions in the State if
    these admit pupils of both white and colored parentage. The
    defiance of the law was in obedience to a definite determination
    on the part of the American Missionary Association to make a
    distinct test of the statute."


From the _Boston Daily Advertiser_:


    "The Sheats law in Florida was passed through the influence of
    malice, prejudice, and partisan venom. Efforts have been made in
    other Southern States to perpetrate similar outrages, but for the
    most part without avail. The better public sentiment all over the
    South is strongly against such meanness. This better sentiment has
    asserted itself successfully elsewhere, and we do not doubt that
    it will do so very soon in Florida."


From the _Boston Journal_:


    "The American Missionary Association will be sustained by an
    enlightened public sentiment in fighting to the last resort the
    outrageous Florida law which makes it a crime to teach colored and
    white pupils in the same school."


These comments are but samples of the sentiment which comes to the
Association respecting this attempt to challenge the constitutional
amendment which came with the emancipation of the colored people from
slavery. But now there is



A SECOND CHAPTER.


After the teachers were arrested it was supposed that this would be the
end of the persecution until the statute should be tested by the courts.
Accordingly they returned to the work in the school as before. On the 4th
of May the Sheriff was instructed by the State Attorney to inquire into
this continued violation of the law, and if he found the school to be
going on as before, to arrest and rearrest, as long as the school should
be continued. In consequence the school was forced to close its sessions,
as the teachers were informed that they would be arrested over and over
again, and that new bail would be required for every successive day; this
not only for the teachers but for the patrons, which would be impossible
in the case of those who are colored. This is in accordance with the
published pronouncement of Supt. Sheats that he will prosecute and
persecute this Orange Park School out of existence.




MEMBERS OF THE ALBANY CONVENTION.


We are desirous of securing the names of the survivors of the little band
that gathered in Albany fifty years ago, and formed the American
Missionary Association. A few years since, we made a similar call to this
in the pages of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY, but the responses were very few.
At the present date, we know of only two persons, Rev. John H. Byrd,
Lawrence, Kan., and Rev. Peter B. Thayer, Garland, Me., who were present
at that time. We hope, if there are any other survivors, they will write
to us promptly, and if there are persons whose eyes fall on this little
notice who happen to know of any person who was present at that meeting,
we will be much obliged if they will send us the name and address.




OUR CHURCHES.


We intend to present to our readers from time to time brief sketches of
some of our churches located in the South and elsewhere, with some account
of the condition of the membership as to property and education, with
glimpses of their poverty and hard struggles to support the pastor, with
occasionally the cheerful story of those who reach self-support. On
another page will be found a sketch by Pastor Snell of the church in
Talladega, Ala.




THE TALENTED TENTH.


In the discussion concerning Negro education we should not forget the
talented tenth man. An ordinary education may answer for the nine men of
mediocrity; but if this is all we offer the talented tenth man, we make a
prodigious mistake. The tenth man, with superior natural endowments,
symmetrically trained and highly developed, may become a mightier
influence, a greater inspiration to others than all the other nine, or
nine times nine like them. Without disparagement of faithful men of
moderate abilities, it may be said that in all ages the mighty impulses
that have propelled a people onward in their progressive career, have
proceeded from a few gifted souls. Sometimes these have been "self-made"
men, so-called, whose best powers were evoked by rare opportunities.
Oftener, they have been men of thoroughly disciplined minds, of sharpened
perceptive faculties, trained to analyze and to generalize; men of
well-balanced judgments and power of clear and forceful statement.

It is this talented tenth man of our colleges that in after years reflects
more honor on his _alma mater_ than the other nine; it is this tenth man
that is the recognized leader in his profession and the leader of public
opinion. To him, rather than to the other nine, the many look for
suggestion and advice in important matters. He is an uncrowned king in his
sphere.

This being true, I repeat that not to make proper provision for the high
education of the talented tenth man of the colored people is a prodigious
mistake. It is to dwarf the tree that has in it the potency of a grand
oak. Industrial education is good for the nine; the common English
branches are good for the nine; but that tenth man ought to have the best
opportunities for making the most of himself for humanity and God.

The powers of this talented tenth man are often latent; unsuspected by
others and even by their possessor, and are evoked only under favorable
conditions, sometimes comparatively late in the youthful period of life.
In a symmetrical course of study calculated to bring into exercise every
mental faculty, somewhere, as by a touchstone, the particular aptitude of
the pupil may be discovered, the secret springs of power be opened; and
the man, having discovered himself, leaps forward to pre-eminence among
his fellows. Scores of such men and women are among the students in the
schools for the colored people of the South. A mere common education will
not disclose their uncommon powers; they need the test of the best. And
somewhere, at several central points at least, provision should be made
for the higher education of the talented tenth as well as ordinary
education for the other nine.

The great need of the colored people of the South is wise leadership along
all lines of development; men of large and comprehensive views acquired by
contact and communion with the world's great thinkers; such men are needed
to-day even more than nine times as many with a little more practical
knowledge concerning the use of the saw, the jack-plane and the
blacksmith's forge. In our educational work for the colored people,
therefore, proper provision should be made for the talented tenth.--DR.
MOREHOUSE in _The Independent_.




ALASKA MISSION.


The following sentences from a personal letter of Miss Anna L. Dawes state
a profound truth in terse and impressive form:


    "If any one is willing to go up there and live with those Eskimos,
    I think the rest of us may well enough agree to help. Indeed,
    nothing has been so good for me for some time as his (Mr. Lopp's)
    visit. It not only makes our Christianity (mine at least) look
    like a mustard seed, but makes you wonder whether it isn't a
    _dead_ seed at that! I have been to hear Mr. Moody to-day, but he
    didn't begin to give me such "conviction of sin" as the urgent and
    eager interest Mr. Lopp showed in going back to his people up
    there. I wonder just what the Lord does think of us all--some of
    us, anyway?"


Mr. Lopp, whom Miss Dawes refers to, is pleading for funds to make it
possible to open the mission among the Eskimos. The American Missionary
Association was obliged to discontinue it for a year on account of the
straitened condition of the treasury. We are now making every effort to
gather funds outside of the current income of the Association, that there
may be at least one Christian mission conducted by Congregationalists in
this great northern mission field. Mr. Lopp's plea for "_his_ people" and
abandon of self-sacrifice both on the part of himself and his wife,
impress every one, as they did Miss Dawes.

This is the only mission of the Congregational denomination in Alaska. No
other denomination plans to occupy this station if given up by the
American Missionary Association. The work requires about five hundred
dollars more than has been subscribed, and this must be in hand by the
first of June, when it is necessary for Mr. Lopp to sail, if he goes this
year.





THE SOUTH.




HISTORY OF A CHURCH IN ALABAMA.


BY REV. SPENCER SNELL.

The beautiful and healthful city of Talladega is located among the
Appalachian foot hills. The First Congregational church was organized in
the year 1868. The first members were people who came out of the colored
Baptist Church, and who had begun to look for a more intelligent mode of
worship and better religious instruction than it was possible to have in
churches whose pastors had been slaves and were uneducated.

The first pastor of the church was Rev. H. E. Brown, of Ridgefield, O.,
whom the American Missionary Association had sent into the South. Since
his retirement the pulpit has been occupied by several pastors, including
the acceptable services of professors of Talladega College. My pastorate
began in 1894.

There are friendly relations between our church and the other colored
churches near at hand. The pastor is often invited to preach in the other
churches. The pastors of two of the Baptist churches are graduates of our
school here, and the pastor of one of the Methodist churches is now taking
lessons in our seminary.

The present membership of the church is 219. Many of them are poor
students who have to be helped through school. The resident members have
but very little money. With one or two exceptions they receive small pay
for what they do. Those who have trades find but little here to do and
have to go away to get employment. Among the male members of the church
are farmers, mechanics, etc., and among the females those who do laundry
work, sewing, etc. Several of these women take the washing of families
home and work very hard for a very little money with which to subsist
their families, buy books, and pay tuition for their children in Talladega
College.

There are about thirty-five members of the church who own their homes, and
about eleven who rent the places where they live. Several of the homes
owned by the members of the church are fairly comfortable for Southern
homes, having from two to seven rooms. None of them are costly. I do not
suppose that one of them cost $1,000. Neither is the furniture in them
costly. Scarcely any of them have carpets on their floors. They look upon
carpets as a luxury which they cannot afford. Plaster on the walls is
almost as rare as carpets on the floors. In some cases there is not a
rocking-chair in the house. The furniture they have is of a very ordinary
kind.

The people have but very little money and are obliged to struggle long and
hard to get a little place to call home, in many cases buying the lumber
and hiring the carpenter on credit. This being the case, it takes them
years and years to pay for the little homes. The homes vary from the
fairly comfortable to the wretched. It is noticeable that those who have
had the advantages of an education have better homes than those who have
no education.

There comes to mind as I write one very miserable home in which both the
parents are ignorant. There are three rooms to the house not nearly so
comfortable as the places where Northern farmers keep their horses and
cattle. There is neither stove nor grate in the house, but simply some
rocks on each side of the open fireplace on which they lay the green wood,
by which they sit and shiver while the cold winds blow through the cracks
in the floor and sides of the house. There are six children and only two
excuses for beds. One of these has on it a tick, the other has a pile of
dirty rags. There is not a whole table or chair in the house.

And yet, these people, like many others just as poor as they, are trying
to educate their children. They believe that in Christian education lies
the only redemption from this condition for them and their race, through
their children, who are enjoying privileges that were denied to them.

There are not more than a dozen individuals in the church who are earning
a comfortable living. More than that number did so when times were better,
but now there is not much for them to do except conduct very poor farms,
on which they cannot earn enough to make themselves comfortable.

There have been very few years in the history of the church when it did
not have a revival of religion. Of late it has been the custom to have two
series of special services each year--one during the winter, while the
school is in session, and another during the summer vacation. Effort is
made each year to have all the students converted. Of all the young people
who have graduated here only two have left without being professing
Christians.

The growth of the church has not been rapid, but steady. During the days
of slavery the colored people were members of the churches to which their
masters belonged. None of them belonged to Congregational churches, and
so, when Congregationalism came to the South after the war, it was
entirely new to the former slaves and to those who had been their masters.

The masses of the children and the young people still cling to the
churches which their parents were taught to love. It will, therefore, be
some time before Congregationalism will grow rapidly in the South. The
church has no building of its own, and no parsonage, but worships in the
chapel of Talladega College. The building in which the chapel is located
was erected by the white Baptists of the Coosa Valley Association before
the war as a college for their sons. Some of the old slaves who helped to
put up the building lived to see freedom, to see the building come into
the hands of the American Missionary Association, and to see their own
children study and graduate in it.




MEETINGS AMONG THE HILLS AND AT A CONVICT CAMP.


BY REV. H. E. PARTRIDGE.

Perhaps nowhere is a religious meeting made more of than in the hill
country of the South. There are reasons _and_ reasons for the fact. Take a
real, genuine Methodist or Baptist matron, or brother, of fifty, and they
love Christ and His cause, and do not fail to associate their love for Him
and the work with the gathering in His name. If it be possible, they will
be in attendance when "the parson" comes round. The girls love to go; some
because they, too, are learning to love the service of the Master, some
because they have no other so good opportunity to see and be seen, and
others because everybody else goes. Where the girls and young ladies are
sure to be, there the boys and young men are apt to be; and so it comes
that when the meeting, especially the "big meeting," is to be held, the
people throng. And if you want to see a genuine democracy, untainted by
any kind of aristocracy, you could not find it better illustrated than
among the hills, at meeting time, in some log "church-house." No Sir
Wonderful to claim best pew, no usher to give you the place _he_ chooses.
You come with your wife and, following the custom, she goes to the left,
you to the right. I will not describe the service. The singing varies from
a wonderful chorus of praise that lacks nothing in volume in one
neighborhood, to the nasal-twanged hymn which some incompetent leader
sings almost alone in some other community. The old songs predominate, but
any brisk moving song of work of praise or progress easily becomes a
favorite, when once it has been sung long enough so that the words and
movement are mastered by a few.

You will not be long in any big meeting or revival service before you will
hear:

  "Mother has a home, sweet home,
  Mother has a home, sweet home,
  Mother has a home, sweet home.
  Lord, I want to join the angels; beautiful home."

This is varied. Now it is Brother, Father, Preacher, or Sister who has a
home.

You may not know the tune or words, but it will not be long before you are
singing with the rest, if you are a participator or worshiper, and not
that horrid and heartless thing, a critical looker-on.

You know of the hand-shaking? If a sinner seeks to enter the Christian
life, he comes, on invitation of the minister, to shake hands at the close
of, or during, the service. And often service closes with an
all-round-hand-shake. There is a song started, like "Say, Brother, will
you meet me?" or some simple devotional hymn, and all rise and shake hands
all around, singing or praying, or speaking gently one to another.

Ah! many a feud has sunk forever, many an unpleasantness has been
forgotten, many a half-ripe quarrel has been strangled, and many a
friendship has been strengthened and ripened in these services of emotion
and love, those hand-shakings of the Mountaineers. The blessings of the
peacemakers should be his who first introduced the service.

Among other invitation hymns I have heard, I remember vividly:

  "Sinner, you are welcome, Yes, Yes, welcome
  To the dying lamb."

This, too, is varied. "Seeker," "Brother," "Sister," and "Everybody's
welcome" being sung.

I could tell of parts I do not like, of excitements the reverse of helpful
to my devotional feelings, and of loudness mistaken for piety or zeal, but
so could others criticise the services at Dr. Cuyler's or Dr. Storrs's
church. I prefer to speak of the really good.

May I tell you of a unique service? It was at the Convict Camp, near
Baker's X Roads, in Cumberland County, Tenn.

No need to ring the bell--the congregation are assembled, and armed guards
are standing by lest someone should escape. Still a bell was tapped.
Silence at once.

"Boys," I said, "when I was here before you kindly asked me to come and
speak to you again. I am here. Before I speak I want to have you sing.
Will you sing?" A moment's pause, and in the rich tones which the colored
people so often have, there rang out from scores of throats, one of those
weird songs of the race. It was of chariots and heaven, of songs and
praises, and of Jesus the King. I cannot reproduce or describe it. I
prayed for a blessing on our service, and several responded with
apparently as fervent "Amen" as ever came from Camp Meeting or Altar
service. Then I read passages, closing with a part of Romans 6: from the
twenty-third verse. I spoke briefly of "The wages of sin, and of the gift
of God." I almost fear I was harsh. Poor fellows--they were criminals, but
who is not guilty, before God, of violations of Divine law?

As I pleaded for the starting of a better life, as I spoke of their
families, as I said "Some of you will be through with prison life soon,"
as I talked of honesty, sobriety, and purity, there were moist eyes. I
asked for an expression at the close. All who will accept Jesus Christ,
and from this very hour live for Him, and with the strength he gives try
to forget the grievances you have thought to revenge; try to love and
serve one another here, in Christ's name, and others when released; strive
to do your work faithfully; in short, try to do what you think Christ
would want you to do--first, give me your hand, and then kneel with me in
prayer. Through the chinks and crevices of the stockade a score of men
thrust their hands, eager to respond to the invitation, and many knelt in
prayer.

How much was make-believe? How much was genuine? The Searcher of hearts
alone knows. Sowing by all waters, I am willing to leave results with God.

Another song, and then "Good-bye, boss!" "Good-bye, Captain!" "Come again,
preacher!"

The days were weeks, and then! Criminal carelessness, perhaps. A premature
explosion of dynamite and powder combined on the railroad, and six of
these men had been discharged. Dead! A rough grave beside the track, God
knows the rest. They were convicts, they were blacks, but they were my
brothers and yours, children of one Father.

I was tired that Sunday, but I am glad God let me go and give them another
invitation to the Christ-life. Perhaps in some other time and place I
shall talk over that service among the boys in black at Convict Camp, with
a soul in white over there. Who knows?




A BRIGHT AND CANDID VIEW OF OUR MOUNTAIN WORK.


The following letter comes from a member of the "Andover Band," three of
whom entered the work among the American Highlanders last year. It is the
first band of theological students organized in any of our seminaries for
work in the field of the American Missionary Association. It was a very
interesting movement and worthy the seminary that has sent out bands into
other parts of the country which have accomplished great results.

The testimony is set forth by Prof. John C. Campbell, a cultured young
man, who looks on this interesting work with a fresh vision and gives
opinions well balanced respecting this field and others.

It should be said that the letter was not written for publication.



The year has been trying and wearing, but I take great satisfaction in
knowing that much has been accomplished. We have established ourselves in
the hearts of the people, I believe, and have the respect and co-operative
interest of the best men in this and adjoining counties, so I hope for
great things in the future if our friends in the North will only help us.

Suspicion has given way to confidence, and I may even fire broadsides at
the tobacco habit now, even if it hits home. They are a trying, promising,
and loveable people. I admire those of my classmates who have heard the
voice of God (not the prompting of inclination) calling them to remain in
dear old hair-splitting New England; but, while I admire their bravery, I
am sorry for them, for it must seem as if they were striking in the air.
Here we see the enemy, and can strike directly at him, and one has some
satisfaction in getting weary and sick at heart in fighting at great odds
against a visible power instead of the more subtle powers "of the air."
But I digress! It is such a temptation to let myself out when
communicating with one who understands this discouraging, fascinating, and
encouraging work. This year's work has given me experience, as well as
gray hair, and even if my labors in the South should terminate this year,
I should feel that I had gained a great deal. I wish that all Northerners
could come to know the best element of the South, and show their
magnanimity as victors by helping the American Missionary Association do
the work which alone will make a new South. To me the South presents a
touching but heroic picture as she struggles nobly, but somewhat
uncertainly, toward the light, still the victim of her cavalier training,
still held back by the poor black and the poor white, the products of her
accursed institution. Now that is all abolished, she needs help from the
North. I doubt if we in the North would be any better had we been placed
in the same environment, and our superiority may be due as much to soil,
climate, and the consequent unprofitableness of slave labor, as to our
Puritan ancestry.

The tide of immigration is beginning to turn toward this State from
Georgia, and many coming from the Dakotas. The mass of ignorance is
appalling. I realize in part, I think, the difficulty of getting the needs
of the whites before a sympathizing audience. When it comes to a white
man's needs and his condition, too many church members and others
substitute the scientific theory of the survival of the fittest for
Christ's law of love. They forget too, I fear, that many of these people
in the mountains are victims of slavery as innocent as the Negro; and they
do not see that their indifference is letting them lie in the hard bed
which circumstances, largely beyond their control, have made for them. If
they will only give us money, "greenbacks," if need be, and enable us to
get the young out of bed on their intellectual and spiritual feet, I shall
be satisfied. And if our Congressmen and politicians would bury the
"Bloody Shirt," and stop throwing stones over Mason and Dixon's fence, and
out of their personal means give, what is too often given uselessly, to
the Association and other similar Boards, the questions which spring from
sectional prejudice would soon be solved. I do believe that what the
American Missionary Association stands for is the panacea for all
political and social ills.




REVIVALS.



CHARLOTTE, N.C.


BY REV. GEO. H HAINES.

We are in the midst of a glorious revival. Rev. James Wharton was with us
six days. What wonderful help he has been to our work during his stay with
us. We had eleven hopeful conversions. We continued our meetings after he
left us, and our total number of conversions is twenty. Among the persons
who have left the ways of sin and turned into the way of life are two very
remarkable cases. A woman of about fifty years of age, a drunkard and one
of the most profane women in our city, asked the people of God to pray for
her. It seemed hard for her to understand the simple plan of salvation,
and that the Lord Jesus would save her if she would believe. The evening
after Mr. Wharton left she received the evidence of her conversion. I can
never tell how the news of this woman's conversion spread over the city.
It created as much excitement as the news of the man who was found by our
Saviour among the tombs. Crowds came to our services to see if the news
was true, and when they heard the testimony for Christ they rejoiced with
us.

The other is a man of about the same age, who has been a great disbeliever
in the word of God, though his wife was a member of our church. He was a
very strong man in all the societies in the city. He has been led out of
darkness into light. The people say: "God bless Mr. Wharton." Our
Sunday-school has grown wonderfully in the last month. Indeed, every
department of our church work is looking up.



BEAUFORT, N.C.


BY REV. J.P. SIMS.

Evangelist Wharton's visit did us a great deal of good. Not only have
souls been converted, but the church has been edified. In the revival
there were six hopeful conversions, and four joined our church, among them
a very promising young man.

Our people are becoming more and more willing to divide their little mite
with the church. They make a special effort once a month to help raise the
pastor's salary by giving what they call a "surprise party," bringing
packages of flour, sugar, coffee, meal, rice, fish, etc., for which I give
them credit. Sometimes the unconverted are with them. They come in
singing, fill the table, then a prayer, and return at once, singing as
they go. By this process we are able to send in a better report than we
have been doing.



CENTRAL CHURCH, NEW ORLEANS, LA.


BY REV. JOHN W. WHITTAKER.

We have just passed through a precious season of revival. We began a
series of meetings during the week of prayer. God's presence and blessing
were manifestly with us, so we were constrained to continue them another
week, holding meetings every night. Fifteen were turned to God. Nine of
them have united with our church and have begun service for the Master.
The meetings were well attended, and our whole church was stirred up to
more faithful work for God and humanity. Our church is steadily increasing
in strength. Almost every Sabbath some one is taken into membership. We
have on our books nearly two hundred and fifty people who have pledged
themselves to give weekly on an average ten cents or more toward the
support of the church. We love the American Missionary Association, and
appreciate all that it is doing for us. We need its aid just now. We
cannot get on without it. But we do not mean to make what you do for us an
excuse for doing less for ourselves.




ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.


DENOMINATIONAL FRATERNITY.--From High Point, N. C., we have the following:


    One of the great hindrances to the evangelization of the colored
    people in the South is the constant flaunting of denominational
    banners by ignorant and unprincipled preachers. But I am happy to
    say, that at our special services on Lincoln Memorial Day, this
    spirit of evil was buried in High Point, at least for one day. It
    was pleasant to see Methodists, Baptists, and Congregationalists
    working harmoniously together to make the occasion successful. One
    brother and wife gave us 45 cents, and the pastor of the Baptist
    Church, after speaking a word in behalf of the American Missionary
    Association came forward and deposited a quarter on the table, at
    the same time urging his members to give liberally to help it
    overcome its great burden of debt. I am pleased also to note the
    self-denial of two faithful members, a mother and daughter of our
    own church, who out of their poverty gave 50 cents each. Both of
    these good women are out in service, and although their earnings
    are very small, they never give less than 25 cents each whenever
    special efforts are made to raise money for the support of the
    work.


GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCES OF THE PAST.--Rev. James Brown, of Anniston, Ala.,
recalls some memories of the past:


    When we met as a church on October 22, to pray for the success of
    the American Missionary Association, it was touching to hear the
    testimony of people from thirty-five to fifty years of age as to
    the self-sacrificing spirit of the missionaries of the American
    Missionary Association, as they came from Talladega to this
    section more than twenty-five years ago. Some told how the
    missionaries had to hide from place to place to keep out of the
    reach of the Ku Klux, the speakers being almost eye-witnesses to
    the murder of Mr. Luke, a few miles from this place. If some of
    our Northern friends could have heard the words of gratitude for
    the work of the American Missionary Association, and seen the
    tears of joy over what has been accomplished, they would know that
    their labors and gifts had not been in vain.


LIBERAL GIVING FROM A SMALL INCOME.--Rev. A. L. DeMond, of Lowell, N. C.,
writes:


    The people have had a heavy burden upon them during the hard times
    of these winter months when there is so little for them to do in
    the way of earning money. Of their little means they give freely
    and gladly. Many of them are paid for their work in provisions at
    the stores so that they do not receive much money. One poor woman
    said to me: "I can always give a little something because I get
    _forty cents every week_ for my washing." She lives in a little
    log cabin, through the sides of which the wind often whistles, but
    every Sunday she gives something for the church of Christ.


A POOR WOMAN'S FINE FEELING.--One day last year our laundress sent her
oldest boy, a lad fourteen years of age, on an errand. He was gone an hour
or more longer than she expected him to be. Upon his return she asked him
what he had been doing all that time. He told her that an expressman had
been run away with, and had been quite badly hurt. He had helped get the
man into a store, had gone for a doctor, and had done all that he could
for him. When he left him the man told him to go to his office the next
day and he would give him something. The boy's mother at once said that he
mustn't think of taking anything for what he had done for the man when he
was in trouble.

Who can say that the colored people are incapable of fine feeling? This
poor woman was certainly not so well provided with this world's goods that
she had no use for money. On the contrary, she was a widow, with a family
of five children that she had kept together and had sent to school at the
cost of much sacrifice and years of hard work at the washtub.





THE INDIANS.




REVIVAL--LIBERAL CONTRIBUTIONS.


MISS M. C. COLLINS, FORT YATES, N. DAK.

I am sure you will be glad to hear of the great, may I say "revival,"
which seems to be upon us. On March 1 at our regular communion we received
into the church fifteen adults, and there were eight marriages and nine
children baptized. Six of these people came from Flying-By region (Miss
Lord's people). She is rejoicing. One, Swift Cloud, and his wife, are a
middle-aged couple, who lived here when I first came to this village. They
are a good addition to our force. Then Two-Runs and his wife are two good
people, Miss Lord's near neighbors, and will be a great help to her. The
others uniting came from my village, and we now have only two men and
their wives in this village who are not in the church. Bird-Dog, another
of Miss Lord's people, and his wife and sister have given me their names
as candidates for membership at the next communion. The Y. M. C. A. down
there are hauling logs to build a place to meet in. The little cabin we
put up is already too small.

Our contributions for Native Missionary work, from October 1 to March 1,
all told, on Standing Rock Agency, are $206.47.

Women's Missionary          $107.20
Societies have given
Y. M. C. A.                   57.99
Grand River Church            21.78
Standing Rock Church          19.50
Elkhorn (on Grand River),     45.65
the Women's Society
Y. M. C. A.                   26.39

Beside this our church here has given about $15 to the Lincoln Memorial
Fund for the Association and $10 to buy table and chairs for the pulpit.
Our Christians are going from house to house to pray with the sick, and
many of these people are being brought to Christ through this means. On
communion Sunday we opened the folding doors and yet the church was so
full that three of us sat down on the little platform behind the pulpit.

I forgot to tell you that aside from this $206 we raised $200 to build a
chapel at One Bull's, where Elias was. The house is too little.

We are not "lazy, good-for-nothing Indians, fit only for the soldiers'
target." We are men and women struggling against clannishness and
superstition--against evil without and within--reaching up to you who know
the blessedness of the Light of the Gospel, asking you to reach down, down
into our dark lives and lift us up. Let us get a glimpse on this side of
the beauties of Heaven.

We need your help, and bye and bye we will join your forces and help you
to gather with God's fold other tribes and nations who know not God. Do
not cut us down this spring. It will break our hearts with discouragement.

God help people to hear our prayer. We shake hands with God's people in
the name of Jesus Christ our Saviour.

P.S.--Three of the people outside the church in this village have given me
their names as candidates for church membership at the May communion.




CROW AGENCY, MONTANA.--The growth of the missionary work among the Indians
at the Crow Agency, Montana, is very encouraging. Recent reports from this
field bring information of large gatherings in the religious services, and
in the church services and Sunday-school. Our missionary, Rev. J. G.
Burgess, is planning to spend several weeks this summer among the camps on
the prairies to which the Indians withdraw during the warmer months. A
chapel is very much needed at this mission in order to afford a place for
religious gatherings and such instruction as the missionary and his wife
are able to give these Indians. This mission of the American Missionary
Association is the only Protestant mission among the entire Crow tribe.





THE CHINESE.




THE OROVILLE MISSION.


BY REV. W.C. POND, D.D.

                     [Illustration: New Years Cake.]

                             New Years Cake.


The cake of which we give a picture is more than a monument to the
artistic cookery of which some of our brethren there are capable. It was
made in a sort of Christian competition with the rude and senseless
operations by which their idol-worshiping countrymen observed their great
annual festival. And on Salvation Army principles, though not after their
methods, it called the attention of multitudes both of Chinese and
Americans to the Mission House and the Mission work and the Saviour for
whom our brethren were eager to bear witness. They did not confine their
attention to cake-making nor express their loyalty to Christ in that way
alone, but made up a very respectable sum, which, as "New Year's Gifts to
Jesus," they placed in our treasury.

The picture, as we are able to give it in our magazine, is not large
enough to show all the points of interest about this cake. It represents,
of course, a Chinese pagoda, but with the idols omitted. Possibly there is
in it a little symbolism of _ascent_--the excelsior spirit which comes
from new life in Christ. Beginning at the shell foundation, we see two
cards which bear in Chinese an inscription literally translated thus:
"Eyes see; hands must not touch." Above this were the more abrupt or
pointed English words: "Hands off." Over the door at the head of the steps
is a framed inscription: "Happy New Year, 1896." In what might be called
the second story there is another inscription, which, being interpreted,
reads: "Blessed News Chapel"--_i.e._, Gospel Chapel--while on the right
post are characters which, literally translated, mean: "Blessed Land: good
cultivating"--_i.e._, to good cultivation this happy land yields large
returns. On the left-hand post the characters literally translated mean:
"News Chapel: righteous pastor: forms intimate friends"--_i.e._, the
righteous pastor of this Gospel Chapel makes warm friends.

On either side of the cake are Chinese New Year's lilies (narcissus)
growing to perfection in saucers supplied with nothing except clean
pebbles and pure water--these are said to symbolize purity and mercy.
Above the lilies rise great clusters of artificial flowers, which also
have some symbolical import; I am unable to say what.

This will be a good place to say a few words about this mission, which has
now been in existence for more than twenty years. During all this period
it has occupied, _rent free_, a small brick building belonging to our
ex-Governor and United States Senator, Hon. George C. Perkins, who began
his wonderfully successful career in this town of Oroville. He has not
even required us to pay the taxes upon it, and when a rumor reached my
ears that his agent had received an offer for the purchase of it, Mr.
Perkins kindly assured me that we should have the first chance to buy it,
and he would help us out by a generous donation. That's the sort of man he
is.

There has always been a large Chinese population engaged mainly in mining,
whose headquarters were at Oroville. When our mission was established the
number was estimated at not less than twenty-five hundred. Chinatown was
quite extensive and all its frail structures swarmed, like bee-hives, with
inhabitants. There are no such throngs now, but there are still people
enough to call forth the most and the best that we can do for them.

A large number of Chinese have here been turned from idol-worship to the
love of Jesus. I have at hand no means of scanning the long roll--reaching
up to many hundreds--of those who have for longer or shorter periods been
brought here to know something of Christ. And the frequent change of
teachers has rendered impossible any adequate statement of results. Among
those whom I specially remember are three Yongs: One, Yong Jim, an
unusually well-educated man who, after being a missionary helper in
several of our fields, returned to China, and has done gospel-work there
in connection with the American Board; another, Yong Kay, was a delegate
from California to the great convention of the Y. P. S. C. E. in Boston,
and made several addresses there, which were well received. He is now
preaching the Word in that city. Yet another of the same family has been
for several years a leader in Christian work among the Chinese in New
York. The Christians in California and elsewhere belonging to this family
have a little missionary work of their own among their relatives in China
in addition to what they do through our Chinese Missionary Society. The
work at Oroville is now in excellent hands. We have a good
helper--intelligent, wise, steadfast--who almost wholly supports himself,
drawing but five dollars per month from our treasury, and giving back a
goodly portion of this. The teachers are faithful and earnest, and I
rejoice to add that for several years our church in that town has
recognized its responsibility for this work, has given it the right hand
of fellowship, and has aided it with generous gifts.




Jubilee Year Fund, Additional Shares.


Rev. MILO N. MILES, Iowa City, Ia.

FIRST CONGREGATIONAL SUNDAY SCHOOL, East Orange, N. J.

Miss M. F. AIKEN, Maiden, Mass.

Mrs. MARY R. ENGLESBY, Burlington, Vt.

Rev. GEO. W. REED and WIFE, Fort Yates, N. D.

E. A. GOODNOW, Worcester, Mass., two shares.

BROADWAY CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Norwich, Conn., twenty shares.

CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Watertown, Conn.

Judge WM. H. UPSON, Akron, O.

TRINITARIAN CONG'L CH., Norton, Mass., four shares.

Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., Chicago, Ill.

Mrs. A. B. ROSS, Cambridgeboro, Pa.

ARTHUR'S MISSION, Millbury, Mass., two shares.

HORACE TRACEY PITKIN, New Hartford, Conn.

Mrs. EMMA P. SHUMWAY, Groton, Mass.

Mrs. AUGUSTA S. THURSTON, Whitinsville, Mass.

HIGH ST. CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Auburn, Me.

FIRST CONGREGATIONAL SOCIETY, Keene, N. H.

Dea. M. M. FISHER, Medway, Mass.

E. FISHER RICHARDSON, Medway, Mass.

Mrs. HARRIET P. SOMERS, Boston, Mass.

FROM A FRIEND IN MEMORY OF HER MOTHER, Boston, Mass.

Mrs. M. N. PHELPS, Foxboro, Mass.

Dr. R. N. BAUGHMAN, Marseilles, Ill., two shares.

WINDHAM CONFERENCE of Connecticut.

MARY R. CUMMINGS, for heirs of W. H. Cummings, two shares.

Mrs. A. L. BAYLEY, Amesbury, Mass.

CONGREGATIONAL SUNDAY SCHOOL AND DEPARTMENTS, Flushing, N. Y.

Mrs. LUCY S. CONNOR, Henniker, N. H.

JOHN P. JUBE, Newark, N. J.

Mrs. SARAH C. KELLOGG, in memory of her Father, Rev. E. J. Comings,
Kingsville, O.

Miss ABBY W. TURNER, Randolph, Mass., two shares.

CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH AND DEPARTMENTS, Grand View, Tenn.

Rev. J. G. BURGESS and Wife, Crow Agency, Mont.

BY A FRIEND in memory of Rev. J. H. Stearns, D.D., Epping, N. H.

A MEMBER OF SOUTH CHURCH, Salem, Mass.

NELSON VALENTINE, in memory of Mrs. R. W. Valentine, New Gloucester, Me.

CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Auburndale, Mass.

Mrs. JULIA E. BRICK, Brooklyn, N. Y.

GLOUCESTER EVANGELICAL CONGREGATIONAL SOCIETY, Chepachet, R. I.

Mrs. JOHN H. WASHBURN, New York.

GEO. W. MARSTON, San Diego, Cal.

Mrs. ANNA LEE MARSTON, San Diego, Cal.

JAMES A. SMITH, Osage, Iowa.

S. B. FRENCH, Chicago, Ill.

SOUTH CHURCH, Salem, Mass., two shares.

NORFOLK CONFERENCE, Mass.

  Previously reported,     34
Subscriptions reported     75
above,
                         ----
Total number of shares    109
reported,




RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1896.


_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

_For the Education of Colored People_.

Income for April           $1,100.00
Previously acknowledged    31,307.35
                          ----------
                          $32,407.35
                          ==========




CURRENT RECEIPTS.


             MAINE, $417.24.
Alfred. Cong. Ch.                    9.50
Auburn. High St. Cong.              57.81
Ch. (50 of which _for
Share Jubilee Fund_)
Auburn. Sixth St. Cong.             15.00
Ch.
Auburn. Sixth St. Cong.
Ch., B. of C. _for
Andersonville, Ga._
Belfast. First Cong. Ch.            50.00
Biddeford. "Friends" in              6.00
Pavillion Ch.
Brewer. First Cong. Ch.             16.00
Bridgton. First Cong. Ch.           14.55
and Soc.
Bridgton. Mrs. Julia P.              1.75
Hall, _for Freight to
Grand View, Tenn._
Bucksport. S.S. Class by             2.13
M.S. Blodgett, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
Cumberland Center.                   3.00
Helping Hand Soc., _for
Student Aid, McIntosh,
Ga._
East Otisfield. Mrs.                 1.00
Susan K. Loring
Eastport. Central Cong.              6.50
Ch., 5.50; Jun. End. Soc.
Central Cong. Ch., 1;
Lincoln Mem. Day Offering
Farmington. Miss. C.N.               2.00
Bixby, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Gardiner. Marietta
Parshley, Bbl. C. _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._
Hallowell. Ladies' Prayer            5.00
Circle, _for Central Ch.,
New Orleans, La._
Kennebunk. Union Ch. and            46.90
Soc.
Litchfield Corners. Cong.            5.00
Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for
Indian M._
Portland. "To help pay              25.00
the debt"
Portland. Class in S. S.            10.00
Second Parish Cong. Ch.,
_for Mountain Work_
Portland. Y. P. S. C. E.            10.00
Bethel Ch., _for Student
Aid, Lincoln Acad.,
King's Mountain, N. C._
South Berwick.  Bbl. C.
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._
South Gardiner. Cong. Ch.            6.00
Standish. Cong. Ch.                  5.00
Vinal Haven. Miss Minnie             6.00
A. Whitten, 5; Mrs.
Carrie L. Paige, 1, _for
Student Aid, McIntosh,
Ga._
Wells. First Cong. Ch.              15.00
Yarmouth. First Parish              30.00
Church
Maine Woman's Aid to A.
M. A., by Mrs. Ida V.
Woodbury, Treas.:
Albany. Mrs. H. G.                   5.00
Lovejoy, 3; Mrs J.E.
Bird, 1; ----, 1
Biddeford. Pavilion Ch.              5.00
Lewiston. Pine St. Ch.              30.00
(10 of which _for Student
Aid, Straight U._)
Portland. Bethel Ch.                23.10
                            ------- 63.10

       NEW HAMPSHIRE, $533.68.
Alstead Center. Cong. Ch.         5.00
Sab. Sch., 2.68; Ladies'
Circle, 2.32
Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and          14.17
Soc.
Concord. First Cong. Ch.        100.88
(8 of which _for the
Debt_) to const. JOHN C.
RICHARDS, LOUIS B. TEBAU,
and MRS. ANN G. CLARK
L.M.'s
Concord. "Friend"                 5.00
Durham. Cong. Ch.                20.00
East Derry. Mrs. Day,             2.30
_for Wilmington, N. C._
East Derry. Cong. Ch.,
Bbl. C., freight paid
_for Wilmington, N. C._
Epping. Cong. Ch., 6.23;         11.23
Mrs. Shepherd's S. S.
Class, 5
Epping. Two Bbls. C. _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._
Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.         41.00
Farmington. Cong. Ch.             3.00
Hampstead. Cong. Ch.             15.00
Hancock. Cong. Ch.                5.00
Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.               3.58
Keene. First Cong. Ch.,          50.00
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Meriden.  Florence
Robinson, Box C. _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._
Nashua. Pilgrim Ch.,            153.44
123.44 to const. MISS
JESSIE A. PLUMMER, MISS
M. E. EMERSON, MRS. A. K.
WOODBURY and H. E.
KENDALL L.M.'s; Y. P. S.
C. E. of Pilgrim Ch., 30
to const. WILLIAM
JENNINGS L.M.
Newfields. Miss H. L.            33.50
Fitts, Col., _for
Wilmington, N. C._
Newmarket. Thos. H.              10.00
Wiswall
Newport. Cong. Ch.               36.18
Penacook. C.H. Saunders,
Case New Boots and Shoe
_for McIntosh, Ga._
Rye. Cong. Ch.                    4.40
West Concord. L. M. S. of
Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for
Tougaloo, Miss._
New Hampshire Female
Cent. Inst. and Home
Missionary Union, Miss A.
A. McFarland, Treas.:
West Concord Y. L. M.            20.00
Soc., _for Tougaloo U._

         VERMONT, $271.85.
Brattleboro. Center Cong.     99.67
Ch.
Brattleboro. Mrs. C. B.        5.00
Rice, _for Fisk U._
Burlington. First Ch.,        50.00
Mrs. Mary R. Engelesby,
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Burlington. Cong. Ch.,
Box Goods, Freight paid,
_for McIntosh, Ga._
Chelsea. Cong. Ch., _for       1.30
Freight to McIntosh, Ga._
Essex Juction. Cong. Ch.      10.89
Fairlee. "A Friend"           10.00
Jeffersonville. Second         5.00
Cong. Ch. of Cambridge
Newport. First Cong. Ch.      16.25
Norwich. Mrs B. B. Newton      5.00
Peacham. Cong. Ch. and S.      5.00
S., adl., "A Friend"
Putney. Ladies' Aid Soc.,
of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Quechee. Cong. Ch.            23.81
Rutland. John Howard           4.00
Vergennes. Cong. Ch.          15.00
West Randolph. Susan E.        5.00
Albin
Williamstown. Cong. Ch.        7.00
Williston. Cong. Ch.           8.93

         MASSACHUSETTS, $5,068.95.
Abington. First Cong. Ch.              6.55
Amherst. South Cong. Ch.               2.39
Arlington. Mrs. E. T.
Hillard, Bbl. C. _for
McIntosh, Ga._
Ballardvale. Union Cong.              25.75
Ch.
Berlin. Cong. Ch.                     18.21
Boston. Union Cong. Ch.              211.36
Old South Ch., adl.                  115.00
Old South Ch., Miss C. M.             40.00
Clapp, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Mrs. Harriet P. Somers,               50.00
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Wm. Shaw, _for Student                35.00
Aid, Straight U._
Charlestown. Winthrop                 35.68
Cong. Ch.
Dorchester. Second Cong.              96.34
Ch.
Dorchester. Mrs. Jacob                10.00
Fullerton
Jamaica Plain.  Boylston              38.50
Cong. Ch.
Roxbury. Eliot Cong. Ch.             131.75
                            -------- 763.63
Boxford. First Cong. Ch.              25.00
Braintree. First Cong.                 3.83
Ch.
Brockton.  "Cottage                    8.00
Prayer Circle" of Cong.
Ch., _for Wilmington, N.
C._
Brookline. Harvard Cong.             103.77
Ch.
Buckland.  Ladies of
Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.
_for Macon, Ga._
Cambridgeport. Prospect              117.35
St. Cong. Ch., 87.06;
Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 25.29;
Mrs. Mary E. Hidden, 5
Cambridgeport. Y. P. S.               10.00
C. E. of Pilgrim Ch.,
_for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._
Carlisle. C. E. Soc., by              25.00
Mrs W. B. Chamberlin,
_for Saluda Sem., N. C._
Charlton. Cong. Ch.                    6.50
Cohasset. Ladies of Cong.
Ch., Bbl. of C. _for
Macon, Ga._
Concord Junction. Union                1.00
Ch.
Conway. Cong. Ch. and                 41.00
Sab. Sch.
Dedham. Sab. Sch. First               20.47
Cong. Ch., _for Indian
Schp., Fort Berthold, N.
D._
Dunstable. Cong. Ch., to              30.00
const. MRS. JAMES E.
WESTON L.M.
East Bridgewater. Union               25.00
Cong. Ch., Extra Cent a
day Band
Enfield. Cong. Ch.                    30.00
Fall River. Central Cong.             25.00
Ch., adl.
Falmouth. North Cong. Ch.              5.00
Florence. Florence Cong.              18.30
Ch.
Foxboro. Mrs M. N.                    50.00
Phelps, _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
Framingham. Plymouth                  36.75
Cong. Ch. (10 of which
_for Indian M._)
Gill. Y. P. S. C. E., by               5.90
Jessie S. Moore, Sec.,
_for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._
Great Barrington. James                5.00
Bird, _for Jubilee Fund_
Greenfield. Mrs. E. M.                25.00
Russell
Groton. Union Cong. Ch.,              50.00
Mrs. Emma P. Shumway,
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Groveland. Rev. L.F.                   1.37
Berry, _for Freight to
Grand View, Tenn._
Hamilton.  Mrs. E. F.
Knowlton and Friends,
Bbl. C. _for Saluda, N.
C._
Haverhill. Algernon P.                50.00
Nichols, _for Fisk U._
Haverhill. Riverside Ch.,              9.23
6.50; Fourth Ch., 2.73
Haydenville. Cong. Ch.                 7.24
and Soc.
Housatonic. Prim. Sab.                 2.00
Sch. Class, _for Student
Aid, McIntosh, Ga._
Ipswich. Sab. Sch. of                 50.00
South Ch., _for Indian
M., Fort Berthold, N. D._
Lawrence. "Friend," _for               0.20
Student Aid, Beach Inst._
Lexington. Hancock Cong.              14.25
Ch.
Malden. Miss M. F. Aiken               5.00
Malden. First Cong. Ch.                3.00
Y. P. S. C. E., _for
Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Mansfield. Ortho. Cong.               22.00
Ch.
Maplewood. Y. P. S. C. E.             15.00
of Cong. Ch.
Marion. Sab. Sch. Cong.                5.69
Ch.
Marshfield Hills. Mrs. G.              2.00
H. Morss, _for Woman's
Work_
Medway. Dea. M. M.                   100.00
Fisher, 50, _for Share
Jubilee Fund_; E. Fisher
Richardson, 50, _for
Share Jubilee Fund_
Melrose. Ortho. Cong.                 31.60
Ch., _for Indian M._
Melrose. Wm. W. Boynton               15.00
Melrose Highlands. "Thank              2.50
Offering"
Middleboro. First Cong.               16.00
Ch.
Millbury.  "Arthurs                  100.00
Mission," _for 2 Shares
Jubilee Fund_
Milton. "A Friend," _for              10.00
new building, Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Mount Hermon. Mount                   25.00
Hermon Miss'y Soc., _for
Fisk U._
Natick. Rev. C. F.                     5.00
Robinson
New Boston. A. E.                      6.00
Callender
Newton. Eliot Ch.                     90.00
Newton Center. First                  94.77
Cong. Ch.
Newton Highlands. Cong.              110.62
Ch., Easter Sunday
Northampton. Dorcas                   55.00
Society, _for Student
Aid, Tougaloo U._
North Brookfield. First               22.70
Cong. Ch. and Soc.
North Brookfield. Extra               20.00
Cent a Day Band, First
Cong. Ch., _for a horse,
Hagan, Ga._
North Carver. Cong. Ch.               14.00
Northfield. Y. P. S. C.                5.00
E., by Elsie Duncan
North Leominster.  Cong.              16.00
Ch., 14; Y. P. S. C. E.
of Cong. Ch., 2
North Leominster. Y. L.
Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
Bbl. C. _for Tougaloo,
Miss._
Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                7.08
Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.              250.00
(200 of which _for 4
Shares Jubilee Fund_)
Pittsfield. First Cong.               54.29
Ch.
Randolph.  Ladies' Benev.             25.00
Ass'n., by Miss Abby W.
Turner, _for Share,
Tougaloo U._
Reedville. Geo. L. Rice                5.00
Rockland. C. E. Society,
2 Bbls. C. _for Tougaloo,
Miss._
Roslindale. Cong. Ch.,                12.00
Children's M. Band, _for
Allen N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._
Salem. South Cong. Ch.               141.56
Salem. Tabernacle Ch. (1              58.02
of which _for Indian M._)
Salem. Sab. Sch. Crombie              15.00
St. Cong. Ch., _for
Santee Indian Sch.,
Santee, Neb._
Somerset. Mrs. A. L.                   2.00
Morrill, Bbl. Goods; 2
_for freight, for
Meridian, Miss._
South Deerfield. L. S.                 2.00
Clary
South Hadley Falls. L. M.             10.00
S., _for Student Aid,
Straight U._
South Hadley Falls. Cong               8.51
Ch.
South Hadley Falls. Jr.                6.00
End. Soc., Cong Ch., _for
Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
South Weymouth. Mrs. Wm.               9.00
Dyer, _for Student Aid,
Allen N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._
Springfield. Cong. Ch.,
Bbl. C.; Y. P. S. E. of
North Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Sterling. Evan. Cong. Ch.             18.18
Stockbridge. Miss A.                  10.00
Byington, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
Stoughton. Cong. Ch.                   8.28
Taunton. Union Cong. Ch.              18.65
Upton. First Cong. Ch.                38.04
Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                  25.98
Wakefield. "Inasmuch                  10.00
Circle" of King's
Daughters Cong. Ch., _for
Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.              68.56
Waltham. "Friend" _for                 0.72
freight to Beach Inst._
Walpole. "Friends"                    30.00
Ware. First Cong. Ch.                 21.35
Wareham. C. E. Soc., _for              1.40
freight to Tougaloo,
Miss._
Warren. Sab. Sch. Cong.               23.80
Ch., _for Cumberland Gap,
Tenn._
Warren. Y.  P. S. C. E.,               4.00
_for Student Aid,
McIntosh, Ga._
Watertown. Phillips Cong.            127.15
Ch.
Westboro. Evan. Cong.                 25.00
Ch., Y. L. B. Soc., _for
Saluda, N. C._
Westboro. Cong. Ch., Y.                5.00
P. S. C. E, _for Student
Aid, Allen N. and I.
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._
West Boxford. Cong. Ch.                7.50
Westfield. ----                        1.00
West Newbury. L. M. Soc.,              5.00
First Cong. Ch. _for
Student Aid, Straight U._
Westport. Pacific Union               12.50
Cong. Ch.
West Springfield. Park                32.25
St. Cong. Ch.
West Springfield. First               10.00
Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C.
E., _for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._
West Stockbridge. Village             20.00
Cong. Ch.
Whitinsville. "Thank                  50.00
Offering," _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
Willbraham. "A Friend"                30.63
Woods Holl. Mrs. G. G.
Dodge, Bbl. C. _for
Wilmington, N. C._
Worcester. Plymouth Cong.            310.00
Ch. (100 of which from E.
A. Goodnow, _for Two
Shares Jubilee Fund_)
Worcester. Mr. and Mrs.              100.00
Samuel R. Heywood, _for
Two Shares Jubilee Fund_
Worcester. Union Ch.,                131.93
91.93; Piedmont Ch., 30;
Chas. O. Bachelor, 10
Woman's Home Missionary
Association of Mass. and
R.I., Miss Annie C.
Bridgman, Treas.:
For Salaries of Teachers             340.00
Brighton. Sab Sch. Evan.              15.00
Ch., _for Indian Schp.
Oahe, S. D._
Brimfield. Mrs. J.W.                   1.00
Browning, _for work for
Chinese Women_
"A Friend in Memory of                50.00
her Mother," _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
                            -------- 406.00
                                  ---------
                                  $4,568.95

               ESTATE.
Chelsea. Estate of Elvira      500.00
L. Harding, _for
Freedmen, Indian and
Chinese M._, by Edwin D.
Sibley, Adm'r
                            ---------
                            $5,068.95

       RHODE ISLAND, $114.09.
Central Falls. Hon. E. L.      100.00
Freeman, _for Two Shares
Jubilee Fund_
Newport. United Cong.           12.89
Ch., quarterly
Providence. Y. P. S. C.          1.20
E., No. Cong. Ch.

          CONNECTICUT, $3,423.76.
Abington. Rev. E. B. Pike              5.00
Andover. C. E. Soc., by                5.68
Ernest K. Post, Sec.
Berlin. Mrs. T. M.                     5.00
Warner, _for Moorehead,
Miss._
Bethlehem. "A Friend."                 4.00
Branford. Cong. Ch., 5;                8.00
A. E. Hammer, 2; L. J.
Nichols, 1
Bridgeport. Second Cong.              56.89
Ch., 48.60; West End
Cong. Ch., 8.29
Bristol. Miss Lena J.                 47.60
Upson, 30; Sab. Sch. of
Cong. Ch., 17.60, _for
Student Aid, Tougaloo U._
Bristol. Cong. Ch.                    25.00
Center Brook. Ladies of               25.00
Cong. Ch., _for Allen N.
and I. Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._
Chaplin. Cong. Ch. to                 30.00
const. WINSLOW B. GALLUP
L. M.
Cheshire. Henry Gaylord,              50.00
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Clinton. "A Friend."                   5.00
Cornwall. Second Cong.                37.30
Ch., to const. WALTER B.
JOHNSON L. M.
Cornwall Hollow. Y. P. S.              9.00
C. E., _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Coventry. Second Cong.                21.63
Ch.
Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                    6.04
Derby. Second Cong. Ch.,              49.47
32.00 to const. REV.
EDWARD C. FELLOWS L.M.;
First Cong. Ch., 17.47
Danbury. West St. Cong.               10.00
Ch.
Darien. Cong. Ch.                     11.38
East Canaan. Sab. Sch.                14.00
Cong. Ch., _for Allen N.
and I. Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._
East Hampton. Cong. Ch.               22.35
East Hartland. Cong. Ch.,              6.00
adl.
East Haven. Cong. Ch.                 35.50
(15.50 of which _for
Central Ch., New Orleans,
La._)
Enfield. Rev. O. W.                   20.00
Means, _for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Enfield. First Cong. Ch.              18.00
Farmington. C. E. Soc.,               15.00
by Mary J. Hart, Treas.,
_for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._
Franklin. Cong. Ch.                    2.00
Greenfield Hill. Cong.                36.26
Ch., 26.26; Y. P. S. C.
E., by M. Louise Meeker,
Treas., 10
Guilford. First Cong.                 31.00
Ch., 30 to const. MISS
LAURA E. BRISTOL L. M.;
Capt. Chas. Griswold, 1
Hartford. First Cong.                138.03
Ch., 124.03; Asylum Hill
Cong. Ch., "A Friend,"
10; Elizabeth Loomis, 4
Hartford.  Atwood                     90.00
Collins, 50; Daniel R.
Howe, 40, _for Student
Aid Tougaloo U._
Hartford. Sab. Sch. Pearl             40.35
St. Cong. Ch., _for Fisk
U._
Higganum. Woman's Cong.               20.00
H.M. Soc. by Katharine E.
Huntington, Treas.
Kent. First Cong. Ch.                 12.46
Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                     13.00
Lyme. Y. P. S. C. E.,                  5.00
_for Jonesboro, Tenn._
Madison. First Cong. Ch.               6.87
Mansfield Center. "A                   1.00
Friend."
Middlefield.  Miss Anna                1.50
G. Birdsey's Sab. Sch.
Class, _for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Middle Haddam. Second                 12.52
Cong. Ch.
New Britain. "Friends,"               25.00
_for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
New Britain. First Ch. of
Christ. Box of house
linen _for Marion, Ala._
New Hartford. Horace                  50.00
Tracy Pitkin, _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
New Hartford. North Cong.              1.50
Ch., Jun. C. E., _for
Student Aid, A. N. and I.
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._
New Hartford. Ladies' Aid
Society, Box C. _for
Tougaloo, Miss._
New Haven. Yale Sem.,                 25.00
Rev. S. Harris, D.D., 10;
Mrs. C. H. Dill, 5; E. H.
Sperry, 5; Wells
Campbell, 3; J. W,
Nichols, 2
New Haven. By Mrs. C.A.                3.20
Pyne, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
New London. First Ch. of              48.62
Christ
New London. Sab. Sch.                 29.15
First Ch. of Christ, _for
Student Aid, Tougaloo U._
New London. Alice C.                   6.00
Crandall, _for Student
Aid, A. N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._
New London. First Ch.,                 0.89
Chinaman's Class in Sab.
Sch., _for Chinese M. in
Cal._
Norfolk. Y. P. S. C. E.,               3.00
by Rev. H.W. Carter
Norfolk. ----, _for                    1.72
freight to Grand View,
Tenn._
Norwich. Broadway Cong.            1,000.00
Ch., Special offering
_for Twenty Shares
Jubilee Fund_
Norwich. Broadway Cong.                2.59
Ch., _for freight to
McIntosh, Ga._
Norwich. Second Cong.                  5.19
Sab. Sch., Mrs. C. W.
Morrison's Class
Norwich. Miss Rossiter,                8.00
_for Athens, Ala._
Norwich. Ladies of Park                0.40
Ch., _for freight to
Blowing Rock, N. C._
Orange. Cong. Ch.                     14.26
Plainfield. First Cong.               10.05
Ch.
Plainfield. Y. P. S. C.                2.01
E., by Amelia V. L.
Arnold, Treas.
Plainville. Cong. Ch.                 28.87
Plantsville. Cong. Ch.                90.77
Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                    1.70
Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                  33.81
Portland. First Cong.                 25.00
Ch., Ladies' Soc., _for
Share, Mountain Teacher_
(10 of which, bal. to
const. MRS. WESLEY W.
SMITH L. M.)
Seymour. Cong. Ch.                     6.32
Somers. "C. B. P."                    30.00
Stafford. Mrs. Thomas H.               5.00
Thresher
Stratford. Sab. Sch.                  10.00
Cong. Ch., _for Lowell,
N. C._
Stratford. Cong. Ch.                   5.00
Storrs. Cong. Ch.                     11.55
Suffield. First Cong.                 48.04
Ch., 23.04, and Sab. Sch.
25 (30 of which to const.
MRS. KATE B. MERRILL L.
M. and 11.85 bal. to
const. MISS NELLIE C.
WANDKE L. M.
Taftville. Cong. Ch.                  12.38
Talcottville. Mrs S. A.                5.00
Talcott, _for Student
Aid, Allen N. and I.
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._
Terryville. Mrs. Bates,               18.00
_for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Terryville. Allentown                 10.00
Sab. Sch., _for Student
Aid, Tougaloo U._
Thomaston. First Cong.                14.19
Ch.
Tolland. Cong. Ch.                    36.90
Torringford. Ch. and Soc.             22.58
Trumbull. Cong. Ch.                    3.00
Union. Cong. Ch.                      15.16
Waterbury. Second  Cong.              35.00
Ch., Woman's Benev. Soc.,
_for Indian Schp., Santee
Sch._
Watertown. Cong. Ch., 35;             50.00
Sab. Sch., 10, and Y. P.
S. C. E., 5, _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
Wallingford. Cong. Ch.,                2.00
Ladies' Benev. Soc., 2,
and Bbl. C. _for Saluda,
N. C._
West Cornwall. Y. P. S.                8.00
C. E., _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
West Hartford. First Ch.              17.99
of Christ
West Haven. First Ch.                 13.22
West Haven. Wm. H.                     5.00
Moulthrop, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Whitneyville. Cong. Ch.,              30.00
to const. REV. CHARLES F.
CLARKE L. M.
Windsor. First Cong. Ch.              51.75
Wilton. Cong. Ch. and C.              19.52
E. Soc.
Wilton. Sab. Sch. Cong.                3.00
Ch., _for Chinese Mission
Home, San Francisco,
Cal._
Windham. Conference of                50.00
Cong. Churches, by Rev.
S. H. Fellows, Register,
_for Share Jubilee Fund_
Woman's Congregational
Home Missionary Union of
Conn., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas.:
Danbury. West St. Ch. Y.              20.60
L. M. S. (60c. of which
_for Student Aid,
Williamsburg Acad._
Hartford. First Ch. Jun.              50.00
Aux.
Hartford. First Ch.                   25.00
"Thank Offering"
Meriden. First Ch.                    10.00
Guardian Soc.
New Britain.  So. Ch.                  1.50
Aux., adl.
Newington. L. H. M. U.                 8.50
Norwich. Park Ch.,                   400.00
154.65; Broadway Ch.,
150; Second Ch., 50;
First Ch., 20; Taftville
Ch., 10.35; Greenville
Ch., 15, _for Salary of a
Teacher at Blowing Rock,
N. C._
                            -------- 515.60

           NEW YORK, $2,158.47.
Binghamton. Mrs. Edward               10.00
Taylor
Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                14.00
Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch.             77.54
Brooklyn. Central Cong.               37.50
Sab. Sch., _for Indian
M., Santee Agency, Neb._
Brooklyn. C. E. League of             10.00
Clinton Av. Cong. Ch.,
_for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._
Brooklyn. Lee Av. Cong.
Ch., Bbl. of Groceries
_for King's Mountain, N.
C._, New England Ch. C.
E. Soc., Bbl. C. _for
Athens, Ala._; Episcopal
Ch. Y. L. Guild, Pkg.
Sew. Material _for
Lexington, Ky._
Carthage. W. M. S., Box                2.00
Carpet and Household
Supplies, and 2 _for
freight to Blowing Rock,
N. C._
Corona. Mrs. W. J. Peck,
Pkg. Literature for
_Beach Inst._
Geneva. Miss Estella                   2.00
Fiero, _for Student Aid,
Tougaloo, Miss._
Grand Island. First Cong.              7.20
Ch.
Ithaca. Sab. Sch. First               40.00
Cong. Ch., _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._
Jamestown. Sab. Sch. of               33.36
Cong. Ch., Special Easter
Offering _for Hagan, Ga._
Livonia. Mrs. William                 20.00
Calvert and Sister
Madison. Cong. Ch., H. M.              3.50
S.
Maine. First Cong. Ch.                28.89
Newark Valley. H. M.
Society, Bbl. C. _for
Tougaloo, Miss._
New York. Broadway                   500.00
Tabernacle, Lucien C.
Warner, M.D.
New York. Lucien C.                  230.00
Warner, M.D., _for Share
Jubilee Fund_, 50; Chas.
L. Mead, _for Share
Jubilee Fund_, 50; Misses
S. L. and D. E. Emerson,
_for Share Jubilee Fund_,
50; Bethany Ch. Sab.
Sch., 50; Broadway Tab.,
"A Friend," Jubilee
Offering, 25; "M. C. H.,"
3; Sab. Sch. Class Mount
Hope Cong. Ch., 2
New York. Miss Grace H.
Dodge, 2 Cases Books _for
Beach Inst._
Rochester. Mrs. H. Clark,              5.00
Easter Offering
Salamanca. Cong. Ch.,                  2.47
adl.
Schenectady. Cong. Ch. Y.              8.00
P. S. C. E., by Grace M.
Chadsey, Sec., _for
Woman's Work_
Sherburne. First Cong.               159.91
Ch. to const. MRS. CORA
H. LITTLE, MISS HARRIET
MARSTERS, and CHARLES
BICKERT L.M.'s
Sinclairville. Cong. Ch.,
Bbl. C. _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._
Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                      8.41
West Newark. D. J.                     3.00
Bothwick, _for Central
Ch., New Orleans, La._
Woodhaven. Jr. C. E. Soc.              2.00
of First Cong. Ch., _for
new building, Cal.
Chinese M._
Yaphank. Mrs. Hampton                 10.00
Overton
FOR GLOUCESTER SCH.,
CAPPAHOSIC, VA.:
Franklin. A.J. Parsons,                8.50
4; Miss A. E. Barnes, 2;
"A Friend," 1; S. P.
Smith, 50c.; Rufus Wood,
50c.; Miss A. J.
Jennings, 25c.; Mrs. G.
W. Bennet, 25c.
New York. Dr. B. Lord                 10.00
Syracuse. D. H. Gowing                25.00
Troy. Mrs. Christie, 2;               10.00
Mrs. John Nhear, 2; Mrs.
Shields, 2; Mrs. Cowell,
1; Mrs. Proudfoot, 1;
Others, 2
                             -------- 53.50
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of N. Y., Mrs. J.
J. Pearsall, Treas.:
W. H. M. U.                          200.00
Antwerp. W. M. S.                      2.00
Albany. First Ch. S. S.,              10.00
_for Student Aid, Howard
U._
Albany. Clinton Av. Ch.,               6.00
L. A. S.
Brooklyn. Ch. of the                 371.20
Pilgrims, W. H. M. S.,
100; Tompkins Av. Ch.,
King's Daughters, 50;
Lewis Av. Ch., W. M. S.,
55.00; Lewis Av. Ch.,
Evangel. Circle to const.
MRS. D. E. CROCHERON
L.M., 36.20; Lewis Av.,
Y. P. S. C. E., to const.
WILBUR MORRIS L.M., 30;
Clinton Av. Y. L. G., 60;
Clinton Av. L. B. S.,
_for New Chinese Mission
House, San Francisco,
Cal._, 25; So. Ch. Jun.
C. E., _for Student Aid,
Fort Berthold, N. D._, 15
Buffalo. First Ch., W. H.             25.00
M. S.
Candor. Y. L. G. _for                 10.00
Schp. Saluda, N. C._
Crown Point. Aux.                     15.49
East Rockaway. Bethany                 3.00
Ch. W. A.
Ithaca. W. M. S. (23.01               63.00
which _for Alaska M._)
Jamesport. L. S.                      10.00
Morrisville. C. E. _for                5.50
Central Ch., New Orleans,
La._
New York City. Broadway               17.50
Tab. Ch. Soc. Woman's
Work
Norwich. W. M. S., to                 30.00
const. MISS MARY
ELIZABETH DECKER L.M.
Pokeepsie. C. E. _for                 15.00
Industrial Work, Fisk U._
Riverhead. W. H. M. U.                19.00
Utica.  Bethesda Ch., H.               5.00
M. S.
Walton. W. M. S.                      10.00
Warsaw. "Earnest Workers"             60.00
to const. MRS. CHARLES H.
FARGO and MRS. E.R. VAN
ALLEN L.M.'s
Watertown. C. E.                       8.30
Watertown. Jun. M. C.                  4.20
                            -------- 890.19

        NEW JERSEY, $533.69.
East Orange. Sab. Sch.         50.36
First Cong. Ch., by Miss
Georgiana Stevenson,
Treas., _for Share
Jubilee Fund_
East Orange. Mrs. C. B.
Clark's Class, Bags _for
Sewing Class, Athens,
Ala._
Montclair. First Cong.        335.58
Ch.
Montclair. Lot of Bedding
for Talladega C., ack. in
April Missionary, should
read Ladies' H. M. Soc.,
Barrel and Bale of Goods,
val. 120, _for Talladega
C._, and Goods for
Rutland, Ga., val 52.
Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.       89.75
Paterson. Auburn St.            8.00
Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.
Westfield. Ladies' Miss'y
Soc., Bbl, Literature
and C. _for McIntosh,
Ga._
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of the N. J. Assn.,
by Mrs. J. H. Denison,
Treas.:
Montclair. First Cong.         50.00
Ch. W. H. M. S.

       PENNSYLVANIA, $135.57.
Cambridgboro. Mrs. A. B.       50.00
Ross, _for Share Jubilee
Fund_, and to const.
HARRIETTE M. ROSS, L.M.
New Milford. H. A.             10.00
Summers
Philadelphia. By J. D.          5.00
Kelley, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
Pittsburg. First Cong.         10.00
Ch.
Ridgway. First Cong. Ch.       51.25
Ridgway. First Cong. Ch.        5.00
S. S. Class, _for
McIntosh, Ga._
Spring Creek. Cong. Ch.         1.82
West Spring Creek. Cong.        2.50
Ch.

          OHIO, $647.50.
Akron. First Cong. Ch.      215.71
(50 of which for Judge
Wm. H. Upson, _for share
in Jubilee Fund_, 110;
West Cong. Ch., 100;
Arlington St. Cong. Ch.,
5.71
Akron. Infant Class, Sab.     8.50
Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
Kindergarten, Memphis,
Tenn._
Ashtabula. King's
Daughters, Bbl C. _for
Tougaloo, Miss._
Aurora. Cong. Ch.,            3.70
Lincoln Mem. Day Offering
Bowling Green. James O.       5.00
Troup, _for Fisk U._
Castalia. First Cong. Ch.    12.09
Cleveland. Euclid Av.        46.33
Cong. Ch.
Cleveland. Euclid Av.
Cong. Ch., by previous
contributions,
constitutes ROY C.
FOSTER, MISS MILLY E.
BROWN, MRS. ANNA
BRADSHAW, and MRS. THOMAS
WILSON L.M's.
Cleveland. Euclid Av. Ch.
Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C.
_for Birmingham, Ala._
Cleveland. Pilgrim Ch.,      87.00
quarterly, 72; Franklin
Av. Cong. Ch., 10; Mrs.
F. W. Low, 5
Cleveland. Pilgrim Cong.
Ch., Bbl. C. _for
Wilmington, N. C._
Coolville. Cong. Ch.          4.10
Dover. Jr. C. E. Soc. of
Cong. Ch., Box and Bbl.
C. _for Tougaloo, Miss._
East Cleveland. Miss          1.00
Elizabeth Burton, _for
Student Aid, Ballard
Normal Sch._
Freedom. Cong. Ch.            8.41
Hamilton. Children, First
Presb. Ch., Box Goods
_for McIntosh, Ga._
Hudson. Cong. Ch.             8.00
Jefferson. Ladies' Aid
Soc., Bbl. C. _for
Tougaloo, Miss._
Marietta. First Cong. Ch.    40.90
North Madison. Y. P. S.       2.00
C. E., by Miss H. E.
Branch, Pres.
Oberlin. Second Cong.       143.80
Ch., 94.24; First Cong.
Ch., quarterly 49.56
Oberlin. New Oberlin S.       3.50
C. E., by J. M.Cook, Sec.
Oberlin. First Cong. Ch.,
2, Bbl. C. _for Tougaloo,
Miss._; "Friends," Box C.
_for Wilmington, N. C._
Oxford. "L. E. K."            3.00
Painesville. Cong. Miss'y    10.00
Soc. of Lake Erie Sem.,
_for Student Aid, Ballard
Normal Sch._
Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.    38.46
Springfield. Elenor M.        5.00
Purcell
Strongsville. Member          1.00
Cong. Ch., adl.

        ILLINOIS, $737.77.
Alton. Church of the          85.86
Redeemer
Bloomington. Mrs. M. E.        5.00
Horr
Bowmansville. Cong. Ch.       12.39
Chapin. Prairie Sab. Sch.
Bbl. C. _for Moorhead,
Miss._
Chicago. University Ch.,      11.50
adl. 6.50; Central Ch. C.
E. Soc., 5
Crescent. Cong. Ch.            4.14
Danville. C. M. Young,       100.00
50, Dr. and Mrs. S. C. T.
Kingsley, 50 _for
furnishing Theo. Dept.,
Fisk U._
Dundee. Cong. Ch., 21.35,     23.35
and Sab. Sch., 2
Earlville. "J. A. D."         25.00
Elmhurst. "M. S.," Bbl.
of C. _for Moorhead,
Miss._
Evanston. Cong. Ch.          118.00
Farmington. Sab. Sch.          3.00
Cong. Ch., _for Mountain
Work_
Farmington. Cong. Ch. to      56.00
const. MILTON G. BREWER
L.M.
Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.           13.48
Jacksonville. "Friends."      12.00
Joy Prairie. Cong. Ch.,
Bbl. C. _for Tougaloo,
Miss._
La Grange. W. M. S.           25.00
La Salle. First Cong. Ch.      6.20
Loda. Ladies' Missionary      11.00
Soc., _for Fisk U._
Marseilles. Dr. R. N.        100.00
Baughman, _for Two Shares
Jubilee Fund_
Moline. "A Friend," _for       1.00
Moorhead, Miss._
Nora. Sab. Sch. Cong.         10.00
Ch., _for Moorhead,
Miss._
Normal. Birthday box, S.       1.08
S. First Cong. Ch.
Plainfield. Cong. Ch.,        37.77
32.25 and Sab. Sch.,
5.52, to const. REV. I.
D. STONE L. M.
Plymouth. W. H. M. S.,         1.00
Box Bedding and 1 for
Freight, _for Tougaloo,
Miss._
                            -------
                            $662.77

             ESTATE.
Cornwall. Estate of Mrs.     75.00
Samantha McConoughey, by
James K. Blish
                           -------
                           $737.77

            MICHIGAN, $608.42.
Agricultural College.                 5.00
Prof. R. C. Kedzie
Bay Mills. Cong. Ch.                  2.00
Bronson. Cong. Ch.                    3.00
Church. A. W. Douglass                5.00
Detroit. German Ch., Y.               7.00
P. S. C. E., by Rev. A.
Huelster, 4; Mount Hope
Sab. Sch., 3
Dexter. Cong. Ch.                     1.50
Hillsdale. John W. Ford               1.00
Hudson. "Anon" (250 of              500.00
which _for Skyland Inst.,
Blowing Rock, N. C._) to
const. MRS. MARY E. LANE,
JAMES SCHERMERHORN, MRS.
EMMA S. TODD, REV. WM. M.
JENKINS, REV. JOHN L.
COLLIER, MRS. NANCY BARR,
REV. E. N. COREY, REV.
DANIEL M. FISK, ARTHUR
BEARDSELL, and MISS CLARA
PEASE L.M.'s
Ludington. Willie
Hammond, Papers _for
Athens, Ala._
Olivet. Y. P. S. C. E.,               9.00
8; Mrs. L. B. Prosser, 1,
_for Student Aid,
Lexington, Ky._
Prattville. Sab. Sch.                 2.25
Cong. Ch., 1.77; C. E.
Soc., 48c., by Rev. I. W.
Bell
Romeo. Miss E. B.                    25.00
Dickinson
Three Oaks. Y. P. S. C.
E., Box of C. _for
Moorhead, Miss._
Vicksburg. Sab. Sch.
Cong. Ch., Box Papers,
_for Athens, Ala._
Ypsilanti. Bbl. of C.
_for Athens, Ala._
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of Michigan, by
Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas.:
Ann Arbor. Mrs. Clara W.              5.00
Peck, Memorial, _for
Student Aid, Lincoln
Acad., King's Mountain,
N. C._
Benton Harbor. W. M. U.               3.00
Bridgman. W. H. M.                   25.17
S.,25c.; Cheboygan, W. H.
M. S., 10; Greenville, W.
H. M. S., 4 17;
Greenville, Y. W. Guild,
5; Ludington, W. H. M.
S., 5; Tipton, 75c., _for
Student Aid, Indian Sch.,
Santee, Neb._
Coloma. W. M. S.                      0.25
Covert. W. M. S.                      5.00
Frankfort. W. H. M. U.                5.00
Galesburg. W. M. S.                   1.00
Grand Rapids. Plymouth                0.50
Ch. W. M. S.
Homestead. W. H. M. S.                0.25
Portland. W. M. S.                    0.25
Somerset. W. M. S.                    0.75
Vicksburg. W. H. M. S.                1.00
Whittaker. W. H. M. S.                0.50
                            -------- 47.67

              IOWA, $520.89.
Algona. First Cong. Ch.,              44.00
Y. P. S. C. E., 25;
King's Daughters, 19,
_for Fisk U._
Ames. Cong. Ch.                       26.68
Belmond. Cong. Ch.                     6.60
Cedar Rapids. Willing
Workers. Box Literature,
etc., _for Beach Inst._
Clay. Cong. Ch., 14.75;               23.15
Y. P. S. C. E., 5.40; Y.
L. M. Soc., 3
Garwin. Talmon Dewey                   3.50
Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch.                 7.45
Gilbert Station. Cong.                13.18
Ch.
Green Mountain. "Children              2.50
of Green Mountain Ch."
Iowa City. Rev M. N.                  50.00
Miles, _for Share Jubilee
Fund_
Mason City. Cong. Ch.,                 7.00
_for Student Aid, Allen
N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._
McGregor. Mrs. J. N.                  10.00
Gilchrist
Minden. Mrs. P. M.                     0.50
Pawour, _for Freight to
Moorhead, Miss._
Preston. Cong. Ch.                     5.10
Winthrop. Cong. Ch.,                   8.00
Ladies' M. Soc.
Iowa Woman's Home
Missionary Union, Miss
Belle L. Bentley, Treas.:
Alpha. L. H. M. S.                     5.00
Cedar Rapids. First Ch.,               0.25
W. M. S.
Clinton. W. M. S.                     10.00
Des Moines. W. M. S.                   3.82
Dubuque. First Ch., W. M.             23.50
S.
Eldon. Y. P. S. C. E.                  3.00
Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                 11.85
Independence. L. M. S.                 6.01
Independence. Mrs.                     1.70
Moses's S. S. Class, _for
Student Aid_
Keosauqua. W. M. S.                    9.00
Mason City. W. M. S.                   9.00
Miles. W. M. S.                        1.93
Mount Pleasant. S. S.                  0.68
Sloan. Mrs. S. K.                      5.00
Gallaher
Talmage. Busy Bee Miss.               10.00
Band
                            -------- 113.33
                                    -------
                                    $320.89

             ESTATE.
Denmark. Estate of Dea.     200.00
Oliver Brooks, by Thomas
S. Taylor, Executor
                           -------
                           $520.89

           WISCONSIN, $187.27.
Baraboo. L. H. M. S., Box
Towels, etc., _for
Lexington, Ky._
Beloit. First Cong. Ch.              15.00
Dodgeville. Welsh Cong.               3.00
Ch.
Fond du Lac. First Cong.             21.00
Ch.
Hartland. Mrs. Mary Le                3.00
Roy, _for Freight to
Tougaloo, Miss._
New London. First Cong.              12.69
Ch.
Portage. Mrs. G. A.                   1.00
Jones, _for Mountain
Work_
Potosi. Rev. L. B. Nobis             15.00
Rosendale. Sab. Sch.,                 3.81
Cong. Ch.
South Milwaukee. First                5.00
Cong. Ch.
Tomah. Cong. Ch.                      5.23
Viroqua. Miss. Soc.                   4.30
Washburn. Cong. Ch., L.
M. S., Pkg. Sew. Material
_for Lexington, Ky._
Whitewater. Cong, Ch.                14.39
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of Wisconsin, Mrs.
C.M.  Blackman, Treas.:
Arena. W. M. S.                       0.85
Beloit. First Ch., W. M.              4.75
S.
Clinton. W. M. S.                     4.00
Eau Claire. W. M. S.                  3.00
Fond du Lac. W. M. S.                10.00
Fort Atkinson. W. M. S.               1.25
Green Bay. W. M. S.                  20.00
Kenosha. W. M. S. _for               25.00
Share_
Madison. Y. L. M. S.,                 3.50
2.50; W. M. S., 1
Plattville. W. H. M. S.               1.50
Windsor. W. M. S.                    10.00
                            -------- 83.85

        MINNESOTA, $92.09.
Ash Creek. Cong. Ch.           1.91
Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.           2.67
Freeborn. Cong. Ch.,           7.67
7.15, and Sab. Sch., 52c.
Kanaranzi. Cong. Ch.           0.58
Mazeppa. Ladies' Miss.         5.00
Soc., _for Jonesboro,
Tenn._
Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.     43.54
Minneapolis.  Ladies of        1.60
Lowry Hill Cong. Ch.,
_for Jonesboro, Tenn._
Minneapolis. Plymouth          1.36
Cong. Ch. _for freight to
King's Mountain, N. C._
Ortonville. Jr. C. E.          0.75
Soc.
Sleepy Eye. Cong. Ch.          6.00
Worthington. Union Cong.       6.11
Ch., 3.36; Union Cong.
Sab. Sch., 2.75
Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch.     14.90

         MISSOURI, $30.50.
Clinton. A. C. Hancock         0.50
Garden City. W. R. Wills,     12.00
10; F. P. Morlan, 1; I.
E. Morlan, 1
Index. P. M. Wills             0.50
Lebanon. First Cong. Ch.      17.50

         KANSAS, $36.61.
Brookville. Sab. Sch.        0.60
Cong. Ch. Lincoln Mem.
Day Offering
Dover. Cong. Ch.             2.15
Hill City. Mrs. T.           1.00
Garnett, _for Lincoln
Sch., Meridian, Miss._
Wabaunsee. First Ch. of      1.25
Christ
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of Kansas, by Mrs.
E. C. Read, Treas.:
           Arkansas City   5.00
              Carbondale   3.60
                Fairview   2.00
                  Goshen   2.00
                Hiawatha   2.65
 Jinsley. Jr. C. E. Soc.   1.00
                  Oneida   4.50
                  Plevna   1.50
                  Salina   5.00
              Wellington   5.00
                           -----
                           $32.23
     Less State expenses   0.64
             ----- 31.61

         NEBRASKA, $11.04.
Blair. Cong. Ch.               5.24
Columbus. Dwight, Robbie,      0.30
and Elton Dickenson, _for
Moorhead, Miss._
Santee Agency. Pilgrim         0.50
Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day
Offering
Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.       5.00
Jun. C. E. Soc.

        NORTH DAKOTA, $81.64.
Fort Yates. "Little             50.00
Harold's Gift," _for
Share Jubliee Fund_
Wahpeton. First Cong. Ch.        7.64
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of North Dakota, by
Mrs. J. M. Fisher,
Treas.:
 Wahpeton. Easter Jubilee       24.00
 Offering

       SOUTH DAKOTA, $23.22.
Meekling. C. E. Soc.            1.00
Milbank. Sab. Sch. Cong.        7.11
Ch.
Mission Hill. Cong. Ch.         4.25
Rapid City. Cong. Soc.          5.40
Springfield. Sab. Sch.          3.46
Cong. Ch.
Waubay. Cong. Ch.               2.00

         ARIZONA, $10.00.
Prescott. Sab. Sch. Cong.    10.00
Ch., _for Student Aid,
Straight U._

           COLORADO.
Grand Junction. Ladies
First Cong. Ch., Box C.
and Papers _for Tougaloo,
Miss._

        CALIFORNIA, $254.60.
Cloverdale. Cong. Ch., Y.       3.80
P. S. C. E.
Redlands. Rebecca H.           10.00
Smiley
San Francisco. The            205.65
California Chinese
Mission, William
Johnstone, Treas. (See
items below)
Ventura. Cong. Ch.             25.15
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of Southern Cal.,
Mrs. Mary M. Smith,
Treas.:
   Riverside. First Cong.      10.00
   Ch.

        OREGON, $4.00.
Albany. First Cong. Ch.    4.00

     DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $228.18.
Washington. Emily S. Cook            5.00
Washington. First Cong.            223.18
Ch. (50 of which from
Genl. E. Whittlesey to
const. GEO. P. WHITTLESEY
L.M.)

         VIRGINIA, $20.75.
_For Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._:
  The Gloucester Ed. Club   10.00
Gloucester. By Miss S. A.   9.75
Robinson, 3; "A Friend,"
2; By Letters, 1.75; Miss
M. M. Hunt, 1; N.
Gregory, 1; Mrs. G. H.
Townsend, 1
     Ivondale. By Rev. J.   1.00
     Robinson
              ----- 20.75

         KENTUCKY, $12.26.
Redash. Cong. Ch.              2.00
Pioneer. Cong. Ch.             0.70
Williamsburg.                  9.56
Williamsburg Acad., 8.08;
Children of Primary
Dept., 1.48; Jubilee
Offering

        TENNESSEE, $26.85.
Bon Air. Cong. Ch.             2.00
Knoxville. Miss I. F.          5.00
Hubbard
Memphis. Missionary Union     10.00
of Second Cong. Ch.
Nashville. King's              5.00
Daughters, Fisk U.
Pomona. Cong. Ch.              4.85

       NORTH CAROLINA, $3.06.
Moncure. Cong. Ch.,              2.00
Lincoln Mem. Day Offering
Tryon. Cong. Ch.                 1.06

         GEORGIA, $25.10.
Albany. Y. P. S. C. E.        2.00
Macon. G. C. Burrage,         5.10
2.60; Miss A. M.
Woodruff, 2; Miss E. B.
Scobie. 50c., _for
Student Aid, Ballard
Normal Sch._
McIntosh. A Friend, 10;      18.00
Prof. Fred. W. Foster, 4;
Mrs. M. W. Foster, 3;
Miss C. A. Whitaker, 1;
_for Student Aid,
McIntosh, Ga._
Savannah. Box and Pkg.
Literature and Toys,
source unknown, _for
Beach Inst._

         ALABAMA, $8.95.
Ironaton. Rev. P. O.          3.00
Wailes
Mobile. Cong. Ch. Sab.        1.50
Sch., "Little Gleaners,"
1; "A small class of
small people," 50c.
Sand Mountain.                1.45
Individuals, Lincoln Mem.
Day Offering
Selma. Burrell Sch.           2.00
Shelby. First Cong. Ch.       1.00

        LOUISIANA, $27.71.
Chocahoula. Cong. Ch.          1.00
Hammond. Cong. Ch. and        20.71
Sab. Sch., Easter
Offering
New Orleans. Carrie E.         5.00
Hodgman, _for Student
Aid, Straight U._
New Orleans. Morris Brown      1.00
Ch.

         FLORIDA, $15.00.
Sanford. Mrs. Moses Lyman    10.00
Winter Park. Mr. and Mrs.     5.00
Nathan Barrows

        MISSISSIPPI, $116.65.
Meridian. "Friend," _for        10.00
Student Aid, Meridian_
Moorhead. Unknown Source,
Bbl. of C.
Tougaloo. Cong. Ch.,           106.65
28.60; Miss Emma A.
Robertson, 15.05; Miss A.
M. Whitsey, 29; Miss Emma
C. Redick, 14; Mrs. L. M.
Sisson, 10; Miss Carrie
E. Parkhurst, 10, _for
Student Aid, Tougaloo U._

          TEXAS, $5.00.
Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch.    5.00

     ----, $10.00
----. "Friend."   10.00

           JAPAN, $5.00.
Japan. "A Friend," _for         5.00
Student Aid_, _Tougaloo
U._
                          ----------
Donations                 $15,627.36
Estates                       775.00
                          ----------
                          $16,402.36

             INCOME, $807.50.
Avery Fund, _for Mendi              418.82
M._
Mrs. S. N. Brewer                    20.93
Endowment Fund
C. F. Dike Fund, _for                50.00
Straight U._
E. B. Eldridge Endowment            225.00
Fund
Fisk University. Theo.                4.50
Endowment Fund
General Endowment Fund               50.00
E. A. Hand Endowment Fund            11.25
S. M. Strong Fund, _for              27.00
Saluda N. C._
                            ------- 807.50

            TUITION, $4,575.15.
Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                 9.20
Lexington, Ky. Tuition                 85.25
Williamburg, Ky. Tuition              147.65
Grand View, Tenn. Tuition              72.53
Jonesboro, Tenn. Public                50.00
Fund
Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition               35.00
Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                434.60
Nashville, Tenn. Tuition              669.77
Pleasant Hill, Tenn.                   49.95
Tuition
Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                12.55
Blowing Rock, N. C.                    20.57
Tuition
Chapel Hill. N. C.                     13.60
Tuition
Enfield, N. C. Tutition                28.75
Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition               20.20
King's Mountain, N. C.                 30.00
Tuition
Saluda, N. C. Tuition                  33.55
Troy, N. C. Tuition                     0.70
Whittier, N. C. Tuition                39.27
Wilmington, N. C. Tuition             162.00
Charleston, S. C. Tuition             314.45
Greenwood, S. C. Tuition              110.42
Albany, Ga.  Tuition                  118.30
Andersonville, Ga.                     13.75
Tuition
Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch.              155.50
Tuition
Macon, Ga. Tuition                    207.00
Marietta, Ga. Tuition                   8.20
Marshallville, Ga.                      2.40
Tuition
Thomasville, Ga. Tuition               47.60
McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                  78.66
Savannah, Ga. Tuition                 151.12
Woodville, Ga. Tuition                  2.50
Athens, Ala. Tuition                   76.31
Marion, Ala. Tuition                   44.05
Mobile, Ala. Tuition                   85.60
Nat, Ala. Tuition                      48.00
Selma, Ala. Tuition                    94.45
Meridian, Miss. Tuition                95.60
Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                17.45
Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition               314.75
New Orleans, La. Tuition              511.00
Martin, Fla. Public Fund               20.00
Orange Park, Fla. Tuition              54.70
Austin, Texas. Tuition                 88.20
                            ------- 4,575.15
                                  ----------
Total for April                   $21,785.01
                                 ===========

             SUMMARY.
Donations               $102,727.14
Estates                   67,711.42
                        -----------
                        $170,438.56
Income                     7,160.26
Tuition                   28,066.15
                        -----------
Total from Oct. 1 to    $205,664.97
April 30
                       ============

     FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.
Subscriptions for April         $42.06
Previously acknowledged         358.78
                              --------
Total                          $400.84

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,
  William Johnstone, Treasurer, from February
             14 to March 21, 1896.
Local Missions:
Fresno. Chinese Mon.                        7.35
Offs., 4; Annual Membs.,
2; First Cong. Ch., 1.35
Los Angeles. Chinese Mon.                   7.00
Offs.
Marysville. Chinese Mon.                    8.40
Offs.
Oakland. Chinese Mon.                      73.00
Offs., 6; Anniversary
Offs. First Cong. Ch. (of
which Rev. S. M.
Freeland, 5; S. T.
Alexander, 5; Mrs. H. R.
Jones, 2.50; Mrs. F. F.
Barbour, 1.50; Jue Sue,
5; Chin Wah, 2), 67
Oroville. Chinese Mon.                      7.70
Offs., 2.20; New Year's
gifts to Jesus, 5.50
Petaluma. Chinese Mon.                      3.25
Offs.
Riverside. Chinese Mon.                     3.20
Offs.
Sacramento. Chinese Mon.                    8.50
Offs.
San Bernardino. Chinese                     4.25
Mon. Offs.
San Diego. Chinese Mon.                     3.75
Offs.
San  Francisco. Central                     5.80
Chinese Mon. Offs.
San Francisco. West                         2.40
Chinese Mon. Offs.
Santa Barbara. Chinese                      6.05
Mon. Offs.
Santa Cruz. Chinese Mon.                    6.35
Offs.
Ventura. Chinese Mon.                       2.25
Offs.
Vernondale. Chinese Mon.                    2.00
Offs.
Watsonville. Chinese Mon.                   1.50
Offs.
                                   ------ 152.75
Prescott, Arizona. First                   14.90
Cong. Ch. Chinese Mission
Worcester, Mass.                            7.00
"Friends"
FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN:
Boston, Mass. Mount                        20.00
Vernon Chinese Sab. Sch.
New Haven, Ct. Mrs J. E.                    1.00
Pond
Central California. W. H.                  10.00
M. U.
                                  ------   31.00
                                        --------
Total                                    $205.65
                                        ========




H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
Bible House, N. Y.




WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


                                 MAINE.
                          WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.

_State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords; Mrs. A.T. Burbank,
Yarmouth; Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.

                             NEW HAMPSHIRE.
              FEMALE CENT. INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.

President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth. Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 16
Rumford St., Concord. Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.

                                VERMONT.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro. Secretary--Mrs. M. K.
Paine, Windsor. Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.

                             MASS. and R.I.
                 (1)WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Massachusetts Ave., Boston, Mass.
Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.

                              CONNECTICUT.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain. Secretary--Mrs. C.
T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford. Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19
Spring St., Hartford.

                                NEW YORK.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn. Secretary--Mrs. Wm.
Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse. Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230
Macon St., Brooklyn.

                               NEW JERSEY.
         WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair. Secretary--Mrs R. J. Hegeman,
32 Forest Street, Montclair. Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150
Belleville Ave., Newark.

                              PENNSYLVANIA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. W. Thomas, Lansford. Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie,
Ridgway. Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.

                                  OHIO.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland. Treasurer--Mrs. G.
B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.

                                INDIANA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis. Treasurer--Mrs. A.
H. Ball, Dewhurst.

                                ILLINOIS.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Issac Claflin, Lombard. Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago. Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.

                                MISSOURI.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City. Treasurer--Mrs.
K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.

                                  IOWA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass, Grinnell. Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins,
Grinnell. Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.

                                MICHIGAN.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. M. Powell, 76 Jefferson Av., Grand Rapids.
Secretary--Mrs. C. C. Denison, 132 N. College Ave., Grand Rapids.
Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.

                               WISCONSIN.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison. Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright,
Madison. Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman, Whitewater.

                               MINNESOTA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, 17 Florence Court, S.E., Minneapolis.
Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.

                              NORTH DAKOTA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. W. P. Cleveland, Caledonia. Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett,
Harwood. Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.

                              SOUTH DAKOTA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins, Bowdle. Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall,
Huron. Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.

                       BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City. Secretary--Mrs. H. H.
Gilchrist, Hot Springs. Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.

                                NEBRASKA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete. Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Second
Street, Lincoln. Treasurer--Mrs. James W. Dawes, Crete.

                                 KANSAS.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka. Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps,
Topeka. Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read. Parsons.

                                COLORADO.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box  508, Denver. Treasurer--Mrs. B. C.
Valantine, Highlands.

                                WYOMING.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne. Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner,
Cheyenne. Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock Springs.

                                MONTANA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. O. C. Clark, Missoula. Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410
Dearborn Ave., Helena. Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.

                                 IDAHO.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise. Secretary--Mrs. E. A. Paddock,
Weiser. Treasurer--Mrs. D. L. Travis, Pocatello.

                               WASHINGTON.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle. Secretary--Mrs.
W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K. Street, Tacoma. Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George,
620 Fourth Street, Seattle.

                                 OREGON.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland. Secretary--Mrs. George
Brownell, Oregon City. Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 546 Third Street,
Portland.

                               CALIFORNIA.
                     WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland. Secretary--Mrs.
L. M. Howard, 911 Grove Street, Oakland. Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329
Harrison Street, Oakland.

                          SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.

                                 NEVADA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno. Secretary--Mrs. Margaret N. Magill,
Reno. Treasurer--Mrs. Mary Clow, Reno.

                    UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah. Secretary--Mrs.
W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City, Utah. Treasurer--Mrs.
Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah. Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar
Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.

                               NEW MEXICO.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow, Albuquerque. Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis,
301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque. Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Bullock,
Albuquerque.

                                OKLAHOMA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher. Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball,
Guthrie. Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.

                            INDIAN TERRITORY.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita. Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd,
Vinita. Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.

                             NORTH CAROLINA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, McLeansville. Secretary and Treasurer--Miss
A. E. Farrington, Oaks.

                                GEORGIA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. H. B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta. Secretary--Mrs. H.
A. Kellam, Atlanta. Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.

                                FLORIDA.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville. Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows,
Winter Park. Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.

                                ALABAMA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma. Secretary--Mrs. J. S. Jackson,
Montgomery. Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.

                    TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY and ARKANSAS.
          WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville. Secretary--Mrs.
E. J. Lewis, 15 Echols Street, Memphis. Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland,
216 N. McNairy Street, Nashville.

                              MISSISSIPPI.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian. Secretary--Mrs.
Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo. Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner,
3012 12th Street, Meridian.

                               LOUISIANA.
                        WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. C. M. Crawford, Hammond. Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère,
New Orleans. Treasurer--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, Straight Univ., New
Orleans.

                                 TEXAS.
                      WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas. Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box
563, Dallas. Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.






FOOTNOTES


    1 While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass.
      and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 06, JUNE, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.