The American Missionary - Volume 49, No. 5, May 1895


by Various




Edition 1, (November 23, 2006)





CONTENTS


Editorial
   FINANCES.
   LET IT BE REMEMBERED:
   CHURCH WORK IN THE SOUTH.
   FRIGHT AT A CAMERA.
   Revival Services in the Mountains.
   A Passage at Arms.
   A SUBSCRIPTION LIST.
The South.
   IN NORTH CAROLINA.
   A SUNDAY AT TALLADEGA, ALA.
   STORRS SCHOOL, ATLANTA, GA.
   ANDERSONVILLE, GA.
The Indians.
   ITEMS FROM INDIAN MISSIONS.
   MRS. ADELAIDE RIDEOUT RIGGS.
   AN INDIAN HELPING NEEDY WHITES.
The Chinese.
   STREET PREACHING IN CHINATOWN.
Bureau of Woman's Work.
   CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR IN THE BLACK BELT.
   WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.
   RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1895.





NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York N. Y., as second-class mail matter.






AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.

_Vice-presidents._

REV. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
REV. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
REV. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
REV. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.

_Corresponding Secretaries._

REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._ REV. A. F. BEARD, D.D.,
_Bible House, N. Y._, REV. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

REV. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Recording Secretary._

REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Treasurer._

H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._

_Auditors._

PETER MCCARTER.
JAMES MITCHELL.

_Executive Committee._

CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

_For Three Years._

WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
JAMES W. COOPER,
LUCIEN C. WARNER,
JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
CHARLES P. PIERCE.

_For Two Years._

CHARLES A. HULL,
ADDISON P. FOSTER,
ALBERT J. LYMAN,
NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
A. J. F. BEHRENDS.

_For One Year._

SAMUEL HOLMES
SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
CHARLES L. MEAD,
WILLIAM H. STRONG,
ELIJAH HORR.

_District Secretaries._

REV. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._
REV. W.E.C. WRIGHT, D.D., _Cong'l Rooms, Y.M.C.A Building, Cleveland,
Ohio._

_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

MISS D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._




COMMUNICATIONS


Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.




DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS


In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be sent
to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the time
to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on label to
the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made afterward the
change on the label will appear a month later. Please send early notice of
change in post-office address, giving the former address and the new
address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers may be
correctly mailed.




FORM OF A BEQUEST.


"I give and bequeath the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American Missionary
Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the State of New
York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.





THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY


VOL. XLIX.
JUNE, 1895.
No. 5.




FINANCES.


The outlook is not bright. The receipts for March from both donations and
estates have fallen off so that in spite of retrenchments the total
indebtedness is somewhat increased. We have now reached the close of the
first six months of the fiscal year, and, with a decrease of $11,246.73 in
all items of expenditure, the debt is $79,696.61. In the last (April)
number of THE MISSIONARY it was shown that there had been during the
previous three months a small but actual reduction of the debt. The
present showing brings the figures back to what they were substantially in
January last.

We hope this falling off is but temporary. We know the pressure of the
times and the difficulty of obtaining money. We are fully aware, too, that
many of our friends make their contributions with self-denial, but,
standing as we do, with the responsibility for the great work entrusted to
this Association, and knowing how vital it is to the welfare and uplifting
of the impoverished and ignorant races of our land, we feel constrained to
press the call still farther upon both rich and poor for the means to
continue the assistance to these needy peoples.




LET IT BE REMEMBERED:


1. That the American Missionary Association was the first to enter the
work of educating and uplifting the Freedmen of the South, and the first
to introduce industrial training into the schools.

2. That it has done the largest work in that field, having spent more
money and educated more pupils than any other society.

3. That it has extended its work among the mountaineers of the South, the
Indians of the West, the Chinese on the Pacific Coast and the Eskimos in
Alaska--its field extending thus from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and
from the Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic Circle.

4. That it has been chosen by National Councils, State Associations, and
local organizations to do the work in these fields and among these peoples
for the Congregational churches of the United States.

5. That its expanding and important work is restricted by the want of
adequate funds, and that while Congregationalists--churches and
individuals--have the undoubted right to exercise their own choice in
aiding institutions in these particular fields, outside of the work of the
Association, yet they ought to bear in mind their responsibility to
sustain the Association in the work which they assign to it.




CHURCH WORK IN THE SOUTH.


We invite the attention of our readers to the illustrated article "In
North Carolina." This sketch covers but a limited portion of our great
work, but it shows the relations it bears to its surroundings in the
public life of the South. Our churches in this district are prosperous,
and we are gratified to say that the promise of church extension over our
wider districts is very encouraging. Eight new churches will be added to
our list immediately among the colored people, and others still are
expected soon to be added. In the mountain work, also, five new churches
will be added to our enrollment.



The next number of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY will contain an extended
article, with illustrations, on our mountain work, hence nothing appears
in this number regarding this field.




FRIGHT AT A CAMERA.


Our readers will find in the account given on another page, of street
preaching in Chinatown, the statement that a large crowd was gathered in
the street, but when the picture is examined the crowd seems very small.
Loo Quong gives this account of the matter: "A big crowd was gathered to
us soon after we sang some hymns, but as soon as the photographer on sight
they all ran away. Chinese do not want their pictures to be taken on the
street. They all ran to the other side of the street and I told the man to
take them there, but they all ran away, too. Still some of them are
taken."




REVIVAL SERVICES IN THE MOUNTAINS.--Revival movements have been very
general in our mountain churches and missions this year and many hundreds
have been hopefully converted.

"Seven persons made application for membership in our church last Sabbath.
They are all converted people. If they are received it will make a
membership of thirty-three, including Mrs. Doane and myself. I have been
holding revival services at a school-house where they have slabs for
benches without backs to them. Part of a log was taken out to make a
window. People come seven and eight miles to the services. They seem
anxious to hear the Gospel preached. They do not seem to care for mud or
rain. I hope this will find the American Missionary Association getting
out of debt. My people are ready and anxious to contribute to the support
of the church. They have sold eggs and saved money, and it is often slow
work."




A PASSAGE AT ARMS.--White children whose parents are laboring in colored
schools are sometimes taunted by the unkind remarks of ill-mannered youth
with whom they come in contact. For example, the little daughter of one of
our teachers was told, "Your papa teaches niggers." The reply came quick
as a flash: "Well, your papa sells them whiskey, and that is worse."
Another threatened to beat her at recess. She promptly said: "You can't do
it. My grandpa beat yours in the war."




A SUBSCRIPTION LIST.


BY A GEORGIA TEACHER.

I inclose something I thought might interest you. The idea of circulating
the paper originated with the girls and the money was nearly all raised
without our knowledge. We added enough to buy a serviceable pair of shoes.
The poor girl to whom they were given was almost barefooted and stayed at
home Saturday afternoon when the others went for their walk. The
thoughtfulness and generosity of the girls touched us, for what they gave
was to most of them a real sacrifice.

                         THE APPEAL OF THE GIRLS.

"While sitting in church to-day my heart was made to feel sad as I sat by
one of the girls. I noticed that she was almost barefooted and has been
for quite a while. Miss C. and I, feeling ourselves unable to purchase a
pair of shoes, concluded we would ask all who will help us to please
assist us, not for our sake, but for the Lord's sake.

"Miss E. H., 5 cts., pd.; Miss C. D., 15 cts., pd.; Miss C. M., 1 ct.,
pd.; Miss A. G., 5 cts., pd.; Miss M. G., 10 cts.; Miss H. G., 5 cts.,
pd.; Miss R. W., 5 cts., pd.; Miss M. D. G., 5 cts., pd.; Miss L. B., 5
cts., pd.; Miss A. S., 5 cts., pd.; Miss L. B., 5 cts., pd.; Miss S. L.; 5
cts., pd.; Miss G., 15 cts."





THE SOUTH.




IN NORTH CAROLINA.


BY SECRETARY WOODBURY.

The Carolinas comprise a territory of eighty-two thousand square miles, a
little more than the combined territory of New York and all New England,
excepting Maine. North Carolina has a population of about a million white
and half a million colored people; while of the million inhabitants of
South Carolina a large majority are colored. In the two States there are a
million and a quarter of colored people.

            [Illustration: MOUNTAIN VIEW, BLOWING ROCK, N. C.]

                    MOUNTAIN VIEW, BLOWING ROCK, N. C.


The length of North Carolina, east and west, is considerably greater than
the distance between Boston and Washington. The western part of the State
is mountainous. From its heights the state slopes into the vast Piedmont
Plateau, a sub-mountain terrace, and thence into the low country or the
Atlantic plain. In western North Carolina the Appalachian Mountains reach
the greatest height in the United States eastward of the Rocky Mountains.
The eye of an observer from the heights near Blowing Rock descries in one
view mountain summits in Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and South Carolina.
The people of western North Carolina are white by a vast majority, while
in the eastern part of the State the black population predominates. In
twenty-five of the western counties 88 per cent. of the people are white.
In the same number of the farthest eastern counties there is a majority of
ten thousand black people. In accordance with this fundamental fact, the
work of the American Missionary Association in the western part of the
State is chiefly among the white, and in the eastern part of the State,
among the black people.

In both Carolinas the vast majority of the population is rural. According
to the last census there was only one city in each State with more than
twenty thousand people, and only six places with more than ten thousand.

In Wilmington, the largest city of North Carolina, the American Missionary
Association began work as the war was closing. Of the twenty-four thousand
people in the county, fourteen thousand are black. Fourteen years ago Mr.
J. J. H. Gregory, of Massachusetts, became much interested in this field
and erected a fine brick church and commodious school buildings. The
combined church and school work have gone on with continued efficiency and
prosperity. There is a strong desire on the part of the people for the
development of an industrial department in the school. The elevating
influence of the church is felt not only in Wilmington, but throughout the
surrounding communities. A great many of the school students have become
teachers in the city schools and in different parts of the State.

         [Illustration: CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, WILMINGTON, N. C.]

                 CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, WILMINGTON, N. C.


While Wilmington and Beaufort are both sea-side places, the former is
chiefly a commercial town while the latter is devoted to the fishing and
oyster industries. The island is swept by refreshing sea breezes, and a
great many of its inhabitants are boatmen and fishermen. The Beaufort
fisheries extend over a large area in which immense schools of fish are
found. In deep sea fishing the nets are dropped to a depth of one hundred
feet and drawn up often filled to bursting. Not infrequently whales are
captured off the coast.

Not long ago both the church and school buildings in Beaufort were swept
away by fire, but they have recently been restored, as seen in the
illustration. The church is making good progress under its young colored
pastor. The school is crowded. Industrial work is being carried on to a
limited extent, and it is hoped that in the coming year an industrial
building can be erected. Nothing can contribute more to the progress and
welfare of the young people than a well-equipped industrial department
where knowledge of trades can be imparted.

             [Illustration: THE WILMINGTON A. M. A. SCHOOL.]

                     THE WILMINGTON A. M. A. SCHOOL.


With their immense preponderance of a country population, naturally the
largest part of the Association's mission work in the Carolinas is in the
country. In the North Carolina Congregational Association most of the
churches are country churches. The Association meetings are well attended.
The accompanying illustration is from a photograph taken at one of the
recent meetings in McLeansville, where there are two churches not far
apart. Besides these in this part of the State, there are country churches
at High Point, Salem, Strieby, Melville, Oaks, Pekin, Dry Creek, Carter's
Mills, Dudley, Malee, Nalls, Troy, Snow Hill, and other points. The annual
meetings of the Association are most interesting occasions. Pastors and
people of these little churches gather from near and far for fellowship,
mutual comfort, and inspiration. With some of these churches schools are
associated, which afford to the young the opportunities of a Christian
education, and contribute from their elder pupils many students for our
higher institutions of learning. With the multiplication and development
of these churches these higher schools will have a steady constituency of
great importance.

                 [Illustration: SCENE IN BEAUFORT, N. C.]

                         SCENE IN BEAUFORT, N. C.


                [Illustration: NORTH CAROLINA FISHERIES.]

                        NORTH CAROLINA FISHERIES.


Thus the Association, so far from confining its work to the cities, is
doing a very large share of its work in the country and among country
people. Some of this work has been long-continued and has achieved a
widespread and beneficial influence in the neighboring communities. The
self-denying devotion of many years is reaching a most blessed fruitage,
and those who have given the strength and vigor of a lifetime to the poor
and despised now find their closing years brightened with the sight of
what has been wrought by their long labors for the advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ. The picture of the Oaks congregation at their church
door is an illustration. There, among the plantations, are two sisters who
have given their lives, until the shadows of age have fallen upon them, to
missionary work in behalf of the poor colored people. One of them is
growing blind and the other has already become so. While the former feels
constrained by her failing sight soon to give up her school work, her more
aged sister has an intense desire to continue, while life lasts, her
labors in behalf of those whom she has come to love, while bringing
blessings to them. Well versed in the Scriptures, she continues to gather
classes of young men and plantation teachers and teach them from the Bible
to prepare them to instruct better those still more ignorant than they.
Although urged by her friends to give up this ministration, she cannot
bring herself to any other course than that of doing all she can until
"the night cometh when no man can work." It is at once a pathetic, an
inspiring and a joyful picture to see this aged blind woman, surrounded by
her students, opening to them the Scriptures and instructing them in the
religion of their common Master.

In contrast with the quiet home and school work carried on by these two
women and yet to the same end are the labors of such a country pastor as
Mr. Collins. For a number of years, while carrying on regular church work
at Troy, he has also had charge of several other churches riding scores of
miles every week, fording the streams and facing the storms in all kinds
of weather. At Dry Creek and Nalls, Pekin, Carter's Mills and Malee, he
has preached regularly or occasionally and has watched with incessant care
and labor the development of missions throughout a wide tract of country.
The influence of these churches has pervaded many communities. Calls have
come to him to develop new church work simply because the poor people of
other churches have seen and felt the higher standards of piety and purer
lives among many in the Congregational churches and have desired that they
too might have the advantage of such ministers.

            [Illustration: CHURCH AND SCHOOL, BEAUFORT, N. C.]

                    CHURCH AND SCHOOL, BEAUFORT, N. C.


Indeed, this long care of our churches and schools is awakening many new
movements among the colored people of the South. Our churches are
generally small and poor, but they have stood steadfastly for human
rights, for Christian equality and freedom of church membership, and for
moral and religious education. While their work has been slow, their
influence has been deep and pervasive, as has been that of our schools,
small and great.

     [Illustration: NORTH CAROLINA STATE ASSOCIATION, McLEANSVILLE.]

             NORTH CAROLINA STATE ASSOCIATION, McLEANSVILLE.


             [Illustration: AT THE CHURCH DOOR, OAKS, N. C.]

                     AT THE CHURCH DOOR, OAKS, N. C.


It is an interesting and important fact that the great work of Christian
education in behalf of the colored people which has been carried on by the
Association is now producing results in a new direction. Our former
students and pupils, grown into manhood and womanhood, find the church
life of their communities greatly inferior to that in which they were
trained in our schools. They  are  reaching after something more pure,
free and spiritual. The leaven of their intelligence and higher standard
of morality is taking hold of many families about them.  From many centers
the call reaches us for the organization of Congregational churches,
churches which shall stand for morality, equal membership rights and a
more rational type of piety. At the same time there is an uprising in
various churches against the centralized forms of church government, which
they feel to be oppressive. They refuse longer to be bound to systems
which, as they believe, invade individual Christian rights. From these and
other causes appeals are coming to us from different quarters for the
recognition of churches which have become independent. A number of these
churches have already been received by council into Congregational
associations, and the indications are that this number will be largely
increased during the year to come.

               [Illustration: THE SPRINGS CABIN AT LOWELL.]

                       THE SPRINGS CABIN AT LOWELL.


                 [Illustration: THE LOWELL CHURCH RUINS.]

                         THE LOWELL CHURCH RUINS.


Of these popular movements toward the Congregational way, that at Lowell
is a typical illustration.  Some of the colored people near this little
hamlet desired to build for themselves a church. With infinite pains and
self-denial and labor they gathered the material for a small, wooden
building and put up the frame with their own hands. Being refused the
official encouragement they felt they had a right to expect from their own
denomination, they began to consider the whole question of church
relations and polity, and made up their minds to become a free church.
They held their services in the cabin depicted in the accompanying
illustration, and sought to push forward the completion of their little
and rude church building. A furious storm blew the frame down. With sore
hearts they piled up the lumber neatly around the foundation frame and
felt that they must give up their cherished hope of having a church
edifice. Having learned of the Congregational way, which superimposes no
centralized church government over the people and seeks to aid the poor
rather than to oppress them, they organized themselves into a
Congregational church, and were recognized in our fellowship by a council.
Afterward they were visited by a representative of the Association, whose
form is seen in the foreground of the picture of their ruined church. A
cheering conference was held with them. In this conversation a single fact
came out which shows something of the labor and self-denial in the
movement. It was found that the young minister of this, and a similar body
of colored people several miles away, although he was afflicted with an
ulcerated ankle, which might well have laid him up in his house, had
repeatedly walked seventeen miles over the heavy roads in order to keep
faithfully his preaching appointments. The people were willing to do their
very utmost. It is hoped, with the aid of our Church Building Society,
that they will now be able to put up their little church building and
prosper in their Christian endeavor of having a free Congregational church
for their religious home.

                 [Illustration: REV. A. W. CURTIS, D.D.]

                         REV. A. W. CURTIS, D.D.


In Raleigh, the State capital, the colored people form a little over half
of the population. Our church work here for a number of years has been in
the charge of Rev. A. W. Curtis, D.D., who is most highly esteemed
everywhere. The convenient, comfortable, and tasteful church building was
erected in 1891. It has a seating capacity of 250. In the political
transformations of the State the race question keeps its prominence. It
was a significant fact that the Legislature voted a few weeks ago to
adjourn in respect to the memory of Fred. Douglass. About the same time
the legislature also voted that the national standard should be raised on
the State house; and, for the first time since the reconstruction days,
our country's flag streamed above the old granite capitol of North
Carolina.

                [Illustration: STATE CAPITOL AT RALEIGH.]

                        STATE CAPITOL AT RALEIGH.




A SUNDAY AT TALLADEGA, ALA.


BY PRESIDENT DEFOREST.

Our different religious services begin early in the day. At 7.30, soon
after breakfast and prayers in the dining hall, the Young Men's Christian
Association holds its meeting for an hour. The Sunday-school, with a large
attendance and many classes occupying different school rooms, convenes at
9.15, with the regular church service following at 10.30. We are never
through with this without feeling keenly the need of a larger, better and
better ventilated house of worship. A new chapel is longed for each
Sabbath, often through the week, and especially at commencement season
when our varied anniversary exercises are all crowded into one small
inadequate and inappropriate room.

Soon after dinner more than a score of students, mainly young men, with a
few of our teachers, go out to seven different mission Sunday-schools, two
of which are in our own tasteful chapels, others in country churches, and
one in a private house, where they meet about 300 different pupils of all
sorts, garbs and ages, but for the most part attentive listeners eager for
instruction, as well as for the papers which Northern benevolence, through
sundry boxes and barrels, enable us to supply. This mission Sunday-school
work began with the first year of the College Church and has accomplished
a large and growing good. Through these schools the college multiplies
itself, carrying the Gospel, with opposition to tobacco and intoxicants,
into needy places. These mission schools are a cordon of outposts
surrounding the citadel. The most remote is five and a half miles away,
and incidentally a good share of pluck is developed by those who, through
cold or heat, mud or dust, regularly make their Sabbath day rounds.

Comparatively few are regularly in these mission enterprises. For those at
home there is the quiet hour and prayer meetings, a gathering in the
interests of purity or temperance--enough to employ the time to the early
supper hour. After that comes the last public meeting of the day in the
chapel, which for some time has been conducted by our Society of Christian
Endeavor. The day is a full one, with large opportunities for personal
growth and usefulness.

From a recent visit, I am able to write more fully of one of the meetings
of the Young Men's Christian Association. The hour was early, but the room
was well filled. The leader took but little time and used it well. Prayers
followed, with volunteer singing; other prayers, brief and earnest, and
then a quartet sang a touching evangelical hymn. Seldom have I spoken to
more attentive hearers than were furnished by these fifty young men. It
was an inspiration to look into their faces and to feel that in a few
years they would all be scattered, if they live, to the four quarters of
the world and wielding a large influence among men. I could but hope that
that influence would be for good. Many earnest prayers followed, and when
an opportunity was offered three young men requested prayers. They were
tenderly remembered. It seemed to me that some of these petitions had in
them the fervor of Pentecost. Two young men were received into the
Association, and when the hour was through I felt that we had been sitting
together in heavenly places in Christ.

And now as a Roman could not end his speech without adding _Delenda est
Carthago_, so I cannot close without saying that if this part of the world
needs Christian schools, if Christian education is the hope of these
regions, then Talladega College ought to be enlarged and endowed. Some who
are giving themselves to this most blessed reconstruction wish that they
had money to add also. May those who cannot come themselves send on
supplies.




STORRS SCHOOL, ATLANTA, GA.


BY MISS ELLA E. ROPER.

We are so sure of your sympathy in our spiritual prosperity that I write
you informally in relation to it.

Sunday, February 10, was a peculiarly happy one for us. In the morning we
had studied together how the Saviour had set the little child in the
midst. At the communion service following there was a large group of
candidates for admission to the church, and then again were the children
"in the midst." Eight were our present pupils; another, a last year's
graduate. Still another was a young man who came to renew his allegiance
to the church of Christ. We wished that all interested in their welfare in
years gone by could look upon them. Several of the younger people admitted
became interested under the preaching of Mr. Moore over a year ago, and
have stood to their post manfully ever since. The present severe weather
causes much acute distress. A recent case had its humorous, as well as
pathetic side. In the bitter zero weather of Friday's blizzard a
microscopic male beggar unfolded a doleful tale, as he basked in the
warmth of the kitchen fire. He gave very unsatisfactory directions to his
home, and we were unsuccessful that night in locating it. Early next
morning he appeared again, and we made immediate preparations for running
him to cover. As we started into the street he said hesitatingly,
"Mother's better now." "That's good; run along." Presently, "She's up and
dressed now." "Run along," we admonished, and took care to keep our eyes
upon him lest he vanish, since he was evidently trying to patch up a peace
with his conscience. He presently darted within a cabin, and there we
found a state of things to which he had hardly done justice,
notwithstanding his remorse that his mother wasn't exactly as he had
represented her. A single stick of wood was wasting in the fireplace. Four
children, smaller than the mite, were as near it as possible without being
on it, eagerly scraping a tin dish with a spoon. A fifth, who had recently
made the acquaintance of this world and its woes, was vigorously
proclaiming his unfavorable opinion of it from the bed. "I cannot take him
up in this cold," the mother explained.

I left them to see what could be done. On my return the last spark of fire
had died upon the hearth. It was zero without and within. Our family of
teachers had made up a sum sufficient for the present needs, however, and
the family were soon made comfortable. At our last visit that day the room
was warm, the baby was up, and evidently had changed his mind. As we were
endeavoring to sort out and fit some garments, the mite (ten years of age,
but apparently about eight) came to me, and, looking up with great
solemnity, said, "If you want any work done, I'll do it for you for
nothin'." So you see there will be a man of business in that house as long
as the mite lives.

We have our usual experience of pleasant classes in Storrs this year. The
same families continuing with us, year after year, seem like our own. Our
Junior Christian Endeavor Society, already quite large, received nine new
members at the last business meeting, and is reaching out for more. Our
industrial department is slowly working in the direction of a modest
exhibit at the coming Atlanta Exposition, and doing considerable toward
clothing the needy with plain garments.




ANDERSONVILLE, GA.


MISS M. E. WILCOX.

Thank you ever so much for the Hand Fund, I feel quite rich with it. These
children are willing to work and the parents are glad to have them do so.
They know very little about doing things properly, and the teaching which
they have in industrial work may do them as much good as their books, but
if you count that, then I am teaching from eight o'clock to five.

You may wish to ask if we feel isolated and lonely. No, we are too busy
for that. The scholars begin to come on the grounds before we are through
breakfast, and we don't have time to wish for other company. You ask how I
find things. One can't find out everything in two months, but as far as I
can judge it is as needy a field as we have heard about.

Of course the best work cannot be done in school until we can have another
room, but now scholars come four or five miles, cross creeks on logs, or,
when the water is too high, their folks bring them across the water and
they walk the rest of the way.

So far, the parents find no fault with the governing at school. One girl
had troubled me by laughing and playing, and I told her at noon if she
couldn't study more she would better stay at home and work. Somebody told
her mother what was said, and the stepfather came down and begged me to
keep her, said that they couldn't read and write and needed to have her
know how, that they would attend "stricter" to her, that she would behave
better when they were through with her, etc. I consented to keep her and
she confided to Jennie, when she came to school, that she had had four
switches "wore out" on her that morning.

Everybody is very poor, of all races, and what is more discouraging they
don't know how to improve their condition. This year the Christmas freeze
spoiled almost all their vegetables, and they lost all their melon crop
last year, and the cold two or three weeks ago froze what garden things
were started; what they are to live on till crops grow is not visible. The
children evidently think our washbasins and soap and towels a great
luxury, for they scrub and rub at every opportunity.

We are putting out flowers and trees and planting grass in the yard to
make it more comfortable looking, the grass, partly to prevent the water
from washing off so much. The church lot is higher than that of the house
and in a heavy rain the water pours down on our lot, but I think we can
stop it in part at least. Our "home" is an "unmixed" blessing. I don't
know how we could get on here without a pleasant resting place, and the
people watch everything we do and everything we have.





THE INDIANS.




ITEMS FROM INDIAN MISSIONS.


SECRETARY C. J. RYDER.

At Santee Industrial School and Mission in Nebraska they have suffered a
sad bereavement. The place left vacant by Mrs. Frederick B. Riggs, who has
just been taken away from the loving circle of missionary workers at this
station cannot be filled. Her absence will be much more than the loss of
one faithful missionary. She was the life, the light and the inspiration
of any circle in which she moved. The brief tribute in another column to
her memory calls attention to her wide usefulness. When we met in the
Mission Council last year at Oahe, S. D., Mrs. Riggs's bright and
confident faith lifted up all our hearts bowed down as they were by
discouragement in view of the vast work to be accomplished and the
retrenchment in funds. All who were present at this Council will remember
how sure she was that light would come after the darkness, and that joy
would come in the morning. There has come to her the richest, fullest
light and joy of the better country. When we meet at the Council this year
we shall be the richer for her strong faith and the abiding presence of
her self-sacrificing love.

Santee Industrial School, through the rigid economy of Dr. Riggs and his
faithful assistants, has enrolled more pupils than the appropriation
permitted. Notwithstanding this, hundreds have been turned from the school
because the funds were not sufficient to furnish them Christian
instruction.

From Oahe comes the report that Rev. T. L. Riggs is gradually recovering
the use of his eyes. Rev. James F. Cross, of Rosebud, has been assisting
Brother Riggs during his sore affliction.

We are sometimes asked whether the hospital at Fort Yates is now in
operation. It is not. Last year, by special solicitation, additional funds
were gathered sufficient to conduct the hospital for one year. This was
done. A hospital plant is always expensive, as it involves the salary of a
trained physician and an assistant, together with medicines and other
supplies. This year the funds have not come in outside of current receipts
sufficient to provide for the expenses of the hospital, and it is,
therefore, closed. This is to the serious loss of the religious work. Word
comes from the prairie that the Indians, women and children especially,
mourn sorely the loss of this hospital and the considerate and skillful
care of our faithful physician.

Miss M. P. Lord, whose address at the annual meeting in Lowell attracted
so general interest, remained in the East for some weeks presenting the
Indian work to the churches, Christian Endeavor Societies and women's
missionary societies. Her work was confined to New England. She remained
as long as it seemed wise for her to be absent from the pressing duties of
her mission, to which she has now returned.

The following letter was recently received from her.


                                         "IN THE LAND OF THE DAKOTAS,
                               LITTLE EAGLE'S VILLAGE, March 25, 1895.

    "During the past week I have been twice down the river to Flying
    By's Village to attend their mid-week prayer meeting and Sunday
    morning service, and also to the Agency. My people seem to be
    active and earnest. Some of them are thinking they had better
    enlarge the little building they put up last year. A number of the
    people there are learning, teaching each other to read; and they
    are asking for a women's missionary society to be formed there.
    Catch-the-Enemy, who is active in the young men's society, said to
    me the other day that there were fifteen members at Flying By's
    Village. Their quarterly dues are ten cents, but the others have
    nothing with which to pay, and so he paid them all.

    "David, dear, good, gentle David, was here to-day from Thunder
    Hawk's. I judge that he is getting on well there. As a teacher, I
    think he can not but be a success, he is so gentle, patient and
    good, and bright, too. A week ago we had a pleasant little visit
    from Mr. Reed over Sunday."


From this letter it will be seen that large opportunities are opening at
this Indian mission, and most hopeful results are already being gathered.
The Christian Indians are more and more realizing their own responsibility
for carrying on Christian work, and are meeting it bravely. They are also
responding to appeals for gifts to missionary work outside of their own
tribes with self-sacrificing devotion. The collection of the Pilgrim
Church at Santee, mentioned in the April magazine, increased to $241. This
was to meet the debt on the treasury of the American Missionary
Association.

Miss Collins, so well known to our readers, is now in the East in behalf
of these needy Indian missions. Before leaving the prairies, she visited
Oahe and Santee, and various missions aside from her own, that she might
have the most recent information of the whole field. The object of her
coming is to give the information, which she possesses so thoroughly, to
the people and so stir them up adequately to support this field of Indian
missions which is suffering so painfully for the lack of funds. There can
not be any further retrenchment of the Indian work if it lives at all. It
has been cut down two years in succession, and greatly suffered. Further
curtailment would mean crucifixion.




MRS. ADELAIDE RIDEOUT RIGGS.


A beautiful life has gone out from our work, taking from it one who was
loved and admired by the Indian people as well as by her fellow-workers.

Mrs. Riggs was born in 1867 in Dorset, Vt., graduating in 1887 from the
Western Reserve Seminary, and after spending two years in Bradford
Academy, Mass., she came as a teacher to the Santee School, Nebraska,
where she made herself exceedingly useful and was afterward employed by
Dr. Riggs as his secretary. In 1893 she was married to Mr. Frederick B.
Riggs and took a trip with him upon the Rosebud and Pine Ridge
Reservations, camping out and sharing the hardship of such travel. Failing
health led to the employment of the best medical advice, and in November,
1894, she went to New Mexico to escape the rigors of the climate of
Nebraska, where it seemed impossible that she could live through the
winter. But in spite of all that could be done, Mrs. Riggs passed away
March 12, 1895. She was admirably fitted for her work and full of
enthusiasm for it. It seemed as if her usefulness had just begun, but God
had prepared her for another and more glorious field.

The funeral service of Mrs. Riggs was held on Sunday afternoon, March 24,
at Santee, Neb. The simple exercises were conducted by Rev. Mr. Dwin,
Superintendent of the Government School, and Pastor Ehnamani. The latter
is the venerable Indian pastor of the church at Santee. He referred
feelingly to Mrs. Riggs giving her life to the work among his people and
of her desire to be buried among those whom she loved.




AN INDIAN HELPING NEEDY WHITES.


The Indians have shown themselves full of sympathy, giving what they could
spare of their annual issue of flannel, cloth, etc., from the Government.
One of the native pastors, Mr. Francis Frazier, told that on his way here
from his home at the Rosebud Reservation, he found at the homes of all the
white families great need of food. He started with a good supply for the
trip, but he left some at each white man's home that he passed on the way.
We have no conception of this suffering. The weather has been very mild
compared with last year, which has been a great blessing to these poor
people. What trust in God it needs to live through such extremities!





THE CHINESE.




STREET PREACHING IN CHINATOWN.


REV. W. C. POND, D.D.

Our brother Loo Quong writes from Fresno as follows: "I cannot help
telling you about the interest we have taken in the street preaching here
in Chinatown, and the interest of the Chinese who have attended our
meetings from Sunday to Sunday. It was a beautiful sight to see the great
big crowd of interesting faces, to hear us sing the songs of praise to the
Almighty God, and to hear the preaching of the sweet gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who loves the Chinese as well as all mankind.

"I have taken more interest in my preaching on the streets in this city
than anywhere else, because I could get more help to sing with us.
Besides, our people here seem to be more interested in such meetings than
anywhere else. We begin at 12.30 p.m. After a few hymns were sung a loud
prayer was offered to our God and Master by Wong Gow. Then I mounted the
chair and preached for half an hour. Then a hymn was sung, and Brother
Wong Gow took the chair and preached another twenty minutes to the big and
interested crowd. After this another hymn was sung. A young American boy
who was a true Christian happened to pass along there, and made a stop to
see what was going on. After he found out he too mounted the chair and
gave the crowd a few cheerful words. Then we closed with the song: 'Are
you Washed in the Blood,' (in Chinese I suppose: W. C. P.) following this
with the Lord's Prayer in Chinese. During all this time there was not one
ever did move away from the big crowd, but rather new-comers swelled it
larger and larger. There were a great many Americans in it too, and they
all seemed to be interested. I am sure that a great many of the Chinese
hearts, at least, were touched by the preaching of the Gospel to-day. May
the Lord, help them to understand it more clearly!

               [Illustration: STREET PREACHING IN FRESNO.]

                       STREET PREACHING IN FRESNO.


"I believe that the street preaching has become the most important part of
the missionary work in this State. For nowadays, with the Chinese, things
are not like those of ten or fifteen years ago, when we could get a great
many Chinese into our schools to be taught English, and so the Gospel
times are getting harder for them in this country every day, and they are
growing old, and therefore they have more cares in their hearts and so
lose interest in study. I have tried this many times. When I succeeded to
get them in for one, two, three, or four nights, they are not interested
and do not come again, and when urged to do so, they offer some kind of
excuse. So we must take the street meetings as the main point to fight
sins, to sow the seeds, and use the schools as our reapers."

And so Loo Quong goes on to urge me to stir up the street preaching at all
our missions, which thing I was and have been forward to do, even without
urging. I believe he is right in saying that while we cannot dispense with
the schools--indeed the whole work without these would be unorganized and
fruitless--yet for "sowing the seed," for reaching those who are far off,
we must depend on street preaching. The English primer has largely lost
its power as a bait for the gospel hook. We must do our fishing for men on
other lines.

Accordingly I am pressing our Chinese Christians into this work, and am
providing them with cards printed in Chinese, on which they can sign their
names to the simple statement: "I like the Jesus' doctrine. I would be
glad to study it. The preacher may call to see me at ----."

The reverse side of the card contains the location of the mission house,
names of teacher, helper, etc. The intent is that no one willing to listen
to the word of life as uttered in private and personal conversation,
should fail to be found and to be urged to take his stand with the
followers of Christ. We wish to follow up the public service with
effective private and personal preaching.

Two of our Chinese brethren at Fresno are to be baptized and welcomed to
the Church to-morrow.

Let no one imagine that street-preaching is a new feature of our work. We
have practiced it on all our fields, and ever since we had Chinese
Christians capable of doing it. But it has not been attended to as
regularly and with as careful preparation: it has not been made a constant
and prominent element of our missionary service, as with God's help I mean
to make it hereafter.

A friend writing from Santa Barbara says of Yong Kay: "For some time God
has been laying the burden of Chinatown upon his mind and heart. He said
that he ought to be like Paul--go to those who have not heard the Gospel.
So, with some singers from the church, he has gone into their street on
Sunday afternoons and held open-air services. A crowd has gathered,
attracted by the singing, and Yong Kay has preached to them in Chinese.
Those who were interested the first time came again yesterday, and one
could tell by their earnest faces that they were _taking in_ the thought
of the speaker. It was a touching scene; and not less touching, perhaps,
that little group at the mission house about to start for the preaching
place, as Yong Kay gathered us about him and said: 'We will have a short
prayer.' He went in the strength of the Lord, and he will doubtless come
again, bringing his sheaves with him."

Mrs. Davis, our teacher at San Bernardino, writes likewise: "We had a song
and preaching service in Chinatown last Sabbath, and the effort was most
gratifying. About forty Chinese gathered and listened with the utmost
interest, as you could see by their very earnest faces and close
attention. We plan to have these services regularly if Gin Foo King can be
continued with us. The longer I work with these people the more my heart
goes out to them in their sad condition, out of Christ."





BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.


MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.




CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR IN THE BLACK BELT.


BY C. E. L.

One hundred and twenty-five happy black faces with eager eyes and
glistening white teeth; one hundred and twenty-five little boys and girls
marching into the schoolroom to go forth as Junior Endeavorers; thus began
our society this morning.

How anxious we were to have the very best one of our number for president,
and to choose wisely the lookout committee and the prayer-meeting
committee! For a whole week we had been thinking just whom we would
choose. The neatest and most careful writer was chosen secretary, the best
singers were placed on the music committee, those whose mothers have
beautiful gardens were placed on the flower committee; five of the very
cheeriest of all these cheerful boys and girls make up the sunshine
committee. Perhaps these children do not yet understand clearly the duties
of the various officers, but the organization means something to them, and
they are very careful not to do things unworthy of Christian Endeavorers.

This society is the outgrowth of the Wednesday morning prayer-meeting. The
meeting this morning was unusually interesting. Our topic, "For what are
you thankful?" we took from the GOLDEN RULE. We did find many things to be
thankful for, so many, in fact, that the privileges we do not enjoy seemed
to sink into insignificance.

Do you think you would be thankful if you had to share a home no larger
than a small bedroom with eleven or twelve brothers and sisters? Could you
give thanks if you had only one suit of clothes and that very ragged; or
if you had to walk four or five miles to school and carry your pockets
full of sweet potatoes to roast in the ashes for your dinner?

Yet we can thank God for health and sunshine and flowers and school and
Junior Endeavor meetings. Indeed, I cannot remember all the things we did
thank Him for this morning. One thing I do remember; we thanked Him for
our voices and the many beautiful hymns we have learned to sing. Oh, how
we do sing! It seems as if we should almost raise the roof sometimes with
our old favorites, "He Arose" and "The Old Ship of Zion."

We have had some very cold mornings. One day Sandy said, "Please, ma'am,
do they send shoes? 'cause I has far to come. I needs ebery ting, but I
wants dem shoes." Poor little boy, he does indeed need "ebery ting." And
there are many others that would fare very badly were it not for the
barrels. There are more than four hundred boys and girls in this school. I
think the heartfelt thanks of these people will call down showers of
blessings on the friends that have provided this school and have been so
prompt in supplying our needs.




WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


               MAINE.
       WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.
_State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose
Woodbury, Woodfords; Mrs. A. T.
Burbank, Yarmouth; Mrs. Helen Quimby,
Bangor.

          NEW HAMPSHIRE.
 FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME
 MISS. UNION.
President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant,
Plymouth.
Secretary--Mrs. John T. Perry,
Exeter.
Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland,
Concord.

              VERMONT.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W.
Brattleboro.
Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St.
Johnsbury.

           MASS AND R. I.
     (1)WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY
     ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, Boston
Highlands, Mass.
Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32
Congregational House, Boston.
Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32
Congregational House, Boston.

            CONNECTICUT.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp
St., New Britain.
Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36
Lewis St., Hartford.
Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19
Spring St., Hartford.

             NEW YORK.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483
Green Ave., Brooklyn.
Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511
Orange St., Syracuse.
Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230
Macon St., Brooklyn.

            NEW JERSEY.
WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE
N. J. ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford,
Montclair.
Secretary--Mrs. R. J. Hegeman, 32
Forest Street, Montclair
Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150
Belleville Ave., Newark.

          PENNSYLVANIA.
    WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A. H. Claflin, 274
Manhattan St., Allegheny.
Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Jennee,
Ridgway.
Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511
Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.

               OHIO.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane
Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 836
Hough Ave., Cleveland.
Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116
Warren St., Toledo.

             INDIANA.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. W.A . Bell, 221
Christian Ave., Indianapolis.
Secretary--Mrs. W. E. Mossman, Fort
Wayne.
Treasurer--Mrs. F. W. Dewhurst, 28
Christian Ave., Indianapolis

            ILLINOIS.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin,
Lombard.
Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151
Washington St., Chicago.
Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field,
Wilmette.

                IOWA
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass,
Grinnell.
Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins,
Grinnell.
Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300
Court Ave. Des Moines.

             MICHIGAN.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 179
West Alexandrine Ave., Detroit.
Secretary--Mrs. J. H. Hatfield, 301
Elm Street, Kalamazoo.
Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Greenville.

          WISCONSIN.
WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. E. G. Updike,
Madison.
Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright,
Madison.
Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman,
Whitewater.

             MINNESOTA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols,
230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, 17
Florence Court, S. E., Minneapolis.
Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
Northfield.

           NORTH DAKOTA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. W. P. Clevelend,
Caledonia.
Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett,
Harwood.
Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.

           SOUTH DAKOTA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins,
Bowdle.
Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall, Huron.
Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.

     BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.
     WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid
City.
Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Gilchrist, Hot
Springs.
Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot
Springs.

             NEBRASKA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. T. Duryea, 2402
Cass Street, Omaha.
Secretary--Mrs. S. C. Dean, 636 31st
Street, Omaha.
Treasurer--Mrs. G. J. Powell, 30th
and Ohio Streets, Omaha.

            MONTANA.
 WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. O. C. Clark,
Missoula.
Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410
Dearborn Ave. Helena.
Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones,
Livingston.

            MISSOURI.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916
Holmes Street, Kansas City.
Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456
Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526
Wabash Ave., Kansas City.

               KANSAS.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps,
Topeka.
Treasurer--Mrs. D. D. DeLong,
Arkansas City.

               OREGON.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. John Summerville, 108
Second Street, Portland.
Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell,
Oregon City.
Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 546
Third Street, Portland.

           WASHINGTON.
 WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 323
Blanchard Street, Seattle.
Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424
South K Street, Tacoma.
Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620
Fourth Street, Seattle.

            CALIFORNIA.
 WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, 572
12th Street, Oakland.
Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 911
Grove Street, Oakland.
Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Havens, 1329
Harrison Street, Oakland.

        SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 510
Downey Ave., Los Angeles.
Secretary--Mrs. P. J. Colcord,
Claremont.
Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public
Library, Riverside.

              NEVADA.
     WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill,
Reno.
Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.

          INDIAN TERRITORY.
      WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. John McCarthy,
Vinita.
Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.

            NEW MEXICO.
     WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow,
Albuquerque.
Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis, 301 So.
Edith Street, Albuquerque.
Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Bullock,
Albuquerque.

           MISSISSIPPI.
    WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421
31st Avenue, Meridian.
Secretary--Mrs Edith M. Hall,
Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012
12th Street, Meridian.

             LOUISIANA.
      WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Miss Bella W. Hume, corner
Gasquet and Liberty Streets, New
Orleans.
Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New
Orleans.
Treasurer--Mrs. C. H. Crawford,
Hammond.

           ALABAMA.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. G. W. Andrews,
Talladega.
Secretary--Mrs. J. S. Jackson,
Montgomery.
Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby,
Talladega.

           FLORIDA.
WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President-Mrs. S. F. Gale,
Jacksonville.
Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows,
Winter Park.
Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown,
Interlachen.

 TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE
  TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.
President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8,
Fisk Univ., Nashville.
Secretary--Mrs. Jos. E. Smith, 304
Gilmer Street, Chattanooga.
Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland, 216
N. McNairy Street, Nashville.

            COLORADO.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. B. C. Valentine,
Highlands.
Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box
508, Denver.
Treasurer--Mrs. Horace Sanderson,
1710 16th Ave., Denver.

            WYOMING.
    WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. G. S. Ricker,
Cheyenne.
Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Whipple,
Cheyenne.
Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock
Springs.

              OKLAHOMA.
      WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. H. Parker,
Kingfisher.
Secretary-Mrs. L. E. Kimball,
Guthrie.
Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw
City.

 UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).
    WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135
Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City,
Utah.
Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar
Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.

          NORTH CAROLINA.
     WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. W. Freeman,
Dudley.
Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E.
Farrington, High Point.

             TEXAS.
 WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin,
Dallas.
Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box
563, Dallas
Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield,
Dallas.

              GEORGIA.
   WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
President--Mrs. H. B. Wey, 253 Forest
Avenue, Atlanta.
Secretary--Mrs. H. A. Kellam,
Atlanta.
Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes,
Barnesville.




RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1895.


                           THE DANIEL HAND FUND


                  _For the Education of Colored People._

Income for March              $38.79
Previously acknowledged    22,519.85
                          ----------
                          $22,558.64
                          ==========




                            CURRENT RECEIPTS.


            MAINE, $319.52.
Alfred.  Ladies'                  10.00
Missionary Circle, by
Emeline L. Jordan, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
Auburn. Sixth St. Cong.           15.83
Ch., 12.50; Miss L. E.
WASHBURN, 3.33, bal. to
const. herself L. M.
Bucksport.  Sab. Sch.,             8.00
Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._
Camden. Elm St. Cong. Ch.         18.00
Cornish. Cong. Ch.                 5.00
Eastport. Miss A.                  2.00
Bibber's S. S. Class,
_for Student Aid,
Dorchester Acad., Tenn._
Fairfield. Y. P. S. C.
E., by Miss B.
Paul, _for Student Aid,            5.00
Skyland Inst., N. C._
Farmington. First Cong.           21.93
Ch., 20.43; "A Friend,"
1.50
Farmington. "A Friend,"           10.00
_for Thunderhawk M._
Garland. Cong. Ch. and             5.50
Soc.
Hampden. Cong. Ch.                 4.00
Harpswell Center. Cong.            6.00
Ch.
Lamoine. Mrs. F. L.                4.00
Hodgkins, _for Student
Aid, Dorchester Acad._
Limerick. Miss E. P.
Hayes, Pkg. C., _for
Skyland Inst., N. C._
Machias Sab. Sch., Centre          5.20
St. Cong. Ch.
Minot Centre. Cong. Ch.           25.00
(of which 14.22 bal. to
const. MISS L. E.
WASHBURN, L. M)
New Vineyard. Cong. Ch.            3.05
Portland. Primary S. S.            2.86
Class, St. Law. St. Cong.
Ch., _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Rockland. Cong. Ch., W.           25.00
M. Soc., 20; Y. P. S. E.,
5, _for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
Rockland. Y. P. S. C. E.,          5.00
by Miss A. M. Moffitt,
_for Student Aid, Blowing
Rock, N. C._
Skowhegan. Island Av.             17.00
Cong. Ch.
Searsport. Mrs. James              5.00
Pendleton, _for Student
Aid, Dorchester Acad._
Strong. Cong, Ch.                  5.13
Westbrook. Cong. Ch.              31.27
Westbrook. Esther Jones,           1.00
_for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
York. Second Cong. Ch.             4.50
Maine Woman's Aid to A.
M. A., by Mrs. Ida V.
Woodbury, Treas.,_ for
Woman's Work:_
              Bethel. Ch.   15.00
South Berwick. "A Friend"   50.00
      Woodfords. L. M. S.   7.25
  ----. "A Friend." Thank   2.00
  Offering
                            ----  74.25

       NEW HAMPSHIRE, $527.28.
Alstead. Third Cong. Ch.         10.00
Alton. Cong. Ch.,                 3.15
Stereopticon Lecture,
_for Mountain Work_
Amherst. "L. F. B."             170.00
Amherst. Cong. Ch., ad'l.         1.00
Berlin. Cong. Ch.                19.15
Bethlehem. Cong. Ch.,             6.31
2.55; C. E. Soc. Of Cong.
Ch., 3.76
Campton. Cong. Ch., _for         10.00
Alaska M._
Colebrook. Y. P. S. C.            6.30
E., by John A. Hodge,
Pres.
East Barrington. Cong.            2.73
Ch., Stereopticon
Lecture, _for Mountain
Work_
East Derry. Cong. Ch.             7.50
(Special), 7.50; Cong.
Ch., L. M. S., 2 Bbls.
C., _for Wilmington, N.
C._
Epping. Cong. Ch.                10.60
Exeter Second Cong. Ch.         125.00
Hanover. Mary A.                  7.00
Fletcher, _for Hospital,
Fort Yates, N. D._
Hanover Centre. "A                5.00
Friend," _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
Hooksett. Cong. Ch.              15.50
Keene. Mrs. H. J.                 2.00
Buckminster, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Langdon. Cong. Ch.                4.60
Meriden. First Cong. Ch.,
25 copies Gospel Hymn
Books, _for Skyland
Inst., N. C._
Milton. Cong. Ch.,                3.36
Stereopticon Lecture,
_for Mountain Work_
New Ipswich. Sab. Sch.           10.00
Cong. Ch.
New Market. Thomas H.            10.00
Wiswall
North Hampton. Cong. Ch.         27.00
Walpole. Cong. Ch. and           27.08
Soc.
Windham. Horace Berry             2.00
New Hampshire Female
Cent. Inst. and Home
Missionary Union, by Miss
Annie McFarland Treas.,
_for Woman's Work:_
  Exeter. Legacy in part,   40.00
  Miss Elizabeth A.
  Chadwick
 Concord. Mrs. Alice M.     2.00
 Nims' S. S. Class, South
 Ch.
                            ---- 42.00

         VERMONT, $504.46.
Barton. W. H. M. S., Bbl.
C., _for McIntosh, Ga_
Benson. Cong. Ch.              6.10
Burlington. Class in          22.00
College St. Sab. Sch.,
_for the maintenance of
an Indian and Negro Boy_,
11 ea.
Burlington. First Ch.,         0.60
from "Tithe"
Cambridge. W. H. M. S.,        1.00
by Mrs. L. E. Wheelock,
Bbl. C, Freight 1, _for
McIntosh, Ga._
Dorset. Cong. Ch.             10.00
Georgia Cong. Ch. and          7.00
Soc.
Guidhall Cong. Ch.             5.22
Hartland  Two Classes,         9.50
Cong. Sab. Sch., by Mrs.
John P. Webster
Hubbardton. Y. P. S. C.        1.75
E., by Miss M. I. St.
John, Cor. Sec.
Jericho. Second Cong. Ch.      5.39
and Soc.
Lowell. Cong. Ch.              4.00
Middlebury. Mrs. S. S.         1.00
Shattuck
Milton. Cong. Ch. and          5.06
Soc.
Montpelier. Bethany Cong.      6.50
Ch.
Newport. S. S. Tinkham,        7.00
5; M. B. Hall, 2
Newport. Ladies' Aux.,
Bbl. C., _for McIntosh,
Ga._
North Bennington, Cong.       45.88
Ch. (of which 25.88 bal.
to const. PERCEY HALL
JENNINGS, WILLIAM CARROLL
HALL CUSHMAN and NORMAN
JULIUS SHELDON L.Ms
North Craftsbury. Miss.        1.00
Soc., Bbl. C., Freight 1,
_for McIntosh, Ga._
Northfield. Cong. Ch. and     19.31
Soc., ad'l.
Norwich. Mrs. B. B.            5.00
Newton
Peacham. Cong. Ch.            28.70
Rochester. Mrs. L. E.          1.00
Martin, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Rutland. Sab. Sch., Cong.     25.00
Ch., _for Student Aid,
Fisk U._
South Duxbury. Cong. Ch.       3.00
Stockbridge. Rev. T. S.        5.39
Hubbard
Wallingford. Senior and       12.00
Junior C. E. and Friends,
_for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._
Washington Co. "A Friend"     20.00
West Charleston. Chas.         1.00
Carpenter, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
West Fairlee. E. G. May,       5.00
_for Indian Sch., Fort
Berthold, N. D._
Westfield Cong. Ch. (1 of     11.38
which from Lella A.
Farman _for Colored
Work_), 5.35; Y. P. S. C.
E. of Cong. Ch., 6.03
Westminster, West. Bbl.
C., _McIntosh, Ga._
Weston. Mrs. C. W.             2.00
Sprague
Williamstown. Cong. Ch.       10.50
Williston. Cong. Ch.           8.95
Windham. Sab. Sch., Cong.      7.23
Ch.
                             ------
                            $304.46
         ESTATE.
Derby. Estate of O. B.       200.00
Hamilton, E. A. Stewart,
Adm'r.
                             ------
                            $504.46

        MASSACHUSETTS, $4,948.31.
Amherst. Amherst College           147.36
Ch., by W. E. Esty,
Treas.
Amherst. Colored Bible
Class, Bbl. C., _for
Wilmington, N. C._
Andover. Miss Grace M.               8.00
Whittemore, _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._
Andover.  West Cong. Ch.,            4.00
Osgood Dist.
Arlington.  Mrs. E. S.               5.00
Hillard, _for Student
Aid, Dorchester Acad._,
5; Friends, by Mrs. L. E.
Wheelock, Bbl. C., _for
McIntosh, Ga._
Ashby.  Ortho Cong. Ch.             14.20
Ashfield.  Henry Taylor,             7.00
5; Cong. Ch., 2
Auburndale.  Cong. Y. P.            32.35
S. C. E., _for C. E.
Hall, McIntosh, Ga._
Bedford.  Miss Emily                 1.00
Davis, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Belchertown. Cong. Ch.,             36.43
to const. MARTIN W.
BARDWELL L.M.
Beechwood.  Rev. John                8.00
Sharp
Billerica.  Mrs. H. B.               1.00
Stanton
Boston.  Union Cong. Ch.    373.64
    Old South Ch. in part   255.90
    Mrs. Charlotte Fiske,   50.00
    _for Lamson Sch.,
    Marshallville, Ga._
             William Shaw   25.00
       Maverick Cong. Ch.   31.66
          Berkeley Temple   12.00
       Z. A. Norris, _for   10.00
       Mountain Work_
  Friends in Central Ch.,   6.00
  _for Indian Sch., Oahe,
  So. Dak._
    Central Ch., Bbl. C.,
    _for Nat, Ala._
Phillips Ch., Sisterhood
of Service, Bbl. reading
matter, _for Lincoln
Acad., Kings Mountain, N.
C._
Allston. Sab. Sch., Cong.   7.44
Ch.
Brighton.  "Two Friends     2.00
in Cong. Ch.," 1; Ladies
Aux., 1, _for Indian M._
Dorchester.  Second Cong.   31.00
Ch., by Mrs. Wm. Wales,
30; to const. MISS MARY
ALICE LITTLE L. M., and 1
_for Hospital, Fort
Yates, N. D._
    Mrs. Jacob Fullerton,   25.00
    _for Hospital, Fort
    Yates, N. D._
Mrs. E. Torrey, 10; Miss            18.00
E. Tolman, 8, _for
Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._
        Central Cong. Ch.   10.40
   Extra Cent a Day Band.   10.00
   Second Cong. Ch., _for
   Indian M._
West Roxbury. Mrs. N. S.    5.00
French _for Student
Aid._, 4; Freight, 1.
                            ------ 873.04
Braintree. First Cong.               4.81
Ch.
Brockton.  Thomas A.                10.00
Baxendale, _for Student
Aid, Wilmington, N. C._
Cambridge.  Rev. J. Henry           25.00
Thayer, D. D., _for
Student Aid, Talladega
C._
Cambridge.  "Helping Hand            8.00
Soc., King's Daughters,"
_for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._
Cambridge.  Shepherd Mem.            5.00
Ch., Rev. L. S. Parker's
Bible Class, _for Nat,
Ala._
Cambridgeport.  Prospect           108.26
St., Ch.
Chatham, Cong. Ch.                   2.85
Chelsea.  Central Cong.             29.55
Ch.
Chester Centre.  Cong.               4.59
Ch.
Cohasset.  Mrs. A.                   5.00
Williams, Jr., _for
Indian M., Fort Yates, N.
D._
Dalton.  W. M. Crane,              100.00
_for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Dedham.  Sab. Sch., First           15.00
Cong. Ch.
East Charlemont.  Cong.              8.48
Ch.
East Douglas.  Dea.                  2.00
Luther Hill
Enfield.  Cong. Ch.                 25.00
Fall River.  Y. P. S. C.            25.00
E. of Central Ch., _for
Student Aid, Fisk U._
Farmington.  "A Friend,"            17.50
_for Indian Schp._
Fitchburg.  C. S. Tolman            18.00
(8 of which _for
Wilmington, N. C._)
Foxboro.  Beth. Ortho.              26.32
Cong. Ch.
Greenfield.  Mrs. Ellen             50.00
M. Russell
Greenwich.  Cong. Ch.                6.00
Groton.  "A Friend," 15,            30.00
_for Indian M._, 10 _for
Mountain Work_, 5 _for
California Chinese M._,
and to const. WILLIAM
HENRY HUNT L. M.
Groton, Cong. Ch. Senior            15.00
Y. P. S. C. E., 10;
Junior Y. P. S. C. E., 5
_for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._
Harvard.  Rev. C. C.                 5.00
Torrey
Holyoke.  Second Cong.              30.00
Ch., Ladies' Prayer
Circle, _for Central Ch.,
New Orleans, La._, and to
const. MRS. C. V. HEIN L.
M.
Hopkinton.  Mrs. Mary E.
Putnam, Bbl. C., _for
Selma, Ala._
Housantonic.  Primary                 .82
Sab. Sch. Class, _for
Student Aid, Dorchester
Acad._
Hyde Park.  First Cong.             22.72
Ch.
Indian Orchard.                     36.30
Christian Endeavor Soc.,
by Geo. G. Bass, Treas.
Lancaster. "A Friend,"               0.50
_for Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Linden.  Y. P. S. C. E.              1.38
of Cong. Ch.
Lowell.  "A Friend," _for           25.00
Student Aid, Evarts, Ky._
Lowell. First Cong. Ch.,             7.00
5; "A. K.," 2
Lynn.  Mrs. M. C. Bean               5.00
Malden.  Miss M. F. Aiken            5.00
Maplewood.  Primary S. S.            2.00
Class, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Marlborough.  Union Cong.           75.00
Ch. and Soc.
Medway.  Bbl. of C., _for
Nat, Ala._
Melrose.  Ortho. Cong.              84.78
Ch.
Melrose.  "Altruist,"                1.00
_for Indian Sch., Oahe,
So. Dak._
Melrose Highlands.  Cong.           40.62
Ch.
Mount Hermon.  Miss. Soc.           25.00
Mt. Hermon Sch., _for
Student Aid, Fisk U._
Newton Highlands, "A                 2.00
Friend," _for Tougaloo
U._
North Andover.  Christian            5.56
End. Soc.
North Beverly.  Y. P. S.             3.64
C. E. of Second Cong.
Ch., _for Alaska M._
North Rochester.  Cong.              3.00
Ch.
Norton.  Trin. Cong. Ch.             4.84
Norwich.  Ladies' Soc.,
by Mrs. H. Cook, Bbl. C.,
_for Skyland Inst., N.
C._
Oakham.  Dea. Packard, 8;           16.00
Mrs. M. S. F. Rugg, 8,
_for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._
Oxford.  Mrs. B. F.                  2.00
White, _for Freight_
Peabody.  "H. M. S.,"                8.00
_for Marshallville, Ga._
Phillipston.  Mary P.                6.00
Estey, Memorial Daniel
Parker, 5 and 1, _for
Indian M._
Pittsfield.  Mrs. Mary E.            5.00
Sears, Thank offering
Randolph.  Ladies' Benev.           25.00
Ass'n, by Mrs. M. J.
Graham
Reading.  Cong. Ch.                 18.00
Reading.  Y. P. S. C. E.,           15.00
Cong. Ch., _for Central
Ch., New Orleans, La._
Rockville.  Cong. Ch.,               5.00
Miss M. E. Jones, _for
Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Salem.  Tabernacle Ch.,            140.42
and Soc. (2 of which for
Indian M.)
Saugus.  "A King's                   5.00
Daughter," _Tougaloo U._
Shelburne Falls.  Cong.              8.45
Ch., Stereopticon Lecture
Springfield. Y. P. S. C.            25.00
E., South Ch., _for
Central Ch., New Orleans,
La._
Springfield. Mrs. E. W.             15.00
Southworth, _for
Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Springfield. "Mission               14.00
Reserves," by Mrs. B. F.
Thompson, _for Student
Aid, Blowing Rock, N. C._
South Amherst.  Sab.                 5.67
Sch., Cong. Ch.
Southbridge.  Ladies'               28.00
Social Circle Cong. Ch.,
21; Juv. Dept. Cong. Sab.
Sch., Birthday offerings,
5; E. S. Swift, 2 _for
Student Aid, Talladega
C._
South Framingham. Cong.
Ch., by Mrs. F. E.
Emrick, Bbl. C., _for
Skyland Inst., N. C._
South Hadley.  "A Friend             1.00
in Mt. Holyoke College"
South Hadley Falls. "G"             50.00
Somerville. Broadway                23.20
Cong. Ch.
South Natick. John Eliot,            6.00
Y. P. S. C. E., _for C.
E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._
Springfield. Sab. Sch.
Children, 2 Bbls.,
Sundries, _for S. S.
Children, Talladega,
Ala._
Sterling. Cong. Ch.                 26.28
Taunton Y. P. S. C. E.,             17.00
of Winslow Ch.
Waltham. Miss Hope                   1.00
Foster, 1, and Box
Sundries, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Ware. "A Friend," _for              10.00
Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Ware. Junior C. E., 5,               5.00
_for Buggy_, and Bbl. C.,
_for McIntosh, Ga._
Ware. Miss Sage, _for                5.00
Meridian, Miss._
Ware. Rev. L. E. Rivard              1.00
Westboro. "A Servant"                5.00
Westboro. Miss Amelia                2.00
Harrington, 2 and Pkg.
Papers, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
West Boylston.  Cong. Ch.            4.00
Westfield. Primary S. S.             3.00
Class, Second Cong. Ch.,
_for Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
West Hawley. Y. P. S. C.             5.00
E., by Rev. A. G. Beebee
West Medway. Second Cong.           10.00
Ch., _for Student Aid,
Nat. Ala._, Bbl. of C.,
_for Nat., Ala._, 10
West Newton. Dr. H. M.              10.00
Paine
Weston. By Mrs. E. M.               25.00
Knox, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosie, Va._
Weymouth and Braintree.             30.00
Union Cong. Ch.
Weymouth Heights. Bbl. of
C., _for Nat, Ala._
Westminister.                        5.00
"Westminster"
Williamsburg. Cong. Ch.             10.00
Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                4.31
Winchester. Miss C. C.               3.00
Varney, 2; Two Ladies, 1,
_for Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Woburn.  Intermediate                8.00
Dept., Cong. Sab. Sch.,
_for Student Aid, Nat.,
Ala._
Worcester. Plymouth Cong.           83.84
Ch., 37.42; Salem St.
Ch., 36.42; Dr. Lamson
Allen, "Thank Offering,"
10
Hampden Benevolent
Association, by George R.
Bond, Treas.:
     Chicopee. Second Ch.   35.95
          East Longmeadow   10.13
               Longmeadow   71.73
        Ludlow. First Ch.   14.00
                Southwick   2.00
 Springfield. North Ch.,    89.17
 bal. to const. EDWARD E.
 THAYER,  CLINTON  W.
 STEBBINS,  CHARLES H.
 RUST and CHARLES W.
 POLLNER L. M.'s
   Springfield. Hope Ch.,   27.51
   Special
Springfield. Emmanuel Ch.   4.00
                            ------ 254.49
Woman's Home Missionary
Association of Mass, and
R. I., Annie C. Bridgman,
Treas., _for Woman's
Work_:
        W. H. M. A., _for   338.47
        Salaries_
  Boston. Ladies Aux. Old   50.00
  South Ch., _for Alaska
  M._
    Milton.  Ladies' Aux.   25.28
 Keene, N. H. Second Ch.,   20.00
 Mrs. Dr. Bevoise's S. S.
 Class
                            ------ 433.75
                                   ------
                                $3,448.31
        ESTATES.
Beverly. Estate of                 600.00
Harriet W. Smith, by F.
H. Morgan, Adm'r.
Boston. Estate of                  400.00
Frederick D. Allen, by
Frederick B. Allen, B.
Preston Clark and Elihu
G. Loomis, Executors
Watertown. Estate of               500.00
Jennette T. Kimball, by
John E. Abbott
                                   ------
                                $4,948.31
CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC.,
RECEIVED AT BOSTON
OFFICE:
Cambridgeport, Mass. "A
Friend in Prospect St.
Ch.," Box S. S. Books
_for Thomasville, Ga._
Oxford, Mass. Mrs. B. F.
White, Box Books.

        RHODE ISLAND, $91.70.
Central Falls. Cong. Ch.        43.50
Providence. N. W.               16.70
Williams, 15; North Cong.
Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., 1.70
Providence. No. 4 Bell
St., One large Human's
Calendar, _for Beach
Inst., Ga._
Slatersville. Y. P. S. C.        3.00
E. of Cong. Ch.
Woonsocket. Globe Cong.         28.50
Ch.

         CONNECTICUT, $7,090.15.
Abington. Y. P. S. C. E.,            5.00
by Anna F. Bird, Sec.,
_for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._
Berlin. Member Second               10.00
Cong. Ch.
Branford. H. G. Harrison            10.00
Branford.  "Unknown                 10.00
Friend," _for Lowell, N.
C._
Branford. Cong. Y. P. S.            10.00
C. E., _for Central Ch.,
New Orleans, La._
Bridgeport. Lena J.                 42.00
Upson, _for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Bridgeport. Mem. Mission            25.00
Circle, First Cong. Ch.,
_for Share, Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._
Bridgeport. Olivet Ch.,              3.00
Ladies' M. Soc.
Bristol. Sab. Sch., Cong.           17.86
Ch.
Canaan. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.           19.71
Deep River. Middlesex                6.15
Conference, by Rev. Wm.
H. Knouse
East Hartford. Cong. Sab.           10.00
Sch., Mrs. Kilbourne's
Class, _for Central Ch.,
New Orleans, La._
East Lyme. Cong. Ch., 2;             3.50
C. E. Soc., 1.50, by Rev.
E. G. Stone
East Wallingford. Mrs.               4.50
Benjamin Hall
East Woodstock. Cong. Ch.           40.42
Enfield. Sab. Sch., Cong.           10.00
_for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
Farmington. First Cong.            100.00
Ch.
Glastonbury. Sab. Sch.,             25.00
by S. H. Williams, _for
Student Aid, Blowing
Rock, N. C._
Greenwich. Second Cong.            111.67
Ch.
Hartford. J. B. Williams,           50.00
_for Student Aid,
Tougaloo U._
Hartford. Pearl St. Cong.           36.20
Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
Student Aid, Fisk U._
Huntington. Cong. Ch.                8.00
Ivoryton. Mrs. J. E.                 8.00
Northrup, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Jewett City. L. H. M. S.,
Bbl. C., _for A. N. and
I. Inst., Thomasville,
Ga._
Meriden. "A Friend," 5;             10.00
Mrs. Merriam, 5, _for
Tougaloo U._
Meriden. "Members First              8.00
Cong. Ch."
Meriden. First Cong. Ch.,            5.00
"I. H. N.," _for Mountain
Work_
New Hartford. North Cong.           31.63
Ch.
New Haven. Howard Av., Y.           25.00
P. S. C. E., _for Central
Ch., New Orleans, La._
New Haven. Dwight Place
Ch., Bbl. C., _for Nat,
Ala._
Norfolk. L. H. M. S., Box
of C., _for A. N. and I.
Inst., Thomasville, Ga._
North Stamford. Junior               3.30
and Senior C. E.
Societies by Winifred
Swinnerton. Sec
Norwich. Y. P. S. C. E.             12.00
of Second Cong. Ch., _for
Central Ch., New Orleans,
La._
Norwich. Broadway Sab.              10.00
Sch. _for Indl. Shop,
McIntosh, Ga._
Norwich. Sab. Sch.,                  6.57
Second Cong. Ch., _for
Athens, Ala._
Norwich. Miss M. T.                  8.00
Norton, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Norwich. Ladies of Cong.             6.30
Ch., by Mrs. E. R.
Huntington
Norwich Town. "A Friend            100.00
in First Ch."
Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.             41.46
Oxford. Cong. Ch.                   12.70
Plainville. Cong. Ch.,              47.33
32.33; "Friends," 15
Plymouth. Mr. and Mrs.              40.00
John M. Wardwell, _for
Student Aid, Tougaloo U._
Saybrook. Mrs. Geo.                  5.00
Dibble
Scitico. Mrs. C. E.
Stone, S. S. Papers, _for
A. N. and I. Inst.,
Thomasville, Ga._
Sharon. First Cong. Ch.              9.85
Somers. Sab. Sch. Class,             1.00
_for Wilmington, N. C._
Sound Beach. Pilgrim
Cong. Ch., Box Papers,
_for Talladega C._
South Canaan. Y. P. S. C.            4.20
E., by Miss Jennie D.
Chase
South Coventry. Y. P. S.             5.00
C. E., by Mrs. A. K.
Avery, Treas.
South Glastonbury. Sab.              6.36
Sch., Cong. Ch.
Stamford. Y. P. S. C. E.            10.35
of Cong. Ch., _for Alaska
M._
Stonington. First Cong.             21.50
Ch.
Suffield. First Cong.               30.00
Ch., to const. MISS HELEN
V. MASON L. M.
Terryville. Lois Gridley             5.00
Thomaston. First Cong.              11.09
Ch.
Tolland. Y. P. S. C. E.,             6.00
by W. A. Agard
Warren. Cong. Ch.                   20.00
Waterbury. "A Friend,"             163.94
100; Second Cong. Ch.,
63.94
Watertown. Sab. Sch.,               20.00
Cong. Ch., 12; Primary
Dept. of Cong. Sab. Sch.,
_for Wilmington, N. C._,
8
West Hartford. "Two                  5.00
Friends"
Westminster. Mrs. S. B.              5.00
Carter
West Suffield. Cong. Ch.            17.06
West Torrington. Cong.
Ch., L. M. S., Bbl. C.,
_for Wilmington, N. C._
Wilton. Cong. Ch.                   20.00
Windham. Cong. Ch., and             33.37
Soc.
Winsted. David Strong,              37.00
30; "Other Friends," 7,
_for Theo. Student Aid,
Talladega C._
---- "A Friend"                     25.00
Woman's Cong. Home
Missionary Union of
Conn., by Mrs. W. W.
Jacobs, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
       Abington. R. F. A.   0.80
       Williams
 Danbury. Young Ladies'     20.00
 Mission Circle, West St.
 Ch.
Enfield. Mrs. Horace        30.00
Patten, by L. B. Soc., to
const. MRS. HENRY B.
PATTEN L. M.
  Higganum. L. H. M. Soc.   15.50
New Haven. United Ch., L.   30.00
A. Soc., _for Central
Ch., New Orleans, La._
    Norwich. Broadway Ch.   150.00
  Norwich. Park Ch., Aux.   25.00
             Norwich Town   17.83
         Plainville. Aux.   5.00
    Stonington. Agreement   10.00
    Hill, H. M. S.
   Terryville. L. B. Soc.   11.00
 Trumbull. W. H. M. Union   25.00
 Woodbury. First Ch. Aux.   11.00
                            ------ 351.13
                                   ------
                                $1,746.13
        ESTATES.
Cornwall. Estate of Silas        2,000.00
C. Beers, by John C.
Calhoun, Executor
Norfolk. Estate of Mrs.          1,544.00
Mary Langdon Porter, F.
E. Porter, Ex.
West Hartford. Estate            1,800.00
Nancy S. Gaylord, Francis
H. Parker, Executor
                                   ------
                                $7,090.13

          NEW YORK, $2,188.96.
Albany. First Cong. Ch.             29.61
Albany. Cong. Ch., Bbl.
C., _for Skyland Inst. N.
C._
Bridgewater. Y. P. S. C.             6.00
E. of Cong. Ch., _for C.
E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._
Bronxville. "A Friend"               1.00
Brooklyn. Church of the          1,013.12
Pilgrims, 860.63; South
Cong. Ch., 145.95;
Rochester Ave. Cong. Ch.,
6.54
Brooklyn. Miss Ellen                26.00
Thurston, 25; Miss Grace
D. Davis, 1, _for
Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Brooklyn. Mrs. E. M.                10.00
Hodge, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Brooklyn. Clinton Ave.,
Young Ladies' Guild, Box
C., _for Saluda, N. C._
Brooklyn. Park Ch., 3
Bbls. C., _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._
Brooklyn. Evangel. Circle
of King's Daughters, Box
and Bbl. C., _for Saluda,
N. C._
Brooklyn. Plymouth Cong.
Ch., Young Women's Guild,
Bbl. Household Supplies,
_for Lincoln Acad.,
King's Mountain, N. C._
Berkshire. "A Friend,"               5.00
_for Student Aid. Gregory
Inst._
Canaan Four Corners.                 1.60
Cong. Ch.
Canandaigua. First Cong.            58.18
Ch.
Clear Creek. Cong. Ch.               3.15
Clifton Springs. "Two               20.00
Friends," 10; Two Members
Cong. Ch., Epping, N. H.,
10
Honeoye. Cong. Ch.                  30.35
Kiantone.  Lewis H.                  1.66
Cheney
Lewis. "Friends," _for               3.75
Talladega C._
Lisle. Sab. Sch. Cong.
Ch., Bbl. C., _Freight
Paid, for McIntosh, Ga._
Little Falls. Loomis                11.00
Burrill, 10; Miss A.
Loomis, 1, _for Student
Aid, A. N. and I. School,
Thomasville, Ga._
Little Valley. MRS.                350.00
RACHEL CHAPMAN to const.
herself, REV. EMILY C.
WOODRUFF, WILLIAM HALL,
MRS. B. WEIDMAN, DE HART
AMES, HENRY HELSH, MISS
EMMA WILLIAMS, MRS. IDA
EDMUNDS and MRS. A. W.
ROBERTS L. M's.
Lynbrook. Junior C. E.              10.13
Soc., 6.13; Y. P. S. C.
E., 4, by Mrs. R. D.
Jacques, _for Student
Aid, A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._
Maine. Woman's Union of
Cong. Ch., Box of
Bedding, etc., _for
Talladega C._
Middle Island. Mrs.                 10.00
Hannah M. Overton, _for
Mountain Work_
Morrisville. Cong. Ch.              11.00
New Haven. "Willing
Workers," Pkg. Flower
Seeds, _for Lincoln
Acad., King's Mt., N. C._
New Haven. Mrs. R. E.
Johnson, Box of Sch.
Apparatus, _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._
New York. Bethany Sab.             100.00
Sch., by W. R. Robinson,
Treas., _for Fort
Berthold, Indian M._
New York. Miss D. E.                25.00
Emerson, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._
New York. Samuel B.
Schiefellin, Case of
Books, _for Talladega C._
New York. REV. JOHN B.              52.12
DEVINS, to const. himself
L. M., 30; Puritan Ch.,
14; Forest Av., Cong.
Sab. Sch., 8.12
North Walton. Misses Lucy            5.00
and Alice Weed, _for
Student Aid, Dorchester
Acad._
Nunda. Mrs. Mary Cosnett,           25.00
proceeds sale of a
beautiful silk quilt made
by her own hands for the
Lord's work
Olean. W. H. M. S., Bbl.
C., _for Hillsboro, N.
C._
Oxford. Cong. Ch.                   18.00
Perry Center. Bbl. C.,               1.96
Freight, 1.96, _for
Tougaloo U._
Ph[oe]nix. Sab. Sch.,               10.50
Cong. Ch., _for Student
Aid, Tougaloo U._
Rochester. Miss Clara M.             3.31
Janes
Saratoga. C. M. Blodgett,            1.00
_for Indian M._
Saratoga. Bbl. C., _for
Lincoln Acad., Kings Mt.,
N. C._
Sherburne. Mrs. C. S.                5.00
Gorton, 4.50; Miss Carrie
Gorton, 50c., _for
Student Aid, Talladega
C._
Syracuse. E. W. Parmelee            30.00
Syracuse. C. A. Hamlin,
Bbl. Papers, _for
Beaufort, N. C._; Mrs. C.
A. Hamlin, Pkg.
Literature, _for Beach
Inst., Ga._
Syracuse. "Pansy Circle,
King's Daughters," Pkg.
S. S. Papers, etc., _for
A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._
Syracuse. Mrs. Spaulding,
Box Papers and Books,
_for Big Creek Gap,
Tenn._
Walton. First Cong. Ch.             77.27
Watertown. Cong. Ch. L.
M. Soc., 2 Bbls. C.
(including 5 doz. Napkins
and 4 Table Cloths), _for
Williamsburg Acad., Ky._
Wellsville. First Cong.             42.25
Ch.
West Bloomfield. Cong.              33.35
Ch.
Woodhaven. S. S. Class,              2.00
_for Saluda, N. C._
Woodside. Y. P. S. C. E.,            2.65
by Fannie Jones, Sec.
Women's Home Missionary
Union of N. Y. by Mrs. J.
J. Pearsall, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
    Baiting Hollow. C. E.   3.00
Buffalo. First Ch., H. M.   25.00
S.
  New York. Broadway Tab.   50.00
  Ch. Soc., _for Woman's
  Work_
Poughkeepsie. L. H. M. S.   25.00
                            ------ 103.00
                                   ------
                                $2,138.96
         ESTATE.
Jefferson. Estate of                50.00
Susanna Ruliffson in
memory of Betsey Hubbard,
by Mrs. C. Nichols
                                   ------
                                $2,188.96

           NEW JERSEY, $527.50.
Belvidere. Ladies' Miss.              3.00
Soc., Oxford Pres. Ch.,
_for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
East Orange. First Cong.             66.50
Ch., 54.07; Sab. Sch.
First Cong. Ch., 12.43
Elizabeth. Mission Band              10.00
First Cong. Sab. Sch.,
_for Share, McIntosh,
Ga._
Moorstown. J. W. Walton,              5.00
_for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Newark. Bellville Ave.              190.00
Cong. Ch., 140; C. S.
Haines, 50
Newark. Frank Blanchard,             12.00
_for Student Aid,
Tillotson Inst._
Orange. Mrs. Sarah                    5.00
Spottiswood
Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.             66.00
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of the N. J. Assn.,
by Mrs. J. H. Denison,
Treas., _for Woman's
Work_:
              W. H. M. U.   150.00
  Montclair. W. H. M. S.,   20.00
  First Cong. Ch., _for
  Student Aid, Talladega
  C._
                            ------ $170.00

        PENNSYLVANIA, $86.90
Germantown. E. I. H.            1.00
Howell, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
Neath. Cong. Ch.                8.90
Philadelphia. Mrs. E. H.       59.00
Farnum, 50; Mrs. Wm. H.
Kimball, 5; E. F.
Partridge, 2; "A Friend,"
1; Miss M. Elsy, 1, _for
Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._
Philadelphia. Mrs. M. V.       18.00
Morris, 10; Mrs. A. E.
Baker, 8, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._

          OHIO, $642.67.
Ashland. J. O. Jennings      10.00
Ashtabula. L. J. Deming,     30.00
to const. LUCIUS DEMING
L. M.
Castalia. First Cong. Ch.    32.40
Chester Cross Roads.          1.50
Cong. Ch.
Cincinnati. Miss              2.00
Pappenheimer, _for
Student Aid, Tillotson
Inst._
Clarksfield. Cong. Ch.        5.00
Cleveland. Horace Ford,      20.00
15; T. M. Bates, 5, _for
Theo. Student Aid,
Talladega C._
Cleveland. Pilgrim Ch.,       5.00
Int. C. E., _for Santee,
Indian M._
Cleveland. Mrs. C. A.         2.00
Garlick, _for Warner
Inst., Jonesboro, Tenn._
Cleveland. Miss Cora
Bean, Box of Domestic
Goods, _for Albany, Ga._
Coolville. Miss Margaret    200.00
B. Bartlett
Cortland. First Cong. Ch.     2.32
East Liverpool. Rev. H.      50.00
D. Kitchel
Fredericksburg. Cong.         6.00
Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.
Geneva. "W. A."               5.00
Hudson. Cong. Ch.            10.00
Jewell. T. B. Goddard       100.00
Medina. Sab. Sch., Cong.     14.30
Ch., 13.30; Junior
Endeavor Soc., 1, _for
Mountain Work_
North Amherst. Y. P. S.       8.75
C. E., 6.75; Junior Y. P.
S. E., _for Indian M._, 2
Oberlin. Second Cong.        61.40
Ch., 46.40; Sab. Sch.
First Ch., 15
Oberlin. Mrs. Geo. Clark     11.00
and "Friends," _for
Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Oberlin. Mary Williams,
Bbl. C., _for Albany,
Ga._
Parkman. S. R. Dole, _for     5.00
Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._
Rootstown. Lloyd Hinman      10.00
Salem. Mrs. B. W. Allen      25.00
Toledo. Central Ch., W.       2.00
M. U., _for Standing
Rock, Indian M._
Wellington. Y. P. S. C.       4.00
E., by F. W. Andrus, Sec.
Wooster. Lizzie D.           20.00
Mullins, _for Teacher,
Thunderhawk M._

         INDIANA, $1.00.
Butler. Mrs. Ida E. Hose     1.00

           ILLINOIS, $618.87.
Alton. Mrs. I. D.                   1.00
Gillman, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Anna. Cong. Ch.                     2.00
Aurora. First Cong. Ch.            20.00
Bowmanville. Cong. Ch.             10.00
Champaign. Jr. C. E. Soc.           4.44
Chandlerville. Cong. Ch.           52.57
Chicago. First Cong. Ch.,         190.53
150.73; South Ch., W. H.
M. U., 39.80
Chicago. Lincoln Park              10.00
Cong. S. S., Mrs. Boyce,
Class No. 8, _for New
Hall, Tillotson Inst._
Chicago. Mrs. Harriet               8.00
Blake, _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Chicago. ----, _for                 5.00
Indian M._
Chicago. Cong. Ch., Jr.
C. E., Box Books and
Papers, _for Williamsburg
Acad., Ky._
Cobden. Sab. Sch.,                  2.00
Birthday Box, 1.25; Y. P.
S. C. E., 75c
Elmwood. Cong. Ch.                  7.00
Evanston. Mrs. J. H.                5.00
Hurlbut
Geneseo. Mrs. P.                    3.00
Huntington, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Hamilton. Chas. Grubb               5.00
Hinsdale. Sab. Sch. Cong.          75.00
Ch., _for Theo. Student
Aid, Talladega C._
La Grange. Y. P. S. C. E.           3.00
Malta. Cong. Ch.                    4.50
Marshall. Cong. Ch.                 8.10
Morris. Cong. Ch.                   1.00
North Aurora. Sab. Sch.             5.00
by Nellie Schneider
Oak Park. Mrs. E. J.               25.00
Humphrey
Peoria. Plymouth Cong.             21.00
Ch.
Polo. Emma R. Parsons               2.00
Rio. Cong. Ch.                      8.02
Saint Charles. Cong. Ch.           13.75
Seward. Second Cong. Ch.,          10.00
7.60; Sab. Sch., by
Robert H. Wright Treas.,
2.40
Shabbona. "A Christian              3.00
Endeavorer," _for Almeda
Gardner Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._
Sterling. Sab. Sch.,                4.12
Cong. Ch.
Thawville. Cong. Ch.                3.45
Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell,           11.00
10; and _for Valdese M._,
1
Tonica. C. E. Soc. of               4.00
Cong. Ch.
Illinois Woman's Home
Missionary Union, Mrs. L.
A. Field, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
  Chicago. New England W.   10.40
  M. S.
   Jacksonville. W. M. S.   21.00
   Moline. First W. M. S.   16.00
        Ottawa. Jr. C. E.   7.34
  Pecatonica. Y. P. S. C.   5.00
  E.
   Poplar Grove. W. M. S.   6.65
    Rockford. First Cong.   25.00
    Ch., W. M. S.
                            ------ 91.39

           MICHIGAN, $272.11.
Ann Arbor. First Cong.             56.10
Ch.
Calumet. Cong. Ch.                 31.00
Calumet. Sab. Sch., Cong.          37.50
Ch., _for Theo. Student
Aid, Talladega C._
Churches Corners. J. F.             2.00
Douglass, _for Student
Aid, Gregory Inst._
Corinth. ------                     2.42
Detroit. First Cong. Ch.,          24.00
Young Ladies' Union, 12;
Y. P. S. C. E., 12, _for
Student Aid, Santee
Indian Sch._
Dorr. Cong. Ch., 14.31,            16.34
and Sab. Sch. 2.03
Maple City, Cong. Ch.               1.00
Olivet. Cong. Ch.,                  5.00
Ladies' Benev. Soc., _for
Student Aid, Talladega
C._
Olivet. Cong. Ch., Three            3.00
S. S. Classes, _for
Lexington, Ky._
South Haven. Clark Pierce          10.00
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of Michigan, by
Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., _for Woman's
Work_:
         Armada. L. A. S.   .50
 Benton Harbor. Y. P. S.    6.00
 C. E., _for Student Aid,
 A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
 Miss._
Benzonia. Y. P. S. C. E.,   2.50
_for Student Aid, Santee,
Neb., Pleasant Hill,
Tenn., and Moorhead,
Miss._
     Detroit. First. Ch.,   25.00
     Woman's Ass'n.
 Detroit. First Ch., Jun.   5.00
 Soc., _for Student Aid,
 A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
 Miss._
  Grand Rapids. Park Ch.,   3.75
  W. H. M. S.
 Greenville. Y. L. M. S.,   5.00
 _for Student Aid,
 Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    Harrison. W. H. M. S.   0.50
 Hopkins Station. Helping   0.50
 Hand M. B., _for Student
 Aid, A. G. Sch.,
 Moorhead, Miss._
    Metamora. W. H. M. S.   10.00
 Three Oaks. W. H. M. S.,   5.00
 _for Student Aid, A. G.
 Sch., Moorhead, Miss._
 South Lake Linden.         20.00
 Woman's Ass'n, 10, _for
 Student Aid, Pleasant
 Hill, Tenn._ and 10 _for
 Indian Student Aid,
 Santee, Neb._
                            ------ 83.75

             IOWA, $281.70.
Alden. Mrs. L. R. Fitch,             1.00
_for Work in South
Carolina_
Burlington. Cong. Ch.               57.25
Clay. Cong. Ch.                     15.52
Davenport. Edwards Cong.            58.25
Ch.
Des Moines. "A Friend,"             10.00
_for Student Aid, Gregory
Inst._
Fairfield. Cong. Y. P. S.            2.00
C. E., _for McIntosh,
Ga._
Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch.               5.06
Grandview. Cong. Ch.,
Ladies' M. Soc., Bbl. C.,
_for Williamsburg Acad.,
Ky._
Granger. Junior C. E.
Soc., by Mrs. C. M.
Gammon, Carpet for Chapel
Platform; Prairie Hill
Cong. Sab. Sch., Pkg.
Papers, _for Beach Inst.,
Ga._
Kelly. Sab. Sch., Infant
Class, by Miss L. B.
Gossard, 5 Pkgs.
Literature and 4 yds.
Toweling, _for Beach
Inst., Ga._
Keokuk. Miss Rebecca H.              5.00
Wilson
Sioux City. Mary and
Sadie West, Sub. for
Harper's Young People,
1895, _for Beach Inst.,
Ga._
Sloan. Mrs. R. F.                    5.00
Gallaher, _for McIntosh,
Ga._
Waucoma. Cong. Ch.                   6.75
Waterloo. Miss Lucy O.              10.00
Leavitt, 10, and Box of
C., _for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
Iowa Woman's Home
Missionary Union, Miss
Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
         Alden. Jr. C. E.   5.00
    Anita. Y. P. S. C. E.   6.25
   Cedar Rapids. W. M. S.   3.00
   Central City. W. M. S.   6.00
         Eldora. W. M. S.   10.50
       Magnolia. W. M. S.   1.50
      Newburg. Mrs. James   0.50
      Newcomer
       Ottumwa. Jr. C. E.   5.00
        Red Oak. W. M. S.   25.00
     Shenandoah. W. M. S.   15.60
       Waterloo. W. M. S.   11.75
        Waucoma. W. M. S.   10.00
     Iowa W. H. M. Union,   5.77
     Undesignated Funds
                            ------ 105.87

          WISCONSIN, $222.14.
Appleton. Cong. Ch.                13.44
Fulton. Cong. Ch., 3.17;            3.71
Indian Ford Station, 54c
Lake Geneva. Cong. Ch.             25.94
Janesville. Miss S. A.              4.00
Watson, _for Student Aid,
Chandler Sch., Lexington,
Ky._
Kenosha. Thomas                    10.00
Gillespie, M. D.
Menasha. Cong. C. E.                8.60
Soc., _for C. E. Hall,
McIntosh, Ga._
Milwaukee. Grand Av.,              10.00
ad'l
Milwaukee. Miss Lucy S.             1.00
Toplin, _for Meridian,
Miss._
New Richmond. First Cong.          17.61
Ch.
River Falls. Cong. Ch.,            31.00
to const. MISS EUNICE
PRATT L. M.
Springvale. Sab. Sch.
Cong. Ch., Box Books,
etc., _for Nat, Ala._
Sturgeon Bay. Y. P. S. C.           3.00
E., _for Student Aid,
Gregory Inst._
Tomah. Cong. Ch.                   10.80
Union Grove. Cong. Ch.,            37.81
33.41, C. E. Soc. of
Cong. Ch., 4.40
Viroque. Cong. Ch.                  4.13
Wisconsin Woman's Home
Missionary Union, Mrs. C.
M. Blackman, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
       Arena. W. H. M. S.   1.10
  Emerald Grove. W. H. M.   10.00
  S.
     Kenosha. W. H. M. S.   5.00
     Madison. W. H. M. S.   18.00
                Wauwatosa   7.00
                            ------ 41.10

        MINNESOTA, $88.23.
Fairmont. Cong. Ch.            2.21
Hasty. Cong. Sab. Sch.,        7.90
_for Student Aid_,
_Tougaloo U._
Litchfield. Mrs. M.            3.00
Weeks, _for Meridian,
Miss._
Minneapolis. Lyndale          30.48
Cong, Ch., 12.50; W. H.
Norris, 12; "Rodelmer,"
5.98
Minneapolis. Y. P. S. C.      11.50
E. of Plym. Ch., _for
Hospital, Fort Yates, N.
D._
St. Paul. Pacific Cong.        6.12
Ch.
St. Paul. Rev. H. H.           2.00
Hart, _for Burrell Sch.,
Selma, Ala._
Stillwater. Grace Cong.        3.32
Ch.
Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch.     21.70

         KANSAS, $22.25.
Kansas City. First Cong.    11.25
Ch.
Topeka. Primary S. S.        5.00
First Cong. Ch., _for
Meridian, Miss._
Wabaunsee. First Ch. of      6.00
Christ

           MISSOURI, $152.71.
De Soto. Cong. Ch.                   4.00
Peirce City. First Cong.            16.00
Ch.
St. Louis. Reber Place              11.27
Cong. Ch., 6; Hope Cong.
Ch., 5.27
Webster Groves. First                1.25
Cong. Ch.
Womans' Home Missionary
Union of Mo., by Mrs. K.
L. Mills, Treas., _for
Woman's Work_:
Sedalia. First Ch., L. H.   15.68
M. S.
 Meadville. Cong. Ch., L.   10.00
 H. M. S.
 St. Louis. Memorial Ch.,   10.00
 L. H. M. S.
 Neosha. Cong. Ch., L. H.   5.75
 M. S.
Lebanon. Cong. Ch., L. H.   10.00
M. S.
Nichols. Cong. Ch., L. H.   3.00
M. S.
 Springfield. First Cong.   5.00
 Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.
  St. Louis. Pilgrim Ch.,   12.50
  Y. P. S. C. E.
    Kansas City. So. West   5.00
    Tab., Y. P. S. C. E.
  St. Louis. Olive Branch   4.26
  Ch., L. H. M. S.
  Hannibal. Hannibal Ch.,   3.00
  L. H. M. S.
 St Louis. Pilgrim, L. H.   1.00
 M. S.
  Bonne. Terre Cong. Ch.,   10.00
  L. H. M. S.
   St. Louis. Union Cong.   25.00
   Ch., L. H. M. S.
                            ------ 120.19

     ARKANSAS, $1.00.
Helena. Miss E. M.     1.00
Thomason

         NEBRASKA, $268.96
Arborville. Cong. Ch.,         5.00
1.25; Y. P. S. C. E.,
2.50; King's Daughters,
1.25, by F. N. Recknor,
Ch. Treas.
Ashland. Cong. Ch.            13.00
Blair. Cong. Ch.               4.50
Cook. F. E. Craig              5.00
Fremont. Cong. Ch.            26.35
Hastings. Cong. Ch.            5.65
Nebraska City Woman's          5.00
Miss. Soc., by Mrs. E. W.
Clark, Treas., _for
Tougaloo U._
Santee Agency. Pilgrim       200.00
Cong. Ch.
Wallace. Cong. Ch.             4.46

        NORTH DAKOTA, $8.26.
Fort Yates. Standing Rock       6.20
Chapel, Coll. 2.60;
Cannon Ball Chapel, 3.60,
by Rev. Geo. W. Reed
Jamestown. Cong. Ch.            2.06

       SOUTH DAKOTA, $32.38.
Aurora. Cong. Ch.               5.12
Holabird. Mrs J. S.             1.50
Harris
Pierre. First Cong. Ch.,       25.76
18.58; Sab. Sch., 5.63,
and C. E., 1.55

         COLORADO, $53.70.
Boulder. Cong. Ch.            10.00
Fruita. L. U. S., _for A.      2.50
N. and I. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._
Grand Junction. Cong. Ch.      5.05
Greeley. Park Cong. Ch.       16.15
Lafayette. Cong. Ch.           5.00
Womans' Home Missionary
Union of Colo. by Mrs.
Horace Sanderson, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
              W. M. H. U.   15.00

        CALIFORNIA, $20.25.
Campbell. Primary Class         3.00
Cong. S. S., _for Student
Aid, Talladega C._
Redlands. Mrs. M. W.            2.00
Gaylord, _for Standing
Rock Indian M._
Sutter Co. "E."                 5.00
Woodland. Cong. Ch.            10.25

         OREGON, $16.90.
Portland. Cong. Ch. Y. P.     8.00
S. C. E., _for Burrell
Sch., Selma, Ala._
Salem. Sab. Sch. First        7.90
Cong. Ch.
Willsburg. Cong. Ch. Jun.     1.00
C. E. Soc.

        WASHINGTON, $8.01.
Fidalgo City. Rev. Horace      3.01
J. Taylor
Skokomish. Cong. Ch.           5.00

      DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $28.76.
Washington. "A Friend,"             28.76
_for Central Ch., New
Orleans, La._, 2;
Plymouth Cong. Ch., 6.76;
"A Friend," _for Alaska
M._, 2

        KENTUCKY, $10.55.
Combs. Con. Ch.               3.55
Red Ash. Cong. Ch.            2.00
Williamsburg. Rev. H. B.      5.00
Fry
Williamsburg. Rev. Geo.
Ames, 2 Chairs, _for Big
Creek Gap, Tenn._

        TENNESSEE, $69.00.
Big Creek Gap. Cong. Ch.,     14.00
9; "A Friend," 5
Memphis. "Friends"            15.00
Nashville. Union Ch., 25;     40.00
Rev. H. S. Bennett, 10;
Rev. C. W. Dunn, 5

       NORTH CAROLINA, $9.55.
Raleigh. Cong. Ch.              2.55
Strieby. Cong. Ch.              4.00
Valle Cruces. Rev. M.           3.00
Jones, _for Student Aid,
Skyland Inst., N. C._

         GEORGIA, $25.56.
Atlanta.  First Cong. Ch.     4.50
Byron.  Cong. Ch. and         1.50
Sab. Sch.
Cypress Slash.  Cong.         3.00
Ch., 1.80; Rev. J. A.
Jones, 1.20
McIntosh.  Cong. Ch.          5.00
McIntosh.  Miss Nellie I.     2.40
Reed, _for Student Aid,
Dorchester Acad._
Rutland.  Cong. Ch. and       2.50
Sab. Sch.
Thomasville.  Bethany         5.01
Cong. Ch.
Woodville.  Rev. J. H. H.     1.65
Sengstacke, 75c.; Rev. J.
Loyd, 45c.; Pilgrim Ch.,
45c.

            ALABAMA, $66.45.
Marion. Cong. Ch., 16.09;          27.35
Miss. Prayer Meeting,
9.91; Infant Class, Cong.
Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
Rosebud Indian M._, 1.35
Mobile. First Cong. Ch.,            8.50
6.50, and Sab. Sch., 2
Sylacauga. First Cong.              1.60
Ch.
Tuskegee. Rev. E. J.               14.00
Penney, _for Student Aid,
Talladega C._
Alabama Woman's
Missionary Union, by Mrs.
E. C. Silsby, Treas.,
_for Woman's Work_:
               State Fees   6.50
         Marion. W. M. U.   3.50
     Montgomery. W. M. U.   5.00
                            ------ 15.00

        LOUISIANA, $19.21.
New Orleans.  Mrs. Anna       11.63
Harris, 5; Rev. Geo. W.
Henderson, 3; Y. P. S. C.
E., of Straight U., 3.63
New Orleans.  Morris           2.08
Brown Junior S. C. E.,
1.08, _for C. E. Hall,
McIntosh, Ga._, and 1
_for Straight U._
Schriever.  Louisiana          5.50
State Assn.

        MISSISSIPPI, $39.00.
Moorhead. Miss E. L.           30.00
Parsons, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead_
Tougaloo.  Miss C. E.           9.00
Parkhurst, 6; Frank H.
Ball, 3, _for Student
Aid, Tougaloo U._

         TEXAS, $5.00.
Austin.  "Tradesmen of      5.00
Austin," _for Blacksmith
Shop, Tillotson Inst._

        NEW MEXICO, $4.40.
White Oaks. Plym. Cong.        3.00
Ch.
Woman's Home Missionary
Union of New Mexico, Miss
Helen Whedon Bullock,
Treas., _for Women's
Work_:
 Albuquerque. W. H. M. U.      1.40

         ------, $23.00.
---- "Ellen B. Stanley,     10.00
_for Teacher's Library,
Straight U._
---- "A Friend," _for       10.00
Knoxville, Tenn._
---- "Friends," _for         3.00
Student Aid, Talladega
C._
---- Communion Set, _for
Ch., Big Creek Gap,
Tenn._

        ENGLAND, $200.00.
London.  Mrs. A. Allen,    200.00
_for Woodworking Dept.,
Le Moyne Inst._

            CHINA, $5.00.
Taiku-Shansi. Miss M. L.         5.00
Partridge
                             --------
Donations                  $12,407.40
Estates                      7,094.00
                             --------
                           $19,501.40

            INCOME, $1,635.00.
Avery Fund, _for Mendi              135.00
M._
Income, _for Talladega            1,500.00
C._
                         -------- 1,635.00

            TUITION, $4,264.25.
Cappahosic, Va.  Tuition               6.25
Evarts, Ky.  Tuition                  23.40
Lexington, Ky.  Tuition               87.90
Williamsburg Acad., Ky.               76.20
Tuition
Big Creek Gap, Tenn.                  21.00
Tuition
Grand View, Tenn.                     24.00
Tuition
Jonesboro, Tenn.  Public             150.00
Fund
Jonesboro, Tenn.  Tuition             10.70
Knoxville, Tenn.  Tuition             26.50
Memphis, Tenn.  Tuition              488.75
Nashville, Tenn.  Tuition            456.35
Pleasant Hill, Tenn.                  60.65
Tuition
Beaufort, N. C.  Tuition              63.00
Blowing Rock, N. C.                   15.25
Tuition
Carters Mills, N. C.                  10.00
Tuition
Hillsboro, N. C.  Tuition             30.30
Kings Mountain, N. C.                 32.00
Tuition
McLeansville, N. C.                    1.00
Tuition
McLeansville, N. C.                   29.00
Public Fund
Nalls, N. C.  Tuition                  5.00
Saluda, N. C.  Tuition                58.00
Troy, N. C.  Tuition                   6.40
Whittier, N. C.  Tuition              13.03
Wilmington, N. C.                    182.25
Tuition
Charleston, S. C.                    303.45
Tuition
Greenwood, S. C.  Tuition             80.50
Albany, Ga.  Tuition                 129.50
Andersonville, Ga.                    17.48
Tuition
Atlanta, Ga.  Storrs                 139.07
Sch., Tuition
McIntosh, Ga.  Tuition                69.96
Macon, Ga.  Tuition                  208.91
Marietta, Ga.  Tuition                 5.05
Savannah, Ga.  Tuition               194.25
Thomasville, Ga.  Tuition             59.55
Woodville, Ga.  Tuition                4.10
Athens, Ala.  Tuition                 42.95
Florence, Ala.  Tuition                7.50
Marion, Ala.  Tuition                 37.40
Nat, Ala.  Tuition                    48.50
Selma, Ala.  Tuition                  94.20
Talladega, Ala.  Tuition             133.20
Orange Park, Fla.                     78.00
Tuition
Meridian, Miss.  Tuition              75.65
Moorhead, Miss.  Tuition              16.75
Tougaloo, Miss.  Tuition              93.75
New Orleans, La.  Tuition            451.00
Austin, Tex.  Tuition                 96.60
                            ------ 4,264.25
          Total for March        $25,400.65
                                  ---------

             SUMMARY.
Donations               $87,197.01
Estates                  43,225.81
                         ---------
                       $130,422.82
Income                    6,005.00
Tuition                  22,594.95
                         ---------
Total from Oct. 1 to   $159,022.77
March 31.
                       ===========

     FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.
Subscriptions for March         $60.74
Previously acknowledged         358.95
                                ------
Total                          $419.69
                              ========

H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
Bible House, N. Y.






FOOTNOTES


    1 For the purpose of exact information we note that, while the W. H.
      M. A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R. I., it
      has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 49, NO. 05, MAY, 1895 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.