Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections)






The American Missionary

MARCH, 1896

VOL. L

No. 3




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  WHAT NOW?                                                           81
  BISHOP HAYGOOD--PAMPHLETS,                                          82
  "HOSANNA"--"CRUCIFY",                                               83
  PRESENT NEED OF THE INDIANS,                                        85
  BOHEMIAN GIRL'S GIFT--ACTIVITY, ECONOMY, BENEVOLENCE,               87


IN MEMORIAM.

  REV. HENRY SWIFT DE FOREST D.D.                                     88
  MISS LUCELIA E. WILLIAMS,                                           89


THE SOUTH.

  THANKS, GOVERNOR STONE--WILMINGTON,  N. C.                          90
  PRAYER WITH BACKBONE--FUNNY ANSWERS,                                91
  FAMILY FEUD IN THE MOUNTAINS--AN INCIDENT OF MOUNTAIN WORK,         92
  PARAGRAPHS,                                                         93


THE INDIANS.

  DI TAPI'O?                                                          94
  THANKSGIVING DAY--BUSY DAY--THANK OFFERING,                         96


THE CHINESE.

  WATSONVILLE MISSION,                                                97
  SANTA CRUZ MISSION,                                                 98


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS,                                          99


RECEIPTS,                                                            101


  NEW YORK:
  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


  Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.
  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as a second-class
    mail matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  EAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please send
early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former address
and the new address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers
may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L.     MARCH, 1896.     No. 3.


WHAT NOW?

One-third of the fiscal year passed on Feb. 1st without any special
campaign of appeals in behalf of the debt and the suffering work of the
American Missionary Association. We have constantly reported to its
supporting churches and friends the exact financial condition of the
Association. We have reiterated the call voted at our Annual Meeting for
such enlargement of support as will bring the receipts of this
semi-centennial year up to $500,000. We have emphasized the urgency of
the present and prospective needs of the work.

We are sensible of the pressure made upon the churches to increase their
benefactions along the different lines of the Congregational mission
service. We rejoice over their increased offerings in this critical
period, although the support of their work through the American
Missionary Association has not been increased. Their contributions to
the Association in these past four months stand at about the disastrous
figure of the corresponding period last year. The other eight months of
that year suffered from a disheartening reduction which raised the total
debt to nearly a hundred thousand dollars. If the coming eight months
are to bring the same proportionate reduction which the corresponding
eight months of last year suffered, we frankly say now and here that a
new debt will be incurred in addition to the old one. We cannot avoid it
and we cannot remain silent about it.

What now? Must our debt grow? We cannot reduce our working forces on the
instant. We cannot at once call off our missionaries whom we have
engaged for the current year and to whom we have pledged their support.
They have both the moral and the legal right to their support for the
time stipulated. This is a necessity in the administration of the
missionary societies which are called to employ large numbers of
missionaries. They must keep faith with their workers.

What now? Reduction? Within the last three years we have reduced our
work by $124,000. But our receipts were reduced in increasing measure
each year by a total of $224,000. Further reduction? Yes, as soon as
possible, under present engagements, if it must be so. Is this the
decision of the Christian people in the churches? Is it wise? Is it
necessary? Must the life-blood of these missions to the poorest, the
most needy of all the peoples in America be shed? Does not the condition
of these lowly and helpless millions cry out to God against it?

The American Missionary Association has been providentially called to
minister to the down-trodden, the submerged millions of our common
country. Their distressful needs are in danger of being left aside in
the pressure of other worthy appeals for aid. Will not the thoughtful,
the large-minded and large-hearted, who lead in every benevolent service
of the churches, come to the rescue of this imperiled Christian service?
Will they not make this fiftieth year of the American Missionary
Association a year of jubilee by bringing an advance of at least a
hundred thousand dollars before the assembling of our great Boston
Convention in October?


BISHOP HAYGOOD.--The recent death of Atticus G. Haygood of the
Methodist Episcopal Church South has removed a very useful man from
among those who are conscientiously engaged in the uplifting of the
colored people and in promoting harmony between the two races in the
South. In the writing of his books and his numerous articles for the
press, in his conscientious administration of the Slater Fund and in his
work as Bishop, he has rendered a permanent benefit to his church and
the country.


PAMPHLETS AND ADDRESSES.

Since the publication, in a recent number of THE MISSIONARY, of
the list of the documents ready for distribution on application of our
friends, we add the following:

Annual Report of the Association.

Sermon by Rev. WM. HAYES WARD, D.D., "Instead of thy Fathers
shall be thy Children."

Citizenship and Christianity, by Rev. SHERROD SOULE.

The Debt of Our Country to the American Highlanders During the
War, by Secretary C. J. RYDER. (Reprint, illustrated.)


"GREAT TRUTHS SIMPLY TOLD" is the title of a most excellent
little book compiled by Prof. George L. Wood, of Philadelphia. A special
fund has been contributed by a friend interested in the circulation of
this useful little volume, which makes it possible for us to offer to
our missionaries a limited number, if they will write asking for the
same. We are very glad to be able in this way to give a wider
circulation to this valuable book, which will prove useful in teaching
Christian truth.


INCREASED GIFTS.--We are glad to learn that the Prospect Hill
Church, Somerville, Mass., of which Rev. E. S. Tead is pastor, have just
added 65 per cent. to their gifts of last year to our work. The Grace
Church of South Framingham, of which Rev. F. E. Emrich is pastor, have
also increased their gifts by about $200 over last year.


"HOSANNA"--"CRUCIFY."

On an ever-memorable day, the Son of Man rode into Jerusalem. A vast
multitude of people thronged the streets and cast their garments and
palm branches before Him, and with unbounded enthusiasm cried "Hosanna
in the highest!" But only a few days later that same multitude, as cruel
as they were fickle, followed the Son of Man with the fiendish cry
"Crucify him! crucify him!" ceasing not until he hung on the cross, and
then they taunted him with sneers and mockings.

The followers of the Son of Man are sometimes called in their measure to
pass through almost similar circumstances changing from the highest
praise to the bitterest denunciation. Dr. Theodore L. Cuyler, that grand
old man, who surpasses all others of this generation in his knowledge of
the great men of his times and in his accurate and vivid descriptions of
them, has given, in a recent article in _The Evangelist_, a striking
sketch of some of the prominent clergymen and laymen of this city two
generations past:

"The death of that noble Christian philanthropist, William A. Booth,
removes from us about the last survivor of a remarkable group of men who
for three-quarters of a century impressed themselves most deeply on the
religious life of New York and the whole country. Among the earlier
members of this group were the brothers, Arthur and Lewis Tappan, Harlan
Page, Anson G. Phelps, Moses Allen, R. T. Haines, W. W. Chester, and
Joshua Leavitt, who was one of the earliest editors of _The Evangelist_.
Later on we come upon the names of William E. Dodge, Christopher R.
Robert, William A. Booth, Apollos Wetmore, R. M. Hartley, Robert Carter,
James Brown, and Jesse W. Benedict. Other names might be added to this
roll of honor, but these were representative and conspicuous.

"As far back as 1825 Arthur Tappan might have been called the most
prominent Christian layman in New York. His moral courage and
philanthropic zeal made him on a humbler scale what Lord Shaftesbury
became on a larger scale in London. Those were days of foundation-laying
of great religious enterprises. The Home Missionary Society, the
American Temperance Society, the American Sunday-school Union, and
the Seamen's Friend Society were born about that time. In February,
1825, Arthur Tappan sent on to Boston for the Rev. Wm. A. Hallock,
who before sunrise on a winter morning presented himself at Mr.
Tappan's door. They called together a few warm-hearted Christians--among
whom were Messrs. Allen, Haines, and Chester--and the American Tract
Society was organized, and its new building was erected. It was while
in the employ of the Tract Society that Harlan Page did his wonderful
work as a consecrated laborer for the conversion of souls."

It was not Dr. Cuyler's purpose to follow these men in their later
experiences. But we take the liberty of doing so in respect to one of
the persons named, Arthur Tappan, of whom Dr. Cuyler says that as far
back as 1825 he might have been called "the most prominent Christian
layman in New York." If we step down nine years to 1834, we shall find
that same Arthur Tappan ostracized by his former associates, ridiculed
and denounced by the press, a reward of $50,000 offered for his head,
and his store assailed by an infuriated mob, and defended inside by Mr.
Tappan and his little band of clerks, of whom the editor and proprietor
of _The Independent_ was then one. It is not too much to say that in
1834 Arthur Tappan was the best-abused man in New York.

It may be asked with surprise, What had made this great change? The
answer is simple: He had become an _abolitionist_. The same zeal in the
Master's cause which led him to do so much in founding and sustaining
the great missionary and benevolent enterprises, induced him to assist
the anti-slavery cause, which had then come forward. He felt a profound
sympathy for the oppressed slave, and rejoiced to do what he could to
secure his emancipation.

It should be remarked that Mr. Tappan did not agree with those
abolitionists who denounced the Constitution and the Church. On the
contrary, he took a leading part in the formation of a new anti-slavery
society that was established in opposition to those extremists. He was
the president of that new society for many years. Mr. Tappan used the
same quiet and unassuming methods in giving his time, influence, and
money to the anti-slavery cause as he did to the other benevolent and
missionary enterprises.

Now we think that the Son of Man, assailed by the mob in the Garden and
crucified on Calvary that He might save the world, was more exalted, and
revealed His divine character more distinctly, than when He was
surrounded by the hosannas of the thoughtless and fickle mob. So, in
like manner and at a humble distance, Arthur Tappan reached his highest
point of honor as a patriotic Christian man when, for the sake of the
poor and downtrodden slaves, he was willing to bear reproach and
jeopardize his life in their behalf.

Mr. Tappan and his associates, fifty years ago, founded the American
Missionary Association amid the obloquy and danger that surrounded
anti-slavery people in that day; and now, as the Association is
rejoicing in its successful and honored work in this its Jubilee year,
we take pleasure in its behalf in testifying to the courage and
self-sacrificing labors of its founders.

_From The Independent._


THE PRESENT NEED OF THE INDIANS.

BY MISS ANNA L. DAWES.

It would appear that there was a certain definite loss to the cause of
Christianity among the Indians when that work ceased to be called
Foreign Missions, and became Home Missions. In the face of much
opposition and many sneers since the day it first discovered its
"marching orders," the Church has never ceased to believe it to be its
duty to go out into all the world and preach the gospel, and
persecution, neglect, or starvation have only served to intensify its
zeal. It _must_ preach the gospel to the heathen. But in regard to Home
Missions the Church has felt that it _may_ preach the gospel to
neighbors, not that it _must_--that it is a good and desirable thing to
do, but by no means an inexorable duty. If the Indians had remained
foreign heathen, we might hope for a Students' Volunteer movement, for
an Inland Mission, for a zeal beyond wisdom which even sets forth to
preach the gospel in the midst of war. The Indians are as pagan as the
Japanese or the Hindus, for instance: their redemption is as great a
necessity as the redemption of the Chinese. Their chiefs plead for help
and teachers in no less touching fashion than do South African kings.
But those fill us with missionary zeal. We cry unto heaven for money and
opportunity to go over seas to convert those; but these, the heathen in
our very midst, most of us neither see nor hear. Can it be because there
is neither romance nor mystery about these others? The test of the
reality of our zeal is before us here and now. We may measure the value
of our professions for ourselves.

At this present time the need of the Indians for missionaries is greater
than ever before. They have reached not only a new crisis, but a crisis
of a new kind. Practically speaking the Government has done what it can
for them, or very nearly all. The Indian has law, land, education, he is
fast becoming absorbed in the surrounding people, but never was he in
worse need. All these great fundamental principles of social life have
been thrust upon him, oft against his will and largely unprepared;
certainly with very little comprehension of their resulting privileges
or duties. He needs a friend beside him at every step. Thrust out into
an alien and hostile community, he is in some sense in a worse case than
when he dwelt alone in undisturbed barbarism.

And again, civilization is not Christianity. This truth, so obvious
everywhere else, seems to be lost sight of when the Indians are
considered. We discover that, although educated, they will not stay
refined, that they are civilized, but will not remain moral. Behold,
says the caviller, there is no good Indian until he dies, and even his
friends complain that the young men will "go back" to gambling games and
horse races. It is true that some measure of refinement and fine morals
is peculiarly necessary to the Indians just now, but these are not any
necessary part of civilization. They are, however, inseparable to
Christianity, and by this token the red man needs Christianity for his
everyday life even more than the white man, who is surrounded by a
Christian atmosphere. If we would have the newly-liberated Indians a
valuable and reliable part of the community in this world they must be
Christianized. Just why goes back a long way; but a fact it is, that
whatever may be true of Chinese or Poles or Bohemians, if the Indian is
to have any staying power, if he is to be anything but a despair to his
friends and a curse to all around him, he must be _converted_ as well as
civilized. The use of his land, the best system of law, an absolute
restriction upon liquor, all together, will do no more for him in the
Northwest than it has done for Cherokee or Choctaw. It is the building
up of the individual that is needed to-day quite as much as any
legislation which shall improve the community.

Not only has the Indian come to a time of special need, not only does he
need Christianity to make his land and his education of any value, not
only is his law unsupported by his own character of little worth, but he
needs Christian missionaries more and more, because he has ceased to be
the Indian and become Indians. It is peculiarly true that every tribe,
every group, every family almost, has reached a different state of need.
The varying pressure of circumstances combined with the differing
methods of education furnished the children, has brought the race to a
time and place when it needs many, many helpers, who, living with them
as Thomas Riggs has lived with them, will find their reward in their
growth and development. Wherever the Riggs family live, there the Indian
problem is solved. Where Bishop Hare and Mary Collins work the answer is
already plain. Let the Omahas without any missionary testify also to the
darker side of the question.

It is not further efforts by the churches for the education of the
Indian that are needed. There are many schools, good, bad, and
indifferent, but still schools, and it is certain that the Government
will attend to the education difficulty. But it is missionaries that
the Indian needs; missionaries to convert heathen. This is an inglorious
service and one of plenteous hardship, but beyond measure it is a
patriotic service, beyond measure it is the work of Him whose "all the
world" began "at Jerusalem," who taught us to find Himself wherever the
least of His children were in sore need.


A LITTLE BOHEMIAN GIRL'S GIFT.

The following letter from Rev. J. S. Porter, Missionary of the American
Board, will explain itself. Will there not be among those who shall read
it some one who would like to purchase the remaining coins given by the
poor little orphan girl in Bohemia for the colored people? If so, our
Treasurer, H. W. Hubbard, will forward the coins upon application from
those who would like to purchase one or more of them. A Christian lady
in Detroit, who abounds in good works, has generously sent us $25 for
one of the coins:

    "PRAGUE, BOHEMIA, Sept. 14, 1895.

    "Enclosed find seven Austrian crowns, the gift of a little orphan
    girl, Marie Kuchera. She wanted to do something for the colored
    people, and this is her offering. Her pastor wished me to send the
    original crowns that she gave. Some two years ago I was called into
    the country, an hour and a half away, to officiate at the communion
    service of a poor consumptive mother and widow. It was a joy to see
    her sweet patient endurance during all the long hours she was
    waiting for her Lord. She had not long to wait.

    "The little girl who sends these seven crowns--which equal $1.40 in
    our money--was the little one she left an orphan. Their home is a
    humble one, only one living room, and yet in this humble cottage she
    is learning to open her heart to the great needs of her Master's
    kingdom, and rejoices to send these offerings for the poor black
    children."


ACTIVITY, ECONOMY, BENEVOLENCE.

The following letter tells the story of the remarkable career of a
Christian minister, whose activity was maintained through a long life,
and whose self-denial enabled him to accumulate handsome sums of money
to be bestowed on worthy objects of benevolence. His sympathies were not
narrow, but widespread, and his genial love of children continued to his
latest days:

"My father, Rev. Otis Holmes, of Lake Grove, L. I., was an enthusiast in
missions, and never let the time of the missionary concerts go by
without attendance. His salary was never above $800 per year--latterly
only $400--and during his last years, to save the Home Missionary
Society, he gave his services. By rigid economy and incessant toil, with
no vacation during fifty years, he laid aside $1,500 for missions, $500
to the American Board, $500 to the American Missionary Association, $500
to the Home Missionary Society. He gave, too, a parsonage lot, and
contributed largely to two parsonages.

"In his earlier ministry he came in contact with pro-slavery
parishioners, and ever and always stood up for the slave, and at no
little sacrifice. And so upon the temperance question, at the age of
eighty and upwards he would arouse most intense enthusiasm in meeting.
None were heard oftener or more gladly. He had great strength and vigor
and rarely ever missed an appointment. No weather detained him. He won
many souls to Christ, and was quite often called away to revival work.
He was exceedingly fond of children and entered heartily into their
pastimes. He died at Lake Grove at the age of nearly ninety-one, and was
an active pastor at the age of eighty-four. He died honored of his
ministerial brethren, whom he ardently loved, and was mourned by a large
number whom he had benefited during his ministry. Such a life of labor
and love should make its appeal to a selfish and skeptical world."




In Memoriam.


REV. HENRY SWIFT DE FOREST, D.D.

The death of this honored servant of God, January 27, at his house in
Talladega, Ala., was sudden and unexpected. Although he has suffered for
several years past under impaired health, yet on the day preceding the
accident he appeared unusually well. He had performed his usual college
duties, attended and spoken at the memorial services for Dr. Cutler on
the afternoon of Friday, and was present at the college social on Friday
night. The accident occurred on Saturday. He arose early in the morning,
as was his custom, and made preparations for his usual bath. On crossing
the hall at the head of the stairway he fell down the entire flight and
was found stretched out, face downward, on the lower floor. The family
came speedily to his relief. Help was summoned from the neighborhood and
medical attendance secured. It was the doctor's opinion that the fall
was due to an apopleptic stroke, which seized him while in the upper
hall and rendered him powerless to either prevent the fall or hinder its
continued progress. Funeral services were held on Tuesday forenoon,
which were attended by many of the best citizens of Talladega, two of
the pastors of the Talladega churches speaking warmly and
sympathetically of Dr. De Forest and of the institution over which he
had presided. Mrs. De Forest and her daughter, accompanied by one of the
professors of the institution, attended the remains to their last
resting place in Sherburne, N. Y.

Dr. De Forest was of Huguenot descent; was born in So. Edmeston, N. Y.,
March 17, 1833, was graduated from Yale College in 1857, and obtained
his theological education at Yale and Union theological seminaries. He
was ordained in New Haven, August 2, 1863, and served as chaplain in the
Eleventh Connecticut Volunteers during the civil war. He was called to
the pastorate of Plymouth Congregational Church, Des Moines, Iowa.,
October 17, 1866, where he remained until October, 1879, when he
accepted the call to the Presidency of Talladega College, Talladega,
Ala., a position he has filled with great acceptance to the day of his
death. He was married August 25th, 1869, to Miss Anna M. Robbins,
daughter of Rev. Alden B. Robbins, D.D., of Muscatine, Iowa.

Dr. De Forest was a man of fine personal presence, affable in manner,
gifted as a speaker, a scholar, and a man of practical affairs. His life
has been varied, but in whatever position he has been employed he has
soon won the confidence and esteem of those with whom he has been
associated.


MISS LUCELIA E. WILLIAMS.

This estimable lady, after four years of severe but patient suffering
from neuralgia, passed away Sunday afternoon, December 22, at her home
in Deerfield, Mass. Miss Williams was a native of Deerfield, an old
historic town in the Connecticut Valley, and a descendant of Rev. T.
Williams, who was taken captive by the Indians. During the war of the
Rebellion Miss Williams was sent by the National Freedman's Aid Society
to labor among the Freedmen of Port Royal Island, S. C. With a
commission and a Government permit alone she found her mission field.
The following year was spent at Richmond, Va., teaching among the
refugees who had come into the city at the close of the war. The next
year she taught a large school in Washington, D. C., at Kendall Green,
and in the autumn of 1867, accompanied by her sister, Miss P. A.
Williams, she began her work at Hampton, Va., teaching in the Butler and
Lincoln schools. After the new building was completed, the sisters were
transferred to the Normal school, which they organized, and the success
of which was largely due to their indefatigable labors. Miss Williams
was connected with the institution two years when she was appointed by
the American Missionary Association as Principal of the Stanton Normal
Institute, Jacksonville, Fla., where she remained seven years.

Miss Williams always secured the confidence and esteem of those with and
for whom she labored, and was considered one of the most efficient
teachers in the employ of the Association.




The South.


THANKS, GOVERNOR STONE.

The popular Governor of Mississippi, Hon. J. M. Stone, who has filled
the responsible position of chief executive for a greater length of time
than any other person since the formation of the State government, in
his last message to the Senate and House of Representatives called
especial attention to Tougaloo University, as follows:

"Although Tougaloo University is not a State institution, I desire, in
its behalf, to convey to you in this parting message a word of warm and
sincere commendation. No school in the South is conducted upon higher
principles, and its good effects are felt throughout the State. By way
of recognition of its great merit, and for the high esteem in which its
principal is held in the community, the Board of Visitors has been
continued from term to term, and I recommend that a Board be appointed
by the Governor for the next biennial year."

As Governor Stone has repeatedly visited Tougaloo, he speaks with
personal knowledge of our great work in the "Black Belt." In
agricultural and industrial work Tougaloo is not excelled in the South,
while the standard of scholarship is greatly superior to that of
industrial schools which seek only elementary attainment.


GREGORY INSTITUTE, WILMINGTON, N. C.

BY PROF. F. T. WATERS.

Christmas in Gregory Normal Institute does not mean simply _receiving_,
but we have what has proved to us, after a trial of two years, a much
better plan--that of _giving_. It is truly surprising how much can be
given, even by those who it would seem are too poor to give anything. On
Thursday, December 19, it was announced by the principal in all the
rooms that all who could bring a Christmas offering might do so on
Friday, the last day of the term before the holidays. Before eight a.m.
Friday the articles began to come in, and the variety would discount any
country grocery store, I am sure. Flour, meat, rice, grits, cracked
peas, beans, potatoes, apples, turnips, cabbages, greens, onions, sugar,
tea, coffee, eggs, bacon, wood, kindling, matches, soap, pictures,
thread, needles, pins, and in fact almost every article that can be
eaten or worn or made use of in any way. Quite a good deal of money was
contributed, and that was used for buying articles for needy persons.

What struck me most forcibly was the willing and cheerful giving. Some
things came from homes where there was scarcely to be found as much more
of the same thing as was brought. I must mention an instance of real
sacrifice, though the things brought will seem, without doubt, to those
who read this article, as of but little worth. One little girl we had
picked out of the most wretched hovel only a few weeks before, so ragged
that except for pity you would wish her out of sight; and when I saw her
coming in with her gift I thought, "What can she bring?" Well, she
brought all she had to bring--literally her whole wealth--a few dirty
little picture cards which some one had given to her and which she had
treasured "lo, these many years," judging from the dirt accumulated on
them. The gift seemed trivial, but it meant something to this little
girl. Hundreds there are in this very city who are in no school--who
can't attend for want of money. Oh that God's treasures could be used to
save his own dear children!

Thank God there are many who hold a little of God's gold who have laid
it on the altar for His use! I wish some of the consecrated gifts I have
received and used for two poor children, with the accompanying letters,
were not so sacred; I should feel like mentioning some--where a poor
factory girl sent one dollar, with a "God bless you!" and where a good
mother in Israel sent fifty cents in stamps, saying, "This is my
consecration money of three months." So poor was she that the
accumulation was by a penny now and then. Many larger amounts I have
received, but all with the same cheerful "God bless you!" that so cheers
the heart of the missionary far from home and loved ones.


PRAYER WITH A BACKBONE.--The pastor of one of our smaller
churches in the South, describing the concert of prayer held in behalf
of the Association, tells this brief but pithy story about it: "The
objects and purposes and work of the American Missionary Association
were briefly reviewed at the prayer-meeting, and the prayers in its
behalf were fervent and earnest. But we shall not cease, but continue to
pray for your success. Inclosed please find one dollar as a sort of
backbone to our prayers."


FUNNY ANSWERS.

A teacher in the mountain field gives in a recent letter some of the
answers that came in from the pupils in their examination papers. Some
of them are amusing.

"Climate is the combined space of heat and moisture."

"The solar system is situated in that part of the heavens called the
Milky Way."

"The polar circle is parallel, running slanting round the earth."

"It is the wind's duty to refresh and cherish the earth."

"A volcano is the safety-valve of an earthquake."

Digestive organs are termed "dijective organs," and the different races
of men were given as "Indians, Negroes, Whites, and French."


FAMILY FEUD IN THE MOUNTAINS.

BY A MISSIONARY.

I have recently witnessed the result of a Kentucky riot, the first since
I came here. Two desperate factions met on the night of the 25th, at
eleven o'clock. Four men and a woman were engaged in it. The leader of
the first faction fired and shot the leader of the second faction in his
own house, and another of the first faction fired at the leader of the
second faction till he fell with two balls through his left arm, one
ball broke his right leg, and two balls went into his back. The leader
of the second faction shot the leader of the first faction in the right
leg and he fell; both men lying within a few feet of each other. The
wife of the leader of the second faction took one of his pistols and
started to kill the first leader, but one of his men stepped up with two
revolvers and told her not to fire, that he would kill her if she did.
This ended the shooting. The first faction helped to carry the leader of
the second faction in the house and then took the first leader away.
They used 32 and 44 calibers.

The first leader lives four miles from my house. When they told him he
could not live he asked them to send for me. I went and helped dress his
wounds and sung and prayed with him. He said he had been a bad man, and
asked me to pray for him. I heard to-day that some of his friends wanted
him to send for some other minister, but he said no, he wanted no one
but myself; and I expect to go and see him to-morrow if he is still
living. I believe in the near future we will have a good hold in eastern
Kentucky, if the American Missionary Association is successful in
getting the right ministers. The minister's wife has a great deal to do
with his success in this work.


AN INCIDENT OF MOUNTAIN WORK.

BY A MISSIONARY.

At noon, the 16th, I reached Rev. Mr. ----'s home, and after dinner he
hitched up his horse, and we set out for ----, some twelve miles away,
reaching there at dark. 'Twas here I heard the wonderful story of ----'s
rescue and salvation through Bro. ----, one of Rev. Mr. ----'s converts.
Next morning I met the Sunday-school and addressed it. Then came the
after-service, and it was a pleasure to look into those faces and preach
the gospel message, which was so earnestly and anxiously received, and
to think that only six months before a preacher could not come into this
valley to preach and be safe. Some were shot, others thrashed, and
because of the low element located there the place was given up as
hopeless.

Our Bro. ----, in his quiet way, went into the homes and gained them by
personal contact, and for six months held meetings, during which they
were constrained to surrender to Christ. I had the pleasure of hearing
some thirty tell the story of how our A. M. A. preacher won them. It was
a marvelous work, and the good part is the activity that characterizes
each member. Of the sixty members belonging to Rev. Mr. ----'s churches
fifty-seven are praying members, and _all_ sixty take active part in
testimony. A most cordial relation exists between pastor and people. We
held an afternoon service at another one of Rev. Mr. ----'s churches,
where I had the privilege of talking and meeting the friends.


A MOTHER TEACHING REVENGE.--"We know the mother in the home of
the mountaineer is a strong influence. How important that she be trained
to occupy this position! I have sat at the fireside and heard the mother
relate the story of a murder and turn to her eldest boy and say, 'Mind
ye, if ever ye meet up with him, you'll not forget to do what ye'er
mammy learned ye to do.' And that boy will not forget unless the grace
of God keep him."


AN INTERESTING CONVERSION.--The month has been a most blessed
one to us at Deer Lodge. The meetings were not large in numbers, but
they were rich in power and full of spiritual blessings. The report that
---- was converted spread quickly, and a large number came last night to
see and hear him. He had been a wicked man for many years, and now his
change is marked, and he proposes to live as near the Christian life as
possible. He commenced to read the Bible, and reads a chapter both
morning and evening. He told me last night, "I cannot read much, but my
wife can help me, and so together we shall help each other." Oh, how
much joy it would give us if the Holy Spirit would sweep into his
kingdom a number of other precious souls at this place. We shall pray
and work for this end. The young ladies who accepted Christ now take
part in our meetings, and it is no small pleasure to hear them testify
for Christ.


A COMMUNION SERVICE.--"We had a pleasant communion service last
Sunday. Six young people joined in regular Congregational form after
careful examination. We had previously elected a new member, who was a
pupil in the school last year, to be deacon immediately upon his joining
the church. One of those who joined the church made an attempt on my
life last year. Though he is nearly as old as I he is now a docile pupil
in the fourth-reader grade."


HEATHERLY CHAPEL.--The new church in the mountain field, in
Tennessee was organized in November, and is called Heatherly Chapel. It
is enjoying a very interesting revival season. About fifty have been
hopefully converted, twenty-two having joined the new church. This new
church is an important addition to the work which the American
Missionary Association is accomplishing in the mountain field.


A USEFUL CHURCH.--From Corbin comes the message of deep
spiritual interest and large usefulness in the church. At the last
communion five were added and the work still goes on very encouragingly.
A Sunday-school is carried on by the Christian Endeavorers of the Corbin
church in a community near by.


CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR SOCIETY.--A Young People's Society of
Christian Endeavor was organized at La Follette, Tenn., early in
December. Thirteen members united with this society and much enthusiasm
was manifested.




The Indians.


DI TAPI'O?

BY REV. C. L. HALL.

We reached the Missouri at dark. A heavy gale tossed the water and
whirled the sand. Can any one hear across the water, or are we to spend
the October night in the timber? The Lord had provided for His work. A
dark figure appeared on the bluff against the fading light. "Di tapi'o?"
is the call across (Who are you?). "Ho-washte" (I am Good Voice) is the
reply. The figure, like the man of Macedonia; the reply, "a voice crying
in the wilderness." The man was Good Bird. He had come out, expecting
his wife, and found us.

The wind had sunk the flat-boat, and our horse had to wait in the brush
till morning. I cared for him, while the carpenter and Good Bird
crossed. Two other Indians came for me. The wind lulled and the dark
flood flowed silently. Their leaky skiff was plugged with mud. One
rowed, the other watched in the shadows for the landing. I bailed with a
tin can. The current swung us in, and we lugged our tools and provisions
and bedding up a sand slide, and slept in the "Independence Station" log
house.

We had made several visits during the summer. Once the whole family
stayed a week. We won the affections of Mrs. Pedi'tska-Kadi'shta (Little
Crow), so that she paddled Mrs. Hall over in her hide "bull-boat," on
our return, for twenty-five cents.

Then our trained nurse left her hospital room and visiting work at Fort
Berthold and kept up the routine, and also treated about twenty patients
among these Mandans.

This time we had come to finish the house for winter, before the lady
missionary's return from her vacation. Four women plastered outside with
a mixture of mud and dry grass. This is woman's part of house-building
here, I was laborer and cook and preacher for three days, and then left
the carpenter plastering inside.

The Mandans are friendly, but much behind our Rees at Fort Berthold.
Dead bodies in rough boxes lie on the ground on a knoll not far from our
house, and near by is an old-style earth lodge.

At Christmas we had more than 125 people out. A cedar tree hung full of
presents. All had a good meal, except plates, which some were not very
familiar with. A crowd of big men reached out eagerly for the luxury of
red apples.

[Illustration: MEETING HOUSE. DWELLING.

MOODY STATION, NO. 1 (INDEPENDENCE).]

This station is named for Mr. Moody, who gave money to start it. The
place is a hill in the midst of a valley independent of the bluffs on
either side and so Awatahesh--Independence.

Mr. A. P. Nichols, of Haverhill, Mass., kindly offered $200 if we would
reopen the station. We have done so, trusting to our friends for $300
more for the year. The work is yet in the dough, but the yeast is in and
it is rising.

Our Elbowoods station began far out in the wilderness in a log house
like the Independence meeting-house. The Government, after several
years, planted its central agency by our station and so brought many
under our influence. Now we have a new dwelling, with a chapel attached,
and the congregation have raised $130 toward the expense.

[Illustration: DWELLING. CHAPEL.

MOODY STATION, NO. 2 (ELBOWOODS).]

These stations are the spokes of which the Fort Berthold
boarding-school and hospital and church work are the hub. Every hub must
have spokes--as here. If you rim the whole with some of your silver or
gold, and bolt it on with prayer the whole work will roll on.

Di tapi'o? Indians, and whites too, some gladly others uneasily, are
finding out who we are--you dear friends of the churches and we here
together--a power for righteousness from and by the King.


THANKSGIVING DAY.--Rev. C. L. Hall gives us the following
interesting glimpse of Thanksgiving in a prairie mission school:

"We are to have a church dinner on Thanksgiving (Shak-s-shte-hun), for
which the church have collected produce and money, so that there will be
a large thank offering to the Lord, all paid up, not subscribed. Mrs.
Black Rabbit and Mrs. Crow and Mrs. Two Bears and Cedar Woman are on the
committee to help cook and prepare dinner. There are rabbits and geese
and beef to cook, which is cooked and which cook you can decide.

Clear moonlight on the snow, mild but no thaw, fine sledding. It was a
good night to come home from prayer meeting at Deacon Many-bears."


BUSY DAY OF AN INDIAN MISSIONARY.--Rev. Myron Eells, our
missionary at S'kokomish, Washington, writes:

"Last Sabbath my work was as follows, though it was a little extra:
Superintended the Sunday-school at the Agency at 9:30; 57 present.
Taught a Sunday-school class. Preached at the same place at 11, then was
on my horse in a few minutes, and at 12:05 was a mile distant and
preached to the Indians. Then rode four miles to John's Creek and
preached to a small congregation of whites in English at 3:00
P.M., eating my lunch as I rode along. Came home by six
o'clock, and at seven o'clock went in for half an hour to the Christian
Endeavor meeting."


A THANK OFFERING.--Miss Collins, of Fort Yates, N. D., in
writing of the Indian work at her mission, says:

"Last night there was a New Year's meeting, and they took up a 'Thank
Offering' because God had been so good the past year, and they handed me
ten dollars this morning for the native missionary society, and they
pledged ten more. Pretty substantial way to show gratitude to God! Oh if
our churches would come to the help of our American Missionary
Association in so liberal a way, what might we not do for Christ this
year!"




The Chinese.


THE WATSONVILLE MISSION.

BY REV. W. C. POND, D.D.

This work was begun about two years ago as an experiment, the teacher,
Mrs. Martha Ellis, giving her services without expense to us for several
months, till it became apparent that the field was one we ought to
occupy. She is an earnest Christian and is putting her very life-blood
into this service for Christ and the souls he died to save. With her has
been associated from the first Mr. Joe Dun, a most faithful and
efficient helper. He was converted in our Marysville Mission, and has
been a steadfast Christian for many years. He accepts less than half pay
in these times of straitness, and tries to eke out a support for himself
and those dependent upon him by attention to business in a small and, I
fear, far from lucrative way, but gives his _heart_ to mission work. I
feel guilty every time I make a remittance to Watsonville because the
pittance we allow him is so small as compared with the work he does. But
he and the zealous teacher have other rewards far richer than coin.

I reached the Mission House at about 2:30 P.M. Mrs. Ellis's
afternoon class of children was just being dismissed. But it seems they
had heard about me, and were glad to come to order again, and get
acquainted with me and let me hear them sing. It was a sight I never
looked upon before, and did not expect to see in California till we had
come much nearer the millennium than I dare think we now are. Nine
children stood in line before me--three of them Americans, three
Chinese, and three Spanish or Mexican. The whole class numbers sixteen,
the absent ones being five Spanish children and two Jewish ones. They
sang for me, with great vigor and quite good harmony, "Jesus Loves Me,"
"Precious Jewels," and "At the Cross." Books were not needed. The words
were packed away in their memory, where they will remain to bless--as we
hope and pray--their whole lives.

After the children had gone, eleven Chinese brethren gathered about
the table to study with me the Confession of Faith and Covenant of
Bethany Church, San Francisco, with reference to being organized into
the BETHANY CHURCH OF WATSONVILLE. About three hours I spent with them
holding them to close study of that which they would profess and
promise if they were united in Church relationship. They were of
various ages and various grades of intelligence, but I felt that
Christ had refused none of them, and I must not do so. Hum Quong was
converted in Marysville five years before, but had not till now had
opportunity--since he was sufficiently confirmed in his discipleship
to do so--to offer himself for baptism. He had become well versed in
Christian truth, and was able to interpret for me, and to assist his
brethren, almost as well as Joe Dun himself. The others were, all of
them, the fruit of our Watsonville work. One had been in California 25
years, but had attended mission-school nowhere except in Watsonville.
He was a substantial looking man, a good miniature of a New England
deacon of the old school but for his complexion and attire. I was
rather pleased--having made such reflections silently--to hear him
nominated by several voices and to see him unanimously elected their
only deacon. His name is Ng Kite.

It was a scene that interested the angels, I am sure, when in our rude
little mission-house, in the presence of a goodly company both of
Chinese and Americans, those twelve disciples stood together, hand in
hand, and accepted their confession and covenant. Eleven were Chinese;
one, their teacher, was an American. Ten were baptized--the largest
number of Chinese that I have ever baptized at one time.

Some, at least, of the village pastors, and a large company of other
Christians--too large for our limited space--would have been with us but
for the fact that Union Evangelistic services were in progress and they
felt it necessary to attend and take part in them.

Is it not worth while to maintain in vigor a work like this?


SANTA CRUZ MISSION.

Of this mission Dr. Pond writes: I give you an opportunity to share my
joy by inclosing the letter from Mrs. Hall, our teacher at Santa Cruz.
She has been for three months teaching a class of Japanese after her
teaching in the Chinese school is ended; that is after nine o'clock in
the evening--often not beginning till nearly ten. The two schools are
now happily united at our Chinese Mission House:

    LETTER FROM MRS. KATE V. HALL.

    "My heart is filled with gladness this New Year, and I am sure that
    the tidings I send you will make you happy also. Four Japanese and
    two Chinese have given their hearts to the Lord in the past month;
    two Japanese and two Chinese will receive baptism Sunday, and the
    other two Japanese will wait till the following Communion, as they
    wish to study the Bible more. I am satisfied to have them wait, if
    they wish, as I want them to have all doubts cleared away.

    "I will not send a report for the Japanese, as they came into the
    Chinese Mission three nights ago. I am so glad they were willing to
    attend the Chinese school, as my work at the Chinese Mission is
    growing each night, and often when I reached the Japanese school I
    was so hoarse I could hardly speak, so now, by remaining a half hour
    later, I will be able to do the same amount of work without hurrying
    so. I feel that the Lord has fully repaid me for my labor at the
    Japanese school."




WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.

  _State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords;
  Mrs. A. T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
  Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 16 Rumford St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS AND R. I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Massachusetts Ave., Boston, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs R. J. Hegeman, 32 Forest Street, Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. W. Thomas, Lansford.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. H. Ball, Dewhurst.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. C. Denison, 132 N. College Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman, Whitewater.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, 17 Florence Court, S. E., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. P. Cleveland, Caledonia.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs H. H. Gilchrist, Hot Springs.
  Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Second Street, Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. James W. Dawes, Crete.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read, Parsons.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valantine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. A. Paddock, Weiser.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D. L. Travis, Pocatello.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 323 Blanchard Street, Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K Street, Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth Street, Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 546 Third Street, Portland.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 911 Grove Street, Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison Street, Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Bullock, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, McLeansville.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, Oaks.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H. B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. S. Jackson, Montgomery.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. J. Lewis, 15 Echols Street, Memphis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland, 216 N. McNairy Street, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Mrs. Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Bella W. Hume, corner Gasquet and Liberty Streets,
    New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Crawford, Hammond.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State body
for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.




RECEIPTS FOR JANUARY, 1986.


_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

For the Education of Colored People.

  Income for January                              $ 7,290.00
  Previously acknowledged                          19,190.00
                                                  ----------
                                                  $27,110.00
                                                  ==========

CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $1,260.54.

  Albany. J. E. Bird                                                5.00
  Alfred. Cong. Ch.                                                 8.30
  Andover. Mrs. Bailey, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Augusta. Rev. J. S. Williamson, Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 50; Sab. Sch. First Cong.
    Ch., _for Mountain Work_, 11.50                                61.50
  Bangor. Hammond St. Cong. Ch., 50; Central Ch., 28;
    "A Friend," 5                                                  83.00
  Bath. Central Ch.                                                 9.30
  Biddeford. Junior and Senior Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. C. _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Boothbay Harbor. Mrs. M. Alice Beal                               3.00
  Bridgton. Miss Caroline Walker, Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Brunswick. Bbl. C. _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch.                                    116.12
  Ellsworth. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Christmas Off.                    5.00
  Fort Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const., MRS. MARY
    CHAFFIN, MRS. FLORA BARTON ROBIE, MRS. CHARLES W. HARDING,
    MRS. FRED A. GIDDINGS, MRS. MARTHA L. HARMON, MRS. SAMUEL O.
    CARRUTHERS, MRS. FRANK A. RIDLON, MRS. BENJ. F. WHITNEY, and
    MISS MARY GRACE WEEKS, L.M.'s                                 120.00
  Gorham. Home M. Soc., Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Greenville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
  Hallowell. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. C., Miss Alice Crosby,
    50c., _for Moorhead, Miss._                                     0.50
  Holden. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Kings Mountain, N. C._           5.00
  Kittery Point. E. F. Safford, 5; Cong. Ch., 1                      6.00
  Lewiston. Miss Lizzie Weymouth, 2 Bbls. C. _for Wilmington,
    N. C._
  Litchfield Corners. Mrs. Smith, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Madison. L. M. S. of Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
  New Gloucester. Cong. Ch.                                        36.75
  North Bridgton. W. M. S. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., 2.10 _for
    freight, for Talladega C._                                      2.10
  Norridgewock. Rev. B. Tappan                                      5.00
  Orland. H. T. and S. E. Buck                                     20.00
  Parsonsfield. Daniel Smith                                       23.00
  Portland. State St. Ch., 250, to const. HERBERT M. BAILEY,
    CHARLES W. PICKARD, FRED. H. MARR and MRS. E. L. O. ADAMS L.
    M's.; High St. Ch., 202.80; Williston Ch., 111.60; State
    Reform Sch., 2                                                566.40
  Portland. Williston C. E. Soc., 8 and Bbl. C., _for
    Wilmington, N. C._                                              8.00
  Portland. Ladies' Aux., _for Freight to Blowing Rock, N. C._      3.00
  Portland. Second Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Rockland. C. E. Soc., by A. M. Moffitt, _for Student Aid,
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                             5.00
  Saco. First Parish Cong. Ch.                                      9.40
  Skowhegan. Bbl. C. _for Andersonville, Ga._
  South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis Smith, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  South Freeport. Miss Fannie E. Soule, 10 and Pkg. C., _for
  Moorhead, Miss._                                                 10.00
  South Gardiner. Cong. Ch.                                         5.23
  Temple. Cong. Ch.                                                 1.30
  West Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch., bal. to const. MRS. S. K.
    BLANCHARD L. M.                                                17.00
  West Paris. Miss Mary L. Dana, _Youths' Companion_, one year,
    _for Macon, Ga._
  Windham Cong. Ch., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._        11.50
  Winslow. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                   4.50
  Woodfords. Ladies, Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Oaks, N. C._        2.00
  Woodfords. Cong. Soc., 2 Bbls. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Yarmouth. First Parish Cong. Ch.                                 27.00
  FOR MCINTOSH, GA., by Prof. Fred. W. Foster:
    Bar Harbor. Miss Lura J. Wardwell              1.00
    Bucksport. Class in S. S. Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid._                                5.00
     Castine. "Rainbow Band," 2 Bbls. C.
     Cumberland Center. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., 2
       Bbls. C.
     Vinal Haven. Carrie E. Leadbetter, _for
       Student Aid_                                5.00
                                                  -----            11.00
  Maine Woman's Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V.
    Woodbury, Pres., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cumberland Center                           19.50
      Cumberland North. Conf. Coll.                7.00
      Houlton                                      9.54
      Turner                                       2.00
      Woodfords. L. M. S.                         11.60
                                                  -----            49.64


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,396.77.

  Atkinson. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Work_             8.80
  Candia. Cong. Ch. Soc.                                           15.00
  Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      15.00
  Claremont. Bbl. Christmas Gifts _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Concord. "A Friend"                                               0.50
  Concord. Y. L. M. Soc. _for Student Aid, Straight U._             5.00
  Concord. Clara Howe Circle, K. D., Box C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Concord. Lydia R. Farnum and Granite M. B., Bbl. C.
    _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Dunbarton. First Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Epsom. Rev. J. O. Tasker                                         10.00
  Exeter. "A Friend"                                              800.00
  Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     10.00
  Greenville. Cong. Ch. (25 of which from F. W. Ely)               45.00
  Goffstown. Mary A. Hadley                                         5.00
  Hanover. Sab. Sch., by Mrs. Chas. P. Chase, _for Indian Sch'p_   15.00
  Hanover Center. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
  Hebron. Mrs. V. P. Clement and Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Hebron. Homeland Circle, 3 pkgs. spoons and holders _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Hopkinton. Bbl. C. _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Hudson. Miss Esther A. Warner, _for Wilmington, N. C._           10.00
  Jaffrey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      14.00
  Jaffrey. "Monadnock Bees," 5, "Lilies of the Field," 5, _for
  Student Aid, Storrs Sch., Ga._                                   10.00
  Keene. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch.                                10.00
  Keene. Cong. Ch. and Mrs. H. J. Buckminster, 8 and 2 Bbls.
  C., _for Wilmington, N. C._                                       8.00
  Laconia. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Saluda, N. C._
  Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                                6.00
  Lebanon. Mrs. J. L. Spring, Bbl. C., _for Enfield, N. C._
  Lebanon. Bbl. C. _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Londonderry. Chas. S. Pillsbury                                   1.00
  Manchester. Franklin St. Ch.                                     36.52
  Mason. By Mrs. L. J. Goodwin, _for Freight to Marietta, Ga._      1.25
  Merrimac. Geo. S. Parkhurst, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     10.00
  Newfields. Miss H. L. Fitts and Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  New Ipswich. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 2; A. N. Townsend, 1              3.00
  North Hampton. Y. L. Dorcas Circle, Bbl. C. _for Saluda, N. C._
  Pelham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       43.50
  Pembroke. "A Friend," _for Wilmington, N. C._                     8.00
  Piermont. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                    12.40
  Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                             7.00
  Sanbornton. Cong. Ch.                                            26.20
  Somersworth. First Cong. Ch.                                      3.00
  South Barnstead. Mrs. L. J. Reynolds, _for Moorhead, Miss._       0.10
  Tilton. Cong. Ch.                                                25.00
  Troy. Cong. Ch.                                                   5.00
  Walpole. Mrs. A. A. Gilson and Miss H. J. Gilson, Bbl. C.
    _for Enfield, N. C._
  West Rindge. George G. Williams                                  14.50
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,196.77

  ESTATE.

  New Ipswich. Estate Dea. Leavitt Lincoln, by J. E. F. Marsh,
  A. A. Carr, and Geo. F. Merriam, Executors                      200.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,396.77


VERMONT, $655.36.

  Barre. L. A. Soc., Bbl. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Barnet. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                       6.42
  Bennington. Second Cong. Ch. to const. ARTHUR J. ELWELL L.M.     38.20
  Bradford. Cong. Ch.                                              21.30
  Bridgeport. Mrs. Chipman, _for Student Aid, Trinity Sch., Ala._   8.00
  Burlington. College St. Cong. Ch.                                79.40
  Burlington. Miss H. Towne, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        1.00
  Castleton. Cong. Ch.                                              4.51
  Colchester. L. M. C., Bbl. C., 1.50 _for Freight, for Moorhead,
    Miss._                                                          1.50
  Coventry. "Busy Bees," _for Moorhead, Miss._                      5.00
  Danby. Cong. Ch.                                                  3.52
  East Arlington. Cong. Ch.                                         2.63
  East Dorset. Cong. Ch.                                            7.01
  Essex Junction. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            5.60
  Manchester. Y. P. S. C. E., Cong. Ch., _for Knox Inst., Athens,
    Ga._                                                            5.00
  New Haven. Mrs. Alice V. Doud's Sab. Sch. Class, _for
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                             1.45
  New Haven. Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  North Chester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                               10.00
  Northfield. "A Friend," to const. MARION CHOLLAR, HEBER C.
    CADY and LAURA E. HAZEN L.M.'s.                               100.00
  North Springfield. Mrs. C. S. Davis                               1.00
  North Thetford. Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
  Norwich. J. G. Stinson, 50; Mrs. H. Burton, 1                    51.00
  Orange. Cong. Ch.                                                 7.00
  Roxbury. Young People Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg, Ky._          5.65
  Rutland. Cong. Ch., 89; John Howard, 4                           93.00
  Saint Johnsbury. Miss Martha J. Hall, Communion Set _for Ch.
    Corbin, Ky._
  Townshend. Cong. Ch.                                             30.00
  Waitsfield. Y. P. S. C. E., by Mrs. Geo. Olmstead, Treas.         7.04
  West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                                      48.50
  Weston. Cong. Ch., 2.58; Lucy P. Bartlett, 2                      4.58
  West Townsend. Cong. Ch.                                          4.15
  Woodstock. "A Friend," 60; to const. MISS LOU E. PORTER and
    MRS. MARY SHAW L.M.'s. Cong. Soc., 15.40                       75.40
  FOR MCINTOSH, GA., by Prof. W. Foster:
    Barton's Landing. Cong. Soc.                   3.00
    Barton's Landing. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Case C.
    Berlin. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Bbl. C., Freight
      paid.
    Chelsea. Cong. C., Bbl. C. East Braintree
      and West Brookfield. Cong. Ch., _for
      Freight_                                     2.00
    Essex Junction. Opportunity Circle, _for
      Freight_                                     2.00
    Florence. "Friends," Bbl. C.
    Franklin. W. H. M. S., Bbl. C.
    Hyde Park. W. H. M. U., Case C., 2 _for
      Freight_                                     2.00
    Manchester, W. H. M. S., Bbl. C.
    McIndoes Falls. Cong. Ch., _for Freight_       3.50
    Newport. W. Aux., Box C.
    Saint Johnsbury. Jr. C. E. S. North Ch.,
      _for Freight_                                1.00
    Waitsfield. Home Circle, Bbl. C., 2 _for
      Freight_                                     2.00
    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch. 2 Bbls. C.
    Westminster. Mrs. A. G. Thompson, 1, and Pkg.
      Christmas Cards                              1.00
                                                  -----            16.50


MASSACHUSETTS, $10,091.07.

  Acton. Cong. Ch.                                                 12.00
  Amesbury. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Schp., Santee
    Indian Sch., Neb._                                             70.00
  Amesbury. R. H. King, Col. 1.65; Miss C. Jefferson, Col.
    1.35; M. Nelson, Col. 1, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            4.00
  Amherst. First Ch.                                               10.00
  Andover. South Cong. Ch., 220.70; West Cong. Ch., 52.50, bal.
    to const. ALBERT A. HARDY AND CHARLES A. JAMESON L.M.'s;
    Free Christian Ch. ad'l, 10                                   283.20
  Andover. Juv. Miss. Soc. West Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                                   25.00
  Andover. Mrs. J. W. Churchill, Bbl. C.; South Ch., Bbl. C.
    _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Andover. Miss Clara Boynton, Christmas Box _for Moorhead,
    Miss._
  Arlington. Cong. Ch.                                             45.34
  Attleboro. Second Cong. Ch.                                      76.14
  Auburn. Cong. Ch., 38.72; C. E. Hunt, 25                         63.72
  Auburndale. Cong. Ch.                                           316.58
  Auburndale. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Nat, Ala._
  Bedford. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                          9.54
  Belchertown. Mrs. Alice Kendall, Bbl. C. _for Grand View,
    Tenn._
  Beverly. Washington St. Cong. Ch.                                27.62
  Beverly. E. P. Foster                                             9.50
  Billerica. W. M. S., Bbl. C. _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Bradford. Ward Hill Ch.                                          10.50
  Braintree. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.                              5.00
  Braintree. First Cong. Ch.                                        3.88
  Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch.                                       4.20
  Boston. Mrs. M. J. Weston, Jubilee Offering,
        _for Mountain Work_                      400.00
     Mount Vernon Ch., ad'l Mrs. S. D. Warren,
       100; Miss Cornelia Warren, 100            200.00
     Wm. G. Means                                125.00
     Mrs. Charlotte Fiske, _for Marshallville,
       Ga._                                      100.00
     Mrs. D. M. Clapp, Old So. Ch., _for Student
       Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._           35.00
     Park St. Ch., ad'l                            5.00
     Mt. Vernon Cong. Ch., ad'l.                   1.00
     Mrs. S. D. Lane, Trunk Books (including
       Cyclopedia) _for Grand View, Tenn._
     A. M. Small, Year's Sub. to "Outlook" _for
       Enfield, N. C._
     L. B. Soc., First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C.,
       freight prepaid, _for Nat, Ala._
   Alston. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., Box C.
   Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. (25 of which
       from B. C. Hardwick)                      128.92
     Mr. and Mrs. J. Fullerton, _for Schp.
       Santee Indian Sch., Neb._                 100.00
   Roxbury. Walnut Av. Cong. Ch.                  37.72
   Immanuel Ch., Aux. _for Central Ch., New
     Orleans, La._                                35.50
   Intermediate Dept. Highland Cong. S. S.,
     _for McIntosh, Ga._                          10.00
                                                  -----         1,178.14
  Brockton. Mrs. Thomas C. Perkins                                  1.50
  Brockton. Mrs D. D. Tilden and Olivet Mem. Ch., 2 Bbls. C.
    _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                             3.38
  Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                                    146.12
  Cambridge. Indian Association, _for Hospital, Fort Yates,
    N. D._                                                         50.00
  Cambridge. North Av. Cong. Ch.                                   20.00
  Cambridge. E. F. Jones, Col. _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                1.00
  Cambridgeport. "A Friend," _for Santee Indian Sch., Neb._       150.00
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                 31.97
  Campello. South Cong. Ch., 35; Cora B. Leach, 50 cents           35.50
  Charlestown. Mrs. C. H. Flint, Christmas Box _for Moorhead,
    Miss._
  Chelsea. A. C. Stone of First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._         26.00
  Chelsea. "Member First Cong. Ch."                                 5.00
  Chester. Two Bbls. C. _for Athens, Ala._
  Chicopee. First Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
  Collinsville. Miss M. A. Brown, _for Moorhead, Miss._             0.10
  Dalton. Mrs. James B. Crane, 100; Zenas Crane, 100; to
    const. MRS. JAMES E. MILNER, J. W. FULLER, and W. H. DODGE
    L.M.'s; Miss Clara L. Crane, 100 Mrs. Z. Marshal Crane, 100;
    to const. EDWIN M. WARREN, MRS. JUDD CONVERSE, MISS ELLA
    BROWNE, and MRS. LYDIA D. STURGES L.M.'s; W. M. Crane, 100    500.00
  Dalton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 30; J. M. Stearns, 5 _for Marion,
    Ala._                                                          35.00
  Danvers Centre. Mrs. C. M. Geer, Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  Dracut. First Cong. Ch. (of which Y. P. S. C. E., 6.73;
    Ladies' Aid Soc., 5; First Cong. Ch. and S. S., 18.27), to
    const. SILAS R. COBURN L.M.                                    30.00
  Dudley. Rev. Dr. Morse, Bbl. C. _for Enfield, N. C._
  East Douglas. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          22.12
  East Hampton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian M., Neb._  20.00
  East Somerville. Mrs. Mary C. Howard                             10.00
  Enfield. Cong. Ch.                                               20.16
  Framingham. Centre Cong. Ch.                                     47.00
  Fall River. Central Cong. Ch., 298.92 (50 of which _for R.
    K. Remington Memorial_), to const. REV. W. WALKER JUBB, REV.
    E. A. BUCK, DEA. CHAS. J. HOLMES, DEA. CHAS. A. BAKER and
    HENRY H. EARL L.M.'s; First Cong. Ch., 84.88                  383.80
  Fitchburg. Rollstone Cong. Ch., 52, to const. DAVID SALMON
    L.M.; "A Friend," in C. C. Church, 30, to const. EDWIN D.
    WHITNEY L.M.; Mrs. F. F. Battles, 50c.                         82.50
  Foxboro. Mrs. Mary N. Phelps, to const. MRS. JAMES W. FLAGG
    L.M.                                                           50.00
  Foxboro. Two Bbls. _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Framingham. Plym. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Georgetown. Rev. W. H. Gay                                        1.00
  Gloucester. Trinity Cong. Ch.                                    72.18
  Greenfield. Jeanette Thompson                                     5.00
  Groton. ----, 15; _for Mountain Work_, 10; _for Indian
    Work_, 5; _for Chinese Work_ and to const. MRS. MARTHA
    TARBELL L.M.                                                   30.00
  Groveland. Rev. L. F. Berry, Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Hadley. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.                                20.56
  Haverhill. West Cong. Ch., 12; Sab. Sch. West Cong. Ch.,
    12.49; Y. P. S. C. E. West Cong. Ch., 3.40; Chas. Coffin,
    4.50                                                           32.39
  Haverhill. T. J. Whiting, Col., _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                1.00
  Haverhill. Mrs. Helen M. Clark, Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Holyoke. Miss E. Louise Patten, _for Macon, Ga._                 10.00
  Hyde Park. Miss M. L. Dewing                                      5.00
  Lancaster. Sab. Sch. Evang. Ch.                                   5.59
  Lawrence. Lawrence St. Cong. Ch.                                145.00
  Leicester. First Cong. Ch.                                      100.17
  Leominster. Mrs. Geo. H. Wheelock                                 5.00
  Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch.                                     28.48
  Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch., 100; First Cong. Ch., 15.36; "A
    Friend," 1                                                    116.36
  Malden. First Cong. Ch., 15; S. James, Col., 1.30, _for
    Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                              16.30
  Malden. Junior C. E. Soc. First Cong. Ch., _Indian M., Fort
    Yates, N. D._                                                   5.00
  Malden. L. S. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Maynard. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill
    Acad., Tenn._                                                  25.00
  Melrose Highlands. "Woman's League," Bbl. Bedding and C.
    _for Macon, Ga._
  Milford. Cong. Ch.                                               77.13
  Milford. Y. P. S. C. E. by H. L. Hunt, _for Student Aid,
    Grand View Acad., Tenn._, and bal. to const. MISS ADDIE C.
    CLARK L.M.                                                      5.00
  Milton. Mrs. E. D. Wadsworth, Pkg. Cards _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  Mittineague. Mrs. F. O. Smith, _for Wilmington, N. C._            1.00
  Mittineague. Southworth Paper Co., Case of Paper; T. W.
    Hitt, Case of Paper; Second Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., etc.;
    Mrs. Fred. Cook, Box C., etc., _for Meridian, Miss._
  Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case of Paper _for Thomasville,
    Ga._
  Monson. Cong. Ch., 14.75; Miss Sarah E. Bradford, 5              19.75
  Montague. First Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
  Natick. First Cong. Ch.                                          75.00
  Natick. Mrs. Bowers, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  New Bedford. North Ch., Mrs. A. E. Peirce and Mrs. Beauvais,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            25.00
  New Bedford. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, A.
    N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                               6.00
  Newburyport. Miss M. W. Tilton                                    5.00
  Newton. Eliot Ch.                                               171.92
  Newton. Cora C. Hood, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._             5.00
  Newton. Bbl. Books, etc., for Thomasville, Ga.
  Newton Centre, First Cong. Ch., 83.39; Extra Cent a Day
    Band, First Cong. Ch., 25.50                                  113.89
  Newton Highlands. "E. H. C."                                     50.00
  North Adams. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. WILLIAM L. TENNEY,
    MRS. ED. A. MCMILLIN, MRS. ED. H. HAMBLEN, MISS MAE RICE
    and MISS JENNIE P. PORTER L.M.'s                              151.43
  Northampton. "A Friend"                                           0.50
  Northampton. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Norwood. First Cong. Ch.                                         95.00
  North Amherst. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              11.78
  North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       23.09
  North Weymouth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                12.00
  Northboro. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                        7.18
  Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                                35.00
  Oxford Ladies' Mission Band, by Mrs. A. F. Child, Bbl.
    Comfortables, etc., _for Savannah, Ga._
  Peabody. Prof. J. K. Cole                                         0.50
  Phillipston. Mrs. Mary P. Estey, 5, Memorial Daniel Parker,
    Greenwich, Mass, and 1 _for Indian M._                          6.00
  Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch.                                      37.54
  Plymouth. Chiltonville Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
  Reading. Cong. Ch.                                               22.50
  Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                               6.00
  Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                               7.40
  Rockland. Cong. Ch., 20; Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., 2.58       22.58
  Rockville. Chapel, by Mrs. M. G. Jones, _for Wilmington, N. C._   5.00
  Royalston. First Cong. Ch.                                        4.08
  Salem. Sab. Sch. Tabernacle Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  25.00
  Salem. "A Friend," _for Moorhead Miss._                          10.00
  Salem. Crombie St. Ch., _for Wilmington, N. C._                   8.00
  Sandwich. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Avery Inst._                 12.00
  South Amherst. South Cong. Ch.                                   10.49
  Southbridge. Cong. Ch., 25.80; Mrs. B. U. Bugbee, 10; Mrs.
    Franklin Carleton, 50 cents                                    36.30
  South Hadley Falls. "G."                                         50.00
  South Natick. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch.                            6.00
  South Royalston. Second Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  South Weymouth. Mr. and Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for Student Aid, A.
    N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                              20.00
  Spencer. S. S. Class, by G. E. Manley, _for McIntosh, Ga._        5.00
  Spencer. Mrs. G. P. Ladd, Box Books _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Springfield. South Cong. Ch., 66.50; Hope Church, 28.39;
    Mrs. J. S. Dean, 5                                             99.89
  Springfield. Bbl. Papers _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Springfield. W. H. M. S. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. and Box
    Books, _for Enfield, N. C._
  Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                           16.14
  Swampscott. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. HARRIET HOOPER HANDY L.M.  30.00
  Templeton. Trinitarian Ch.                                       16.17
  Topsfield. Y. L. M. C., Bbl. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Turners Falls. Mrs. Mayo's S. S. Class, _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               7.50
  Tyngsboro. Evan. Ch.                                              5.00
  Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                                             15.40
  Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                         14.50
  Ware. Sab. Sch. East Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_              40.00
  Ware. Y. P. S. C. E. East Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  20.00
  Ware. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Meridian, Miss._                  3.26
  Ware. S. R. Sage and Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Warren. Cong. Ch. to const. MISS MARY C. BURBANK, ARCHER
    TUTTLE, GEORGE E. TARBELL, FRED. D. HOLDSWORTH, MISS FOSTINA
    KENNEY, and MRS. ADELLA H. ROBBINS L.M.'s                     200.00
  Webster. First Cong. Ch., bal. to const. MISS MAUD JOSLIN
    and HENRY REA L.M.'s                                           31.04
  Welfleet. Mrs. Geo. W. Holbrook, Box Bedding _for Enfield,
    N. C._
  Wellesley. P. W. Dana, _for Santee Indian Sch., Neb._            40.00
  Westborough. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                     48.40
  Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen's Ass'n _for share, Tougaloo U._,
    and to const. MRS. JESSIE TEASDALE L.M.                        30.00
  Westboro. Miss Amelia Harrington, Bbl. C. _for Wilmington,
    N. C._
  West Boylston. First Cong. Ch.                                    3.25
  West Medway. Third Cong. Ch.                                     17.00
  Weston. Herbert F. Burrage, _for Talladega C._                    5.00
  West Springfield. "A Friend," 5; Park St. Cong. Ch.,
    "A Friend," 5                                                  10.00
  Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                                    82.49
  Williamstown. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Winchester. First Cong. Ch.                                     136.67
  Winchester. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Meridian, Miss._                                               40.00
  Winchester. Mrs. J. P. Boutelle, 13, and Pkg. Christmas
  Goods, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                                   13.00
  Woburn. First Cong. Ch., 182.19; Mrs. S. T. Greenough, 5        187.19
  Woburn. Jr. C. E. S. Cong. Ch., Pkg. Christmas Goods _for
    Williamsburg, Ky._
  Worcester. Central Ch., 112.39; Union Ch., 97.16; Piedmont
    Ch., quarterly, 53.22; "A Friend," 30, to const. MISS S. E.
    WHEELER L.M.                                                  292.77
  Worcester. Immanuel Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for Mountain Work,
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                          25.00
  Worcester. Ladies' Miss. Aux. Plymouth Ch., by Mrs. Ruth P.
    Beaman, _for King's Mountain, N. C._                           25.00
  Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
  ----. "A Friend in Mass."                                       450.00

  FOR MCINTOSH, GA., by Prof. Fred W. Foster:
   Athol. W. C. T. U., Bbl. C.
   Baldwinsville. L. M. S. Memorial Ch., 2
     Bbls. C.
   Boston. H. H. Carter & Co., Large Case
     Christmas Goods
   Dorchester. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
   Great Barrington. Ladies' Benev. Soc.,
     Bbl. C.
   Monson. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
   North Brookfield. Miss Laura M. Miller,
     Bbl. C.
   Orange. Misses Davis and Holbrook               2.00
   Orange. L. H. M. S., Bbl. C. and Freight
   Warren. King's Daughters, Pkg. Christmas Goods
   Westboro. Ladies' of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
                                                  -----             2.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass.
    and R. I., Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas.,
    _for Woman's Work_:
      For Salaries of Teachers                   340.00
      Roxbury. Walnut Av. Cong. Ch. Aux.          20.27
      Roxbury. Aux.                               17.00
      Roxbury. H. M. Aux., Bbl. C. _for
        Blowing Rock, N. C._
                                                  -----           377.27
                                                               ---------
                                                               $7,971.54

  ESTATES.

  Boston. Estate Mrs. Elizabeth C. Parkhurst, by Elmore F.
    Brackett, Executor                                          1,108.89
  Essex. Estate of Addison Cogswell, by Mrs. Elvira D.
    Cogswell, Executrix                                         1,000.00
  Holliston. Estate of George Batchelder, by John M.
    Batchelder                                                     10.64
                                                              ----------
                                                              $10,091.07

  CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

  South Berwick, Me. Ladies' Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for
    Andersonville, Ga._
  Mason, N. H. Ladies' Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Marietta, Ga._
  Natick, Mass. Miss E. B. Stefan, Books, etc., _for Joppa,
    Ala._
  North Carver, Mass. Mrs. T. M. Cole, 2 Boxes C. and
    Literature.
  Winchester, Mass. Mrs. C. A. Richardson, Box Scrap Books,
    Cards, etc.
  Wakefield, Mass. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Oakdale, Tenn._


RHODE ISLAND, $234.22.

  Newport. "A Friend," 20; United Cong. Ch., quarterly,
    14.44; Wm. Andrews, 4.50                                       38.94
  Pawtucket. Cong. Ch.                                             65.00
  Providence. Union Cong. Ch, 78.71; Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 49.02;
    Y. P. S. C. E. of North Cong. Ch., 1.12                       128.85
  Providence. Home Mission Band, _for Williamsburg, Ky._            1.43
  Providence. E. B. Hale, Pkg. Booklets _for Saluda, N. C._


CONNECTICUT, $3,559.80.

  Abington. Cong. Ch.                                               9.00
  Bethel. First Cong. Ch., 46.23; "A Friend," 5                    51.23
  Bethel. Jr. C. E. Soc., 1; Y. L. M. Circle Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    C., _for Saluda, N. C._                                         1.00
  Bloomfield. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., 5; _for Evarts, Ky._,
    5; _for A. N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                   10.00
  Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch.                                     72.45
  Bridgeport. Memorial Mission Circle North Cong. Ch., _for
    Share, Salary, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                           25.00
  Bristol. Cong. Ch., quarterly (5 of which _for Indian M._)       77.03
  Bristol. Jr. End. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Work_              13.00
  Canterbury. Olive D. Sanger, 2 Bbls. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Chester. Y. P. S. C. E., 6.17; Gertrude M. Turner, 5, _for
    Central Ch. New Orleans, La._                                  11.17
  Clinton. Cong. Ch., 31.95; Rev. Robert Crawford, 10              41.95
  Columbia. Cong. Ch., 17.86. Incorrectly ack. in Feb. number
    from Columbus.
  Cornwall. First Cong. Ch.                                        54.75
  Cornwall. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., 16.28 _for A. N. and I.
    Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, and 16.28 _for Indian Mission, Fort
    Berthold, N. D._                                               32.56
  Danbury. First Cong. Ch.                                         79.29
  Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     20.74
  East Hartford. First Cong. Ch.                                  100.00
  East Hartford. Mrs. Bowman's Bible Class, Cong. Ch., _for
    Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                                  7.00
  Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch.                                     27.62
  Farmington. First Cong. Ch.                                     100.00
  Guilford. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Glastonbury. James B. Williams, _for Theo. Dept.,
    Talladega C._                                                  25.00
  Glastonbury. Rev. G. F. Waters and Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Granby. First Cong. Ch.                                           2.16
  Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      12.50
  Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., 234.50; Fourth Cong. Ch.,
    16.22; Mrs. Mary A. Williams, 15                              265.72
  Hartford. First Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._)                                                253.36
  Hartford, Sab. Sch. Pearl St. Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud
    Indian M._                                                     32.96
  Hartford. Ladies' Bible Class South Ch., _for Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                          8.00
  Hartford. "E. O. L.," _for Orange Park, Fla._                     1.00
  Hartford. Miss L. G. Talcott, Pkg. of Papers _for Thomasville,
    Ga._
  Hotchkissville. Mrs. F. Dawson, _for Thomasville, Ga._            1.00
  Kensington. Cong. Ch.                                            22.51
  Ledyard. Cong. Ch., 9.82; Mrs. Anna Gallup, 5; Sab. Sch. Cong.
    Ch., 3.82                                                      18.64
  Lyme. Old Lyme Cong. Ch.                                         58.00
  Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                            49.28
  Marlboro. Cong. Ch.                                               6.72
  Meriden. Center Ch., 75; "Member First Cong. Ch.," 5; W. E.
    Benham, 5; First Cong. Ch., 1.50                               86.50
  Middletown. South Cong. Ch.                                      85.72
  Middletown. Sab. Sch. First Ch., _for Indian M._                 35.00
  Millington. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
  Monroe. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.20
  Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
  Mount Carmel. Cong. Ch. (9.07 of which _for Indian M._)          29.37
  New Britain. Sab. Sch. South Ch., _for Indian Work_              31.80
  New Britain. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_            25.14
  New Britain. First Ch. of Christ, adl., to const. MRS. ELLEN
    B. BOARDMAN, MISS MATTIE E. PECK, MISS BERTHA BANCROFT,
    ARTHUR C. BLAKE, CHAUNCEY B. ANDREWS, and JAMES S. NORTH
    L.M.'s                                                          8.32
  New Canaan. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Teacher, Santee Indian
    Sch., Neb._                                                    50.00
  New Canaan. Nearest at Hand Circle K. D., Box C. _for King's
    Mountain, N. C._
  New Haven. Sab. Sch. Plymouth Ch.                                15.00
  New Haven. Sab. Sch. United Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                           15.00
  Newington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., by Rev. C. W. Francis, _for
    Marshallville, Ga._                                            75.00
  New Lebanon. Milo Mead                                            4.50
  New London. First Ch. of Christ, 43.98; Miss M. G. Brainard,
    50c.                                                           44.48
  New Milford. Sewing Soc., Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Norfolk. Cong. Ch., 25; Mrs. E. B. Porter, 1                     26.00
  Norfolk. Mrs. R. I. Crissey, 2 Bbls. C. _for Grand View,
    Tenn._
  Northford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl.                               5.00
  North Guilford. Cong. Ch.                                        15.00
  North Guilford. Miss Rossiter, _for Student Aid, Trinity
    Sch., Ala._                                                     5.25
  Norwich. Second Cong. Soc., 72.53; First Cong. Ch., 54.40,
    to const. MRS. FRANK CURTIS L.M.; Greeneville Cong. Ch., 10   136.93
  Norwich. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch., 23.27, _for Athens,
    Ala._; 9 _for Tougaloo U._                                     31.27
  Norwich. Second Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for Athens, Ala._
  Norwich. Miss Rossiter's Girls, Christmas Box _for Athens,
    Ala._
  Plantsville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                 10.34
  Pomfret. W. M. S., _for Freight to Talladega, Ala._               2.00
  Preston. Long Soc., 9; Cong. Ch., 17                             26.00
  Putnam. C. E. Soc. Second Cong. Ch.                              25.00
  Putnam. Mrs. C. H. Brown and S. S. Class, _for Student Aid_,
    6; Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Talladega C._                       6.00
  Salem. C. E. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for C. E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._      7.00
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                             20.03
  Scotland. Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Sound Beach. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E. of Pilgrim Cong Ch., Bbl. C.
    _for Childersburg, Ala._
  South Manchester. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                                    8.00
  Southington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 47.12; Cong. Ch., 28.78        75.90
  Stamford. Y. P. S. C. E. First Cong. Ch., 15.50; First Cong.
    Ch., 10; W. L. Wilde, 1, _for Mountain Work_                   26.50
  Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                                       10.64
  Thompson. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Church Work in Ga._           5.00
  Thompsonville. Dennis Pease, _for Indian M., Nebraska and
    Dakota_                                                       100.00
  Torringford. Mrs. M. E. Norris, _for Moorhead, Miss._             5.00
  Torrington. Two Sab. Sch. classes Third Cong. Ch., by Mrs.
    Burr Lyon, _for Indian Schp., Santee, Neb._                    10.67
  Torrington. Miss G. B. Filers's S. S. Class, Bbl. Christmas
    Goods _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Unionville. Mrs. Mary M. Smith                                   30.00
  Wapping. Cong. Ch.                                               16.06
  Washington. Henry Nettleton, _for Wilmington, N. C._              8.00
  Waterbury. First Cong. Ch., 100; Dr. Robert Crane, 10           110.00
  Waterbury. Mrs. Hill, _for Wilmington, N. C._                     8.00
  Westbrook. "A Friend"                                             5.00
  West Hartford. "An Unknown Friend," _for Indian M._              50.00
  West Hartford. Anson Chappell, 12; "Two Friends," 5              17.00
  West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   33.05
  Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch.                                    23.28
  West Torrington. Y. P. S. C. E., by A. W. Hull, _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                         10.78
  Wethersfield. Cong. Ch., 11.05; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 28.30;
    C. E. Soc. Cong. Ch., 2.25, _for A. N. and I. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._                                              41.60
  Winsted. David Strong, _for Theo. Dept. Talladega C._            50.00
  Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                                            10.83
  ----. "A Friend"                                                400.00
  ----. "A Friend"                                                 10.00

  FOR MCINTOSH, GA., by Prof. Fred W. Foster:
    Columbia. Mrs. Mary A. Preston, _for Student
      Aid_, 1; W. H. M. S., Bbl. C.; 1.50 _for
      Freight_; 50c. _for Student Aid_             3.00
    Ledyard. W. H. M. S., Bbl. C. and Freight.
    Norwich. Sab. Sch. Broadway Ch., for C. E.
      Hall, 15; Broadway Cong. Ch., 5 Bbls. C.,
      2 Boxes New Goods and Freight; Greeneville
      Ch., 2 Bbls. C. and Freight; Miss B.
      McDowell's S. S. Class, 1; H. M. S.
      Greeneville Ch., _for Freight_, 1.50        17.50
                                                  -----            20.50

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn.,
    Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Norwalk. "Forget me not Circle" of K. D.
        First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
        Blowing Rock, N. C._                      12.00
      South Norwalk. W. M. Ass'n.                 25.00
      Thompson. Aux.                              14.00
      Torringford. Aux.                            3.50
      West Chester. A Few Ladies of Cong. Ch.      3.50
      West Winsted. Second Ch. Aux.               10.00
                                                  -----            68.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $3,476.30

  ESTATES.

  New Britain. Estates of Sophia and Cornelia Stanley by
    Trustee                                                        83.50
                                                               ---------
                                                               $3,559.80


NEW YORK, $2,052.30.

  Altmar. Cong. Ch.                                                 1.00
  Amsterdam. Juliette W. Turner                                     0.50
  Angola. First Cong. Ch.                                          10.05
  Antwerp. First Cong. Ch.                                         18.00
  Berkshire. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch.                               5.00
  Berkshire. Miss Julia Dwight and Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Brooklyn. Ellen Thurston, _for Santee Indian Sch., Neb._         50.00
  Brooklyn. Y. P. S. C. E. of Tompkins Av. Cong. Ch., 25;
    Beecher Memorial Ch., 20                                       45.00
  Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian
    Sch., Neb._                                                    37.50
  Brooklyn. C. E. League Clinton Av. Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                                   10.00
  Brooklyn. L. B. Soc. Tompkins Av. Ch., 3 Bbls. Goods _for
    Cumberland Gap, Tenn._
  Brooklyn. Bbl. C. _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Brooklyn. Miss Taft, Cards _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Buffalo. First Cong. Ch., 40; Niagara Square People's Ch.,
    3.16; Niagara Sq. People's Ch. Miss'y Concert 1.80             44.96
  Cambria. Molyneux Corners Miss'y Soc.                             5.00
  Canandaigua. Sab. Sch. First Cong.  Ch., _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._                                                         40.21
  Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. (11.66 of which _for Santee
    Indian Sch., Neb._)                                            15.56
  Castile. Mrs. Harriet A. Southworth (100 of which _for
    Indian M._)                                                   125.00
  Chittenango. Mrs. Amelia L. Brown                                 5.00
  Clifton Springs. "A Friend"                                       5.00
  Clifton Springs. Bbl. C. _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Cortland. L. M. S. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  Derby. Sab. Sch., by Mrs. Fanny E. Squier, _for Indian Schp._    15.00
  East Albany. Rev. C. W. Herdendof, Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  East Bloomfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_        25.00
  Elizabethtown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                14.50
  Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                            4.50
  Flushing. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.                               8.00
  Jamestown. First Cong. Ch.                                       52.50
  Lisle. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._             2.00
  Little Falls. Mrs. D. E. Emerson, _for Gloucester Sch., Va._      1.00
  Lockport. W. H. M. S. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  10.00
  Lockport. H. M. S. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., etc., _for
    Talladega C._
  Maine. W. M. S. Cong. Ch., Box Bedding _for Talladega C._
  Middletown. Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._
  Morristown. First Cong. Ch.                                       8.33
  Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                           22.71
  New York. Broadway Tabernacle, "A Friend," 50; Broadway
    Tabernacle Ch., adl. 10; Mrs. M. D. Wickes, 10; Miss J. P.
    Roberts, 1                                                     71.00
  New York. Miss E. S. Grojian, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            3.00
  New York. "Anarchist," _for Indian Work_                          2.00
  New York. "A Friend," 2 Pkgs. C.; National Temp. Soc., Pkg.
    Literature; "Friend," Pkg. Pictures; Miss Grace H. Dodge,
    Magazines, _for Savannah, Ga._
  New York. B. Van Wagoner, Box Candy and Christmas Cards _for
    Marion, Ala._
  New York. Friend, Box Books _for Enfield, N. C._
  Northfield. Y. P. S. C. E., by Seely Wood, Treas., _for
    Thunderhawk Indian M._                                         10.80
  Northville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
  Orient Point. Cong. S. S. Association, by Rufus W. Tuthill       19.51
  Oswego. Cong. Ch.                                                10.08
  Oxford. Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Peterboro. Mrs. Mary W. Calkins, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Phoenix. P. Gates, Bbl. Apples _for Marion, Ala._
  Pitcher. Cong. Ch.                                                5.41
  Plattsburg. G. W. Dodds                                           2.00
  Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Ch.                                    50.19
  Riverhead. L. S. Cong. Ch., Box C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Rochester. Sab. Sch. St. Peter's Presb. Ch., Bbl. C. for
    Macon, Ga.
  Rochester. Whatsoever Circle of K. D. So. Cong. Ch., Half
    Bble. C., etc., _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Sayville. Cong. Ch.                                               34.20
  Schroon Lake. Cong. Ch., by Rev. Wm. Marsh                        5.00
  Sherburne. Jr. Aux. M. S., Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  10.00
  Smyrna. Cong. Ch.                                                 4.33
  Spencerport. Bbl. and Box Groceries, etc., _for King's
    Mountain, N. C._
  Ticonderoga. W. H. M. A. and Y. P. S. C. E., 2 Bbls. C. _for
    King's Mountain, N. C._
  Troy. Mrs. A. Belden, Col., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            5.00
  Vernon Center. Rev. G. C. Judson                                  5.00
  Wadhams Mills. Happy Workers M. B., _for McIntosh, Ga._           1.00
  Warsaw. "Ernest Workers," Christmas Bbl. _for King's Mountain,
    N. C._
  West Bloomfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                              5.29
  West Brook. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._      4.00
  West Winfield. Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._)                                                 25.13
  Williamsbridge. M. M. Snowden, Col., _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                5.00
  Woodhaven. Jr. C. E. Soc., Christmas Box _for Moorhead, Miss._

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. Y., by Mrs.
    J. J. Pearsall, _for Woman's Work_:
      Barryville. H. M. S.                           2.00
      Brooklyn. Lee Av. W. M. S.                     1.00
      Buffalo. Pilgrim Ch. W. M. S.                  7.00
      Candor. Jun. C. E., for _C. E. Hall,
        McIntosh, Ga._                               1.51
      Hancock. Mission Band                          2.00
      Morrisville. C. E., _for Central Ch., N. O._   5.00
      New Haven. Aux.                               29.03
      New Haven. Willing Workers                    15.00
      New York. "Broadway Tabernacle Soc., _for
        Women's Work_"                               6.00
      Utica. Plymouth Ch. W. M. S.                  10.00
      Walton. W. H. M. S.                           25.00
      West Newark. W. M. S.                          7.00
                                                    -----         110.54
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $989.80

  ESTATES.

  Perry Center. Estate of Martha B. Sheldon, by Milton A.
    Barber, Executor                                               62.50
  Troy. Estate of Mrs. E. C. Stewart, by J. F. Leonard,
    Executor                                                    1,000.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $2,052.30


NEW JERSEY, $155.78.

  Colt's Neck. Reformed Ch.                                         4.94
  Dunellen. Mary A. Shepard, Box C., 1.69 _for Freight, for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._                                            1.69
  Dunellen. Mrs. Stevens, Clothing and Books _for Blowing
    Rock, N. C._
  East Orange. "Willing Workers," Box Bedding, etc., _for
    Athens, Ala._
  Elizabeth. Mission Band First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Share in Teacher's Salary, McIntosh, Ga._                      10.00
  Glen Ridge. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Work_               10.00
  Montclair. Misses Ryerson, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Morristown. Miss Mary Decker, Pkg. Cards _for Savannah, Ga._
  Newark. Miss Florence C. Seymour, Memoriam Mrs. Lucy I.
    Seymour                                                        30.00
  Orange. Mrs. Austin Adams, 2 Pkgs. Mittens and Comforters
    _for Indian M._
  Paterson. Auburn St. Cong. Ch.                                   13.00
  Upper Montclair. Union Cong. Ch.                                 50.00
  Upper Montclair. Sab. Sch. Christian Union Cong. Ch.             36.15


PENNSYLVANIA, $174.91.

  Edwardsdale. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                      6.50
  Edwardsdale. Bethesda Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Germantown. Second Presb. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Guy's Mills. Mrs. F. M. Guy                                       5.00
  Le Raysville. Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
  Neath. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            5.00
  North East. Miss C. A. Talcott                                    1.00
  Philadelphia. Mrs. E. A. Baker, _for Wilmington, N. C._           5.00
  Philadelphia. Miss S. A. Robinson, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                2.00
  Philadelphia. Mrs. Hall, Bag Carpet Rags _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Philadelphia. Mrs. John Wanamaker, Box Sch. Readers _for
    McIntosh, Ga._
  Pittsburg. "Cash"                                               100.00
  Pittston. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                        12.00
  Providence. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
  Ridgway. Y. P. Bible Class, No. 6, by Mrs. W. M. Sweet            5.00
  Scranton. Plymouth Cong. Ch. Mission Sab. Sch.                    8.41
  Wilkes Barre. First Welsh Cong. Ch.                              10.00

  Pennsylvania Woman's Missionary Union, by Mrs. T. W.
    Jones, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Riceville. W. M. S.                                           2.00


OHIO, $821.15.

  Brecksville. First Cong. Ch.                                      1.83
  Castalia. Rev. A. D. Barber                                      50.00
  Chatham. Mrs. Dr. Moody, Bbl. Bedding _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Cincinnati. Miss Elizabeth Schott, 5; Leo Schott, 5, _for
    Tillotson Inst._               10.00
  Cincinnati. Storrs Cong. Ch., _for Ch. Toliver, Ky._              5.32
  Claridon. Mrs. Eames, _for Indian Work._                         10.00
  Creston. Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. C. and Freight, _for McIntosh,
    Ga._
  Cleveland. Pilgrim Ch., quarterly, 80.84; First Cong. Ch.,
    32.32; Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 18.16; Irving St. Cong.
    Ch., 7.25; Mrs. F. W. Low, 4; Olivet Cong. Ch., 1.25          143.82
  Cleveland. Y. P. S. C. E. Hough Av. Cong. Ch., _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                         10.00
  Cleveland. King's Daughters Pilgrim Ch., _for C. E. Hall,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                 10.00
  Cleveland. Hough Av. Ch., _for Freight to Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._                                                          1.10
  Delaware. William Bevan.                                          5.00
  Elyria. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      20.00
  Hamilton. "Friends," 2 Boxes C. _for McIntosh, Ga._
  Hudson. Cong. Ch., quarterly                                      8.00
  Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                                  13.21
  Madison. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch.                             10.00
  Mallet Creek. Mrs. M. W. Bingham                                  5.00
  Mansfield. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian M.,
    Neb._                                                          56.31
  North Fairfield. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  North Ridgeville. Cong. Ch.                                      17.41
  Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 66.90; First Cong. Ch., Mrs. M. A.
    Keep, 25; Dudley Allen, M. D., 30; Mrs. E. H. H. Reed, 50c.   122.40
  Oberlin. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._   12.25
  Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Oberlin. Mrs. E. L. Lord, 3 Bbls. Magazines, etc., Freight
    pd.; Mrs. May Williams, Bbl. C., _for Enfield, N. C._
  Saybrook. Mission Band Cong. Ch.                                  3.23
  Sylvania. Cong. Ch.                                               3.00
  Tallmadge. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., quarterly                        11.84
  Wakeman. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      7.60
  Walnut Hills. Rev. Sidney Strong, 25; Mrs. Henry N. Bird, 15,
    _for Ch. Toliver, Ky._                                         40.00
  Wilmington. First Cong. Ch.                                      60.00
  Weymouth. First Cong. Ch.                                         2.70
  York. Cong. Ch.                                                  21.00
  Youngstown. Ladies' Soc., _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill
    Acad., Tenn._                                                  10.00
  ----. "Friend," _for Student Aid, Storrs Sch., Ga._               2.50

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Geo. B. Brown,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Bellevue. W. M. S.                           3.00
      Berea. W. M. S.                              5.00
      Chester Cross Roads. Y. L. M. S.             3.00
      Cleveland. Euclid Av. W. H. M. S., 13;
        First W. H. M. S., 10; Hough Av. Jr.
        C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
        La._, 5; Pilgrim W. A., 12.50             40.50
      Columbus. Mrs. P. L. Alcott (20 of which
        _for Indian M._), 35; "C.," 15            50.00
      Hudson. W. M. S.                             7.00
      Huntsburg. Kingdom Ex. Soc.                  2.95
      Jefferson. W. M. S.                          5.00
      Marietta. First W. H. M. S.                  5.00
      North Amherst. Y. P. S. C. E.                5.00
      Painesville. Jr. C. E.                       1.00
      Toledo. Central S. S., 53c.; Washington
        St. W. M. U., 14.65                       15.18
      Tallmadge. W. M. S.                          5.00
                                                  -----           147.63


INDIANA, $26.

  Brightwood. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
  Brimfield. Miss Mary Huston, Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Terre Haute. First Cong. Ch.                                     25.00


ILLINOIS, $796.17.

  Alton. Chas. Phinney                                             25.00
  Atkinson. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., for Moorhead, Miss.                7.87
  Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                               27.65
  Chicago. Mrs. Mary R. Blackburn, 10; Norman P. Willard, 10;
    Mrs. R. M. Cady, 1                                             21.00
  Chicago. University Ch. (5 of which from Mrs. Carrol Cutler
    and 3 from Miss S. R. Cutler, _for Student Aid, Theo.
    Dept., Talladega C._)                                          29.25
  Chicago. F. W. Upham, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                 25.00
  Chicago. Mrs. Harriet Blake, _for Wilmington, N. C._              8.00
  Cobden. Union Cong. Ch.                                           6.00
  Delavan. R. Hoghton                                              20.00
  Earlville. "J. A. D."                                            25.00
  Elgin. Prospect St. Cong. Ch., 4.18; C. E. Prospect St. Cong.
    Ch., 2                                                          6.18
  Elmhurst. Two Bbls. _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Evanston. Mrs. E. C. Reed                                        50.00
  Galesburg. Central Cong. Ch.                                     94.11
  Galena. Alice Chamberlin, _for Moorhead, Miss._                    .20
  Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                               55.32
  Joy Prairie. Sab. Sch., by W. R. Burd                            11.93
  Lockport. Cong. Ch.                                               5.00
  Marshall. Cong. Ch.                                               9.01
  Milburn. Cong. Ch.                                               13.00
  Milburn. Alice E. Dodge and Vera H. Worden, _for Moorhead,
    Miss._                                                          1.00
  Moline. "A Friend," _for Moorhead, Miss._                         1.00
  Naperville. Cong. Ch.                                            26.00
  Oak Park. Clarence S. Pellet                                     10.00
  Oak Park. Ladies' Benev. Soc. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C.
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Peoria. First Cong. Ch., 154.02; Y. P. S. C. E. Plymouth
    Cong. Ch., 68c.                                               154.70
  Quincy. Union Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.                           10.00
  Rockford. Fifteen No. 5 Gospel Hymns _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Rollo. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.00
  Saint Charles. Cong. Ch.                                          9.32
  Seward. First Cong. Ch.                                           7.00
  Shabbona. "A Friend." _for Student Aid, for A. G. Sch.,
    Moorhead, Miss._                                                5.00
  Sheridan. Mrs. Heavenhill                                         1.50
  Somonauk. Cong. Ch., 14.25; Y. P. S. C. E., 7.47                 21.72
  Stillman Valley. Y. P. S. C. E.                                   5.00
  Toulon. Miss Addie J. Smith, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._      1.00
  Upper Alton. "A Friend," _for Moorhead, Miss._                    1.00
  Waverly. Y. P. S. C. E.                                           2.77
  Warren. Miss E. H. Brewer, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            3.00
  Wheaton. First Cong. Ch. C. E.                                    5.00

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A. Field,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Amboy. Christmas Offering                    14.00
      Chicago. Lincoln Park W. M. S.                4.70
      Dundee. Jr. C. E.                             1.16
      Genesco. Mrs. Huntington                     10.00
      Marseilles. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
        A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._               10.00
      Milburn. W. M. S.                            18.00
      Mont Clare. W. M. S.                          1.00
      Oak Park. W. M. S.                            3.00
      Oneida. W. M. S.                              2.58
      Port Byron. W. M. S.                         12.70
      Rockford. Second Ch. W. M. S.                 1.00
                                                   -----           78.14


MICHIGAN, $239.39.

  Alamo. Julius Hackley                                            40.00
  Ann Arbor. Mrs. M. V. Torrans, _for Moorhead, Miss._              0.50
  Armada. Mrs. I. S. True, _for Moorhead, Miss._                    0.30
  Battle Creek. Harriet Root                                        0.50
  Charlotte. Carmel Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._      2.00
  Clinton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      4.50
  Cooper. Y. P. S. C. E., by Florence Sluman, Chairman (1.50
    of which _for Student Aid_)                                     3.50
  Detroit. Y. P. S. C. E. First Cong. Ch., _for Primary
    Building, Grand View, Tenn._                                   20.00
  Detroit. Mrs. Carson, Bbl. C. _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett                                       2.20
  Ludington. Mrs. Helen Hutton, Pkg. Christmas Gifts, _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Ludington. Carpets and Box Papers _for Athens, Ala._
  Milford. Mrs. Wm. A. Arms, 5, and 5.50 from Family Reunion
    Christmas Offering                                             10.50
  Muskegon. Christmas Box _for Athens, Ala._
  Olivet. First Cong. Ch.                                          25.00
  Saugatuck. Y. L. M. Circle, _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill
    Acad., Tenn._                                                  35.00
  South Haven. Clark Pierce                                        10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Ann Arbor. W. H. M. S.                      20.00
      Grand Rapids. Y. L. M. S. Park Ch., _for
        Girls' Santee Indian Sch., Neb._          25.00
     Hancock. W. M. S.                            25.00
     Ovid. G. M. S., _for Student Aid, Santee
       Indian Sch., Neb._                          1.25
     South Haven. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
       Santee Indian Sch., Neb._                   4.00
     Three Oaks. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
       Santee Indian Sch., Neb._                  10.14
                                                  -----            85.39


IOWA, $456.55.

  Algona. Miss Clara Zahlton, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           10.00
  Anita. Ladies' Miss. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                       35.00
  Belle Plaine. First Cong. Ch.                                     3.35
  Burlington. First Cong. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         25.00
  Cedar Rapids. Band Willing Workers, by Mrs. L. R. Munger,
    _for Student Aid, Beach Inst., Ga._                             3.00
  Charles City. Mrs. C. D. Ellis, Prudence and Constance,
    _for Moorhead, Miss._                                           5.50
  Clinton. S. S. Class, Christmas Pkg.; S. S. Class, by Miss
    Lucy M. Frink, Teacher, Christmas Box _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Des Moines. Sab. Sch. Pilgrim Ch., _for Theo. Dept.,
    Talladega C._                                                   5.00
  Des Moines. Sab. Sch. North Park Cong. Ch.                        2.56
  Des Moines. Frank and Howard Cowles, _for Moorhead, Miss._        0.30
  Dubuque. "Thankful"                                               5.00
  Glenwood. Jr. C. E. Soc., Pkg. Cards _for Savannah, Ga._
  Goldfield. Chas. Philbrook                                        5.00
  Grinnell. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., 2.50; Cong. Ch.,
    adl., 1.50                                                      4.00
  Mason City. Y. P. S. C. E., 5; Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., 3, _for
    Student Aid, A. N. and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._               8.00
  McGregor. Mrs. B. H. Daniels, Pkg. Literature, etc., _for
    Savannah, Ga._
  McGregor. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
  Miles. Mrs. Shatzer                                               1.00
  Osage. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, A. N. and I. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._                                              10.00
  Postville. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
  Red Oak. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      4.18
  Rockford. Mrs. C. E. Taggart, 50 Bags _for Athens, Ala._
  Rockwell. Cong. Ch.                                               5.00
  Sibley. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00
  Victor. L. H. M. Soc., Pkg. Literature _for Savannah, Ga._
  Waterloo. J. H. Leavitt, _for Talladega C._                      50.00
  Waucoma Missionary Soc., by Mrs. Anna Beebe, Treas.              10.00
  Wittemburg. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                   7.93

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Big Rock. W. M. S.                           2.85
      Cedar Falls. W. M. S.                        1.50
      Cedar Rapids. W. M. S.                       0.50
      Clay. W. M. S.                               4.50
      Correctionville. Jr. C. E.                   2.50
      Davenport. Edwards Y. P. S. C. E.           16.34
      Davenport. Edwards W. M. S.                 10.00
      Decorah. W. M. S.                           10.00
      Decorah. S. S.                               1.86
      Des Moines. Plymouth W. M. S.                5.94
      Eldora. W. M. S.                            26.86
      Eldora. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid,
        Tougaloo U._                              15.00
      Grinnell. W. M. S.                          20.90
      Hampton. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E.                  5.00
      Independence. Mrs. Morse's S. S. Class,
        _for Student Aid_                          3.84
      Marion. Y. P. S. C. E.                      10.00
      McGregor. W. M. S.                          32.00
      Muscatine. First Y. L. M. S.                 2.00
      Old Man's Creek. W. H. and F. M. S.          1.00
      Rockford. W. M. S.                           0.20
      Rockford. Jr. C. E. (3 of which _for
        Student Aid, Meridian, Miss._)             6.00
      Shenandoah. W. M. S.                        13.00
      Tabor. W. M. S.                              0.94
      Webster City. W. M. S.                       4.00
                                                  -----           196.73
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $406.55

  ESTATE.

  Durant. Estate of Mrs. S. M. Dutton by S. A. Dutton,
    Administrator                                                  50.00
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $456.55


WISCONSIN, $238.84.

  Antigo Junior C. E. by Miss L. F. Mason, Supt., _for
    Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._                             3.00
  Beloit. Second Cong. Ch.                                         13.99
  Brandon. L. A. Soc., 24 yds. Carpeting _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                                4.00
  Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                               16.80
  Fond du Lac. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00
  Fort Atkinson. Ch. Beneficent Fund                               11.00
  Lafayette. Cong. Ch.                                              6.00
  Lake Geneva. First Cong. Ch., adl.                                9.43
  Lake Geneva. Miss Hattie Curtis, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._      38.00
  Menasha. Rev. S. T. Kidder, Bbl. C. and Bbl. Papers _for
    Grand View, Tenn._
  Menomonie. Cong. Ch.                                              4.15
  Ripon. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                        8.25
  Royalton. Cong. Ch.                                               3.00
  West Salem. Miss Olive Leonard                                    1.00
  Whitewater. Cong. Ch.
                                         36.72
  Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. C. M.
    Blackman, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Arena. W. H. M. U.                           1.00
      Beloit. First, W. H. M. U.                  12.50
      Madison. Y. P. S. C. E.                     40.00
      Whitewater. W. H. M. U.                     25.00
                                                  -----            78.50


MINNESOTA, $209.96.

  Austin. First Cong. Ch., 60, to const. MRS. NANCY E. CLARK
    and MISS SARAH R. COOK L.M.'s; Sab. Sch. First Cong.
    Ch. 4.36                                                       64.36
  Cannon Falls. First Cong. Ch.                                     3.01
  Dodge Center. Miss E. Garner, _for Student Aid, W. Inst.,
    Jonesboro, Tenn._                                               1.50
  Duluth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                        42.60
  Mantorville. Cong. Ch.                                           10.70
  Medford. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
  Minneapolis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                   24.95
  Minneapolis. Mrs. A. T. Whiting and Friends, _for Moorhead,
    Miss._                                                          5.00
  Minneapolis. Maude Bell, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._                1.00
  New Duluth. Mayflower Cong. Ch.                                   2.00
  Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                               8.00
  Red Wing. D. C. Hill                                              5.00
  Winona. First Cong. Ch.                                          30.20
  Worthington. Union Cong. Ch., 5; Sab. Sch. Union Cong. Ch.,
    1.64                                                            6.64
  ----. Bbl. C. _for Grand View, Tenn._


KANSAS, $84.90.

  Alma. Cong. Ch.                                                   3.00
  Manhattan. Wm. E. Castle                                         30.00
  Manhattan. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. Books, C., etc., _for Selma,
    Ala._
  Oswego. Emma Willard                                             15.00
  Topeka. Ladies' First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Meridian,
    Miss._                                                         15.15
  Wabaunsee. Y. P. S. C. E., by Hattie M. Noyes, Treas.             3.25

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Kansas, by Mrs. E. C. Read,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Kirwin.                                      2.50
      Fort Scott.                                 15.00
      Westmoreland.                                1.00
                                                  -----            18.50


MISSOURI, $160.03.

  Saint Louis. First Cong. Ch., 117.03; Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 43     160.03


NEBRASKA, $33.29.

  Cortland. Cong. Ch.                                               2.74
  Crawford. Cong. Ch.                                               4.50
  Exeter. First Cong. Ch.                                           4.20
  Franklin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                  3.36
  Lincoln. First Cong. Ch.                                         14.00
  Santee. Miss Mabel Egeler                                         1.00
  Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                          3.49


NORTH DAKOTA, $8.36.

  Caledonia. Cong. Ch.                                              3.36
  Oberon. L. M. U. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00


SOUTH DAKOTA, $26.26.

  Aberdeen. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                         2.41
  Cresbard. Cong. Ch.                                               1.30
  Huron. Cong. Ch.                                                 11.50
  Huron. Mrs. Adda M. Wilcox, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._            1.50
  Myron. Cong. Ch.                                                  0.55
  Yankton. Sab. Ch. Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian Sch., Neb._       8.00
  Yankton. "A Sister in Christ"                                     1.00


COLORADO, $86.62.

  Colorado Springs. First Cong. Ch.                                15.25
  Greeley. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._   10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Colorado, by Mrs. Belle C.
    Valentine, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Colorado Springs. First L. M. S.             3.18
      Denver. North Denver L. M. S., 2.91; Second
        Cong. Ch. L. M. S., 6.25; Boulevard
        L. M. S., 8.55; Boulevard Jr. C. E., 2;
        Harmon L. M. S., 2.85; South Broadway
        L. M. S., 7.38                            29.94
      Greeley. L. M. S.                            3.00
      Lafayette. L. M. S.                          1.25
      Longmont. L. M. S.                          14.00
      Pueblo. Pilgrim L. M. S.                     7.00
      Pueblo. First L. M. S.                       3.00
                                                  -----            61.37


ARIZONA, $2.50.

  Nogales. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                          2.50


UTAH, $22.58.

  Salt Lake City. Plymouth Sab. Sch., 4; Utah Cong. Chinese
    Mission at Christmas Exercise, 5.73; Chinese Mission,
    by Mrs. M. E. Jones, Teacher, 12.85                            22.58


CALIFORNIA, $762.48.

  Avalon. Rev. E. O. Tade                                           2.00
  Campbell. Mrs. A. G. Williams's S. S. Class, Pkg. Aprons,
    etc.; S. A. Moulton's S. S. Class, 3, _for Talladega C._        3.00
  Highlands. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 5.55; S. H. Barrett, 6           11.55
  Nordorf. Cong. Ch.                                                2.50
  North Berkeley. Cong. Ch.                                         1.00
  Oakland. Cong. Ch., "Self-Denial Week"                           15.35
  Pasadena. First Cong. Ch.                                        14.30
  Pomona. Sab. Sch. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                              10.00
  Pueblo. First Cong. Ch.                                           2.00
  Redlands. Rev. J. M. R. Eaton                                    25.00
  Sacramento. First Cong. Ch.                                      78.10
  San Francisco. The California Chinese Mission, William
    Johnstone, Treas. (See items below)                           552.77
  San Rafael. Cong. Ch.                                             3.75
  Saratoga. Cong. C., 15.21; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. 1.30              16.51
  Stockton. Rev. J. C. Holbrook                                     5.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Northern Cal., by Mrs.
    J. M. Haven, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      W. H. M. U. of N. C.                                         11.65

  Southern Cal., by Mrs. Mary M. Smith,  Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
    Ontario. W. H. M. S.                           3.00
    Santa Ana. W. H. M. S.                         5.00
                                                  -----             8.00


OREGON, $5.00.

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Oregon, by Mrs. W. D.
    Palmer, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      W. H. M. U. of O.                                             5.00


WASHINGTON, $6.00.

  Walla Walla. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., _for Moorhead, Miss._  6.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $36.00.

  Washington. "A Friend," _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._      36.00


MARYLAND, $58.13.

  Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                                       50.74
  Baltimore. Trinity Bapt. Ch., 3.14; Rev. J. W. Scott, 50c.;
    Dr. H. Johnson, 50c.; W. W. Cook, 50c.; Lewis Whiting, 50c.;
    J. H. Gardner, 50c.; Sandy Moody, 50c.; Mrs. F. Byrd, 25c.,
    _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                          6.39
  Frostburg. Cong. Ch.                                              1.00


VIRGINIA, $28.50.

  Churchland. Edward Elliott, 50c.; Gloucester Co., Smithfield
    Bapt. Ch., 3; ----, Educational Club, 20; ----, J. H. Lockly,
    Col. 5, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                 28.50


KENTUCKY, $37.84.

  Berea. Ch. at Berea, 15.74; Mrs. Maria Goodell Frost, 5          20.71
  Harrison Co. Republican Christian Ch., _for Ch. Toliver, Ky._     3.60
  Newport. Cong. Ch., _for Ch. Toliver, Ky._                       11.50
  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $4.00.

  Carters Mills. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00


TENNESSEE, $16.25.

  Crossville. Cong. Ch.                                             4.15
  Harriman. Mrs. Lee Montgomery                                     2.00
  Nashville. C. E. Soc., Fisk U., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        5.00
  Pleasant Hill. "Friend," _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._               5.00


GEORGIA, $24.30.

  Macon. Miss Ellen B. Scobie, 5; Miss Mary E. Simonds, 3,
    _for Macon, Ga._                                                8.00
  McIntosh. Carrie E. Whitaker, 8; Mr. and Mrs. J. Perkins, 4;
    Prof. Fred. W. Foster, 3; _for Student Aid_                    15.00
  Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 55c.; Pilgrim Ch., 45c.;
    Rev. J. Loyd 30c.                                               1.30


ALABAMA, $57.64.

  Anniston. Abraham Lincoln Cent. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                 5.00
  Anniston. Rev. James Brown, _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._       5.00
  Athens. Bbl. C. from unknown source.
  Childersburg. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                       2.00
  Fort Payne. Jr. C. E. Soc. First Cong. Ch.                        1.00
  Ironaton. Rev. P. O. Wailes                                       3.00
  Shelby. Covenant Cong. Ch.                                        3.54
  Talladega. Rev. H. S. De Forest, _for Talladega C._               8.10

  Alabama Woman's Missionary Union, by Mrs. E. C. Silsby,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Talladega. W. M. S., 20; Little Helpers, 5  25.00
      Ala. W. M. U.                                5.00
                                                  -----            30.00


FLORIDA, $3.00.

  Leesburg. Sarah A. Benedict                                       3.00


MISSISSIPPI, $9.00.

  Moorhead. Miss E. S. Parsons, _for Moorhead, Miss._               4.00
  Tougaloo. Mrs. F. G. Woodworth, _for Moorhead, Miss._             5.00


LOUISIANA, $6.66.

  New Orleans. Sab. Sch. of Central Ch. Christmas Off.              6.66


TEXAS, $3.60.

  Austin. F. R. Bush, 1; W. S. Goss, 1; _for Library Tillotson
    Inst._                                                          2.00
  Dallas. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                           1.60


CANADA, $10.00.

  Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                         5.00
  Sherbrooke. Mrs. H. J. Morey                                      5.00
                                                              ----------

Donations                                                     $20,346.12

Estates                                                         3,515.53
                                                              ----------
                                                              $23,861.65


INCOME, $664.30.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                     190.00
  O. P. Atterbury. Endowment Fund                 36.80
  De Forest Fund, _for President's Ch.,
    Talladega C._                                185.62
  C. F. Dyke Fund, _for New Orleans, La._         50.00
  C. B. Fisk Fund, _for Fisk U._                  11.25
  General Endowment Fund                          50.00
  Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._          112.50
  Haley Schp. Fund, _for Fisk U._                 22.50
  Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._           5.63
                                                  -----           664.30


TUITION, $4,188.31.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                         32.00
  Evarts, Ky. Public Fund                        111.42
  Evarts, Ky. Tuition                              6.70
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                       74.15
  Big Creek Gap, Tenn. Tuition                     8.82
  Grand View, Tenn. Public Fund                   80.00
  Grand View, Tenn. Tuition                       30.27
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                        10.20
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Public Fund                    75.00
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                        36.65
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                       507.94
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                   153.50
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                         10.00
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                     20.04
  Chapel Hill, N. C. Tuition                      10.00
  Enfield, N. C. Tuition                           6.62
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                        27.65
  King's Mountain, N. C. Tuition                  32.00
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                           43.25
  Troy, N. C. Tuition                              1.23
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                         25.45
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                      178.25
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                      272.45
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                        90.65
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                            114.34
  Andersonville, Ga. Tuition                      11.20
  Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch. Tuition               158.95
  Marshallville, Ga. Tuition                       1.50
  Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                       108.45
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                             200.15
  Marietta, Ga. Tuition                            8.00
  McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                          130.20
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                          152.60
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                           2.00
  Athens, Ala. Tuition                           104.11
  Joppa, Ala. Tuition                             23.90
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                            47.45
  Mobile, Ala. Tuition                           181.85
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                               73.50
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                             81.65
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                        192.77
  Martin, Fla. Public Fund                        40.00
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuition                       77.50
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                         50.00
  Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                         26.50
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                       453.25
  Helena, Ark. Tuition                            47.70
  Austin, Texas. Tuition                          56.50
                                                  -----         4,188.31
                                                              ----------

Total for January                                             $28,714.26
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                                   $62,417.35
  Estates                                                      25,654.15
                                                              ----------
                                                              $88,071.50
  Income                                                        4,129.30
  Tuition                                                      13,410.77
                                                             -----------
  Total from Oct. 1 to Jan. 31                               $105,611.57
                                                             ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for January                                      $123.93
  Previously acknowledged                                         131.87
                                                                 -------
  Total                                                          $255.80
                                                                 =======

RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, William
  Johnstone, Treas., from November 15 to January 23, 1896.

  From November 15 to December 30, 1895.
  Fresno. Chinese Mon. Offs.                       3.00
  Los Angeles. Chinese Mon. Offs.                  6.05
  Marysville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                  17.40
  Oakland. Mon. Offs., 12; Mrs. Geo. Mooar, 1;
    First Cong. Ch. Birthday Fête, 1.17           14.17
  Oroville. Chinese. Mon. Offs.                    1.50
  Petaluma. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     3.10
  Riverside. Chinese Mon. Offs., 3.05;
    Y. P. S. C. E. First Cong. Ch., 15            18.05
  Sacramento. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   8.00
  San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.               2.80
  San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    5.60
  San Francisco. Mon Offs., Central, 4.65;
    Barnes, 25c.; West, 2.80; S. F. Br. Cong.
    Assn. Of Christian Chinese, 5                 12.70
  Santa Barbara. Chinese Mon. Offs.                3.25
  Santa Cruz. Mon. Offs.                           6.00
  Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs.                      3.00
  Vernondale. "A Friend"                           0.25
  Watsonville.                                     1.60
                                                  -----           106.47

  PERSONAL GIFTS:
    Miss Cornelia Felt                           150.00
    Hon. Giles H. Gray                            10.00
                                                  -----           160.00
  EASTERN FRIENDS:
    Portland, Me. Teachers and Pupils Second
      Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., bal. to const.
      JOHN H. STEELE L.M.                                          10.00

  Receipts to meet the expenses of the last fiscal year
    between November 15 and December 17, 1895.

  FROM LOCAL MISSIONS:
    Fresno. Anniversary Pledges                   10.00
    Los Angeles. Tom Yin Daup                      2.00
    Oakland. Jee Y. Shuck, 2; Yip Bow, 5.45        7.45
    Riverside. Anniversary Pledges                 5.50
    Ventura. Anniversary Pledges                   5.50
    Watsonville. Anniversary Pledges              21.40
                                                  -----            51.85

  FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN:
    Worcester, Mass. Pilgrim Ch. W. H. M. Soc.     3.00
    Albany, N. Y. Friends of Chinese, by Miss J.
      MacNaughton                                 30.00
                                                  -----            33.00

  Receipts from December 30, 1895, to January 23, 1896.

  FROM LOCAL MISSIONS:
    Fresno. Chinese Mon. Offs., 4.50; Ann.
      Membs., 3                                    7.50
    Los Angeles. Chinese Mon. Offs., 2.40;
      Special Col. for New Organ, 25.00           27.40
    Marysville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                 7.50
    Oakland. Chinese Mon. Offs., 11; Pilgrim Ch.
      Y. P. S. C. E., 2                           13.00
    Oroville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   2.85
    Petaluma. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   2.00
    Riverside. Chinese Mon. Offs.                  4.35
    Sacramento. Chinese Mon. Offs., 8; Ng. Good,
      2.50                                        10.50
    San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.             4.25
    San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs., 4.35; Ann.
      Membs., 2                                    6.35
    San Francisco. Central Chinese Mon. Offs.,
      5.05; West, Chinese Mon. Offs., 3.20;
      Barnes, Chinese Mon. Offs., 1                9.25
    Santa Barbara. Chinese Mon. Offs.              3.75
    Santa Cruz. Chinese Mon. Offs.                 6.50
    Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    2.50
    Vernondale. Chinese Mon. Offs.                 2.00
    Watsonville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                3.50
                                                  -----           113.20

  PERSONAL GIFT:
    Rev. F. B. Perkins                                              5.00

  EASTERN FRIENDS:
    Bangor, Me. Central Ch.                        5.00
    Morristown, Penn. Mrs. Ida Lang, _for Organ,
      Los Angeles Mission_                        50.00
    Holland, Mich. Miss Senie Visscher's
      S. S. Class                                  7.25
    Wheaton, Ill. Primary Class S. S. College
      Ch.                                          1.00
                                                  -----            63.25

  FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN:
    Greenfield, Mass. Mrs. E. B. Loomis.                           10.00
                                                                 -------
  Total                                                          $552.77
                                                                 =======


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N. Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 03, MARCH, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.