[Unless otherwise noted, spelling and punctuation are unchanged.
  Errors are listed at the end of the text.]


  THE
  Accomplisht Cook,
  OR THE
  ART & MYSTERY
  OF
  COOKERY.

  Wherein the whole ART is revealed in a
  more easie and perfect Method,
  than hath been publisht in any language.

  Expert and ready Ways for the Dressing
  of all Sorts of FLESH, FOWL, and FISH,
  with variety of SAUCES proper for each of them;
  and how to raise all manner of _Pastes_;
  the best Directions for all sorts of _Kickshaws_,
  also the _Terms_ of _CARVING_ and _SEWING_.

  An exact account of all _Dishes_ for all _Seasons_
  of the Year, with other _A-la-mode Curiosities_.

  The Fifth Edition, with large Additions
  throughout the whole work:
  besides two hundred Figures of several Forms
  for all manner of bak'd Meats,
  (either Flesh, or Fish)
  as, Pyes Tarts, Custards; Cheesecakes,
  and Florentines, placed in Tables,
  and directed to the Pages they appertain to.

  Approved by the fifty five Years
  Experience and Industry of _ROBERT MAY_;
  in his Attendance on several Persons of great Honour.

  _London_, Printed for _Obadiah Blagrave_
  at the _Bear_ and _Star_
  in St. _Pauls Church-Yard_, 1685.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  _CONTENTS_

  [Added by transcriber using author's section headings.]

    Directions for the order of carving Fowl.

    Bills of Fare for every Season in the Year

  SECTION I:
    Perfect Directions for the A-la-mode Ways of dressing all manner
    of Boyled Meats, with their several sauces, &c.

      To make several sorts of Puddings.
      Sheeps Haggas Puddings.
      To make any kind of sausages.
      To make all manner of Hashes.
      Pottages.
      Divers made Dishes or _Capilotado's_.

  SECTION II:
    An hundred and twelve excellent wayes for the dressing of Beef.

  SECTION III:
    The A-la-mode ways of dressing the Heads of any Beasts.

  SECTION IV:
    The rarest Ways of dressing of all manner of Roast Meats,
    either of Flesh or Fowl, by Sea or land, with their Sauces
    that properly belong to them.

  SECTION V:
    The best way of making all manner of Sallets.

  SECTION VI:
    To make all manner of Carbonadoes, either of Flesh or Fowl;
    as also all manner of fried Meats of Flesh, Collops and Eggs,
    with the most exquisite way of making Pancakes, Fritters,
    and Tansies.

  SECTION VII:
    The most Excellent Ways of making All sorts of Puddings.

  SECTION VIII:
    The rarest Ways of making all manner of Souces and Jellies.

  SECTION IX:
    The best way of making all manner of baked Meats.

  SECTION X:
    To bake all manner of Curneld Fruits in Pyes, Tarts,
    or made Dishes, raw or preserved, as Quinces, Warden,
    Pears, Pippins, &c.

  SECTION XI:
    To make all manner of made Dishes, with or without Paste.

  SECTION XII:
    To make all manner of Creams, Sack-Possets, Sillabubs,
    Blamangers, White-Pots, Fools, Wassels, &c.

  SECTION XIII:
    The First Section for dressing of Fish.
    Shewing divers ways, and the most excellent, for Dressing
    of Carps, either Boiled, Stewed, Broiled, Roasted, or Baked, &c.

  SECTION XIV:
    The Second Section of Fish.
    Shewing the most Excellent Ways of Dressing of Pikes.

  SECTION XV:
    The Third Section for dressing of Fish.
    The most excellent ways of Dressing Salmon, Bace, or Mullet.

  SECTION XVI:
    The fourth Section for dressing of Fish.
    Shewing the exactest ways of dressing Turbut, Plaice,
    Flounders, and Lampry.

  SECTION XVII:
    The Fifth Section of Fish.
    Shewing the best way to Dress Eels, Conger, Lump, and Soals.

  SECTION XVIII:
    The Sixth Section of Fish.
    The A-la-mode ways of Dressing and Ordering of Sturgeon.

  SECTION XIX:
    The Seventh Section of Fish.
    Shewing the exactest Ways of Dressing all manner of Shell-Fish.

  SECTION XX:
    To make all manner of Pottages for Fish-Days.

  SECTION XXI:
    The exactest Ways for the Dressing of Eggs.

  SECTION XXII:
    The best Ways for the Dressing of Artichocks.

  SECTION XXIII:
    Shewing the best way of making Diet for the Sick.

  SECTION XXIV:
    Excellent Ways for Feeding of Poultrey.

  [Index] THE TABLE

  [Publisher's Advertising]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  _To the Right Honourable my _Lord Montague,_ My _Lord Lumley,_
    and my _Lord Dormer;_ and to the Right worshipful Sir
    _Kenelme Digby,_ so well known to this Nation for their
    Admired Hospitalities._


_Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful_,

He is an Alien, a meer Stranger in _England_, that hath not been
acquainted with your generous House-keepings; for my own part my
more particular tyes of service to you my Honoured Lords, have built
me up to the height of this Experience, for which this Book now at
last dares appear to the World; those times which I tended upon your
Honours were those Golden Days of Peace and Hospitality when you
enjoyed your own, so as to entertain and releive others.

Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, I have not only been an
eye-witness, but interested by my attendance; so as that I may
justly acknowledge those Triumphs and magnificent Trophies of
Cookery that have adorned your Tables; nor can I but confess to the
world, except I should be Guilty of the highest Ingratitude, that
the only structure of this my Art and knowledge, I owed to your
costs, generous and inimitable Epences; thus not only I have derived
my experience, but your Country hath reapt the Plenty of your
Humanity and charitable Bounties.

Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, Hospitality which was once a
Relique of the Gentry, and a known Cognizance to all ancient Houses,
hath lost her Title through the unhappy and Cruel Disturbances of
these Times, she is now reposing of her lately so alarmed Head on
your beds of Honour: In the mean space that our English World may
know the _Mec√¶na_'s and Patrons of this Generous Art, I have exposed
this Volume to the Publick, under the Tuition of your Names; at
whose Feet I prostrate these Endeavours, and shall for ever remain

  _Your most humble devoted Servant._
   _ROBERT MAY._

  _From _Soleby_ in _Leicestershire_,
    September 29. 1684._




  _To the Master Cooks, and to such young Practitioners
    of the Art of Cookery, to whom this Book may be useful._

To you first, most worthy Artists, I acknowledg one of the chief
Motives that made me to adventure this Volume to your Censures, hath
been to testifie my gratitude to your experienced Society; nor could
I omit to direct it to you, as it hath been my ambition, that you
should be sensible of my Proficiency of Endeavours in this Art. To
all honest well intending Men of our Profession, or others, this
Book cannot but be acceptable, as it plainly and profitably
discovers the _Mystery_ of the _whole Art_; for which, though I may
be _envied by some that only value their private Interests above
Posterity, and the publick good_, yet God and my own Conscience
would not permit me _to bury these my Experiences with my Silver
Hairs in the Grave_: and that more especially, as the advantages of
my Education hath raised me above the _Ambitions_ of others, in the
converse I have had with other _Nations_, who in this _Art_ fall
short of what I _have known experimented by you my worthy Country
men_. Howsoever, the _French by their Insinuations, not without
enough of Ignorance_, have bewitcht some of the _Gallants of our
Nation_ with Epigram Dishes, smoakt rather than drest, so strangely
to captivate the _Gusto_, their _Mushroom'd Experiences_ for _Sauce_
rather than _Diet_, for the generality howsoever called _A-la-mode_,
not worthy of being taken notice on. As I live in _France_, and had
the Language and have been an eye-witness of their _Cookeries_ as
well, as a Peruser of their Manuscripts, and Printed _Authors_
whatsoever I found good in them, I have inserted in this _Volume_.
I do acknowledg my self not to be a little beholding to the
_Italian_ and _Spanish_ Treatises; though without my fosterage, and
bringing up under the _Generosities_ and _Bounties of my Noble
Patrons and Masters_, I could never have arrived to this
_Experience_. To be confined and limited to the narrowness of a
Purse, is to want the _Materials_ from which the _Artist_ must gain
his knowledge. Those _Honourable Persons_, _my Lord_ Lumley, and
others, with whom I have spent a part of my time, were such whose
generous cost never weighed the Expence, so that they might arrive
to that right and high esteem they had of their _Gusto's_. Whosoever
peruses this _Volume_ shall find it amply exemplified in _Dishes_ of
such high prices, which only these _Noblesses Hospitalities_ did
reach to: I should have sinned against their (to be perpetuated)
Bounties, if I had not set down their several varieties, that the
_Reader_ might be as well acquainted with what is extraordinary, as
what is ordinary in this _Art_; as I am truly sensible, that some of
those things that I have set down will amaze a not thorow-paced
_Reader_ in the _Art of Cookery_, as they are Delicates, never till
this time made known to the World.

_Fellow Cooks_, that I might give a testimony to my _Countrey_ of
the _laudableness of our Profession_, that I might encourage young
Undertakers to make a Progress in the _Practice of this Art_, I have
laid open these Experiences, as I was most unwilling to hide my
Talent, but have ever endeavoured to do good to others;
I acknowledge that there hath already been _several Books publisht_,
and amongst the rest some out of the _French_, for ought I could
perceive to very little purpose, _empty and unprofitable Treatises_,
of as little use as some _Niggards Kitchens_, which the _Reader_ in
respect of the confusion of the Method, or barrenness of those
_Authors_ experience, hath rather been puzled then profited by; as
those already extant Authors have trac't but one common beaten Road,
repeating for the main what others have in the same homely manner
done before them: It hath been my task to denote some _new Faculty
or Science_, that others have not yet discovered; this the _Reader_
will quickly discern by those _new Terms of Art_ which he shall meet
withal throughout this _whole Volume_. Some things I have inserted
of _Carving and Sewing_ that I might demonstrate the whole Art. In
the contrivance of these my labours, I have so managed them for the
general good, that those whose Purses cannot reach to the cost of
rich Dishes, I have descended to their meaner Expences, that they
may give, though upon a sudden Treatment, to their Kindred, Friends,
Allies and Acquaintance, a handsome and relishing entertainment in
all seasons of the year, though at some distance from Towns or
Villages. Nor have my serious considerations been wanting amongst
direction for Diet how to order what belongs to the sick, as well as
to those that are in health; and withal my care hath been such, that
in this Book as in a Closet, is contained all such Secrets as relate
to _Preserving_, _Conserving_, _Candying_, _Distilling_, and such
rare varieties as they are most concern'd in the _best husbandring
and huswifering_ of them. Nor is there any Book except that of the
_Queens Closet_, which was so _enricht with Receipts_ presented to
her _Majesty_, as yet that I ever saw in any _Language_, that ever
contained so many _profitable Experiences, as in this Volume_: in
all which the _Reader_ shall find most of the _Compositions_, and
mixtures easie to be prepared, most pleasing to the Palate, and not
too chargeable to the Purse; since you are at liberty to employ as
much or as little therein as you please.

In this Edition I have enlarged the whole Work; and there is added
two hundred several Figures of all sorts of Pies, Tarts, Custards,
Cheesecakes, &c. more than was in the former: You will find them in
Tables directed to the _Folio_ they have relation to; there being
such variety of Forms, the Artists may use which of them they
please.

It is impossible for any _Author_ to please all People, no more than
the best Cook can fancy their Palats whose Mouths are always out of
taste. As for those who make it their business to hide their Candle
under a Bushel, to do only good to themselves, and not to others,
such as will curse me for revealing the Secrets of this Art, I value
the discharge of my own Conscience, in doing Good, above all their
malice; protesting to the whole world, that I have not _concealed
any material Secret_ of above my _fifty and five years Experience_;
my Father _being a Cook_ under whom in my Child-hood I was bred up
in this Art.

To conclude, the diligent Peruser of this _Volume_ gains that in a
small time (as to the _Theory_) which an _Apprenticeship_ with some
_Masters_ could never have taught them. I have no more to do, but to
desire of God a blessing upon these my Endeavours; and remain.

  _Yours in the most ingenious
    ways of Friendship_,
      ROBERT MAY.

  Sholeby in Leicestershire,
    _Sept. 30. 1664_.




  _A short Narrative of some Passages of the Authors Life._


For the better knowledge of the worth of this Book, though it be not
usual, the _Author_ being living, it will not be amiss to acquaint
the _Reader_ with a breif account of some passages of his Life, as
also the eminent Persons (renowned for their House-keeping) whom he
hath served through the whole series of his Life; for as the growth
of Children argue the strength of the Parents, so doth the judgment
and abilities of the Artist conduce to the making and goodness of
the Work: now that such great knowledge in this commendable Art was
not gained but by long experience, practise, and converse with the
most able men in their times, the _Reader_ in this breif Narrative
may be informed by what steps and degrees he ascended to the same.

He was born in the year of our Lord 1588. His Father being one of
the ablest _Cooks_ in his time, and his first Tutor in the knowledge
and practice of Cookery; under whom having attained to some
perfection in this Art, the old Lady _Dormer_ sent him over into
_France_, where he continued five years, being in the Family of a
noble Peer, and first President of _Paris_; where he gained not only
the _French_ Tongue but also bettered his Knowledge in his
_Cookery_, and returning again into _England_, was bound an
Apprentice in _London_ to Mr. _Arthur Hollinsworth_ in _Newgate
Market_, one of the ablest Work-men in _London_, Cook to the
_Grocers Hall and Star Chamber_. His Apprentiship being out, the
Lady _Dormer_ sent for him to be her Cook under Father (who then
served that Honourable Lady) where were four Cooks more, such Noble
Houses were then kept, the glory of that, and the shame of this
present Age; then were those Golden Days wherein were practised the
_Triumphs and Trophies of Cookery_; then was Hospitality esteemed,
Neighbourhood preserved, the Poor cherished, and God honoured; then
was Religion less talkt on, and more practised; then was Atheism &
Schism less in fashion: then did men strive to be good, rather then
to seem so. Here he continued till the Lady _Dormer_ died, and then
went again to _London_, and served the Lord _Castlehaven_, after
that the Lord _Lumley_, that great lover and knower of Art, who
wanted no knowledge in the discerning this mystery; next the Lord
_Montague_ in _Sussex_; and at the beginning of these wars, the
Countess of _Kent_, then Mr. _Nevel_ of _Crissen Temple_ in _Essex_,
whose Ancestors the _Smiths_ (of whom he is descended) were the
greatest maintainers of Hospitality in all those parts; nor doth the
present M. _Nevel_ degenerate from their laudable examples. Divers
other Persons of like esteem and quality hath he served; as the Lord
_Rivers_, Mr. _John Ashburnam_ of the Bed-Chambers, Dr. _Steed_ in
_Kent_, Sir _Thomas Stiles_ of _Drury Lane_ in _London_, Sir
_Marmaduke Constable_ in _York-shire_, Sir _Charles Lucas_; and
lastly the Right Honourable the Lady _Englefield_, where he now
liveth.

Thus have I given you a breif account of his Life, I shall next tell
you in what high esteem this noble Art was with the Ancient Romans:
_Plutarch_ reports, that _Lucullus_ his ordinary diet was fine
dainty dishes, with works of pastry, banketting dishes, and fruit
curiously wrought and prepared; that, his Table might be furnished
with choice of varieties, (as the noble Lord _Lumley_ did) that he
kept and nourished all manner of Fowl all the year long. To this
purpose he telleth us a story how _Pompey_ being sick, the
Physitians willed him to eat a Thrush, and it being said there was
none to be had; because it was then Summer; it was answered they
might have them at _Lucullus_'s house who kept both Thrushes and all
manner of Fowl, all the year long. This _Lucullus_ was for his
Hospitality so esteemed in _Rome_, that there was no talk, but of
his Noble House-keeping. The said _Plutarch_ reports how _Cicero_
and _Pompey_ inviting themselves to sup with him, they would not let
him speak with his men to provide any thing more then ordinary; but
he telling them he would sup in _Apollo_, (a Chamber so named, and
every Chamber proportioned their expences) he by this wile beguil'd
them, and a supper was made ready estimated at fifty thousand pence,
every _Roman_ penny being seven pence half penny _English_ money;
a vast sum for that Age, before the _Indies_ had overflowed
_Europe_. But I have too far digressed from the Author of whom I
might speak much more as in relation to his Person and abilities,
but who will cry out the Sun shines? this already said is enough to
satisfie any but the malicious, who are the greatest enemies to all
honest endeavours. _Homer_ had his _Zoilus_, and _Virgil_ his
_Bavius_; the best Wits have had their detractors, and the greatest
Artists have been maligned; the best on't is, such Works as these
outlive their _Authors_ with an honurable respect of Posterity,
whilst envious Criticks never survive their own happiness, their
Lives going out like the snuff of a Candle.

  _W. W._




  _Triumphs and Trophies in Cookery, to be used at Festival Times,
    as _Twelfth-day_, &c._


Make the likeness of a Ship in Paste-board, with Flags and
Streamers, the Guns belonging to it of Kickses, bind them about with
packthread, and cover them with close paste proportionable to the
fashion of a Cannon with Carriages, lay them in places convenient as
you see them in Ships of war, with such holes and trains of powder
that they may all take Fire; Place your Ship firm in the great
Charger; then make a salt round about it, and stick therein
egg-shells full of sweet water, you may by a great Pin take all the
meat out of the egg by blowing, and then fill it up with the
rose-water, then in another Charger have the proportion of a Stag
made of course paste, with a broad Arrow in the side of him, and his
body filled up with claret-wine; in another Charger at the end of
the Stag have the proportion of a Castle with Battlements,
Portcullices, Gates and Draw-Bridges made of Past-board, the Guns
and Kickses, and covered with course paste as the former; place it
at a distance from the ship to fire at each other. The Stag being
placed betwixt them with egg shells full of sweet water (as before)
placed in salt. At each side of the Charger wherein is the Stag,
place a Pye made of course paste, in one of which let there be some
live Frogs, in each other some live Birds; make these Pyes of course
Paste filled with bran, and yellowed over with saffron or the yolks
of eggs, guild them over in spots, as also the Stag, the Ship, and
Castle; bake them, and place them with guilt bay-leaves on turrets
and tunnels of the Castle and Pyes; being baked, make a hole in the
bottom of your pyes, take out the bran, put in your Frogs, and
Birds, and close up the holes with the same course paste, then cut
the Lids neatly up; To be taken off the Tunnels; being all placed in
order upon the Table, before you fire the trains of powder, order it
so that some of the Ladies may be perswaded to pluck the Arrow out
of the Stag, then will the Claret-wine follow, as blood that runneth
out of a wound. This being done with admiration to the beholders,
after some short pause, fire the train of the Castle, that the
pieces all of one side may go off, then fire the Trains, of one side
of the Ship as in a battel; next turn the Chargers; and by degrees
fire the trains of each other side as before. This done to sweeten
the stink of powder, let the Ladies take the egg-shells full of
sweet waters and throw them at each other. All dangers being
seemingly over, by this time you may suppose they will desire to see
what is in the pyes; where lifting first the lid off one pye, out
skip some Frogs, which make the Ladies to skip and shreek; next
after the other pye, whence come out the Birds, who by a natural
instinct flying in the light, will put out the Candles; so that what
with the flying Birds and skipping Frogs, the one above, the other
beneath, will cause much delight and pleasure to the whole company:
at length the Candles are lighted, and a banquet brought in, the
Musick sounds, and every one with much delight and content rehearses
their actions in the former passages. These were formerly the
delight of the Nobility, before good House-keeping had left
_England_, and the Sword really acted that which was only
counterfeited in such honest and laudable Exercises as these.




[Decoration]

  _On the Unparalell'd Piece of _Mr. May_ His Cookery._


  See here a work set forth of such perfection,
  Will praise it self, and doth not beg protection
  From flatter'd greatness. Industry and pains
  For gen'ral good, his aim, his Countrey gains;
  Which ought respect him. A good _English_ Cook,
  Excellent Modish Monsieurs, and that Book
  Call'd _Perfect Cook_, _Merete's_ Pastery
  Translated, looks like old hang'd Tapistry,
  The wrong side outwards: so Monsieur adieu,
  I'm for our Native _Mays_ Works rare and new,
  Who with Antique could have prepar'd and drest
  The Nations _quondam_ grand Imperial Feast,
  Which that thrice Crown'd Third _Edward_ did ordain
  For his high Order, and their Noble Train,
  Whereon St. _George_ his famous Day was seen,
  A Court on Earth that did all Courts out-shine.
    And how all Rarities and Cates might be
  Order'd for a Renown'd Solemnity,
  Learn of this Cook, who with judgment, and reason,
  Teacheth for every Time, each thing its true Season;
  Making his Compounds with such harmony,
  Taste shall not charge with superiority
  Of Pepper, Salt, or Spice, by the best Pallat,
  Or any one Herb in his broths or Sallat.
  Where Temperance and Discretion guides his deeds;
  _Satis_ his Motto, where nothing exceeds.
  Or ought to wast, for there's good Husbandry
  To be observ'd, as Art in Cookery.
  Which of the Mathematicks doth pertake,
  Geometry proportions when they bake.
  Who can in paste erect (of finest flour)
  A compleat Fort, a Castle, or a Tower.
  A City Custard doth so subtly wind,
  That should Truth seek, she'd scarce all corners find;
  Platform of Sconces, that might Souldiers teach,
  To fortifie by works as well as Preach.
  I'le say no more; for as I am a sinner,
  I've wrought my self a stomach to a dinner.
  Inviting Poets not to tantalize,
  But feast, (not surfeit) here their Fantasies.

  _James Parry._


  _To the Reader of (my very loving Friend) Mr. _Robert May_
    his incomparable Book of Cookery._

  See here's a Book set forth with such things in't,
  As former Ages never saw in Print;
  Something I'de write in praise on't, but the Pen,
  Of Famous _Cleaveland_, or renowned _Ben_,
  If unintomb'd might give this Book its due,
  By their high strains, and keep it always new.
  But I whose ruder Stile could never clime,
  Or step beyond a home-bred Country Rhime,
  Must not attempt it: only this I'le say,
  _Cato_'s _Res Rustica_'s far short of _May_.
  Here's taught to keep all sorts of flesh in date,
  All sorts of Fish, if you will marinate;
  To candy, to preserve, to souce, to pickle,
  To make rare Sauces, both to please, and tickle
  The pretty Ladies palats with delight;
  Both how to glut, and gain an Appetite.
  The Fritter, Pancake, Mushroom; with all these,
  The curious Caudle made of Ambergriese.
  He is so universal, he'l not miss,
  The Pudding, nor Bolonian Sausages.
  Italian, Spaniard, French, he all out-goes,
  Refines their Kickshaws, and their Olio's,
  The rarest use of Sweet-meats, Spicery,
  And all things else belong to Cookery:
  Not only this, but to give all content,
  Here's all the Forms of every Implement
  To work or carve with, so he makes the able
  To deck the Dresser, and adorn the Table.
  What dish goes first of every kind of Meat,
  And so ye're welcom, pray fall too, and eat.
  _Reader_, read on, for I have done; farewell,
  The Book's so good, it cannot chuse but sell.

  _Thy well-wishing Friend_,

    John Town.




[Decoration]

  _The most Exact, or A-la-mode Ways of Carving and Sewing._


  _Terms of Carving._

Break that deer, leach that brawn, rear that goose, lift that swan,
sauce that capon, spoil that hen, frust that chicken, unbrace that
mallard, unlace that coney, dismember that hern, display that crane,
disfigure that peacock, unjoynt that bittern, untach that curlew,
allay that pheasant, wing that partridge, wing that quail, mince
that plover, thigh that pidgeon, border that pasty, thigh that
woodcock; thigh all manner of small birds.

Timber the fire, tire that egg, chine that salmon, string that
lamprey, splat that pike, souce that plaice, sauce that tench, splay
that bream, side that haddock, tusk that barbel, culpon that trout,
fin that chivin, transon that eel, tranch that sturgeon, undertranch
that porpus, tame that crab, barb that lobster.


  _Service._

First, set forth mustard and brawn, pottage, beef, mutton, stewed
pheasant, swan, capon, pig, venison, hake, custard, leach, lombard,
blanchmanger, and jelly; for standard, venison, roast kid, fawn, and
coney, bustard, stork, crane, peacock with his tail, hern-shaw,
bittern, woodcock, partridge, plovers, rabbits, great birds, larks,
doucers, pampuff, white leach, amber-jelly, cream of almonds,
curlew, brew, snite, quail, sparrow, martinet, pearch in jelly,
petty pervis, quince baked, leach, dewgard, fruter fage, blandrells
or pippins with caraways in comfits, wafers, and Ipocras.


  _Sauce for all manner of Fowls._

Mustard is good with brawn, Beef, Chine of Bacon, and Mutton,
Verjuyce good to boil'd Chickens and Capons; Swan with Chaldrons,
Ribs of Beef with Garlick, mustard, pepper, verjuyce, ginger; sauce
of lamb, pig and fawn, mustard, and sugar; to pheasant, partridge,
and coney, sauce gamelin; to hern-shaw, egrypt, plover, and crane,
brew, and curlew, salt, and sugar, and water of Camot, bustard,
shovilland, and bittern, sauce gamelin; woodcock, lapwhing, lark,
quail, martinet, venison and snite with white salt; sparrows and
thrushes with salt, and cinamon. Thus with all meats sauce shall
have the operation.




  Directions for the order of carving Fowl.


  _Lift that Swan._

The manner of cutting up a Swan must be to slit her right down in
the middle of the breast, and so clean thorow the back from the neck
to the rump, so part her in two halves cleanly and handsomly, that
you break not nor tear the meat, lay the two halves in a fair
charger with the slit sides downwards, throw salt about it, and let
it again on the Table. Let your sauce be chaldron for a Swan, and
serve it in saucers.


  _Rear the Goose._

You must break a goose contrary to the former way. Take a goose
being roasted, and take off both his legs fair like a shoulder of
Lamb, take him quite from the body then cut off the belly piece
round close to the lower end of the breast: lace her down with your
knife clean through the breast on each side your thumbs bredth for
the bone in the middle of the breast; then take off the pinion of
each side, and the flesh which you first lac't with your knife,
raise it up clear from the bone, and take it from the carcase with
the pinion; then cut up the bone which lieth before in the breast
(which is commonly call'd the merry thought) the skin and the flesh
being upon it; then cut from the brest-bone, another slice of flesh
clean thorow, & take it clean from the bone, turn your carcase, and
cut it asunder the back-bone above the loin-bones: then take the
rump-end of the back-bone, and lay it in a fair dish with the
skinny-side upwards, lay at the fore-end of that the merry-thought
with the skin side upward, and before that the apron of the goose;
then lay your pinions on each side contrary, set your legs on each
side contrary behind them, that the bone end of the legs may stand
up cross in the middle of the dish, & the wing pinions on the
outside of them; put under the wing pinions on each side the long
slices of flesh which you cut from the breast bone, and let the ends
meet under the leg bones, let the other ends lie cut in the dish
betwixt the leg and the pinion; then pour your sauce into the dish
under your meat, throw on salt, and set it on the table.


  _To cut up a Turkey or Bustard._

Raise up the leg very fair, and open the joynt with the point of
your knife, but take not off the leg; then lace down the breast with
your knife on both sides, & open the breast pinion with the knife,
but take not the pinion off; then raise up the merry-thought betwixt
the breast bone, and the top of the merry-thought, lace down the
flesh on both sides of the breast-bone, and raise up the flesh
called the brawn, turn it outward upon both sides, but break it not,
nor cut it not off; then cut off the wing pinion at the joynt next
to the body, and stick on each side the pinion in the place where ye
turned out the brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, take
the middle piece, and that will just fit the place.

You may cut up a capon or pheasant the same way, but of your capon
cut not off the pinion, but in the place where you put the pinion of
the turkey, you must put the gizard of your capon on each side half.


  _Dismember that Hern._

Take off both the legs, and lace it down to the breast with your
knife on both sides, raise up the flesh, and take it clean off with
the pinion; then stick the head in the breast, set the pinion on the
contrary side of the carcase, and the leg on the other side, so that
the bones ends may meet cross over the carcase, and the other wings
cross over upon the top of the carcase.


  _Unbrace that Mallard._

Raise up the pinion and the leg, but take them not off, raise the
merry-thought from the breast, and lace it down on each side of the
breast with your knife, bending to and fro like ways.


  _Unlace that Coney._

Turn the back downwards, & cut the belly flaps clean off from the
kidney, but take heed you cut not the kidney nor the flesh, then put
in the point of your knife between the kidneys, and loosen the flesh
from each side the bone then turn up the back of the rabbit, and cut
it cross between the wings, and lace it down close by the bone with
your knife on both sides, then open the flesh of the rabbit from the
bone, with the point of your knife against the kidney, and pull the
leg open softly with your hand, but pluck it not off, then thrust in
your knife betwixt the ribs and the kidney, slit it out, and lay the
legs close together.


  _Sauce that Capon._

Lift up the right leg and wing, and so array forth, and lay him in
the platter as he should fly, and so serve him. Know that capons or
chickens be arrayed after one sauce; the chickens shall be sauced
with green sauce or veriuyce.


  _Allay that Pheasant._

Take a pheasant, raise his legs and wings as it were a hen and no
sauce but only salt.


  _Wing that Partridg._

Raise his legs, and his wing as a hen, if you mince him sauce him
with wine, powder of ginger, and salt, and set him upon a chafing
dish of coals to warm and serve.


  _Wing that Quail._

Take a quail and raise his legs and his wings as an hen, and no
sauce but salt.


  _Display that Crane._

Unfold his Legs, and cut off his wings by the joynts, then take up
his wings and his legs, and sauce them with powder of ginger,
mustard, vinegar, and salt.


  _Dismember that Hern._

Raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with vinegar,
mustard, powder of ginger and salt.


  _Unjoynt that Bittern._

Raise his legs & wings as a heron & no sauce but salt.


  _Break that Egript._

Take an egript, and raise his legs and his wings as a heron, and no
sauce but salt.


  _Untach that Curlew._

Raise his legs and wings as a hen, & no sauce but salt.


  _Untach that brew._

Raise his legs and his wings in the same manner, and no sauce but
only salt.


  _Unlace that Coney._

Lay him on the back, and cut away the vents, then raise the wings
and the sides, and lay bulk, chine, and sides together, sauce them
with vinegar and powder of ginger.


  _Break that Sarcel._

Take a sarcel or teal, and raise his wings and his legs, and no
sauce but only salt.


  _Mince that Plover._

Raise his leg and wings as a hen, and no sauce but only salt.


  _A Snite._

Raise his legs, wings and his shoulders as a plover, and no sauce
but salt.


  _Thigh that Woodcock._

Raise his legs as a hen, and dight his brain.




  _The Sewing of Fish._


  _The First Course._

To go to the sewing of Fish, Musculade, Minews in few of porpos or
of salmon, bak'd herring with sugar, green fish pike, lamprey,
salent, porpos roasted, bak'd gurnet and baked lamprey.


  _The Second Course._

Jelly white and red, dates in confect, conger, salmon, birt, dorey,
turbut holibut for standard, bace, trout, mullet, chevin, soles,
lamprey roast, and tench in jelly.


  _The Third Course._

Fresh sturgeon, bream, pearch in jelly, a jole of salmon sturgeon,
welks, apples and pears roasted; with sugar candy, figs of molisk,
raisins, dates, capt with minced ginger, wafers, and Ipocras.


  _The Carving of Fish._

The carver of fish must see to peason and furmety, the tail and the
liver; you must look if there be a salt porpos or sole, turrentine,
and do after the form of venison; _baked herring_, lay it whole on
the trencher, then white herring in a dish, open it by the back,
pick out the bones and the row, and see there be mustard. Of salt
fish, green-fish, salt salmon, and conger, pare away the skin; salt
fish, stock fish, marling, mackrel, and hake with butter, and take
away the bones & skins; _A Pike_, lay the womb upon a trencher, with
pike sauce enough, _A salt Lamprey_, gobbin it in seven or eight
pieces, and so present it, _A Plaice_, put out the water, then cross
him with your knife, and cast on salt, wine, or ale. _Bace_,
_Gurnet_, _Rochet_, _Bream_, _Chevin_, _Mullet_, _Roch_, _Pearch_,
_Sole_, _Mackrel_, _Whiting_, _Haddock_, and _Codling_, raise them
by the back, pick out the bones, and cleanse the rest in the belly.
_Carp Bream_, _Sole_, and _Trout_, back and belly together.
_Salmon_, _Conger_, _Sturgeon_, _Turbut_, _Thornback_, _Houndfish_,
and _Holibut_, cut them in the dishes; the _Porpos_ about, _Tench_
in his sauce; cut two _Eels_, and _Lampreys_ roast, pull off the
skin, and pick out the bones, put thereto vinegar, and powder.
A _Crab_, break him asunder, in a dish make the shell clean, & put
in the stuff again, temper it with vinegar, and powder them, cover
it with bread and heat it; a _Crevis_ dight him thus, part him
asunder, slit the belly, and take out the fish, pare away the red
skin, mince it thin, put vinegar in the dish, and set it on the
Table without heating. _A Jole of Sturgeon_, cut it into thin
morsels, and lay it round about the dish, _Fresh Lamprey bak'd_,
open the pasty, then take white bread, and cut it thin, lay it in a
dish, & with a spoon take out Galentine, & lay it upon the bread
with red wine and powder of Cinamon; then cut a gobbin of Lamprey,
mince it thin, and lay it in the Gallentine, and set it on the fire
to heat. _Fresh herring_, with salt and wine, _Shrimps_ well
pickled, _Flounders_, _Gudgeons_, _Minews_, and Muskles, Eels, and
Lampreys, Sprats is good in few, musculade in worts, oysters in few,
oysters in gravy, minews in porpus, salmon in jelly white and red,
cream of almonds, dates in comfits, pears and quinces in sirrup,
with parsley roots, mortus of hound fish raise standing.


  _Sauces for Fish._

Mustard is good for salt herring, salt fish, salt conger, salmon,
sparling, salt eel and ling; vinegar is good with salt porpus,
turrentine, salt sturgeon, salt thirlepole, and salt whale, lamprey
with gallentine; verjuyce to roach, dace, bream, mullet, flounders,
salt crab and chevin with powder of cinamon and ginger; green sauce
is good with green fish and hollibut, cottel, and fresh turbut; put
not your green sauce away for it is good with mustard.




  _Bills of _FARE_ for every Season in the Year; also how to set
    forth the _MEAT_ in order for that Service, as it was used
    before Hospitality left this Nation._


  _A Bill of Fare for _All-Saints-Day_, being _Novemb. 1_._

      Oysters.
  1   A Collar of brawn and mustard.
  2   A Capon in stewed broth with marrow-bones.
  3   A Goose in stoffado, or two Ducks.
  4   A grand Sallet.
  5   A Shoulder of Mutton with oysters.
  6   A bisk dish baked.
  7   A roast chine of beef.
  8   Minced pies or chewits of capon, tongue, or of veal.
  9   A chine of Pork.
  10  A pasty of venison.
  11  A swan, or 2 geese roast.
  12  A loyn of veal.
  13  A French Pie of divers compounds.
  14  A roast turkey.
  15  A pig roast.
  16  A farc't dish baked.
  17  Two brangeese roasted, one larded.
  18  Souc't Veal.
  19  Two Capons roasted, one larded.
  20  A double bordered Custard.


  _A Second Course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and lemons.
  1   A souc't pig.
  2   A young lamb or kid roast.
  3   Two Shovelers.
  4   Two Herns, one larded.
  5   A Potatoe-Pye.
  6   A duck and mallard, one larded.
  7   A souc't Turbut.
  8   A couple of pheasants, one larded.
  9   Marinated Carp, or Pike, or Bream.
  10  Three brace of partridg, three larded.
  11  Made Dish of Spinage cream baked.
  12  A roll of beef.
  13  Two teels roasted, one larded.
  14  A cold goose pie.
  15  A souc't mullet and bace.
  16  A quince pye.
  17  Four curlews, 2 larded.
  18  A dried neats tongue.
  19  A dish of anchoves.
  20  A jole of Sturgeon.
      Jellies and Tarts Royal, and Ginger bread, and other Fruits.


  _A Bill of Fare for Christmas Day, and how to set the Meat
    in order._

      Oysters.
  1   A collar of brawn.
  2   Stewed Broth of Mutton marrow bones.
  3   A grand Sallet.
  4   A pottage of caponets.
  5   A breast of veal in stoffado.
  6   A boil'd partridge.
  7   A chine of beef, or surloin roast.
  8   Minced pies.
  9   A Jegote of mutton with anchove sauce.
  10  A made dish of sweet-bread.
  11  A swan roast.
  12  A pasty of venison.
  13  A kid with a pudding in his belly.
  14  A steak pie.
  15  A hanch of venison roasted.
  16  A turkey roast and stuck with cloves.
  17  A made dish of chickens in puff paste.
  18  Two bran geese roasted, one larded.
  19  Two large capons, one larded.
  20  A Custard.


  _The second course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and Lemons.
  1   A young lamb or kid.
  2   Two couple of rabbits, two larded.
  3   A pig souc't with tongues.
  4   Three ducks, one larded.
  5   Three pheasants, 1 larded
  6   A Swan Pye.
  7   Three brace of partridge, three larded.
  8   Made dish in puff paste.
  9   Bolonia sausages, and anchoves, mushrooms, and Cavieate,
        and pickled oysters in a dish.
  10  Six teels, three larded.
  11  A Gammon of Westphalia Bacon.
  12  Ten plovers, five larded.
  13  A quince pye, or warden pie.
  14  Six woodcocks, 3 larded.
  15  A standing Tart in puff-paste, preserved fruits, Pippins,
        _&c._
  16  A dish of Larks.
  17  Six dried neats tongues.
  18  Sturgeon.
  19  Powdered Geese.
      Jellies.


  _A Bill of Fare for _new-years Day_._

      Oysters.
  1   Brawn and Mustard.
  2   Two boil'd Capons in stewed Broth, or white Broth.
  3   Two Turkies in stoffado.
  4   A Hash of twelve Partridges, or a shoulder of mutton.
  5   Two bran Geese boil'd.
  6   A farc't boil'd meat with snites or ducks.
  7   A marrow pudding bak't
  8   A surloin of roast beef.
  9   Minced pies, ten in a dish, or what number you please
  10  A Loin of Veal.
  11  A pasty of Venison.
  12  A Pig roast.
  13  Two geese roast.
  14  Two capons, one larded.
  15  Custards.


  _A second Course for the same Mess._

      Oranges and Lemons.
  1   A side of Lamb
  2   A souc't Pig.
  3   Two couple of rabbits, two larded.
  4   A duck and mallard, one larded.
  5   Six teels, three larded.
  6   A made dish, or Batalia-Pye.
  7   Six woodcocks, 3 larded.
  8   A warden pie, or a dish of quails.
  9   Dried Neats tongues.
  10  Six tame Pigeons, three larded.
  11  A souc't Capon.
  12  Pickled mushrooms, pickled Oysters, and Anchoves in a dish.
  13  Twelve snites, six larded
  14  Orangado Pye, or a Tart Royal of dried and wet suckets.
  15  Sturgeon.
  16  Turkey or goose pye.
      Jelly of five or six sorts, Lay Tarts of divers colours and
        ginger-bread, and other Sweet-meats.


  _A Bill of Fare for _February_._

  1   Eggs and Collops.
  2   Brawn and Mustard.
  3   A hash of Rabbits four.
  4   A grand Fricase.
  5   A grand Sallet.
  6   A Chine of roast Pork.


  _A second Course._

  1   A whole Lamb roast.
  2   Three Widgeons.
  3   A Pippin Pye.
  4   A Jole of Sturgeon.
  5   A Bacon Tart.
  6   A cold Turkey Pye.
      Jellies and Ginger-bread, and Tarts Royal.


  _A Bill of fare for _March_._

      Oysters.
  1   Brawn and Mustard.
  2   A fresh Neats Tongue and Udder in stoffado.
  3   Three Ducks in stoffado.
  4   A roast Loin of Pork.
  5   A pasty of Venison.
  6   A Steak Pye.


  _A second Course._

  1   A side of Lamb.
  2   Six Teels, three larded.
  3   A Lamb-stone Pye.
  4   200 of Asparagus.
  5   A Warden-Pye.
  6   Marinate Flounders.
      Jellies and Ginger-bread, and Tarts Royal.


  _A Bill of fare for _April_._

      Oysters.
  1   A Bisk.
  2   Cold Lamb.
  3   A haunch of venison roast.
  4   Four Goslings.
  5   A Turkey Chicken.
  6   Custards of Almonds.


  _A second Course._

  1   Lamb, a side in joynts.
  2   Turtle Doves eight.
  3   Cold Neats-tongue pye.
  4   8 Pidgeons, four larded.
  5   Lobsters.
  6   A Collar of Beef.
      Tansies.


  _A Bill of Fare for _May_._

  1   Scotch Pottage or Skink.
  2   Scotch collops of mutton
  3   A Loin of Veal.
  4   An oline, or a Pallat pye.
  5   Three Capons, 1 larded.
  6   Custards.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Lamb.
  2   A Tart Royal, or Quince Pye
  3   A Gammon of Bacon Pie.
  4   A Jole of Sturgeon.
  5   Artichock Pie hot.
  6   Bolonia Sausage.
      Tansies.


  _A bill of Fare for _June_._

  1   A shoulder of mutton hasht
  2   A Chine of Beef.
  3   Pasty of Venison, a cold Hash.
  4   A Leg of Mutton roast.
  5   Four Turkey Chickens.
  6   A Steak Pye.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Jane or Kid.
  2   Rabbits.
  3   Shovelers.
  4   Sweet-bread Pye.
  5   Olines, or pewit.
  6   Pigeons.


  _A bill of Fare for _July_._

      Muskmelons.
  1   Pottage of Capon.
  2   Boil'd Pigeons.
  3   A hash of Caponets.
  4   A Grand Sallet.
  5   A Fawn.
  6   A Custard.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Pease, of French Beans.
  2   Gulls four, two larded.
  3   Pewits eight, four larded.
  4   A quodling Tart green.
  5   Portugal eggs, two sorts.
  6   Buttered Brawn.
      Selsey Cockles broil'd.


  _A Bill of Fare for _August_._

      Muskmelons.
  1   Scotch collops of Veal.
  2   Boil'd Breast of Mutton.
  3   A Fricase of Pigeons.
  4   A stewed Calves head.
  5   Four Goslings.
  6   Four Caponets.


  _A Second Course._

  1   Dotterel twelve, six larded
  2   Tarts Royal of Fruit.
  3   Wheat-ears.
  4   A Pye of Heath-Pouts.
  5   Marinate Smelts.
  6   Gammon of Bacon.
      Selsey Cockles.


  _A Bill of Fare for _September_._

      Oysters.
  1   An Olio.
  2   A Breast of Veal in stoffado.
  3   twelve Partridg hashed.
  4   A Grand Sallet.
  5   Chaldron Pye.
  6   Custard.


  _A second Course._

  1   Rabbits
  2   Two herns, one larded.
  3   Florentine of tongues.
  4   8 Pigeons roast, 4 larded.
  5   Pheasant pouts, 2 larded.
  6   A cold hare pye.
      Selsey cockles broil'd after.


  _A bill of Fare for _October_._

      Oysters.
  1   Boil'd Ducks.
  2   A hash of a loin of veal.
  3   Roast Veal.
  4   Two bran-geese roasted.
  5   Tart Royal.
  6   Custard.


  _A second Course._

  1   Pheasant, pouts, pigeons.
  2   Knots twelve.
  3   Twelve quails, six larded.
  4   Potato pye.
  5   Sparrows roast.
  6   Turbut.
      Selsey Cockles.


  _A bill of Fare formerly used in Fasting days, and in _Lent_._

  _The first Course._

       Oysters if in season.
  1    Butter and eggs.
  2    Barley pottage, or Rice pottage.
  3    Stewed Oysters.
  4    Buttered eggs on toasts.
  5    Spinage Sallet boil'd.
  6    Boil'd Rochet or gurnet.
  7    A jole of Ling.
  8    Stewed Carp.
  9    Oyster Chewits.
  10   Boil'd Pike.
  11   Roast Eels.
  12   Haddocks, fresh Cod, or Whitings.
  13   Eel or Carp Pye.
  14   Made dish of spinage.
  15   Salt Eels.
  16   Souc't Turbut.


  _A second Course._

  1   Fried Soals.
  2   Stewed oysters in scollop shells.
  3   Fried Smelts.
  4   Congers head broil'd.
  5   Baked dish of Potatoes, or Oyster pye.
  6   A spitchcock of Eels.
  7   Quince pie or tarts royal.
  8   Buttered Crabs.
  9   Fried Flounders.
  10  Jole of fresh Salmon.
  11  Fried Turbut.
  12  Cold Salmon pye.
  13  Fried skirrets.
  14  Souc't Conger.
  15  Lobsters.
  16  Sturgeon.




  [Decoration]

  THE

  ACCOMPLISHT COOK,

  OR,

  The whole Art and Mystery of
  COOKERY, fitted for all
  Degrees and Qualities.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  SECTION I.

  _Perfect Directions for the A-la-mode Ways of dressing all manner
    of Boyled Meats, with their several sauces_, &c.


  _To make an Olio Podrida._

Take a Pipkin or Pot of some three Gallons, fill it with fair water,
and set it over a Fire of Charcoals, and put in first your hardest
meats, a rump of Beef, _Bolonia_ sausages, neats tongues two dry,
and two green, boiled and larded, about two hours after the Pot is
boil'd and scummed: but put in more presently after your Beef is
scum'd, Mutton, Venison, Pork, Bacon, all the aforesaid in Gubbins,
as big as a Ducks Egg, in equal pieces; put in also Carrots,
Turnips, Onions, Cabbidge, in good big pieces, as big as your meat,
a faggot of sweet herbs, well bound up, and some whole Spinage,
Sorrel, Burrage, Endive, Marigolds, and other good Pot-Herbs a
little chopped; and sometimes _French_ Barley, or Lupins green or
dry.

Then a little before you dish out your Olio; put to your pot,
Cloves, Mace, Saffron, _&c._

Then next have divers Fowls; as first

  _A Goose, or Turkey, two Capons, two Ducks, two Pheasants,
  two Widgeons, four Partridges, four stock Doves, four Teals,
  eight Snites, twenty four Quails, forty eight Larks._

Boil these foresaid Fowls in water and salt in a pan, pipkin, or
pot, _&c._

Then have _Bread_, _Marrow_, _Bottoms of Artichocks_, _Yolks of hard
Eggs_, _Large Mace_, _Chesnuts boil'd and blancht_, _two
Colliflowers_, _Saffron_.

And stew these in a pipkin together, being ready clenged with some
good sweet butter, a little white wine and strong broth.

Some other times for variety you may use Beets, Potato's, Skirrets,
Pistaches, PineApple seed, or Almonds, Poungarnet, and Lemons.

Now to dish your Olio, dish first your Beef, Veal or Pork; then your
Venison, and Mutton, Tongues, Sausage, and Roots over all.

Then next your largest Fowl, Land-Fowl, or Sea-Fowl, as first,
a Goose, or Turkey, two Capons, two Pheasants, four Ducks, four
Widgeons, four Stock-Doves, four Partridges, eight Teals, twelve
Snites, twenty four Quailes, forty eight Larks, _&c._

Then broth it, and put on your pipkin of Colliflowers Artichocks,
Chesnuts, some sweet-breads fried, Yolks of hard Eggs, then Marrow
boil'd in strong broth or water, large Mace, Saffron, Pistaches, and
all the aforesaid things being finely stewed up, and some red Beets
over all, slic't Lemons, and Lemon peels whole, and run it over with
beaten butter.


  _Marrow Pies._

For the garnish of the dish, make marrow pies made like round
Chewets but not so high altogether, then have sweet-breads of veal
cut like small dice, some pistaches, and Marrow, some Potato's, or
Artichocks cut like Sweetbreads: as also some enterlarded Bacon;
Yolks of hard Eggs, Nutmeg, Salt, Goosberries, Grapes, or
Barberries, and some minced Veal in the bottom of the Pie minced
with some Bacon or Beef-suit, Sparagus and Chesnuts, with a little
musk; close them up, and bast them with saffron water, bake them,
and liquor it with beaten butter, and set them about the dish side
or brims, with some bottoms of Artichocks, and yolks of hard Eggs,
Lemons in quarters, Poungarnets and red Beets boil'd, and carved.


  _Other Marrow Pies._

Otherways for variety, you may make other Marrow Pies of minced Veal
and Beef-suit, seasoned with Pepper, Salt, Nutmegs and boiled
Sparagus, cut half an inch long, yolks of hard Eggs cut in quarters,
and mingled with the meat and marrow: fill your Pies, bake them not
too hard, musk them, _&c._


  _Other Marrow Pies._

Otherways, Marrow Pies of bottoms of little Artichocks, Suckers,
yolks of hard eggs, Chesnuts, Marrow, and interlarded Bacon cut like
dice, some Veal sweet-breads cut also, or Lamb-stones, Potato's, or
Skirrets, and Sparagus, or none; season them lightly with Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt, close your Pies, and bake them.


  __Olio_, Marrow Pies._

  _Butter three pound, Flower one quart, Lamb-Stones three pair,
  Sweet-Breads six, Marrow-bones eight, large Mace, Cock-stones
  twenty, interlarded Bacon one pound, knots of Eggs twelve,
  Artichocks twelve, Sparagus one hundred, Cocks-Combs twenty,
  Pistaches one pound, Nutmegs, Pepper, and Salt._

Season the aforesaid lightly, and lay them in the Pie upon some
minced veal or mutton, your interlarded Bacon in thin slices of half
an inch long, mingled among the rest, fill the Pie, and put in some
Grapes, and slic't Lemon, Barberries or Goosberries.

  1. Pies of Marrow.

  _Flower, Sweet bread, Marrow, Artichocks, Pistaches, Nutmegs,
  Eggs, Bacon, Veal, Suit, Sparagus, Chesnuts; Musk, Saffron,
  Butter._

  2. Marrow Pies.

  _Flower, Butter, Veal, Suet, Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Sparagus, Eggs,
  Grapes, Marrow, Saffron._

3. Marrow Pies.

  _Flower, Butter, Eggs, Artichocks, Sweet-bread, Lamb-stones,
  Potato's, Nutmegs, Pepper, Salt, Skirrets, Grapes, Bacon._


To the garnish of an extraordinary Olio: as followeth.

  _Two Collers of Pigbrawn, two Marrow Pies, twelve roste Turtle
  Doves in a Pie, four Pies, eighteen Quails in a Pie, four Pies,
  two Sallets, two Jelleys of two colours, two forc't meats,
  two Tarts._

Thus for an extraordinary Olio, or Olio Royal.


  _To make a Bisk divers ways._

Take a wrack of Mutton, and a Knuckle of Veal, put them a boiling in
a Pipkin of a Gallon, with some fair water, and when it boils, scum
it, and put to it some salt, two or three blades of large Mace, and
a Clove or two; boil it to three pints, and strain the meat, save
the broth for your use and take off the fat clean.

Then boil twelve Pigeon-Peepers, and eight Chicken Peepers, in a
Pipkin with fair water, salt, and a piece of interlarded Bacon, scum
them clean, and boil them fine, white and quick.

Then have a rost Capon minced, and put to it some Gravy, Nutmegs,
and Salt, and stew it together; then put to it the juyce of two or
three Oranges, and beaten Butter, _&c._

Then have ten sweet breads, and ten pallets fried, and the same
number of lips and noses being first tender boil'd and blanched, cut
them like lard, and fry them, put away the butter, and put to them
gravy, a little anchove, nutmeg, and a little garlick, or none, the
juyce of two or three Oranges, and Marrow fried in Butter with
Sage-leaves, and some beaten Butter.

Then again have some boil'd Marrow and twelve Artichocks, Suckers,
and Peeches finely boil'd and put into beaten Butter, some Pistaches
boiled also in some wine and Gravy, eight Sheeps tongues larded and
boiled, and one hundred Sparagus boiled, and put into beaten Butter,
or Skirrets.

Then have Lemons carved, and some cut like little dice.

Again fry some Spinage and Parsley, _&c._

These forefaid materials being ready, have some _French_ bread in
the bottom of your dish.

Then dish on it your Chickens, and Pidgeons, broth it; next your
Quaile, then Sweet breads, then your Pullets, then your Artichocks
or Sparagus, and Pistaches, then your Lemon, Poungarnet, or Grapes,
Spinage, and fryed Marrow; and if yellow Saffron or fried Sage, then
round the center of your boiled meat put your minced Capon, then run
all over with beaten butter, &c.

  1. For variety, Clary fryed with yolks of Eggs.

  2. Knots of Eggs.

  3. Cocks Stones.

  4. Cocks Combs.

  5. If white, strained Almonds, with some of the broth.

  6. Goosberries or Barberries.

  7. Minced meat in Balls.

  8. If green, Juyce of Spinage stamped with manchet, and strained
  with some of the broth, and give it a warm.

  9. Garnish with boiled Spinage.

  10. If yellow, yolks of hard Eggs strained with some Broth and
  Saffron.

And many other varieties.


  _A Bisk otherways._

Take a Leg of Beef, cut it into two peices, and boil it in a gallon
or five quarts of water, scum it, and about half an hour after put
in a knuckle of Veal, and scum it also, boil it from five quarts to
two quarts or less; and being three quarters boil'd, put in some
Salt, and some Cloves, and Mace, being through boil'd, strain it
from the meat, and keep the broth for your use in a pipkin.

Then have eight Marrow bones clean scraped from the flesh, and
finely cracked over the middle, boil in water and salt three of
them, and the other leave for garnish, to be boil'd in strong broth;
and laid on the top of the Bisk when it is dished.

Again boil your Fowl in water and Salt, Teals, Partridges, Pidgeons,
Plovers, Quails, Larks.

Then have a Joint of Mutton made into balls with sweet Herbs, Salt,
Nutmeggs, grated Bread, Eggs, Suit, a Clove or two of Garlick, and
Pistaches, boil'd in Broth, with some interlarded Bacon, Sheeps
tongues, larded and stewed, as also some Artichocks, Marrow,
Pistaches, Sweet-Breads and Lambs-stones in strong broth, and Mace a
Clove or two, some white-wine and strained almonds, or with the yolk
of an Egg, Verjuyce, beaten butter, and slic't Lemon, or Grapes
whole.

Then have fryed Clary, and fryed Pistaches in Yolks of Eggs.

Then Carved Lemons over all.


  _To make another curious boil'd meat, much like a Bisk._

Take a Rack of Mutton, cut it in four peices, and boil it in three
quarts of fair Water in a Pipkin, with a faggot of sweet Herbs very
hard and close bound up from end to end, scum your broth and put in
some salt: Then about half an hour after put in thre chickens finely
scalded and trust, three Patridges boiled in water, the blood being
well soaked out of them, and put to them also three or four blades
of large Mace.

Then have all manner of sweet herbs, as Parsley, Time, Savory,
Marjorim, Sorrel, Sage; these being finely picked, bruise them with
the back of a ladle, and a little before you dish up your boil'd
meat, put them to your broth, and give them a walm or two.

Again, for the top of your boil'd meat or garnish, have a pound of
interlarded Bacon in thin slices, put them in a pipkin with six
marrow-bones, and twelve bottoms of yong Artichocks, and some six
sweet-breads of veal, strong broth, Mace, Nutmeg, some Goosberries
or Barberries, some Butter and Pistaches.

These things aforesaid being ready, and dinner called for, take a
fine clean scoured dish and garnish it with Pistaches and
Artichocks, carved Lemon, Grapes, and large Mace.

Then have sippets finely carved, and some slices of _French_ bread
in the bottom of the dish, dish three pieces of Mutton, and one in
the middle, and between the mutton three Chickens, and up in the
middle, the Partridge, and pour on the broth with your herbs, then
put on your pipkin over all, of Marrow, Artichocks,