Produced by David Garcia, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net











THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY ORDE




OTHER BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR

   THE CLAIM JUMPERS
   THE WESTERNERS
   THE BLAZED TRAIL
   BLAZED TRAIL STORIES
   THE MAGIC FOREST
   CONJUROR'S HOUSE
   THE SILENT PLACES
   THE FOREST
   THE MOUNTAINS
   THE PASS
   CAMP AND TRAIL
   THE RIVERMAN
   ARIZONA NIGHTS

   With Samuel Hopkins Adams
   THE MYSTERY

[Illustration: "ALWAYS REMEMBER THAT A TRUE SPORTSMAN IN EVERY WAY IS
ABOUT THE SCARCEST THING THEY MAKE--AND THE FINEST. SO NATURALLY THE
COMMON RUN OF PEOPLE DON'T LIVE UP TO IT. IF _you_--NOT THE THINKING
YOU, NOR EVEN THE CONSCIENCE YOU, BUT THE WAY-DOWN-DEEP-IN-YOUR-HEART
_you_ THAT YOU CAN'T FOOL NOR TRICK NOR LIE TO--IF THAT _you_ IS
SATISFIED, IT'S ALL RIGHT."]




   THE ADVENTURES OF
   BOBBY ORDE

   BY

   STEWART EDWARD WHITE

   [Illustration]

   ILLUSTRATED BY WORTH BREHM

   NEW YORK
   GROSSET & DUNLAP
   PUBLISHERS




   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION
   INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES, INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

   COPYRIGHT, 1911, BY DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

   COPYRIGHT, 1908, 1909,
   BY THE PHILLIPS PUBLISHING COMPANY




CONTENTS


   CHAPTER                                                          PAGE

   I. THE BOOMS                                                        3

   II. THE PICNIC                                                     36

   III. HIDE AND COOP                                                 67

   IV. THE PRINTING PRESS                                             81

   V. THE LITTLE GIRL                                                 91

   VI. THE LITTLE GIRL (_Continued_)                                 103

   VII. UNTIL THE LAST SHOT                                          115

   VIII. THE FLOBERT RIFLE                                           140

   IX. MR. DAGGETT                                                   150

   X. THE SPORTSMAN'S ASSOCIATION                                    160

   XI. THE MARSHES                                                   167

   XII. THE TRESPASSERS                                              209

   XIII. THE PLAYMATES                                               221

   XIV. THE SHOOTING CLUB                                            235

   XV. THE UPPER ROOMS                                               239

   XVI. THE THIRD STORY                                              243

   XVII. "SLIDING DOWN HILL"                                         247

   XVIII. CHRISTMAS                                                  262

   XIX. THE BOXING MATCH                                             284

   XX. THE PARTNERS                                                  292

   XXI. WINTER                                                       298

   XXII. THE MURDER                                                  304

   XXIII. THE TRIAL                                                  317

   XXIV. THE TRIAL (_Continued_)                                     322

   XXV. THE HOLE IN THE CAP                                          326

   XXVI. THE SIXTEEN-GAUGE SHOTGUN                                   332

   XXVII. THE SPORTSMAN                                              337


THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY ORDE




I

THE BOOMS


At nine o'clock one morning Bobby Orde, following an agreement with his
father, walked sedately to the Proper Place, where he kept his cap and
coat and other belongings. The Proper Place was a small, dark closet
under the angle of the stairs. He called it the Proper Place just as he
called his friend Clifford Fuller, or the saw-mill town in which he
lived Monrovia--because he had always heard it called so.

At the door a beautiful black and white setter solemnly joined him.

"Hullo, Duke!" greeted Bobby.

The dog swept back and forth his magnificent feather tail, and fell in
behind his young master.

Bobby knew the way perfectly. You went to the fire-engine house; and
then to the left after the court-house was Mr. Proctor's; and then, all
at once, the town. Father's office was in the nearest square brick
block. Bobby paused, as he always did, to look in the first store
window. In it was a weapon which he knew to be a Flobert Rifle. It was
something to be dreamed of, with its beautiful blued-steel octagon
barrel, its gleaming gold-plated locks and its polished stock. Bobby was
just under ten years old; but he could have told you all about that
Flobert Rifle--its weight, the length of its barrel, the number of
grains of both powder and lead loaded in its various cartridges. Among
his books he possessed a catalogue that described Flobert Rifles, and
also Shotguns and Revolvers. Bobby intoxicated himself with them. Twice
he had even seen his father's revolver; and he knew where it was
kept--on the top shelf of the closet. The very closet door gave him a
thrill.

Reluctantly he tore himself away, and turned in to the straight, broad
stairway that led to the offices above. The stairway, and the hall to
which it mounted were dark and smelled of old coco-matting and stale
tobacco. Bobby liked this smell very much. He liked, too, the echo of
his footsteps as he marched down the hall to the door of his father's
offices.

Within were several long, narrow desks burdened with large ledgers and
flanked by high stools. On each stool sat a clerk--five of them. An
iron "base burner" stove occupied the middle of the room. Its pipe ran
in suspension here and there through the upper air until it plunged
unexpectedly into the wall. A capacious wood-box flanked it. Bobby was
glad he did not have to fill that wood-box at a cent a time.

Against the walls at either end of the room and next the windows were
two roll-top desks at which sat Mr. Orde and his partner. Two or three
pivoted chairs completed the furnishings.

"Hullo, Bobby," called Mr. Orde, who was talking earnestly to a man;
"I'll be ready in a few minutes."

Nothing pleased Bobby more than to wander about the place with its
delicious "office smell." At one end of the room, nailed against the
wall, were rows and rows of beautifully polished models of the firm's
different tugs, barges and schooners. Bobby surveyed them with both
pleasure and regret. It seemed a shame that such delightful boats should
have been built only in half and nailed immovably to boards. Against
another wall were maps, and a real deer's head. Everywhere hung framed
photographs of logging camps and lumbering operations. From any one of
the six long windows he could see the street below, and those who passed
along it. Time never hung heavy at the office.

When Mr. Orde had finished his business, he put on his hat, and the big
man, the little boy and the grave, black and white setter dog walked
down the long dark hall, down the steps, and around the corner to the
livery stable.

Here they climbed into one of the light and graceful buggies which were
at that time a source of such pride to their owners, and flashed out
into the street behind Mr. Orde's celebrated team.

Duke's gravity at this juncture deserted him completely. Life now meant
something besides duty. Ears back, mouth wide, body extended, he flew
away. Faster and faster he ran, until he was almost out of sight; then
turned with a whirl of shingle dust and came racing back. When he
reached the horses he leaped vigorously from one side to the other,
barking ecstatically; then set off on a long even lope along the
sidewalks and across the street, investigating everything.

Mr. Orde took the slender whalebone whip from its socket.

"Come, Dick!" said he.

The team laid back their pointed delicate ears, shook their heads from
side to side, snorted and settled into a swift stride. Bobby leaned over
to watch the sunlight twinkle on the wheel-spokes. The narrow tires sunk
slightly in the yielding shingle fragments. _Brittle!_ _Brittle!_
_Brittle!_ the sound said to Bobby. Above all things he loved to watch
the gossamer-like wheels, apparently too light and delicate to bear the
weight they must carry, flying over the springy road.

At the edge of town they ran suddenly out from beneath the maple trees
to find themselves at the banks of the river. A long bridge crossed it.
The team clattered over the planks so fast that hardly could Bobby get
time to look at the cat-tails along the bayous before blue water was
beneath him.

But here Mr. Orde had to pull up. The turn-bridge was open; and Bobby to
his delight was allowed to stand up in his seat and watch the wallowing,
churning little tug and the three calm ships pass through. He could not
see the tug at all until it had gone beyond the bridge, only its smoke;
but the masts of the ship passed stately in regular succession.

"Three-masted schooner," said he.

Then when the last mast had scarcely cleared the opening, the ponderous
turn-bridge began slowly to close. Its movement was almost
imperceptible, but mighty beyond Bobby's small experience to gauge. He
could make out the two bridge tenders walking around and around, pushing
on the long lever that operated the mechanism. In a moment more the
bridge came into alignment with a clang. The team, tossing their heads
impatiently, moved forward.

On the other side of the bridge was no more town; but instead, great
lumber yards, and along the river a string of mills with many
smokestacks.

The road-bed at this point changed abruptly to sawdust, springy and
odorous with the sweet new smell of pine that now perfumed all the air.
To the left Bobby could see the shipyards and the skeleton of a vessel
well under way. From it came the irregular _Block!_ _Block!_ _Block!_ of
mallets; and it swarmed with the little, black, ant-like figures of men.

Mr. Orde drove rapidly and silently between the shipyards and the rows
and rows of lumber piles, arranged in streets and alleys like an
untenanted city. Overhead ran tramways on which dwelt cars and great
black and bay horses. The wild exultant shriek of the circular saw rang
out. White plumes of steam shot up against the intense blue of the sky.
Beyond the piles of lumber Bobby could make out the topmasts of more
ships, from which floated the pointed hollow "tell-tales" affected by
the lake schooners of those days as pennants. At the end of the lumber
piles the road turned sharp to the right. It passed in turn the small
building which Bobby knew to be another delightful office, and the huge
cavernous mill with its shrieks and clangs, its blazing, winking eyes
beneath and its long incline up which the dripping, sullen logs crept in
unending procession to their final disposition. And then came the
"booms" or pens, in which the logs floated like a patterned brown
carpet. Men with pike poles were working there; and even at a distance
Bobby caught the dip and rise, and the flash of white water as the
rivermen ran here and there over the unstable footing.

Next were more lumber yards and more mills, for five miles or so, until
at last they emerged into an open, flat country, divided by the
old-fashioned snake fences; dotted with blackened stumps of the
long-vanished forest; eaten by sloughs and bayous from the river. The
sawdust ceased. Bobby leaned out to watch with fascinated interest the
sand, divided by the tire, flowing back in a beautiful curved V to cover
the wheel-rim.

As far as the eye could reach were marshes grown with wild rice and
cat-tails. Occasionally one of these bayous would send an arm in to
cross the road. Then Bobby was delighted, for that meant a float-bridge
through the cracks of which the water spurted up in jets at each impact
of the horses' hoofs. On either hand the bayou, but a plank's thickness
below the level of the float-bridge, filmed with green weeds and the
bright scum of water, not too stagnant, offered surprises to the
watchful eye. One could see many mud-turtles floating lazily, feet
outstretched in poise; and bullfrogs and little frogs; and, in the clear
places, trim and self-sufficient mud hens. From the reeds at the edges
flapped small green herons and thunder pumpers. And at last----

"Oh, look, papa!" cried Bobby excited and awed. "There's a snap'n'
turtle!"

Indeed, there he was in plain sight, the boys' monster of the marshes,
fully two feet in diameter, his rough shell streaming with long green
grasses, his wicked black eyes staring, his hooked, powerful jaws set in
a grim curve. If once those jaws clamped--so said the boys--nothing
could loose them but the sound of thunder, not even cutting off the
head.

Ten of the twelve miles to the booms had already been passed. The horses
continued to step out freely, making nothing of the light fabric they
drew after them. Duke, the white of his coat soiled and muddied by
frequent and grateful plunges, loped alongside, his pink tongue hanging
from one corner of his mouth, and a seraphic expression on his
countenance. Occasionally he rolled his eyes up at his masters in sheer
enjoyment of the expedition.

"Papa," asked Bobby suddenly, "what makes you have the booms so far
away? Why don't you have them down by the bridge?"

Mr. Orde glanced down at his son. The boy looked very little and very
childish, with his freckled, dull red cheeks, his dot of a nose, and his
wide gray eyes. The man was about to make some stop-gap reply. He
checked himself.

"It's this way Bobby," he explained carefully. "The logs are cut 'way up
the river--ever so far--and then they float down the river. Now,
everybody has logs in the river--Mr. Proctor and Mr. Heinzman and Mr.
Welton and lots of people, and they're all mixed up together. When they
get down to the mills where they are to be sawed up into boards, the
logs belonging to the different owners have to be sorted out. Papa's
company is paid by all the others to do the floating down stream and the
sorting out. The sorting out is done in the booms; and we put the booms
up stream from the mills because it is easier to float the logs, after
they have been sorted, down the stream than to haul them back up the
stream."

"What do you have them so far up the stream for?" asked Bobby.

"Because there's more room--the river widens out there."

Bobby said nothing for some time, and Mr. Orde confessed within himself
a strong doubt as to whether or not the explanation had been understood.

"Papa," demanded Bobby, "I don't see how you tell your logs from Mr.
Proctor's or Mr. Heinzman's or any of the rest of them."

Mr. Orde turned, extending his hand heartily to his astonished son.

"You're all right, Bobby!" said he. "Why, you see, each log is stamped
on the end with a mark. Mr. Proctor's mark is one thing; and Mr.
Heinzman's is another; and all the rest have different ones."

"I see," said Bobby.

The road now led them through a small grove of willows. Emerging thence
they found themselves in full sight of the booms.

For fifty feet Bobby allowed his eyes to run over a scene already
familiar and always of the greatest attraction to him. Then came what he
called, after his Malory, the Stumps Perilous. Between them there was
but just room to drive--in fact the delicate points of the whiffle tree
scratched the polished surfaces of them on either hand. Bobby loved to
imagine them as the mighty guardians of the land beyond, and he always
held his breath until they had been passed in safety.

Shying gently toward each other, ears pricked toward the two obstacles,
the horses shot through with pace undiminished and drew up proudly
before the smallest of the group of buildings. Thence emerged a tall,
spare, keen-eyed man in slouch hat, flannel shirt, shortened trousers
and spiked boots.

"Hullo, Jim," said Mr. Orde.

"Hullo, Jack," said the other.

"Where's your chore boy to take the horses?"

"I'll rustle him," replied the River Boss.

Bobby drew a deep breath of pleasure, and looked about him.

From the land's edge extended a wide surface of logs. Near at hand
little streaks of water lay between some of them, but at a short
distance the prospect was brown and uniform, until far away a narrow
flash of blue marked the open river. Here and there ran the confines of
the various booms included in the monster main boom. These confines
consisted of long heavy timbers floating on the water, and joined end to
end by means of strong links. They were generally laid in pairs, and
hewn on top, so that they constituted a network of floating sidewalks
threading the expanse of saw-logs. At intervals they were anchored to
bunches of piles driven deep, and bound at the top. An unbroken palisade
of piles constituted the outer boundaries of the main boom. At the upper
end of them perched a little house whence was operated the mechanism of
the heavy swing boom, capable of closing entirely the river channel.
Thus the logs, floating or driven down the river, encountered this
obstruction; were shunted into the main booms, where they were
distributed severally into the various pocket booms; and later were
released at the lower end, one lot at a time, to the river again. Thence
they were appropriated by the mill to which they belonged.

Bobby did not as yet understand the mechanism of all this. He saw merely
the brown logs, and the distant blue water, and the hut wherein he knew
dwelt machinery and a good-natured, short, dark man with a short, dark
pipe, and the criss-cross floating sidewalks, and the men with long pike
poles and shorter peavies moving here and there about their work. And he
liked it.

But now the chore boy appeared to take charge of the horses. Mr. Orde
lifted Bobby down, and immediately walked away with the River Boss,
leaving with Bobby the parting injunction not to go out on the booms.

Bobby, left to himself, climbed laboriously, one steep step at a time,
to the elevation of the roofless porch before the mess house. The floor
he examined, as always, with the greatest interest. The sharp caulks of
the rivermen's shoes had long since picked away the surface, leaving it
pockmarked and uneven. Only the knots had resisted; and each of these
now constituted a little hill above the surrounding plains, Bobby always
wished that either his tin soldiers could be here or this well-ordered
porch could be at home.

The sun proving hot, he peeped within the cook-house. There long tables
flanked each by two benches of equal extent, stretched down the dimness.
They were covered with dark oil-cloth, and at intervals on them arose
irregular humps of cheese cloth. Beneath the cheese cloth, which Bobby
had seen lifted, were receptacles containing the staples and condiments,
such as stewed fruit, sugar, salt, pepper, catsup, molasses and the
like. Innumerable tin plates and cups laid upside down were guarded by
iron cutlery. It was very dark and still, and the flies buzzed.

Beyond, Bobby could hear the cook and his helpers, called cookees. He
decided to visit them; but he knew better than to pass through the
dining room. Until the bell rang, that was sacred from the boss himself.

Therefore he descended from the porch, one step at a time, and climbed
around to the kitchen. Here he found preparations for dinner well under
way.

"'Llo, Bobby," greeted the cook, a tall white-moustached lean man with
bushy eyebrows. The cookees grinned, and one of them offered him a cooky
as big as a pie-plate. Bobby accepted the offering, and seated himself
on a cracker box.

Food was being prepared in quantities to stagger the imagination of one
used only to private kitchens. Prunes stewed away in galvanized iron
buckets; meat boiled in wash-boilers; coffee was made in fifty-pound
lard tins; pies were baking in ranks of ten; mashed potatoes were
handled by the shovelful; a barrel of flour was used every two and a
half days in this camp of hungry hard-working men. It took a good man to
plan and organize; and a good man Corrigan was. His meals were never
late, never scant, and never wasteful. He had the record for all the
camps on the river of thirty-five cents a day per man--and the men
satisfied. Consequently, in his own domain he was autocrat. The dining
room was sacred, the kitchen was sacred, meal hours were sacred. Each
man was fed at half-past five, at twelve, and at six. No man could get a
bite even of dry bread between those hours, save occasionally a teamster
in the line of duty. Bobby himself had once seen Corrigan chase a
would-be forager out at the point of a carving knife. As for Bobby, he
was an exception, and a favourite.

The place was enthralling, with its two stoves, each as big as the
dining room table at home, its shelves and barrels of supplies, its rows
of pies and loaves of bread, and all the crackle and bustle and aroma of
its preparations. Time passed on wings. At length Corrigan glanced up at
the square wooden clock and uttered some command to his two
subordinates. The latter immediately began to dish into large
receptacles of tin the hot food from the stove--boiled meat, mashed
potatoes, pork and beans, boiled corn. These they placed at regular
intervals down the long tables of the dining room. Bobby descended from
his cracker box to watch them. Between the groups of hot dishes they
distributed many plates of pie, of bread and of cake. Finally the
two-gallon pots of tea and coffee, one for each end of each table, were
brought in. The window coverings were drawn back. Corrigan appeared for
final inspection.

"Want to ring the bell, Bobby?" he asked.

They proceeded together to the front of the house where hung the bell
cord. Bobby seized this and pulled as hard as he was able. But his
weight could not bring the heavy bell over. Corrigan, smiling grimly
under his white moustache, gave him advice.

"Pull on her, Bobby, hang yer feet off'n the ground. Now let up entire!
Now pull again! Now let up! That's the bye! You'll get her goin' yit
widout the help of any man."

Sure enough the weight of the bell did give slightly under Bobby's
frantic, though now rythmic, efforts. Nevertheless Corrigan took
opportunity to reach out surreptitiously above the little boy's head to
add a few pounds to the downward pull. At last the clapper reached the
side.

_Cling!_ it broke the stillness.

"There you got her goin', Bobby!" cried Corrigan, "Now all you got to do
is to keep at her. Now pull! Now let go. See how much easier she goes?"

The bell, started in its orbit, was now easy enough to manipulate. Bobby
was delighted at the noise he was producing, and still more delighted at
its results. For from the maze of his toil he could see men coming--men
from the logs near at hand, men from the booms far away--all coming to
the bell, concentrating at a common centre. By now the bell was turning
entirely over. Bobby was becoming enthusiastic. He tugged and tugged.
Sometimes when he did not let go the rope in time, he was lifted
slightly off his feet. The sun was hot, but he had no thought of
quitting. His hat fell off backward, his towsled hair wetted at the
edges, clung to his forehead, his dull red cheeks grew redder behind
their freckles, his eyes fairly closed in an ecstasy of enjoyment. He
did not hear Corrigan laughing, nor the gleeful shouts of the men as
they leaped ashore and with dripping boots advanced to the expected
meal. All he knew was that wonderful _clang!_ _clang!_ _clang!_ over
him; the only thought in his little head was that he, _he_, Bobby Orde,
was making all this noise himself!

How long he would have continued before giving out entirely it would be
hard to say, but at this moment Mr. Orde and Jim Denning came around the
corner with some haste. Both looked worried and a little angry until
they caught sight of the small bell-ringer. Then they too laughed with
the men.

But Mr. Orde swooped down on his son and tossed him on his shoulder.

"That'll do," he advised, "we're all here. Lord, Corrigan! I thought you
were afire at least."

"You got to show us up a reg'lar Christmas dinner to match that," said
one of the men to Corrigan.

After the meal, which Bobby enjoyed thoroughly, because it was so
different from what he had at home, he had a request to proffer.

"Papa," he demanded, "I want to go out on the booms."

"Haven't time to-day, Bobby," replied Mr. Orde. "You just play around."

But Jim Denning would not have this.

"Can't start 'em in too early, Jack," said he. "I bet you'd been fished
out from running logs before you were half his age."

Mr. Orde laughed.

"Right you are, Jim, but we were raised different in those days."

"Well," said Denning, "work's slack. I'll let one of the men take him."

At the moment a youth of not more than fifteen years of age was passing
from the cook house to the booms. He had the slenderness of his years,
but was toughly knit, and already possessed in eye and mouth the steady
unwavering determination that the river life develops. In all details
of equipment he was a riverman complete: the narrow-brimmed black felt
hat, pushed back from a tangle of curls; the flannel shirt crossed by
the broad bands of the suspenders; the kersey trousers "stagged" off a
little below the knee; the heavy knit socks; and the strong shoes armed
with thin half-inch, needle-sharp caulks.

"Jimmy Powers!" called the River Boss after this boy, "Come here!"

The youth approached, grinning cheerfully.

"I want you to take Bobby out on the booms," commanded Denning, "and be
careful he don't fall in."

The older men moved away. Bobby and Jimmy Powers looked a little
bashfully at each other, and then turned to where the first hewn logs
gave access to the booms.

"Ever been out on 'em afore?" asked Jimmy Powers.

"Yes" replied Bobby; then after a pause, "I been out to the swing with
Papa."

They walked out on the floating booms, which tipped and dipped ever so
slightly under their weight. Bobby caught himself with a little stagger,
although his footing was a good three feet in width. On either side of
him nuzzled the great logs, like patient beasts, and between them were
narrow strips of water, the colour of steel that has just cooled.

"How deep is it here?" asked Bobby.

"Bout six feet," replied Jimmy Powers.

They passed an intersection, and came to an empty enclosure over which
the water stretched like a blue sheet. Bobby looked back. Already the
shore seemed far away. Through the interstices between the piles the
wavelets went _lap_, _lap_, _slap_, _lap_! Beyond were men working the
reluctant logs down toward the lower end of the booms. Some jabbed the
pike poles in and then walked forward along the boom logs. Others ran
quickly over the logs themselves until they had gained timbers large
enough to sustain their weight, whence they were able to work with
greater advantage. The supporting log rolled and dipped under the burden
of the man pushing mightily against his implement; but always the
riverman trod it, first one way, then the other, in entire
unconsciousness of the fact that he was doing so. The dark flanks of the
log heaved dripping from the river, and rolled silently back again,
picked by the long sharp caulks of the riverman's boots.

"Can you walk on the logs?" asked Bobby of his companion.

"Sure," laughed Jimmy Powers.

"Let's see you," insisted Bobby.

Jimmy Powers leaped lightly from the boom to the nearest log. It was a
small one, and at once dipped below the surface. If the boy had
attempted to stand on it even a second he would have fallen in. But all
Jimmy Powers needed was a foothold from which to spring. Hardly had the
little timber dipped before he had jumped to the next and the next
after. Behind him the logs, bobbing up and down, churned the water
white. Jimmy moved rapidly across the enclosure on an irregular zigzag.
The smaller logs he passed over as quickly as possible; on the larger he
paused appreciably. Bobby was interested to see how he left behind him a
wake of motion on what had possessed the appearance of rigid immobility.
The little logs bobbed furiously; the larger bowed in more stately
fashion and rolled slowly in dignified protest. In a moment Jimmy was
back again, grinning at Bobby's admiration.

"Look here," said he.

He took his station sideways on a log of about twenty inches diameter,
and began to roll it beneath him by walking rapidly forward. As the
timber gained its momentum, the boy increased his pace, until finally
his feet were fairly twinkling beneath him, and the side of the log
rising from the river was a blur of white water. Then suddenly with two
quick strong stamps of his caulked feet the young riverman brought the
whirling timber to a standstill.

"That's birling a log," said he to Bobby.

They walked out on the main boom still farther. The smaller partitions
between the various enclosures were often nothing but single round poles
chained together at their ends. On these Bobby was not allowed to
venture.

"How deep is it here?" he asked again.

"Bout thirty feet," replied Jimmy Powers.

Bobby for an instant felt a little dizzy, as though he were on a high
building. All this fabric on which he moved suddenly seemed to him
unreal, like a vast cobweb in suspension through a void. It was a brief
sensation, and little defined in his childish mind, so it soon passed,
but it constituted while it lasted a definite subjective experience
which Bobby would always remember. As he looked back, the buildings of
the river camp, lying low among the trees, had receded to a great
distance; apparently at another horizon was the dark row of piling that
marked the outer confines of the booms; up and down stream, as far as he
could see, were the logs. Bobby suddenly felt very much alone, with the
blue sky above him, and the deep black water beneath, and about him
nothing but the quiet sullen monsters herded from the wilderness. He
gripped very tightly Jimmy Powers's hand as they walked along.

But shortly they turned to the left; and after a brief walk, mounted the
rickety steps to the floor of the hut where dwelt old man North, and the
winch for operating the swinging boom. Old man North was short, dark,
heavy and bearded; he smoked perpetually a small black clay pipe which
he always held upside down in his mouth. His conversation was not
extensive; but his black eyes twinkled at Bobby, so the little boy was
not afraid of him. When he saw the two approaching, he reached over in
the corner and handed out a hickory pole peeled to a beautiful white.

"The wums is yonder," said he.

Bobby put a fat worm on his hook and sat down in the opposite doorway
were he could dangle his feet directly over the river. Where the shadow
of the cabin fell, he could see far down in the water, which there
became a transparent fair green. Close to the piles, on the tops of
which the hut was built, were various fish. Jimmy leaned over.

"Mostly suckers," he advised. "Yan's a perch, try him."

Bobby cautiously lowered his baited hook until it dangled before the
perch's nose. The latter paid absolutely no attention to it. Bobby
jiggled it up and down. No results. At last he fairly plumped the worm
on top of the fish's nose. The perch, with an air of annoyance, spread
his gills and, with the least perceptible movement of his tail, sank
slowly until he faded from sight.

"Better let down your hook and fish near bottom," suggested Jimmy
Powers.

Bobby did so. The peace of warm afternoon settled upon him. He dangled
his chubby legs, and tried to spit as scientifically as he could, and
watched the waving green current slip silently beneath his feet. Beside
him sat Jimmy Powers. The fragrant strong tobacco smoke from North's
pipe passed them in wisps.

"I'd like to walk on logs," proffered Bobby at last, "It looks like lots
of fun."

"Oh, that's nothin'," said Jimmy Powers, "You ought to be on drive."

The boys fell into conversation. Jimmy told of the drive, and the
log-running. Bobby listened with the envy of one whose imagination
cannot conceive of himself permitted in such affairs. He was entirely
absorbed. And then all at once the peace was shattered.

"Yank him, Bobby, yank him!" yelled Jimmy.

"Christmas! he's a whale!" said old North.

For, without wavering, the tip of the hickory pole had been ruthlessly
jerked below the water's surface, and the butt nearly pulled from
Bobby's hands.

Bobby knew the proper thing to do. In such cases you heaved strongly.
The fish flew from the water, described an arc over your head, and lit
somewhere behind you. He tried to accomplish this, but his utmost
strength could but just lift the wriggling, jerking end of the pole from
the water.

"Give her to me!" cried Jimmy Powers.

"Le' me 'lone," grunted Bobby.

He planted the butt of the pole in the pit of his stomach, and lifted as
hard as ever he could with both hands. His face grew red, his ears
rang, but, after a first immovable resistance, to his great joy the tip
of the bending, wriggling pole began to give. Slowly, little by little,
he pulled up the fish, until he could make out the flash of its body
darting to and fro far down in the depths.

"Black bass!" murmured Jimmy Powers breathlessly.

And then just as his size and beauty were becoming clearly visible, the
line came up with a sickening ease. The interested spectators caught a
glimpse of white as the fish turned.

Bobby let out a howl of disappointment.

"Oh _gee_, that's hard luck!" cried Jimmy Powers.

"Bet he weighed four pounds," proffered North curtly.

But at this instant a faint clear whistle sounded from about the wooded
bend of the river above.

"Boat coming," said North, "Clear out of the way, boys."

He began at once to operate the winch which drew the long slanting swing
boom out of the channel, for the River was navigable water, and must not
be obstructed. In a moment appeared the _Lucy Belle_, a
shallow-draught, flimsy-looking double decker, with two slim
smokestacks side by side connected by a band of fancy grill-work, a
walking beam, two huge paddle boxes and much white paint. She sheered
sidewise with the current around the bend, and headed down upon them
accompanied by a vast beating of paddle wheels. Bobby could soon make
out atop the walking-beam, the swaying iron Indian with bent bow, and
the piles of slabs which constituted the _Lucy Belle_'s fuel. Almost
immediately she was passing, within ten feet or so of the hut. The water
boiled and eddied among the piles, rushing in and sucking back. A fat,
ruddy-faced man in official cap and citizen's clothes leaned over the
rail.

"Well, you made her to-day," shouted North.

"Bet ye," called the man with a grin. "Only aground once."

The _Lucy Belle_ swept away with an air of pride. She made the trip to
and from Redding, forty miles up the River, twice a week. Sometimes she
came through in a day. Oftener she ran aground.

Now Bobby reverted to his original idea.

"I'd like to walk on the logs," said he.

"Well, come on, then," said Jimmy Powers.

They retraced their steps along the booms until near the shore.

"You don't want to try her where she's deep," explained Jimmy Powers,
"'Cause then if you should fall in, the logs would close right together
over your head, and then where'd you be?"

Bobby shuddered at this idea, which in the event continued to haunt him
for some days.

"There's a big one," said Jimmy Powers. "Try her."

Bobby stepped out on a big solid-looking log, which immediately proved
to be not solid at all. It dipped one way, Bobby tried to tread the
other. The log promptly followed his suggestion--too promptly. Bobby
soon found himself about two moves behind in this strange new game. He
lost his balance, and the first thing he knew, he found himself waist
deep in the water.

Jimmy Powers laughed heartily; but to Bobby this was no laughing matter.
The penalties attached both by nature and his mother were dire in the
extreme. He foresaw sickness and spankings, both of which had been
promised him in the event of wet feet merely, and here he was dripping
from the waist down! In any other surroundings or with any other company
he would have wept bitterly. Even in the presence of Jimmy Powers his
lower lip quivered; and his soul filled to the very throat with dismay.
Jimmy Powers could not understand his very evident perturbation. If took
a great deal of explanation on Bobby's part; but finally there was
conveyed to the young riverman's understanding a slight notion of the
situation. To the child the day seemed lost; but Jimmy Powers was more
resourceful. He surveyed his charge thoughtfully.

"You're all right, kid," he announced at last. "Your collar's all right,
and your hair ain't wet. The rest'll dry out so nobody will know the
diff'."

Bobby brightened.

"Won't I catch cold?" he asked doubtfully.

"This kind of weather? Naw!" said Jimmy Powers with scorn. "You rustle
in to the cook shanty and get Corrigan to let you sit by the stove."

Bobby said farewell to his guide, and presented himself to the cook.

"I fell in," he announced, "can I sit by the stove?"

"Sure" said Corrigan hospitably. "Take a cracker-box and go over by the
wood box. Tryin' to ride a log?"

"Yes" confessed Bobby.

"Well, you want to look out for them," warned Corrigan a little vaguely.
He produced the customary cooky. Bobby sat and steamed, and munched and
told about the fish he had almost caught. He liked Corrigan because the
latter talked to him sensibly, without ill-timed facetiousness, as to an
equal. In a moment Duke thrust his muzzle in the door. Bobby looked
hastily down. His clothes were quite dry.

"Don't tell Papa," he begged.

For answer Corrigan portentously winked one eye, and went on peeling
potatoes. After a moment Mr. Orde appeared at the door.

"Bobby here?" he inquired. "Oh yes! Come on, youngster."

Bobby showed himself with considerable trepidation; but apparently Mr.
Orde noticed nothing wrong, and the little boy's spirits rose. The team
was waiting, and they mounted the buggy at once. Duke fell in behind
them soberly. For him the freshness of the expedition was over. It was
now merely a case of get back home.

"Have a good time?" asked Mr. Orde.

Bobby talked busily all the way in. He told principally of the fish,
although the _Lucy Belle_ and Jimmy Powers came in for a share. From
time to time Mr. Orde said, "That's good," or, "Yes," which sufficed
Bobby. Probably, however, the man heard little of his son's talk. His
mind was very busy with the elements of the game he was playing, sorting
and arranging them, figuring how to earn and borrow the money necessary
to permit his taking advantage of a chance he thought he saw in the
western timber lands. He heard little, to be sure, and yet he was in
reality wholly occupied with the child prattling away at his side--with
his fortune, and his business prospects of thirty years hence.

Under the maples the sun slanted low and golden and mote-laden. Bobby
suddenly felt a little tired, and more than a little hungry. He
descended from the buggy with alacrity. The wetting was forgotten in the
home-coming. Only when washing for dinner did he remember with certain
self-felicitation that even his mother had noticed nothing. For the
first time it occurred to him that his parents were not
omniscient:--that was the evil of the afternoon's experiences. For the
first time also it occurred to him that he possessed the ability to meet
an emergency without their aid:--that was the good of it. And the good
far outweighed the evil.

That night Bobby called upon the Lord to bless those dear to him, as
usual; but he offered on his own account an addendum.

"And make Bobby grow up a big man like Jimmy Powers."




II

THE PICNIC


One Saturday, shortly after, everybody was early afoot in preparation
for a picnic up the River. Bobby had on clean starched brown linen
things, and his hair was parted on one side and very smoothly brushed
across his forehead. His mother had been somewhat inclined to the dark
green velvet suit with the lace collar, but to his great relief his
father had intervened.

"Give the boy a chance," said he, "He'll want to eat peaches and go down
in the engine room, and perhaps catch sunfish."

At the wharf, built along the front of the river at the foot of Main
Street, they could see, when they turned the corner at the engine-house,
the single sturdy stack of the _Robert O_ pouring forth a cloud of gray
smoke, while in front of it fluttered the white of the women's dresses.

"We're going to be late," danced Bobby.

"I guess they'll wait for us," replied Mr. Orde easily. "They know
what's in this," he smiled, patting the hamper he was carrying.

At the wharf they were greeted by a chorus of exclamations from a large
group of people. Mr. and Mrs. Taylor were there, the latter sweet and
dainty in one of the very latest creations in muslin; Mr. and Mrs.
Fuller with Tad and Clifford; young Mr. Carlin from the bank; Mr. and
Mrs. Proctor, and their young-lady daughter wearing a marvellous
"waterfall"; Angus McMullen, alone, his father detained professionally;
Mrs. Cathcart and Georgie; young Bradford carrying his banjo, his
wonderful raiment and his air of vast leisure; Welton, the lumberman,
red-faced, jolly, popular and ungrammatical. The women guarded baskets.
All greeted the Ordes with various degrees of hilarity. When the noise
had died down, a massive and impressive lady, heretofore unnamed,
stepped forward. She held a jewelled arm straight before her, the hand
drooping slightly, so that, although she was in reality of but medium
stature, she gave the impression of condescending from a height.

"Good morning, Mrs. Owen," greeted Mrs. Orde, shaking the proffered
hand.

"Good morning, my dear," replied Mrs. Owen regally. She swept slowly
sideways to reveal a woman and a little girl of seven or eight years,
immediately behind her. "Allow me to present to you my very dear friend,
Mrs. Carleton. Mrs. Carleton is from the city, staying at the Ottawa for
a few weeks, and I knew you would like the chance to show her some of
our beautiful River." Mrs. Carleton, a pretty, modish woman, with the
ease of city manner, bowed quietly and murmured her pleasure. The little
girl looked half bashfully through a wealth of natural curls at the
grown-ups to whom she was presented in the off-hand method one employs
with children. She was altogether a charming little girl. Her hair was
of the colour of ripe wheat; her skin was of the light smooth brown
peculiar to an exceptional blonde complexion tanned in the sun; her
mouth was full and whimsical; and her eyes, strangely enough in one
otherwise so light, were so black as to resemble spots. Her dress was
very simple, very starched, very white. A big leghorn hat with red roses
half hid her head. She was shy, that was easily to be seen; but shyness
was relieved from the awkwardness so usual and so painful in children of
her age by the results of what must have been a careful training. She
answered when she was spoken to, directly and to the point; and yet it
could not but be evident that her spirit fluttered.

The combination was charming; and Mrs. Orde fell to it at once.

"Celia, my dear," she said kindly, "come with me, we're going to have a
nice day together; and I have a little boy named Bobby who will show you
everything."

But now the _Robert O_ gave two impatient toots. Everybody ceased
greeting everybody else, and began to pile the shawls and lunch baskets
aboard. The thick strong gunwale of the _Robert O_ was a foot or so
below the chute level from the wharf. The women were helped aboard
soberly by the men. Miss Proctor, however, slipped little slips and
screamed little screams, while young Mr. Carlin, Bradford and Welton,
with galvanized beaming smiles, all attempted to help her. Mrs. Owen
marched down the chute, waited calmly and without impatience until all
the available men were at hand, and then stepped down majestically with
dignity unimpaired.

Long before this, Bobby had quit the altogether uninteresting wharf. The
_Robert O_ he had seen many times from a distance, and once of twice
near at hand lying at the cribs and piers, but this was his first chance
to explore. Accordingly he dropped down to her deck, and, with the
natural instinct to see as far ahead as possible, marched immediately to
the very prow. The deck proved to slope up-hill strangely, which, in its
unlikeness to any floor Bobby had ever walked on, was in itself a
pleasure. The hawser around the bitt interested him; and the glimpse he
had of the sparkling river slipping toward him from the yellow hills up
stream. He could just rest his chin on the rail to look.

Then he turned his gaze aft; and encountered the amused scrutiny of a
man leaning on a wheel in a little house. The house had big windows, and
on top was an iron eagle with spread wings. Two steps led up to a door
on each side; and Bobby without hesitation entered one of these doors.

The inside of the house he found different from any house he had ever
been in before; and possessed of a strange fascination. There was the
wheel, with projecting handles to every spoke, and above it, racks
containing spyglasses, black pipes, tobacco-tins. At hand projected a
speaking-tube like that in the back hall at home, and two or three
handles connected with wires. Behind the wheel was a broad leather seat;
and clothes on nails; and a chart; and a pilot's licence, of which Bobby
understood nothing, but admired the round gold seals.

"Well, Bobby, what do you think of it?" asked the man.

Bobby had not had time to look at the man. He did so now and liked him.
The first thing he noticed was the man's eyes, which were steady and
unwavering and as blue as the sky. Then he surveyed in turn gravely his
heavy bleached, flaxen moustache; his hard brown cheeks; the round
barrel of his blue-clad body; and his short sturdy legs.

"Think you'd like to run a tug?" inquired this man.

"I don't know," replied Bobby; "what is your name?"

"I'm Captain Marsh," replied the man. He glanced out the open door at
the group on the wharf. "If they're going up past the bend to-day,
they'll have to get a move," he remarked. "Here, Bobby, want to blow the
whistle?"

He lifted the boy up in the hollow of one arm. "There, that's it; that
handle. Pull down on it, and let go."

Bobby did so and his little heart almost stopped at the shock of the
blast, so loud was it, and so near.

"Now again," commanded Captain Marsh.

Bobby recovered and obeyed. The passengers began to embark.

Captain Marsh watched until the last was safely aboard; then he set
Bobby gently to the floor.

"If you want to see out, go sit on the bunk back there," he advised.

Somebody cast off the lines. Captain Marsh pulled the other handle. A
sharp tinkling bell struck somewhere far in the depths of the craft.
Immediately Bobby felt beneath him the upheaval and trembling of some
mighty force. The wharf seemed to slip back. In another moment at a
second tinkle of the bell the tug had gathered headway, and the little
boy was watching with delight the sandhills and buildings on one side
and the other slipping by in regular succession.

Captain Marsh stood easily staring directly ahead of him, and paying no
more attention to the child. Bobby sat very straight in his absorption.
New impressions were coming to him so fast that he had no desire to
move. The slow turn of the great wheel; the throb of the engine; the
swift passing of water; the orderly procession of the river banks; the
feeling of smooth, resistless motion--these sufficed. How long he might
have sat there if undisturbed, it would be hard to say; but at the end
of a few moments Angus McMullen looked in at the door.

"What you stayin' here for, Bobby?" he inquired with contemptuous
wonder. "Come on out and see the big waves we're making."

Outside Bobby found all the grown-ups gathered forward of the pilot
house. The older people were seated on folding camp chairs, the
equilibrium of which they found some difficulty in maintaining on the
sloping deck. Bradford, Carlin, Welton and Miss Proctor, however, had
established themselves in the extreme bow. Miss Proctor perched on the
bitts, while the men stood or leaned near at hand. Occasionally, as the
tug changed course, Miss Proctor would utter a little exclamation and
thrust her arms out aimlessly, as though uncertain. All three of the men
thereupon assured her balance for her. With the group Bobby saw the
little girl with light hair.

"Not up there," advised Angus. "This way." A very narrow passage ran
between the thick gunwale and the deck-house. It sloped down and then
gradually up toward the stern. At its lowest point it seemed to Bobby
fearfully near the river; and as he descended to that point he
discovered that indeed the displacement of rapid running appeared to
force the water even above the level of the deck. Bits of chip, sawdust
and the like shot swiftly by in the smooth, oily curve of the liquid.
The wet smell of it came to Bobby's eager nostrils, the subtle cool
aroma of the river.

But, from a little door level with the deck, smoking a pipe, leaned a
negro who greeted them jovially. He dwelt in a narrow place down in the
hull, filled with machinery and the glow of a furnace. The boys hung in
the opening fascinated by the regular rise and fall of the polished
rods; savouring the feel of heavy heated air and the clean smell of oil.
In a moment the negro flung open an iron door whence immediately sprang
glowing light and a blast of heat. Into this door he thrust two or three
long slabs which he took from the deck on the other side of the tug; and
shut it to with a clang.

After gazing their fill, the boys continued their way back. The
deck-house ended. They found themselves on the broad, flat, spoon-shaped
after-deck occupied by the strong towing-bitts and coils of cable.

"Isn't this great?" asked Angus.

They joined the Fuller boys hanging eagerly over the stern. Here the
wake boiled white and full of bubbles from the action of the powerful
propeller necessary to a towing-tug. Along the edges it was light green
shot with blue; and the central line of its down-section waved from side
to side like a snake. On either side long, slanting waves pushed aside
by the bow surged smoothly away; behind followed other round waves in
regular and diminishing succession. Over them the chips and bark rode
with a jolly, dancing motion.

Shortly, however, the younger people discovered the possibilities of the
after-deck. Miss Proctor leaned her back against the low gunwale astern.
The men disposed themselves about her. They talked with a great deal of
laughter; but Bobby did not find their conversation amusing. Finally
they began to entreat Mr. Bradford to play his banjo. That young
gentleman became suddenly afflicted with shyness.

"I don't play much," he objected. "Honestly I don't--just picked up a
few chords by ear."

"Oh, Mr. _Bradford_," cried Miss Proctor, "I've heard you play
_beautifully_. _Do_ get it."

Mr. Bradford objected further; and was further cajoled by Miss Proctor.
Bobby wondered why he had brought the banjo along, if he didn't want to
play on it. The other men did none of the persuading. Finally Mr.
Bradford procured the instrument. He took some time to tune it; and had
something to say concerning damp air and the strings. Finally he played
the "Spanish Fandango," to the enthusiasm of Miss Proctor and the polite
attention of the other men. This he followed by a song called "Listen to
the Mocking Bird," the chorus to which consisted of complicated gurgling
whistling supposed to represent the song of the mocking bird, though it
is to be doubted if that performer would have recognized himself in it.
Miss Proctor approving of this, Bradford next played a trick piece, in
the course of which he did acrobatics with his instrument, but without
missing a note.

Carlin and Welton finally strolled away unnoticed. The lumberman offered
the other a cigar.

"Ain't no use buckin' the funny man with the banjo, Tommy," he observed
with a rueful grin.

Mr. Bradford now put two pennies under the bridge.

"Makes it sound like a guitar," he explained; and drifted into
thrillingly sentimental selections. He sang three in so low a voice that
Bobby began to think it useless to listen any more; when a loud and
prolonged whistle from the tug drowned all other sounds. Mr. Bradford
looked savage; but the boys were delighted.

"Going to pass the drawbridge!" shrieked Angus.

They raced away to the bow in order to watch the imminence of the great
structure over their heads; to see the smokestack dip back on its hinges
as they passed beneath; and to gloat over the smash of their waves
against the piling of the bridge's foundation. Here Bobby was captured
by Mrs. Orde.

"Here, Bobby," said she, "This is Celia Carleton, and I want you to be
nice to her."

With that she left them staring at each other.

"How do you do?" remarked Bobby gravely.

"How do you do?" said she.

They were no further along.

"I got a new knife," blurted out Bobby, in desperation.

"That's nice," said Celia politely. "Let's see it."

"I haven't got it with me," confessed Bobby. He was ashamed to say that
he was not yet permitted to use it.

He glanced at her sideways. Somehow he liked the fresh clean stiffness
of her starched, skirts, and the biscuit brown of her complexion. He
desired all at once that she think well of him.

"I can jump off our high-board fence to the ground," he boasted.

Celia seemed impressed.

"My knife's nothing," said Bobby, "My father's got a razor that can cut
anything. He lets me take it whenever I want it. It's awful sharp. If I
had it here I could cut this boat right in two with it."

"My!" said Celia, "But I wouldn't want to cut it in two. Would you?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Bobby, his legs apart, his head on one side. He
was sure now that he liked this new acquaintance; she seemed pleasantly
to be awestricken. "Come on, let's go in the back part of the boat" he
suggested, "and I'll show you things."

"All right," said she.

Bobby led her past the scornful Angus to the narrow deck.

"This is the engine room," he announced out of his new knowledge.

But Celia did not care for it.

"It's awfully dirty," said she.

This was a new point of view; and Bobby marvelled. However, she was
delighted with the after-deck, and the wake, and the attendant waves.
Bobby showed them off to her as though they had been his private
possessions. This was the first little girl he had ever known. The
novelty appealed to him; the daintiness of her; the freshness and
cleanness; the dependence of her on Bobby's ten years of experience--all
this brought out the latent and instinctive male admiration of the
child. He remained heedless of the other three boys hanging awkwardly in
the middle distance. All his small store of knowledge he poured out
before her--he told her everything, without reservation--of Duke, and
the sand-hills, and the fort, and Sir Thomas Malory, and the booms, and
the Flobert Rifle, and the "Dutchmen" on the side street. She found it
all interesting. They became very good friends.

In the meantime Mr. Bradford had long since laid aside the banjo, and
was basking in Miss Proctor's unshared attention. The pleased smile
never left his face; the lean of his head bespoke deep deference; the
curve of his body respectful devotion. He talked in a low voice, and
every moment or so Miss Proctor would giggle, or exclaim, "Oh, Mr.
_Bradford_!" in a pleased and reproving voice.

In the meantime the tug was going rapidly up river; and yet, with the
exception of an occasional glance from some isolated individual, and the
sporadic attention of the boys, no one saw what was passing. All were
absorbed by the people, the little happenings and the talk aboard the
craft. So without comment they swept past the tall yellow sand-hills
with their fringe of crested trees on the left; and the wide plain on
the right. Only Bobby remarked the deep bayou in the bosom of the hills
where dreamed in the peace and mystery of an honourable old age the
hulks of a dozen vessels rotting in the sun. The shipyards and the mills
the other side the drawbridge nobody saw, for at that time even Bobby
was absorbed in his new acquaintance.

But beyond that, the boy having offered and the girl received the first
burst of confidence, the children turned their attention to things
passing. They saw the wide marshes of rushes and cat-tails, with their
bayous and channels wherein swam the white-billed mud-hens; and the long
booms to the left filled with brown logs. From this level, low to the
water, these things seemed to them wonderful and vast. After a little
the _Robert O_ whistled again. They passed the swing at the upper end of
the booms. Old man North stood, in the doorway of his hut, smoking his
short black pipe upside down. Bobby was astonished to see how different
the hut looked from this point of view. He would hardly have recognized
it were it not for the swing-tender, who waved his pipe at Bobby when
the tug passed.

"I know him," said Bobby proudly to Celia.

The _Robert O_ swept through, and the long slanting waves, and the round
following waves sucked up and down among the piles.

"Now we're going around the Bend!" cried Bobby excitedly. "I never been
around the Bend!"

But Celia suddenly arose.

"I'm going back to mamma and the rest," she announced.

"Why?" asked Bobby astonished. "Come on; stay here and see what there is
around the Bend."

Celia stood on one foot, her black eyes wide and speculative, staring
past Bobby into some fair realm of feminine caprice. She shook her head,
slowly, so that first a curl on one side, then on the other fell across
her eyes. After a long deliberate moment she turned and went forward,
followed at a distance by the grieved and puzzled Bobby. In the bow she
sidled up to her mother, against whom she leaned lightly, her head on
one side, her eyes dreamy, her hand slipped into one of her mother's
open palms. Bobby, shut out, made his way to the prow, where he rested
his chin on the rail, and rather glumly contemplated the surprises of
"around the Bend."

But over the prow the little boy was the first--except for Captain
Marsh--to see from afar the landing, first as a glimmering shadow under
the reflection of the elms; then as a vague ill-defined form above the
River's glassy surface; finally as a wide, low, T-shaped platform wharf,
reaching its twenty feet from the grassy banks to shimmer in the heat
above its own wavering reflection.

The tug sidled alongside with a great turmoil of white-and-green
bubble-shot water drifting around in eddies from her labouring
propeller. Captain Marsh, after one prolonged jingle of his bell emerged
from his pilot-house, seized a heavy rope, and sprang ashore. The end of
the rope he cast around a snubbing-pile.

But some inset of current or excess of momentum made it impossible to
hold her. The rope creaked and cried as it was dragged around the smooth
snubbing-pile. Finally the end was drawn so close that Captain Marsh was
in danger of jamming his hands. At once, with inconceivable dexterity
and quickness, he cast loose, ran forward, wrapped the line three times
around another pile farther on and braced his short, sturdy legs against
the post for a trial of strength. Here the heavy, slow surge of the tug
was effectually checked. Captain Marsh turned his wide grin of triumph
toward his passengers. Everybody laughed, and prepared to disembark.

Between the gunwale and the wharf's edge could be seen a narrow glinting
strip of very black water. The _Robert O_ slowly approached and receded
from the dock; and this strip of water correspondingly widened and
narrowed. Over it every one must step; and the anxieties and precautions
were something tremendous. Bobby came toward the last, and was lifted
bodily across, his sturdy legs curling up under like a crab's.

The wharf he found broad and square and shady, with a narrow way leading
ashore. In the middle of it were piled, awaiting shipment on the _Lucy
Belle_, three tiers of the old-fashioned, open-built, pail-shaped
peach-baskets containing the famous Michigan fruit. Each was filled to a
gentle curve above the brim, and over the top was wired pink mosquito
netting. This at once protected the fruit from insects; added to the
brilliancy and softness of its colouring; and lent to the rows of
baskets a gay and holiday appearance. The men examined them attentively,
talking of "cling stones," "free stones," "Crawfords," and other
technicalities which Bobby could not understand. When the last lunch
basket had been passed ashore, all crossed to the bank of the river and
the grove of elms, leaving the _Robert O_ and Captain Marsh and the
engineer.

In the grove the boys immediately scattered in search of adventure. All
but Bobby. He remained with the older people, wishing mightily to take
Celia with him; but suddenly afraid to approach her with the direct
request. So he contented himself with expressive gestures, which she,
close to her mother, chose to ignore.

Two of the men disappeared up the path, one carrying an empty pail. The
others went busily about collecting wood, building a fire, smoothing out
a place to spread the rugs which would serve as a table. All the women
fluttered about the lunch baskets examining the contents, discussing
them, finally distributing them in accordance with the mysterious system
considered proper in such matters. Bobby, left alone, without occupation
on the one hand, nor the desire for his companions' amusements on the
other, was then the only one at leisure to look about him, to observe
through the alders that fringed the bank the hide-and-seek glint of the
River; to gaze with wonder and a little awe on the canopy of waving
light green that to his childish sense of proportion seemed as far above
him as the skies themselves; to notice how the sunlight splashed through
the rifts as though it had been melted and poured down from above; to
feel the friendly warmth of summer air under trees; to savour the hot
springwood-smells that wandered here and there in the careless
irresponsibility of forest spirits off duty. This was Bobby's first
experience with woods; and his keenest perceptions were alive to them.
The tall trunks of trees rising from the graceful, fragile,
half-translucence of undergrowth; little round tunnels to a distant
delicate green; lights against shadows, and shadows against lights; the
wing-flashes of birds hidden and mysterious; and above all the
marvellous green transparence of all the shadows, which tinted the very
air itself, so that to the little boy it seemed he could bathe in it as
in a clear fountain--all these came to him at once. And each brought by
the hand another wonder for recognition, so that at last the picnic
party disappeared from his vision, the loud and laughing voices were
hushed from his ears. He stood there, lips apart, eyes wide, spirit
hushed, looking half upward. The light struck down across him.

The picnic party went about its business unaware of the wonderful thing
transacting in their very presence. Men do not grow as plants, so many
inches, so many months. The changes prepare long and in secret, without
visible indication. Then swiftly they take place. The qualities of the
soul unfold silently their splendid wings.

After a moment the boys ran whooping through the woods from one
direction demanding food; the two men came shouting from the other
carrying a pail of water and an open basket of magnificent peaches.
Bobby shivered slightly, and looked about him, half dazed, as though he
had just awakened. Then quietly he crept to a tree near the table and
sat down. For perhaps a minute he remained there; then with a rush came
the reaction. Bobby was wildly and reprehensibly naughty.

Once in a while, and after meals, Mrs. Orde allowed him a single piece
of sponge-cake; no more. But now, Bobby, catching the eye of Celia upon
him, grimaced, pantomimed to call attention, and deliberately _broke_
off a big chunk of Mrs. Owen's frosted work of art and proceeded to
devour it. Celia's eyes widened with horror; which to Bobby's depraved
state of mind was reward enough. Then Mrs. Orde uttered a cry of
astonishment; Mrs. Owen a dignified but outraged snort; and Bobby was
yanked into space.

After the storm had cleared, he found himself, somewhat dishevelled,
aboard the _Robert O_, entrusted to Captain Marsh, provided with three
bread-and-butter sandwiches, and promised a hair-brush spanking for the
morrow.

Mrs. Orde was not only mortified, but shocked to the very depths of her
faith.

"I don't know how to explain it!" she said again and again. "Bobby is
always so good about such things! I've brought him up--and
_deliberately_. My dear Mrs. Owen, such a beautiful frosting, and to
have it ruined like that!"

But Mrs. Fuller, fat, placid, perhaps slightly stupid, here rose to the
heights of what her husband always admiringly called "horse sense."

"Now, Carroll," she said, "stop your worrying about it. You'll get
yourself all worked up and spoil your lunch and ours, all for nothing.
Children will be naughty sometimes. I was naughty myself. So were you,
probably. That's human nature. Just don't worry about it and spoil the
good time."

Mrs. Orde thereupon fell silent, for she was a sensible woman and could
see the point as to lessening the other's enjoyment. Little by little
she cooled off, until at last she was able to join in the fun; although
always in the background of her mind persisted the necessity of knowing
a _reason_ for such an outbreak.

The flurry over, Welton insisted that they all admire the peaches.

"Best Michigan produces," he boasted. "Every one big as a coffee-cup;
and perfect in shape, colour and flavour. Freestone, too. Nothing
exceptional about them either. Millions more just like 'em. Can't match
them anywhere in the world."

"Saw by the paper this spring that the peach crop was ruined by the
frost," marvelled Carlin.

Taylor laughed.

"My dear fellow, the Michigan peach crop is destroyed regularly _every_
spring. Seem to be enough peaches by August, however."

They fell to on the lunch. When they had eaten all they could, there
still remained enough to have fed four other picnics of the same size as
their own.

Bobby remained not long cast down, however.

"Been at it, have you?" observed Captain Marsh after the irate parent
had departed. "What was it this time?"

"I ate a piece of cake," replied Bobby.

"H'm! That doesn't sound very bad."

"It was Mrs. Owen's cake," supplemented Bobby.

"I see," said the Captain gravely in enlightenment. "What are you going
to do now?"

"I'm going to eat my lunch," Bobby informed him, showing the three
bread-and-butter sandwiches.

"H'm. So'm I," said the Captain. "Better join me."

They entered the pilot-house and established themselves facing each
other on the wide leather seat. The Captain produced a tin dinner-pail
with a cupola top such as Bobby had often seen men carrying, and which
he had always desired to investigate. This came apart in the middle. The
top proved to contain cold coffee all sugared and creamed. The bottom
had a fringed red-checked napkin, two slabs of pie, two doughnuts, and
four thick ham sandwiches made of coarse bread. They ate. Captain Marsh
insisted on Bobby's accepting a doughnut and a piece of pie. Bobby did
so, with many misgivings; but found them delicious exceedingly because
they were so different from what he was used to at home.

"Now," said the Captain, brushing away the crumbs with one comprehensive
gesture, "what do you want to do now? You got to stay aboard, you
know?"

"Can't we fish?" suggested Bobby timidly.

The Captain looked about him with some doubt.

"Well," he decided at last, "we might try. The time of day's wrong, and
the place don't look much good; but there's no harm trying."

Two long bamboo poles fitted with lines, hooks, and sinkers were slung
alongside the deck-house. Captain Marsh produced worms in a can. The two
sat side by side, dangling their feet over the stern, the poles slanting
down toward the dark water, silent and intent. In not more than two
minutes Bobby felt his pole twitch. Without much difficulty he drew to
the surface a broad flat little fish that flashed as he turned in the
water.

"Hi!" cried Bobby, "there _are_ fish here!"

"Oh, that's a sunfish," said Captain Marsh.

Bobby looked up.

"Aren't sunfish good?" he inquired anxiously.

Captain Marsh opened his mouth to reply, caught Bobby's apprehensive and
half-disappointed expression, and thought better of it.

"Why, sure!" said he. "They're a fine fish."

At the end of an hour Bobby had acquired a goodly string. Captain Marsh
early drew in his line, saying he preferred to smoke. Bobby had an
excellent time. He was very much surprised at the return of the picnic
party. The period of punishment had not hung heavy.

By the time all had embarked, the steam pressure was up. The _Robert O_
swung down stream for home.

But now Celia, forgetting her earlier caprice of indifference, watched
Bobby constantly. After a little he became aware of it, and was
flattered in his secret soul, but he attempted no more advances, nor did
he vouchsafe her the smallest glance. Soon she sidled over to him shyly.

"What made you do it?" she asked in a whisper.

"Do what?" pretended Bobby.

"Break Mrs. Owen's cake."

"'Cause I wanted to."

"Didn't you know 't was very bad?"

"'Course."

Celia contemplated Bobby with a new and respectful interest. "I wouldn't
dare do it," she acknowledged at last. In this lay confession of the
reason for her change of whim; but Bobby could not be expected to
realize that. With masculine directness he seized the root of his
grievance and brought it to light.

"Why were you so mean this noon?" he demanded.

She made wide eyes.

"I wasn't mean. How was I mean?"

"You went away; and you wouldn't look at me or talk to me."

"I didn't care whether I talked to you or not," she denied. "I wanted to
be with my mamma."

So on the return trip, too, Bobby had a good time. The wharf surprised
him, and the flurry of disembarkation prevented his saying formal
good-bye to Celia. He waved his hand at her, however, and grinned
amiably. To his astonishment she gave him the briefest possible nod over
her shoulder; and walked away, her hand clasping that of her mother,
even yet a dainty airy figure in her mussed white dress still flaring
with starch, her slim black legs, and her wide leghorn hat with the red
roses.

The hurt and puzzle of this lasted him to his home, and caused him to
forget the spanking in prospect. He ate his supper in silence, quite
unaware of his mother's disapproval. After supper he hunted up Duke and
sat watching the sunset behind the twisted pines on the sandhills. He
did much cogitating, but arrived nowhere.

"Bobby!" called his mother. "Come to bed."

He said good night to Duke, and obeyed.

"Now, Bobby," said Mrs. Orde, "I don't like to do this, but you have
been a very naughty boy to-day. Come here."

Bobby came. The hair brush did its work. Usually in such case Bobby
howled before the first blow fell, but to-night he set his lips and
uttered no sounds. _Slap!_ _slap!_ _slap!_ _slap!_ with deliberate
spaces between. Bobby was released. He climbed down, his soul tense,
with agony, but his face steady--and laughed!

It was not much of a laugh, to be sure, but a laugh it was. Mrs. Orde,
shocked, scandalized, outraged and now thoroughly angry, yanked her son
again across her knees.

"Why! I never heard of anything like it!" she cried. "You naughty,
_naughty_ boy! I don't see what's got into you to-day. I'll teach you to
laugh at my spankings!"

Bobby did not laugh at this spanking. It was more than a stone could
have borne. After the fifth well-directed and vigorous smack, he howled.

Later, when the tempest of sobs had stilled to occasional gulps, Mrs.
Orde questioned him about it. They were rocking back and forth in the
big chair, the twilight all about them. Bobby said he was sorry and his
mamma had cuddled him and loved him, and all was forgiven.

"Now, Bobby, tell mamma," soothed Mrs. Orde. "Why were you such a bad
little boy as to laugh at mamma when she spanked you just now?"

"I wasn't bad," protested Bobby, "I was trying to be good. You told me
not to cry when I got hurt, but to jump up and laugh about it."

"Oh, my baby, my poor little man!" cried Mrs. Orde between laughter and
tears.

They rocked some more.

"Now, Bobby, tell mamma," insisted Mrs. Orde gently. "Why did you break
Mrs. Owen's cake? Were you as hungry as all that?"

"No ma'am," replied Bobby.

"Why did you do it, then?"

"I don't know."

Mr. Orde laughed uproariously when told of Bobby's attempt to be brave
under affliction.

"The little snoozer!" he cried. "Guess I'll go up and see him."

Bobby loved to have his father lie beside him on the bed. They never
said much; but the little boy lay, looking up through the dimness,
bathed in a deep comfortable content at the man's physical presence.

To-night they lay thus in silence for at least five minutes. Then Bobby
spoke.

"Papa," said he "don't you think Celia Carleton is pretty?"

"Very pretty, Bobby."

Another long silence.

"Papa," complained Bobby at last, "why does Celia be nice to me; and
then not be nice to me; and change all the while?"

Mr. Orde chuckled softly to himself.

"That's the way of 'em, Bobby," said he. "There's no explaining it. All
little girls are that way--and big girls, too," he added.

So long a pause ensued that Mr. Orde thought his son must be asleep, and
was preparing softly to escape.

"Papa," came the little boy's voice from the darkness, "I like her just
the same."

"Carroll," said Mr. Orde to his wife as blinking he entered the lighted
sitting room, "you can recover your soul's equanimity. I've found out
why he broke into the cake."

"Why?" asked Mrs. Orde eagerly.

"He was showing off before that little Carleton girl," replied Mr.
Orde.




III

HIDE AND COOP


Early Monday morning Bobby was afoot and on his way to the Ottawa Hotel.
He ran fast until within a block of it; then unexpectedly his gait
slackened to a walk, finally to a loiter. He became strangely reluctant,
strangely bashful about approaching the place. This was not to be
understood.

Usually when he wanted to go play with any one, he simply went and did
so. Now all sorts of barriers seemed to intervene, and the worst of it
was that these barriers he seemed to have spun from out his own soul.
Then too a queer feeling suddenly invaded his chest, exactly like that
he remembered to have experienced during the downward rush of a swing.
Bobby could not comprehend these things; they just were. He was fairly
to the point of deciding to go back and look at the Flobert Rifle, in
the shop window, when a group of children ran out from the wide office
doors to the croquet court at the side.

Among them Bobby made out Celia, a different Celia from her of the
picnic. Her curls danced as full of life and light as ever; the biscuit
brown of her complexion glowed as smooth and clean; even from a distance
Bobby could see the contrast of her black eyes; but on her head she wore
a brown chip hat; her gown was of plain blue gingham; her slim straight
legs were encased in heavy strong stockings. She looked like a healthy,
lively little girl out for a good time; and the sight cheered Bobby's
wavering courage as nothing else could. His vague ideas of retreat were
discarded.

But he did not know how to approach. The children inside the low rail
fence were placing the brilliantly-striped wooden balls in a row in
order to determine by 'pinking' at the stake who should have the
advantageous last shot. Bobby, irresolute, halted outside, shifting
uneasily, wanting to join the group, but withheld by the unwonted
bashfulness. Amid shouts and exclamations each clicked his mallet
against his ball, and immediately ran forward with the greatest
eagerness to see how near the stake he had come. At last the group
formed close. A moment's dispute cleared. Celia had won, and now stood
erect, her cheeks flushing, her eyes dancing with triumph. In so doing
she caught sight of Bobby hesitating outside.

"Why, there's Bobby!" she cried. "Come on in, Bobby, and play!"

At the sound of her voice, all his timidity vanished. He entered boldly
and joined the others.

"This is Bobby," announced Celia by way of general introduction, "and
this," she continued, turning to Bobby, "is Gerald, and Morris, and
Kitty and Margaret."

"Hullo," said Morris, "Grab a mallet, and come on."

Bobby liked Morris, who was a short, redheaded boy of jolly aspect.
Gerald, a youth of perhaps twelve years of age, rather tall and slender,
of very dark, clear, pale complexion, nodded carelessly. Bobby took an
immediate distaste for him. He looked altogether too superior, and
sleepy and distinguished--yes, and stylish. Bobby was very young and
inexperienced; but even he could feel that Gerald's round straw hat, and
norfolk-cut jacket, and neat, loose, short trousers buckled at the knee
contrasted a little more than favourably with his own chip hat, blue
blouse and tight breeches. Also he was already dusty, while Gerald was
immaculate.

As to Kitty and Margaret, they were nice, neat, clean, pretty little
girls--but not like Celia!

Bobby found a mallet and ball in the long wooden case, and joined the
game. He was not skilful at it, and soon fell behind the others in the
progress through the wickets. Indeed, when, after two strokes, he had at
last gained position for the "middle arch," he met Gerald coming the
other way. Gerald shot for his ball; hit it; and then, with a disdainful
air, knocked Bobby away out of bounds across the lawn. This was quite
within the rules, but it made Bobby angry just the same. As he trudged
doggedly away after his ball, he felt himself very much alone under what
he thought must be the derisive eyes of all the rest. The game ended
before he had gained the turning stake.

"Skunked," remarked Morris cheerfully.

Gerald said nothing, did not even look; but Bobby liked Morris's comment
better than Gerald's assumed indifference.

"Let's have another game--partners," suggested Gerald to Celia.

But Bobby, to his own great surprise, found courage to speak up.

"Let's not play croquet any more," said he. "Let's have a game of
Hi-Spy."

"It's too hot," interposed Gerald quickly.

The others said nothing, but with the child's keen instinct for the
drama, had drawn aside in favour of the principal actors. Gerald stood
by the stake, leaning indolently on his mallet, his long black lashes
down-cast over the dark pallor of his cheeks, very handsome, very
graceful. Bobby had drawn near on Celia's other side. The comparison
showed all his freckles and the unformed homeliness of his rather dumpy,
sturdy figure; it showed also the honest dull red of his cheeks and the
clear unfaltering gray of his eyes. Celia, between them, looked down,
tapping her croquet ball with the tip of her shoe.

"I don't think it's very hot," she said at last, looking up. "Let's play
Hi-Spy."

A wave of glowing triumph rushed through Bobby's soul. Gerald merely
shrugged his shoulders.

But unmixed joy was to be a short-lived emotion with Bobby as far as
Celia was concerned. He knew lots of fine hiding-places about the
grounds of the Ottawa, and he promised himself that he would take Celia
to them. They could hide together; and that would be delightful.

Morris counted out first to be "it." He leaned his arm against a post,
his head against his arm, and closed his eyes.

"Ten-ten-double-ten-forty-five-fifteen" he repeated over ten times as
rapidly as possible. That was his way of counting a thousand.

The other children scurried off as fast as their legs could carry them
in order to reach concealment before the end of the count. And somehow,
against his will, Bobby found himself cast in the hurry of the moment
with Kitty instead of with Celia. And Celia he saw disappear in Gerald's
convoy.

"Coming!" roared Morris, uncovering his eyes.

"Oh dear, he's coming!" cried Kitty in distress, "and we're not hid!
Where shall we go? Don't you know any good places?"

But Bobby, still confused over his disappointment, had not the wits
wherewith to think in so pressing an emergency. He vacillated between
pillar and post; and so was espied by the goal-keeper. Morris
immediately set himself in rapid motion for the "home."

"One, two, three for Bobby Orde!" he cried, striking the post
vigorously. "One, two, three for Kitty Clark!"

The two reluctantly appeared.

"There, now, you got us caught," accused Kitty sulkily.

"Never mind," consoled Bobby, "anyway he saw me first. I'm it!"

Morris was off prowling after more prey. As he disappeared around the
corner of the building a rapid flash of skirts was visible from the
other. Morris caught it; and, turning, raced with all his might back to
the home goal. But Margaret had too good a head start. She arrived
first; and immediately began to dance around and around, her long legs
twinkling, her two thick braids flying.

"In free! In free!" she shrieked over and over again.

There still remained Celia and Gerald. Morris set himself very carefully
to find them, prowling into all likely places, but returning abruptly
every moment or so in order to forestall or discourage attempts to get
in. He proved unsuccessful; nor did his absence seem to afford the
others chances to run home. The other three watched with growing
impatience.

"Oh, Morris, let them in!" begged Kitty. Bobby felt a glow of kindliness
toward her for making the suggestion. He would not have proffered it
himself for worlds. Morris, however, was obstinate. He continued his
search for at least ten minutes. At last he had to give in.

"All sorts in free!" he called at the top of his voice.

Celia and Gerald appeared smiling and unruffled. They refused to divulge
their hiding-place.

"We'll save it until next time," said Celia.

Bobby blinded his eyes and counted. He had no interest in the game, and
experienced inside himself a half-sick, hollow feeling unique in his
experience. Morris, Kitty and Margaret got in free, simply because his
attention was too lax. Gerald and Celia had once more disappeared. After
a decent interval the others became clamorous again for general amnesty.

"Blind again, Bobby," they urged, "let them in free."

But Bobby continued to search beyond the places he had already looked.
His further knowledge of the hotel grounds was a negligible quantity; so
he began, consistently to eliminate all possibilities. From one corner
he zigzagged back and forth, testing every nook and cranny that might
contain a human being. Thus he examined every foot of the place; but
without results. He was puzzled; but he would not give up. Methodically,
and to the vast disgust of the others, he began over again at the corner
from which he had started. No results.

"No fair outside the grounds!" he shouted. To this of course, no answer
came.

"Give it up!" urged the others.

"I won't!" insisted Bobby doggedly.

He did not know where to search next, so he looked up. The hotel was
provided with a broad shady flat-roofed verandah. At the edge of this
roof, projecting the least bit above, Bobby glimpsed a fold of blue. The
pair were evidently lying at full length in the spacious water gutter.
The blue could be nothing but the gingham of Celia's dress. Nevertheless
Bobby walked to goal and calmly announced.

"One, two, three for Gerald--on the verandah roof!" And then, after a
deliberate pause, "All sorts in free!"

Gerald blinded. Bobby, with determination, took Celia's hand, and
breathlessly the pair sped away. The little boy's first move was to
place the hotel building between himself and Gerald.

"Can you climb a fence?" he asked hurriedly.

"If it isn't too high."

"Come on then, I know a dandy place."

Bobby attacked the board fence behind the hotel. Two packing-boxes of
different heights made the problem of ascent easy. But the other side
was a sheer drop; and Celia was afraid.

"I can't!" she cried. "It's too far!"

"Just drop," advised Bobby desperately. "Hurry up! He'll be around the
corner!"

"I daren't!" cried poor Celia. "You go first."

Promptly Bobby dangled; and dropped.

"See; it's easy. Come on, I'll catch you!"

Finally Celia wiggled over the edge, shut her eyes, and let go. She
landed directly on Bobby, and the two went down in a heap.

"Come on!" whispered Bobby. "Scoot!"

Before them rose a whitewashed barn. Celia's hand in his, Bobby darted
in at the open doorway, and more by instinct than by sight, found a
rickety steep flight of stairs and ascended to the hay-mow.

"There, isn't that great?" he whispered.

They sank back on the soft fragrant hay, and breathed luxuriously after
the haste of the last few moments. A score of mice had scurried away at
their abrupt entrance; and the fairy-like echoes of these animals' tiny
feet seemed to linger in the twilight. Through cracks long pencils of
sunlight lay across the hay and the dim criss-cross of the rafters
above. Dust motes crossed them in lazy eddies, each visible for a golden
moment as it entered the glow of its brief importance, only to be
blotted into invisibility as it passed.

"Is this a fair hide?" whispered Celia. "This is outside the grounds."

"It's the hotel barn," replied Bobby. "I bet he doesn't find us here."

They fell silent, because they were hiding, and in that silence they
unconsciously drew nearer to each other. The delicious aroma of the hay
overcame their spirits with a drowsiness. New sensations thronged on
Bobby's spirit, made receptive by the narcotic influences of the tepid
air, the mysterious dimness, the wands of gold, the floating brief
dust-motes. He wanted to touch Celia; and he found himself diffident. He
wanted to hear her voice; and he suddenly discovered in himself an
embarrassment in addressing her which was causeless and foolish. He
wanted to look at her; and he did so; but it was not frankly and
openly, as he had always looked at people before. His shy side-glances
delighted in the clear curve of her cheeks; the soft wheat-colour of her
curls; the dense black of her half-closed eyes; the brown of her
complexion; the sweet cleanliness of her. A faint warm fragrance
emanated from her. Bobby's heart leaped and stood still. All at once he
knew what was the matter. It is a mistake to imagine that children do
not recognize love when it comes to them. Love requires no announcement,
no definition, no description. Only in later years when the first fresh
purity of the heart has gone, we may perhaps require of him an
introduction.

At once Bobby felt swelling within his breast a great longing, a hunger
which filled his throat, a yearning that made him faint. For what? Who
can tell. The idea of possession was still years distant; the thought of
a caress had not yet come to him; the bare notion that Celia could care
for him had not as yet unfolded its dazzling wings; even the desire to
tell her was not yet born. Probably at no other period of a human
being's life is the passion of love so pure, so divorced from all
considerations of the material, or of self, so shiningly its ethereal
spiritual soul. Yet love it is; such love as the grown man feels for his
mate; with all the great inner breathless longings of the highest
passion.

The two lay curled side by side in their nests of hay. Time passed, but
they did not know of it. The little boy was drowned in the depths of
this new thing that had come to him. Celia filled the world to him. His
reverie brimmed with her. Yet somehow also there came to him other
things, unsought, and floated about him, and became more fully part of
him than they had ever been before. It was an incongruous assortment;
some of the knights of Sir Malory; the River above the booms, with the
brown logs; a plume of white steam against the dazzling blue sky; the
mellow six-o'clock church bell to which he arose every morning; the
snake-fence by the sandhill as it was in winter, with the wreaths of
snow; and all through everything the feel of the woods he had seen at
the picnic, their canopy of green so far above, their splashes of
sunlight through the rifts, the friendly summer warmth of their air,
their hot, spicy wood-smells wandering to and fro; their tall trunks,
their undergrowth, with the green tunnels far through them, the flashes
of their birds' wings, their green transparent shadows. These came to
him, vaguely, and their existence seemed explained. They were because
Celia was. And so, in the musty loft of an ill-kept stable, Bobby
entered another portion of the beautiful heritage that was some day to
be his.




IV

THE PRINTING PRESS


Next week was Bobby's birthday. He received many gifts, but as usual,
saved the biggest package until the last. It had come wrapped in stout
manila paper, tied with a heavy cord, and ornamented with the red
sticker and seals of the Express Company. With some importance Bobby
opened his new knife and cut the string. The removal of the wrapper
disclosed a light wooden box. This was filled with excelsior, which in
turn enclosed a paper parcel. A card read:

"For Bobby on his eleventh birthday, from Grandpa and Grandma."

Wrought to trembling eagerness by the continued delays, Bobby tore off
the paper. Within was a small toy cast-iron printing press. Its
ink-plate was flat and stationary. Its chase held two wooden grooves
into which the type could be clamped by means of end screws. The
mechanism was worked by a small square lever at the back. Bobby opened
a red pasteboard box to discover a miniature font of Old English type; a
round tin box to uncover sticky but delicious-smelling printer's ink; a
package to reveal the ink-roller and a parcel to complete the outfit
with a pack of cheap pasteboard cards.

"What do you think of that?" cried Mrs. Orde.

"Now you'll be able to go into business, won't you?" said his father.
"You might make me twenty-five calling cards for a starter."

Immediately breakfast was finished, then Bobby took his printing press
upstairs and installed it on his little table. He would have liked very
much to show Celia his gifts, but this Mrs. Orde peremptorily forbade.

After some manipulation he loosened the chase and laid it on the table.
Then he began to pick out the necessary type and arrange it in the upper
grove to spell his father's name. The replacement of the chase was easy
after his experience in taking it out. Ink he smeared on the top plate,
according to directions, rolling it back and forth with the composition
roller until it was evenly distributed. Nothing remained now but to
adjust the guides which would hold the cards on the tympan. Bobby
passed the inked roller evenly back and forth across the face of the
type, inserted a card and bore down confidently on the lever. He
contemplated this result:

[Illustration]

Besides the transpositions and inversions, the impression itself was
blurred and imperfect and smeared with ink.

After the first gasp of dismay, Bobby set to work in the dogged
analytical mood which difficulties already aroused in him. The remedy
for the inversion was plain enough. Bobby changed the type end for end
and turned the R and the E right side up, but he worked slower and
slower and his brow was wrinkled. Suddenly it cleared.

"Oh, I know!" said he aloud. "It's just like the looking-glass!"

Satisfied on this point, he finished the resetting quickly and tried
again. This time the name read correctly but it slanted down the card
and was blurred and inky. Bobby fussed for a long time to get the line
straight. Experiment seemed only to approximate. One end persisted in
rising too high or sinking too low. The problem was absorbing and all
the time Bobby was thinking busily along, to him, original lines. At
last, by means of a strip of paper and a pencil he measured equidistants
from top and bottom of the platen, adjusted the guides in accordance and
so that problem was solved. Bobby, flushed and triumphant, addressed
himself to remedying the blurring.

"Too much ink," said he.

Obviously the way to remedy too much ink was to rub some of it off and
the directest means to that end was the ever-useful pocket handkerchief.
The paste proved very sticky and the handkerchief was effective only at
the expense of great labour. Bobby ruined three more cards before he
established the principle that superfluous ink must be removed not only
from the plate but from the roller and type as well.

But now further difficulties intervened before perfection. Some of the
letters printed heavily and some scarcely showed at all. Here Bobby
entered the realm of experiments which could not be lightly solved in
the course of a half hour. He tried raising the type to a common level
and locking them as tightly as possible, but always they slipped. He
attempted to insert bits of paper under what proved to be the shorter
types. This improved the results somewhat, but was nevertheless far from
satisfactory. By now he had learned not to use a fresh card every time.
The first half-dozen were printed back and forth, front and behind.
Bobby was smeared with more ink than the printing press. Scissors,
pencils, paper, used cards and type were scattered everywhere. All the
time his fingers were working his brain, too, was busy, searching back
from the result to the cause, seeking the requisite modification. Mr.
Orde, returning at noon, burst out laughing at the sight.

"Well, youngster," said he, "how do you like being a printer?"

"Oh Bobby!" cried Mrs. Orde behind him. "You are a _sight_! Don't you
know it's time to get ready for lunch?"

Bobby looked up in bewildered surprise. Lunch! Why he had hardly begun!
His father was chuckling at him.

"Benzine will take it off," said Mr. Orde to his wife.

Bobby caught at the hint.

"Will benzine take off the ink?" he cried eagerly.

"It's supposed to," replied his father; "but in your case----"

"Can I have a little, in a bottle, and a toothbrush?" begged Bobby. He
saw in a flash the solution of the ink problem.

"We'll see," said Mrs. Orde. "Come with me, now."

They disappeared in the direction of the bathroom. Mr. Orde examined the
cards with some amusement.

"Well, sonny," said he to Bobby at lunch. "The printing doesn't seem to
be a howling success. What are you going to do about it?"

"I don't know," replied Bobby; "but I'll fix it all right yet."

Bobby was busy with his birthday party all that afternoon, but next
morning he was afoot even before the Catholic Church bell called him.
The press occupied him until breakfast time, but he made small progress.
His father's morning paper filled him with envy by reason of its clear
impression. After breakfast he begged a tiny bottle of benzine and an
old toothbrush from his mother, and went at it again for nearly an hour.
The benzine worked like a charm. The type came out bright as new and the
old ink dissolved readily from the platen and roller. Bobby took note
that he should have cleared them the day before, as a night's neglect
had left them sticky. With it all he seemed to have arrived at a dead
wall. All his limited mechanical ingenuity was exhausted and still the
letters printed either too deep or too light. About half-past nine he
cleaned up and went down to the Ottawa.

His friends there were all sitting under the trees before the hotel,
resting rather vacantly after a hard romp. Celia perched high on a root,
her curls against the brown bark, her hat dangling by its elastic from a
forefinger, her lips parted, her eyes vacant. Gerald leaned gracefully
against the trunk. Bobby sat cross-legged on the ground watching
her--and him. Kitty and Margaret reclined flat on their backs, gazing up
through the leaves. Morris alone showed a trace of activity. He had
fished from his pockets the short, blunt stub of a pencil, a penny and a
piece of tissue paper. The latter he had superimposed over the penny and
by rubbing with the pencil was engaged in making a tracing of the
pattern on the coin. Through his preoccupation Bobby at last became
cognizant of this process. He sat and watched it with increasing
interest.

"By Jimmy!" he shouted leaping to his feet.

"What is it?" they cried, startled by the abrupt movement.

"I got to go home," said Bobby.

They expostulated vehemently, for his departure spoiled the even number
for a game. But he would not listen, even to Celia's reproachful voice.

"I'll be back after lunch," he called, and departed rapidly. Duke arose
from his warm corner, stretched deliberately, yawned, glanced at the
children, half wagged his tail and finally trotted after.

Bobby rushed home as fast as he could; broke into the house like a
whirlwind; tore upstairs and, breathless with speed and the excitement
of a new idea, flung himself into the chair before his little table. He
had seen the solution. To the flash of embryonic creative instinct
vouchsafed him, Morris's penny had represented type, the inequalities of
its design were the inequalities of alignment over which he had
struggled so long and the pressure of the pencil and tissue paper
paralleled the imposition of the card on the letters. But in the case of
Morris's penny the type did not conform to the paper and the pressure,
_the paper conformed to the type_.

His brain afire with eagerness, Bobby first stretched several clean
sheets of paper over the platen and clamped them down; then he inked the
type and pressed down the lever. Thus he gained an impression on the
platen itself. At this point he hesitated. On his father's desk down
stairs was mucilage, but mucilage was strictly forbidden. The hesitation
was but momentary, however, for the creative spirit in full blast does
not recognize ordinary restrictions. With his own round-pointed scissors
he cut out little squares of paper. These he pasted on the platen over
the letters whose impression had been too faint. A few moments adjusted
the guides. Bobby inked the type and inserted a fresh card. The moment
of test was at hand.

He paused and drew a long breath. From one point of view the matter was
a small one. From another it was of the exact importance of a little
boy's development, for it represented the first fruits of all the
hereditary influences that had silently and through the small
experiences of babyhood, led him over the edge of the dark, warm nest to
this first independent trial of the wings. He pressed the lever gently
and took out the card. It was not a very good job of printing; the ink
was not quite evenly distributed, the type were so heavily impressed
that they showed through the reverse of the card like stamping; _but
each letter had evidently received the same amount of pressure!_

Bobby uttered a little chuckle of joy--he had not time for more--and
plunged into the rectification of minor errors. And by noon the press
was working steadily, though slowly, and a very neat array of _Mr. John
Ordes_ was spread out on the window drying.

The game was absorbing. Bobby brushed his type with the benzine and
toothbrush; distributed it and set up another name--Miss Celia Carleton.
He had printed nearly a dozen of these when his mother's voice behind
him interrupted his labours.

"Robert," said the voice sternly, "what are you doing with that
mucilage?"




V

THE LITTLE GIRL


Bobby spent as much time with Celia as he was allowed. On Sunday he took
her on his regular excursion to Auntie Kate--and Auntie Kate's cookies.

"Aren't you glad there was no Sunday School to-day?" he inquired
blithely.

"I like Sunday School," stated Celia.

Bobby stopped short and looked at her.

"Do you like church too?" he demanded.

"I love it," she said.

"Do you like pollywogs?"

"Ugh, No!"

"Or stripy snakes?"

"They're _horrid!_"

"Or forts?"

"I don't know."

"Or rifles an' revolvers?"

"I am afraid of them."

"Or dogs?"

"I love dogs. I've got one home. His name is Pancho."

"What kind is he?" asked Bobby with a vast sigh of relief at finding a
common ground. He had been brought to realize yesterday that little
girls differ from boys; but for a few dreadful, floundering moments this
morning he had feared they might, so to speak, belong to a different
race. Afterward he realized that it would not have mattered even if she
had not liked dogs. He merely wished to be near her. When he left her he
immediately experienced the strongest longing to be again where he could
see her, and breathe the deep, intoxicating, delicious, clean influence
of her near presence. And yet with her his moments of unalloyed
happiness were few and his hours of sheer misery were many.
Self-consciousness had never troubled Bobby before; but now in the
presence of Gerald's slim elegance and easy, languid manner, he became
acutely aware of his own deficiencies. His clothes seemed coarser; his
hands and feet were awkward; his body dumpier; his face rounder and more
freckled. To him was born a great humility of spirit to match the great
longing of it.

Nevertheless, as has been said, he and Duke trudged down to the Ottawa
every morning, and again every afternoon, or as many of them as Mrs.
Orde permitted. He was content to come under the immediate spell of the
dancing, sprite-like, sunny little girl. No thought of the especial
effort to please, called courtship, entered his young head. He played
with the children, and kept as close to Her as possible; that was all.
And one evening, trudging home dangerously near six o'clock, he ran slap
against the legend chalked in huge letters on a board fence:

     CELIA CARLETON and BOBBY ORDE

He stopped short, his heart jumping wildly. Often had he seen this
coupling of names, other names; and he knew that it was considered a
little of a shame, and somewhat of a glory. The sight confused him to
the depths of his soul; and yet it also pleased him. He rubbed out the
letters; but he walked on with new elation. The undesired but
authoritative sanction of public recognition had been given his
devotion. Gerald was not considered. Somebody had observed; so the
affair must be noticeable to others. And with another tremendous leap
of the heart Bobby welcomed the daring syllogism that, since the
somebody of the impertinent chalk had fathomed his devotion to her,
might it not be possible, oh, remotely inconceivably possible, of
course, that the unknown had equally marked some slight interest on her
part for him? The board fence, the maple-shaded walk, the soft brown
street of pulverized shingles, all faded in the rapt glory of this
vision. Bobby gasped. Literally it had not occurred to him before. Now
all at once he desired it, desired it not merely with every power of his
child nature, but with the full strength of the man's soul that waited
but the passing of years to spread wide its pinions. The need of her
answer to his love shook him to the depths, for it reached forward and
back in his world-experience, calling into vague, drowsy, fluttering
response things that would later awaken to full life, and reanimating
the dim and beautiful instincts that are an heritage of that time when
the soul is passing the lethe of earliest childhood and retains still a
wavering iridescence of the glory from which it has come. The question
rose to his lips ready for the asking. He wanted to turn track on the
instant, to call for Celia, to demand of her the response to his love.

And then, after the moment of exaltation, came the reaction. He was
afraid. The thought of his stubby uninteresting figure came to him; and
a deep sense of his unworthiness. What could she, accustomed to
brilliant creatures of the wonderful city, of whom Gerald was probably
but a mild sample, find in commonplace little Bobby Orde? He walked
meekly home; and took a scolding for being late.

Nevertheless the idea persisted and grew. It came to the point of
rehearsal. Before he fell asleep that very night, Bobby had ready cut
and dried a half-dozen different ways in which to ask the question, and
twice as many methods of leading up to it. In the darkness, and by
himself, he felt very bold and confident.

The next morning, however, even after he had succeeded in sequestrating
Celia from her companions, he found it impossible to approach the
subject. The bare thought of it threw him to the devourings of a panic
terror. This new necessity tore him with fresh but delicious pains. He
felt the need of finding out whether she cared for him as he had never
conceived a need could exist; yet he was totally unable to satisfy it.
By comparison the former misery of jealousy seemed nothing. Bobby lived
constantly in this high breathless state of delight in Celia; and
misery in the condition of his love for her. The Fuller boys and Angus
saw him no more; the little library was neglected; the wood-box half the
time forgotten; and the arithmetic, always a source of trouble, tangled
itself into a hopeless snarl of which Bobby's blurred mental vision
could make nothing.

All of his spare time he spent at his toy printing press, trying over
and over for a perfect result--unblurred, well-registered, well
aligned--in the shape of calling cards for "Miss Celia Carleton."

As soon as they were done to his satisfaction, he wrapped them in a
clumsy package, and set out for the Ottawa, followed, as always, by
Duke.

He found Celia alone in a rocking chair.

"Why didn't you come down this morning?" she asked him at once.

Bobby held up the package and looked mysterious.

"This," said he.

"Oh! what is it?" she cried, jumping up.

"I made it," said Bobby.

"What is it?" insisted Celia. "Show it to me."

But Bobby thrust the package firmly into his pocket.

"Up past our house there's a fine sand-hill to slide down," said he,
"and we got a fine fort over the hill, and I know where there's a place
you can climb up on where you can see 'most to Redding."

"Show me what you've got!" pleaded Celia.

"I will," Bobby developed his plan, "if you'll come up and play in the
fort."

"All right," agreed Celia in a breath; "I'll tell mamma I'm going. And
I'll hunt up the others."

"I don't want the others to go," announced Bobby boldly.

She calmed to a great stillness, and looked at him with intent eyes.

"All right," she agreed quietly after a moment.

They walked up the street together, followed by the solemn black and
white dog. The shop windows did not detain them, as ordinarily. At the
fire-engine house they turned under the dense shade of the maples. But
by the end of the second block said Bobby:

"We'll go this way."

He was afraid of encountering Angus, or perhaps the Fuller boys.

The sand-hill proved toilsome to Celia, but without a single pause she
struggled bravely up its sliding, cascading yellow surface to the top.
Then she stood still, panting a little, her cheeks flushed, her eyes
bright, the tiniest curls about her forehead wet and matted with
perspiration. With a great adoration, Bobby looked upon her slender
figure held straight against the blue sky. Almost--almost dared he
speak. At least that is what he thought until the words rose to his
lips; and then all at once he realized what a wide gulf lay between the
imagined and the spoken word.

"The fort's over this way," said he gruffly.

"Show me the package first," insisted Celia.

Bobby drew out the cards, and thrust them into her hands.

"They're for you," he said hastily. "I did them on my printing press."

Celia was delighted and wanted to say so at length, but Bobby had his
sex's aversion to spoken gratitude.

"Come on, see the fort," he insisted.

He showed her the elaborate works and explained their uses, and pointed
out the enemy of stumps charging patiently. Celia caught fire with the
idea at once.

[Illustration: ALMOST--ALMOST DARED HE TO SPEAK]

"I'll make bullets the way they did in the Colonies!" she cried.

"Have you 'Old Times in the Colonies,' too?" asked Bobby eagerly.

They seated themselves and talked of their books. Celia was just
beginning the Alcott series. Bobby had never heard of them, and so they
had to be explained. The children had romped and played games together;
but they had never exchanged such ideas as their years had developed.
For once Bobby forgot the fact of his love, and its delicious pains, and
its need for something which he could not place, in the unselfconscious
joy of intimate communion. He drew close to Celia in spirit; and his
whole being expanded to a glow that warmed him through and through. The
westering sun surprised them with the lateness of the hour. At the hotel
gate Celia left him.

"My, but we had a good time!" said she.

With much trepidation Bobby next day suggested in face of the whole
group that he and Celia should climb the high hill from which Bobby
fondly believed he could see "'most to Redding." To his surprise, and to
the surprise of the others, Celia consented at once. They climbed the
hill in short stages, resting formally every ten feet. Bobby they
called the Guide; while Celia was assigned the duty of announcing the
resting-places. There was a wood-road up the hill, but they preferred
the steep side. Trees shaded it; and undergrowth veiled it. Little open
spaces were guarded mysteriously and jealously by the thickets; little
hot pockets held like cups the warmth of the sun. Birds flashed and
disappeared; squirrels chattered indignantly; chipmunks scurried away.
Occasionally they came to dense shade, and moss, and black shadow, and
low sweet shrubs a few inches high, and the tinkle of a tiny streamlet.
Once a tangle of raspberries in a little clearing fell across their way.
Bobby had never happened on these. They had been well picked over by the
squaws, who sold fruit in town by the pailful, but the children managed
to find a few berries, and ate them, enjoying their warm, satiny feel.

Thus they climbed for a long time. The rests were frequent, the course
not of the straightest. For many years their recollection of that hill
was as of a mountain. Finally the top sprang at them abruptly, as though
in joke.

"Come over this way, I'll show you," said Bobby.

He led the way to a point where the scant timber had in times past
suffered a windfall. Through the opening thus made they looked abroad
over the countryside. They could see the snake-fences about the farms,
and the white dusty road like a ribbon and the stumps like black dots,
and the waving green tops of the "wood lots" and far away the flash of
the River.

Thus Bobby gained another of his great desires. Celia proved strangely
acquiescent to suggestions for these excursions. Gerald's dreaded
attractions relaxed their power over Bobby's spirit; and in
corresponding degree Bobby regained the lost captaincy of his soul. The
self-confidence which he lacked seeped gradually into him; and he began,
though very tentatively, to recognize and respect his own value as an
individual. These are big words to employ over the small problems of a
child; yet in the child alone occur those silent developments, those
noiseless changes which touch closest to true abstraction. Later in life
our processes are stiffened by the material into forms of greater
simplicity.

They explored the country about; and what the shortness of their legs
denied them in the matter of actual distance, the largeness of their
children's imaginations lavished bounteously.

Bobby had explored most of it all before--the stump pastures, the
wood-lots, the hills, the beach, the piers, the upper shifting downs of
sand--but now he saw them for the first time because he was showing them
to Celia. One day they made their way under tall beech woods, through a
scrub of cedars, and found themselves on the edge of low bluffs
overlooking the yellow shore and the blue lake. Long years after he
could remember it vividly, and all the little details that belonged to
it--the flash of the waters, the dip of gulls, the gentle wash of the
quiet wavelets against the shore, the thin strip of dark wet sand that
marked the extent of their influences, and, in a long curve to the blue
of distance, the uneven waste of the yellow dry sand on which lay and
from which projected at all angles countless logs, slabs and timbers
cast up derelict by the storms of years. But at the time he was not
conscious of noticing these things. In the darkness of his room that
night all he remembered was Celia standing bright and fair against the
shadow of ancient twisted cedars.




VI

THE LITTLE GIRL (CONTINUED)


Every Saturday evening the Hotel Ottawa gave a hop in its dining room.
Mrs. Carleton suggested that the Ordes dine with her, and afterward take
in this function. The hop proper began at nine o'clock; but the floor
for an hour before was given over to the children. Mrs. Orde accepted.

Promptly at half-past six, then, they all entered the dining room.
Bobby, living in the town, had never taken a meal there. He saw a
high-ceilinged, large room, filled with small, square and round tables
arranged between numerous, slender, white plaster pillars. At the base
of each pillar were still smaller serving tables each supporting a metal
ice-water pitcher. Two swinging doors at the far end led out. Tall
windows looked into the grounds where the children had been in the habit
of playing.

People were scattered here and there eating. Statuesque ladies dressed
in black, with white aprons, stood about or sailed here and there,
bearing aloft in marvellous equilibrium great flat trays piled high with
steaming white dishes. They swung corners in grand free sweeps, the
trays tilted far sideways to balance centrifugal force; they charged the
swinging doors at full speed, and when Bobby held his breath in
anticipation of the crash, something deft and mysterious happened at the
hem of their black skirts and the doors flew open as though commanded by
a magic shibboleth. They were tall and short, slender and stout, dark
and light, but they had these things in common--they all dressed in
black and white, their hair was lofty and of exaggerated waterfall, and
their expressions never altered from one of lazy-eyed, lofty, scornful
ennui. To Bobby they were easily the leading feature of the meal.

After dinner the party sat on the verandah a while, the elders
conversing; the children feeling rather dressed up. By and by their
other playmates joined them. The lights were lit, and shadows descended
with evening coolness. From within came the sound of a violin tuning.

Immediately all ran to the dining room. The tables had been moved to one
end where they were piled on top of one another; the chairs were
arranged in a row along the wall; the floor, newly waxed, shone like
glass. A small upright piano manipulated by an elderly female in
glasses; a tremendous bass viol in charge of a small man, and a violin
played by a large man represented the orchestra.

All the children shouted, and began to slide on the slippery floor.
Bobby joined this game eagerly, and had great fun. But in a moment the
music struck up, the guests of the hotel commenced to drift in and the
romping had to cease.

Gerald offered his arm to Celia, and they swung away in the hopping
waltz of the period. Other children paired off. Bobby was left alone.

He did not know what to do, so he sat down in one of the chairs ranged
along the wall. After a minute or so Mrs. Carleton and the Ordes came
in. Bobby went over to them.

"Don't you dance, Bobby?" asked Mrs. Carleton kindly.

"No, ma'am," replied Bobby in a very small voice.

When the music stopped, the children gathered in a group at the lower
end of the hall. Bobby joined them; but somehow even then he felt out
of it. Celia's cheeks were flushed bright with the exercise and
pleasure. Her spirits were high. She laughed and chatted with Gerald
vivaciously. Poor Bobby she included in the brightness of her mood, but
evidently only because he happened to be in the circle of it. She was
sorry he did not dance; but she loved it, and just now she could think
of nothing else but the enjoyment of it. Bobby could not understand that
there was nothing personal in this. He saw, with a pang, that Gerald
danced supremely well; that Morris romped through the steps with a
cheerful hearty abandon not without its attraction; that Tad Fuller, who
had come in with his mother and his brother, and half a dozen others
whom Bobby knew, all made creditable performers; that even Angus,
red-faced, awkward, perspiring as he was, could yet command the hand,
time and attention of any little girl he might choose to favour. He
himself was useless; and therefore ignored.

At the end of the children's hour he said good night miserably, and
trailed along home at his parents' heels. Ordinarily he liked to be out
after dark. The stars and the velvet shadows and the magic
transformations which the night wrought in the most ordinary and
accustomed things attracted him strongly. But now he was too conscious
of a smarting spirit. Mr. and Mrs. Orde were talking busily about
something. He could not even get a chance to ask a question; and that
seemed the last straw. His lips quivered, and he had to remember very
hard that he was _not_ a little girl in order to keep back the tears.

Finally the talk died.

"Mamma," blurted out Bobby.

"Yes?"

"Can't I learn how to dance?"

The pair wheeled arm in arm and surveyed him. In the starlight his round
child face showed white and anxious.

"Why, of course you can, darling," replied Mrs. Orde, "Don't you
remember mamma wanted you to go to dancing school last winter, and you
wouldn't go?"

"How soon does dancing school open?" demanded Bobby.

"I don't know. Not much before Christmas, I suppose."

Having thus made a definite resolution to remedy matters, Bobby felt
better, even though he would have to wait another year. This recovery
of spirit was completed the next day. He went with some apprehension to
ask Celia to walk again. She had seemed to him so aloof the night
before, that he could hardly believe her unchanged. However, she
assented to the expedition with alacrity. Hardly had they quitted the
hotel grounds when Bobby shot his question at her.

"Celia," said he, "if I learn how to dance this winter will you dance
with me when you come back next summer?"

"Why of course," said Celia.

"Will you dance with me a lot?"

"Yes."

"Will you dance with me more than you do with any one else?"

Celia pondered.

"I don't know," she said slowly. She paused, her eyes vague. "I guess
so," she added at last.

"Then I'll learn," said Bobby.

"It's lots of fun," said she.

Bobby trod on air. Without his conscious intention their course took
direction to the river front. They walked to the left along the wide,
artificial bank of piling. Beneath them the water swished among the
timbers. On one side were the sand-hills, on the other the blue,
preoccupied river. Across the stream was another facade of piles,
unbroken save for the little boatslips where the Life Saving men had
their station. A strong sweet breeze came from the Lake. Far down ahead
they could just make out the twin piers that, jutting into the Lake,
continued artificially the course of the river. The lighthouses on their
ends were dwarfed by distance.

By and by Celia tired a little, so they sat and dangled their feet and
watched the tiny scalloped blue wavelets dance in the current. A
passer-by stopped a moment to warn them.

"Look out, youngsters, you don't fall in," said he.

Bobby still exalted with the favour he had been vouchsafed, looked up
with dignity.

"_I_ am taking care of this little girl," he said deliberately, and
turned his back.

The man chuckled and passed on.

For a long time they sat side by side looking straight out before them.

"Celia," said Bobby without turning his head, "I love you. Do you love
me?"

"Yes," said Celia steadily.

Neither stirred by so much as a hair's breadth. After a little they
arose and returned to the hotel. Neither spoke again.

Strangely enough the subject was not again referred to, although of
course the children continued to play together and the excursions were
not intermitted. There seemed to be nothing to say. They loved each
other, and they were glad of each other's nearness. It sufficed.

Each morning Bobby awoke with a great uplift of the spirit, and a great
longing, which was completely appeased when he had come into Celia's
presence. Each evening he retired filled with an impatience for the
coming day, and with divine rapture of little memories of what had that
day passed. It seemed to him that hour by hour he and Celia drew closer
in a sweet secret, intimacy that nevertheless demanded no outer symbol.
When he spoke to her of the simplest things, or she to him, he
experienced a warm, cosy drawing near, as though beneath the commonplace
remark lay something hidden and subtle to which each must bend the ear
of the spirit gently. This was the soul of it, a supreme inner
gentleness one to the other, no matter how boisterous, how laughing, how
brusque might be the spoken word. And in correspondence all the
beautiful sunlit summer world took on a new softness and splendour and
glory in which they walked, but whose source they did not understand.

This much for the essence of it. But of course, Bobby, being masculine
must give presents after his own notion, and being a small boy must give
them according to his age. The quarter he had earned from his father he
invested in a pack of cards on the upper left-hand corner of which were
embossed marvellous doves, wonderful flowers and miraculous tangles of
scroll-work in colour. These he printed with Celia's name and address.
Near the wharf and railroad station stood a small booth from which a
discouraged-looking individual tried to sell curios. Bobby's eye fell on
a cheap bracelet of silver wire from which dangled half a dozen
moonstones. It caught his eye; day by day his desire for it grew;
finally he asked advice on the subject.

"No, Bobby," replied his mother, "I don't think Celia would care for it.
It is cheap-looking. She has several very pretty bangles already; and
this is not a good one."

Nevertheless, Bobby, being as we have said thoroughly masculine,
deliberated some days further, and bought it. The price was two
dollars--an almost fabulous sum. Most men give their wives or
sweethearts what they think they would like themselves were they women,
and were a man to offer a gift. That is one reason why in so many bureau
drawers are tucked away unused presents. Young as she was, Celia had the
taste not to care for the moonstone bangle, but, like all the rest, she
accepted it with genuine delight because Bobby gave it. She even wore
it. These were the principal transactions of the kind; but anything
Bobby particularly fancied he brought her. Shortly she became possessed
of a bewildering collection consisting variously of large glass marbles
with a twist of coloured glass inside; two or three lichi nuts, then a
curiosity; a dried gull's wing; several exploded shotgun shells; and a
"real," though broken-pointed chisel. Celia gave Bobby her tiny narrow
gold ring with two little turquoises. He could just get it on his little
finger, and wore it proudly, in spite of jeers. Being teased about Celia
was embarrassing to the point of pain; but in the last analysis it was
not unpleasant.

So matters slipped by. Abruptly the end of August came. One day Bobby
found Celia much perturbed.

"I can't go out long," she said, "I've got to help mamma."

"What doing?" asked Bobby.

But Celia shook her head dolefully.

"Come, let's go walk somewhere and I'll tell you," said she.

They crossed Main Street to the shaded street on which lived Georgie
Cathcart.

"What is it?" demanded Bobby again.

"We are going home to-morrow," Celia announced mournfully. "Mamma has a
letter."

Bobby stopped short.

"Going home!" he echoed.

"Yes," said Celia.

"Then we won't see each other till next summer!" he cried.

"No," said she.

"And we can't walk any more or--or----" Bobby felt the lump rising in
his throat.

"No," said Celia.

Bobby swallowed hard.

"Are--are you sorry?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Celia quietly. "Are you?"

"I don't know what I'm going to do!" cried Bobby desperately.

After a little, the main fact of the catastrophe being accepted, they
talked of the winter to come.

"You'll write me some letters, won't you?" pleaded Bobby.

"If you write to me."

"Of course I will write to you. And you'll send me your picture, won't
you? You said you would."

"I don't believe I have any," demurred Celia; "and mamma has them all;
and they're very comspensive."

"I'll give you one of mine," offered Bobby, "if I have to get it from
the album. Please, Celia."

"I'll see," said she.

They were moving again slowly beneath the trees.

Bobby looked up the street; he looked back. He turned swiftly to her.

"Celia," he asked, "may I kiss you?"

"Yes," said Celia steadily.

She stopped short, looking straight ahead. Bobby leaned over and his
lips just touched her cool smooth cheek. They walked on in silence. The
next day Celia was gone.




VII

UNTIL THE LAST SHOT


There remained as consolation after this heartbreaking defection but
two interesting things in life--the printing press and the Flobert
Rifle. Somehow the week dragged through until Sunday, when Bobby duly
scrubbed and dressed, had to go to church with his father and mother.
Bobby, to tell the truth, did not care very much for church. Always his
glance was straying to a single upper-section of one of the windows,
which, being tipped inward at the bottom, permitted him a glimpse of
green leaves flushed with sunlight. A very joyous bird emphasized the
difference between the bright world and this dim, decorous interior with
its faint church aroma compounded of morocco leather, flowers, and the
odour of Sunday garments. Only when the four ushers tiptoed about with
the collection boxes on the end of handles, like exaggerated
corn-poppers, did the lethargy into which he had fallen break for a
moment. The irregular passage of the receptacle from one to another was
at least a motion not ordered in the deliberate rhythm of decorum; and
the clink of the money was pleasantly removed from the soporific. Bobby
gazed with awe at the coins as they passed beneath his little nose. He
supposed there must be enough of them to buy the Flobert Rifle.

The thought gave him a pleasant little shock. It had never occurred to
him that probably the Flobert Rifle had a price. It had seemed so
passionately to be desired as to belong to the category of the
inaccessible--like Mr. Orde's revolver on the top shelf of the closet,
or unlimited ice cream, or the curios locked behind the glass in Auntie
Kate's cabinet. Now the revelation almost stopped his heart.

"Perhaps it doesn't cost more'n a thousand dollars!" he said to himself.
And he had already made up his mind to save a thousand dollars for the
purpose of getting a boat. The boat idea lost attraction. His papa had
agreed to give half. Bobby lost himself in an exciting daydream
involving actual possession of the Flobert Rifle. He resolved that, on
the way home, if the curtains were not down, he would take another look
at the weapon.

The curtains were not down; but now, attached to the Flobert Rifle, was
a stencilled card. Bobby set himself to reading it.

"First Prize," he deciphered, "An-nual Trap Shoot, Monrovia Sportsman's
Club, Sep. 10, 1879."

For some moments the significance of this did not reach him. Then all at
once a sob caught in his throat. It had never occurred to poor little
Bobby that there might be other Flobert rifles in the world; and here
this one was withdrawn from circulation, as it were, to be won as prize
at the trap shooting.

Bobby did not recover from this shock until the following morning. Then
a bright idea struck him, an idea filled with comfort. The Rifle was not
necessarily lost, after all. He trudged down to the store, entered
boldly, and asked to examine the weapon.

"My papa's going to win it and give it to me," he announced.

A very brown-faced man with twinkling gray eyes turned from buying black
powder and felt wads to look at him amusedly.

"Hullo, Bobby," said he, "so your father's going to win the rifle and
give it to you, is he? Are you sure?"

"Of course," replied Bobby simply; "my papa can do anything he wants
to."

The man laughed.

"What do you know about rifles, and what would you do with one?" he
asked.

"I know all about them," replied Bobby with great positiveness, "and I
know where there's lots of squirrels."

The storekeeper had by now taken the Flobert from the show window. The
other man reached out his hand for it.

"Well, tell me about this one," he challenged.

"It's a Flobert," said Bobby without hesitation, "and it weighs five and
a half pounds; and its ri-fling has one turn in twenty-eight inches; and
it has a knife-blade front sight, and a bar rear sight; and it shoots 22
longs, 22 shorts, C B caps, and B B caps. Only B B caps aren't very good
for it," he added.

"Whew!" cried the man. "Here, take it!"

Bobby looked it over with delight and reverence. This was the first time
he had enjoyed it at close hand. The blue of the octagon barrel was like
satin; the polish of the stock like a mirror; the gold plating of the
most fancy lock and guards like the sheen of silk. Bobby loved, too, the
indescribable _gun_ smell of it--compounded probably of the odours of
steel, wood and oil. With some difficulty he lifted it to his face and
looked through the rather wobbly sights. Reluctantly he gave it back
into the storekeeper's hands.

"Would you mind, please," he asked, a little awed, "would you mind
letting me see a box of cartridges?"

Stafford smiled and reached to the shelf behind, from which he took a
small, square, delightful, red box. It had reading on it, and a portrait
of the little cartridges it contained. Bobby feasted his eyes in
silence.

"I--I know it's a prize," said he at last. "But--how much _was_ it?"

"Fifteen dollars," replied Mr. Bishop.

Bobby's eyes widened to their utmost capacity.

"Why--why--why!" he gasped; "I thought it must be a thousand."

Both men exploded in laughter, in the confusion of which, stunned,
surprised, delighted and excited with the thought of eventual ownership,
Bobby marched out the door, where he was joined gravely by Duke, his
beautiful feather tail waving slowly to and fro as he walked.

Later in the day Kincaid, the spare, brown man with the twinkling gray
eyes, met Mr. Orde on the street.

"Hullo, Orde!" he greeted. "Hear you have a sure win of the tournament."

"Sure win!" said Orde, puzzled, "What you talking about? You know I
couldn't shoot against you fellows."

"Well, your small boy told me you were going to win that rifle down at
Bishop's, and give it to him."

Orde's face clouded.

"He's been talking nothing but rifle for a month," said he. "I'm going
West in September. Wouldn't have any show against you fellows, anyway."

When Bobby heard this paralyzing piece of news, his entire scheme of
things seemed shattered. For a long time he sat staring with death in
his heart. Then he arose silently and disappeared.

In the Proper Place, among Bobby's other possessions, was a small toy
gun. Its stock was of pine, its lock of polished cast iron, and its
barrel of tin. The pulling of the trigger released a spring in the
barrel, which in turn projected a pebble or other missile a short and
harmless distance. Then a ramrod re-set the spring. When, the previous
Christmas, Bobby had acquired this weapon, he had been very proud of it.
Latterly, however, it had fallen into disfavour as offering too painful
a contrast to the real thing as exemplified by the Flobert Rifle.

Bobby rummaged the darkness of the Proper Place until he found this toy
gun. From the sack in his father's closet--forbidden--he deliberately
abstracted a handful of bird-shot. Retiring to the woodshed, he set the
spring in the gun, poured in what he considered to be about the proper
quantity of shot, and solemnly discharged it at the high fence. The
leaden pellets sprayed out and spattered harmlessly against the boards.
Thrice Bobby repeated this. Then, quite without heat or rancour, he
threw the toy gun and what remained of the shot over the fence into the
vacant lot behind it. His common sense had foretold just this result to
his experiment, so he was not in the least disappointed; but he had
considered it his duty to try the only expedient his ingenuity could
invent. For if--by a miracle--the little gun had discharged the shot
with force; Bobby might--by a miracle--be permitted to participate with
it in the Shoot; and might--by a miracle--win the Flobert himself. Bobby
was no fool. He marked the necessity of three miracles; and he did not
in the least expect them. Merely he wished to fulfill his entire duty to
the situation.

Saturday morning--the very day of the Shoot--Mr. Orde left for
California.

After lunch Bobby trudged to Main Street, turned to the right, away from
town, and set himself in patient motion toward the shooting grounds.

These were situated some two miles out along the county road. Bobby had
driven to them many times, but had never attempted to cover the distance
afoot. The sun was hot, and the way dusty. Many buggies and one large
carry-all passed him, each full of the participants in the contest. No
one thought of giving Bobby a lift, in fact no one noticed him at all.
He could not help thinking how different it would be if only his father
had not gone West.

"Hello!" called a hearty voice behind him.

He turned to see a yellow two-wheeled cart drawn by a gaunt white horse.
On the seat close to the horse's tail sat Mr. Kincaid.

"Going to the Shoot?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," said Bobby.

"Well, jump in."

Mr. Kincaid moved one side, and lifted half the seat so Bobby could
climb in from the rear. Then he let the seat down again and clucked to
the horse.

Mr. Kincaid wore an ancient gray slouch hat pulled low over his eyes;
and a very old suit of gray clothes, wrinkled and baggy. Somehow, in
contrast, his skin showed browner than ever. He looked down at Bobby,
the fine good-humour lines about his eyes deepening.

"Well youngster," said he, "where's your father?"

Bobby's eyes fell; he kicked his feet back and forth. Beneath them lay
Mr. Kincaid's worn leather gun-case, and an oblong japanned box which
Bobby knew contained shells. For an instant he struggled with himself.

"He--he had to go to California," he choked; and looked away quickly to
hide the tears that sprang to his eyes.

Mr. Kincaid whistled and raised his hand so abruptly that the old white
horse, mistaking the movement for a signal, stopped dead, and instantly
went to sleep.

"Get ap, Bucephalus!" cried Mr. Kincaid indignantly.

Bucephalus deliberately awoke, and after a moment's pause moved on. To
Bobby's relief Mr. Kincaid said nothing further, but humped over the
reins, and looked ahead steadily across the horse's back. He stole a
glance at the older man; and suddenly without reason a great wave of
affection swept over him. He liked his companion's clear brown skin, and
the close clipped gray of his hair, and his big gray moustache beneath
which the corners of his mouth quirked faintly up, and the network of
fine crow's feet at his temples, and the clear steady steel-colour of
his eyes beneath the bushy brows. On the spot Bobby enshrined a hero.

But now they turned off the main road through a gap in the snake-fence,
and followed many wheel tracks to the farther confines of the field
where, under a huge tree they could see a group of men. These hailed Mr.
Kincaid with joy.

"Hello, Kin, old man," they roared. "Got here, did you? What day did you
start? The old thing must be about dead. Lean him up against a tree, and
come tell us about the voyage."

"The cannon-ball express is strictly on schedule time, boys," replied
Mr. Kincaid, looking solemnly at his watch.

He drove to the fence, where he tied Bucephalus. The other rigs were
hitched here and there at distances that varied as the gun-shyness of
the horses. Bobby proudly bore the gun-case. Mr. Kincaid lifted out the
heavy box of shells.

Bobby took in the details of the scene with a delight that even his just
cause for depression could not quench.

The men, some twenty in number, sprawled on the ground or sat on boxes.
Before them stood a wooden rack with sockets, in which already were
stacked a number of shotguns. Two pails of water flanked this rack, in
each of which had been thrust a slotted hickory "wiper" threaded with a
square of cloth. A fairly large empty wooden box, for the reception of
exploded shells, marked the spot on which the shooters would stand. The
rotary trap lay in plain sight eighteen yards away. That completed the
list of arrangements, which were, in the light of modern methods, as
every trap shooter of to-day will recognize, exceedingly crude.

The men, however, supplied the interest which the equipment might lack.
At that time every trap-shot was also a field shot. The class which
confines itself to targets had not even been thought of. And good
picked-shots have in common everywhere certain qualities, probably
developed by the life in the open, and the unique influences of woodland
and upland hunting. They are generous, and large in spirit, and
absolutely democratic--the millionaire and the mechanic meet on equal
ground--and deliberate in humour, and dry of wit. The quiet chaffing,
tolerant, good-humoured, genuine intercourse of hunters cannot be
matched in any other class.

The components of this group had each served his apprenticeship in the
blinds or the cover. They knew each other in the freemasonry of the
Field; and when they met together, as now, they spoke from the gentle
magic of the open heart.

One exception must be made to this statement, however. Joseph Newmark,
in advance of his time, shot methodically and well at the trap, never
went afield, and maintained toward his neighbours an habitual dry
attitude of politeness.

Bobby seated himself on the ground and prepared to listen with the
completest enjoyment. These men were to him great or little according
as they shot well or ill. That was to him the sole criterion. It did not
matter to him that Mr. Heinzman controlled the largest interests in the
western part of the state--he "couldn't hit a balloon"; nor that young
Wellman was looked upon as worthless and a loafer--he was well up among
the first five.

Nearly everybody smoked something. The tobacco smelled good in the open
air.

"Well," remarked Kincaid, "if that Stafford party doesn't show up before
long, I'm going home. I can't stand you fellows without some excitement
for a counter-irritant."

"That's right, Kin," called somebody, "Better start that old Buzzard
toward town pretty soon, if you want to get in for breakfast--there's a
good moon!"

But at this moment a delivery wagon turned into the field, and drove
briskly to the spot. From it Mr. Stafford descended spryly.

"Sorry to be a little late, boys; just couldn't help it," he apologized.

His arrival galvanized the crowd into activity. From the delivery wagon
they unloaded boxes of shells, two camp stools and a number of barrels.
The driver then hitched his horses to the fence, and returned to act as
trap-puller.

One of the barrels was rolled out to the trap, opened, and its contents
carefully spilled on the ground. It contained a quantity of sawdust
and brown glass balls. These were about the size of a base-ball, had an
opening at the top, and were filled with feathers. John, the driver of
the delivery wagon, climbed down into a pit below the trap. He set the
spring of the trap and placed a glass ball in its receptacle at the end
of one of the two projecting arms. A long cord ran from the trap back to
the shooting stand.

Mr. Stafford opened a camp stool, sat down, and produced a long blank
book. In this he inscribed the men's names. Each gave him two dollars
and a half as an entrance fee. A referee and scorer were appointed from
among the half-dozen non-shooting spectators.

"Newmark to shoot; Heinzman on deck!" called the scorer in a
business-like voice.

The trapper ducked into his hole. Mr. Newmark thrust five loaded shells
into his side pocket, picked his gun from the rack and stepped forward
to the mark. Then he loaded one barrel of the gun and stood at ready.
In those days nobody thought of standing gun to shoulder, as is the
present custom. The rule was, "stock below elbow."

"Ready," said he in his dry incisive voice.

"Ready," repeated the trap puller at his elbow.

"Pull!" commanded Mr. Newmark abruptly.

Immediately the trap began to revolve rapidly; after a moment or so it
sprung, and the glass ball, projected violently upward, sailed away
through the air. The mechanism of the trap was such that no one could
tell precisely how long it would revolve before springing; nor in what
direction it would throw the target. Nevertheless the mark offered would
now, in comparison with our saucer-shaped target, be considered easy.
Mr. Newmark brought his gun to his shoulder and discharged it apparently
with one motion, before the ball had more than begun its flight. A roar
of the noisy black powder shook the air. The glass sphere seemed
actually to puff out in fine smoke. Only the feathers it had contained
floated down wind.

"Dead!" announced the referee in a brisk business-like voice.

Mr. Newmark broke his gun and flipped the empty yellow shell into the
box next him. A cloud of white powder smoke drifted down over the
group. Bobby snuffed it eagerly. He thought it the most delicious smell
in the world; and so continued to think it for many years until the
nitros displaced the old-fashioned compounds. Four times Mr. Newmark
repeated his initial performance; then stepped aside.

"Heinzman to shoot; Wellman on deck!" announced the scorer.

Mr. Heinzman was already at the mark; and young Wellman arose and began
to break open a box of shells. Mr. Newmark thrust his gun barrels into
one of the pails and with the hickory wiper pumped the water up and
down.

"He's a good snap-shot," Bobby heard a man tell a stranger, in a
half-voice.

"Has a brilliant style," commented the other.

They fell into a low-toned conversation on the partridge season, and the
ducks, to which Bobby listened with all his ears, the while his eyes
missed nothing of what took place before him. Nobody now spoke aloud.
The chaffing had ceased. Shooter's etiquette prohibited anything that
even by remote possibility might "rattle" the contestants. Only the
voices of the men at mark and the referee were heard, and the heavy
_bang_ of the black powder. Bobby liked to listen to the referee.
Reporting, as he did, hundreds of results in the course of the
afternoon, his intonation became mechanical.

"Dead!" he snapped in the crispest, shortest syllable, when the glass
ball was broken by the charge.

"Law-s-s-t!" he drawled when the little sphere sailed away unharmed.

Each shooter on finishing his first string of five, swabbed out his gun,
leaned it against the rack, and went to squat in the group where he
commented to his friends on his own or others' luck, but always quietly.
An air of the strictest business held the entire assembly.

This broke slightly when Mr. Kincaid's name was called. A stir went
through the crowd; and some one called out,

"Go it, Old Reliable. Have you had any hoops put around her lately?"

Mr. Kincaid grinned good-naturedly, but made no reply. He had discarded
his coat; and now wore a brown cardigan jacket. He took his place with
the greatest deliberation, consuming twice as much time as any one else.

"Ready," said he.

"Ready," replied the trapper mechanically.

"Pool!" cried Mr. Kincaid.

The discharge delayed so long that Bobby looked to see if a misfire had
occurred; but when the ball reached the exact top of its swing, Mr.
Kincaid broke it.

"One of the most reliable duck shots we have," said Bobby's neighbour to
the stranger. "He shoots just like that, always. Never in a hurry; but
he seems to get there. Kills a lot of game in the season."

The shoot progressed with almost the precision of a machine. Bobby
amused himself by closing his eyes to hear the regular _ready, pull,
bang!_ that marked the progress of the score. From his level with the
tops of the brown grasses of late summer he enjoyed the wandering puffs
of hot air, the drift of pungent aromatic powder smoke, the rapid
successive bending of the stalks as though fairies were running over
them when the breezelets passed. It was all very pleasant and, for the
time being, he forgot his disappointment.

The match was to be at one-hundred balls--sixty singles, and twenty
pairs of doubles. Early in the game the different shooters began roughly
to group themselves on the score-cards according to their ability. One
class, among whom were Newmark and Kincaid, continued to break their
targets with unvarying accuracy. Young Wellman by rights belonged with
these; but he had undershot a strong incomer; and the miss had cost him
two others before he could recover his temper. The second class had
missed from one to five each. The third class, typified by Mr. Heinzman,
had a long string of "goose-eggs" to their discredit.

The fiftieth bird, however, Mr. Kincaid missed. It flipped sideways from
the arm of the trap, and flew for twenty feet close to the ground. The
referee had actually started to call "no bird"; but Mr. Kincaid elected
to try for it; missed; and had to abide by his decision. At the close of
the singles, Newmark had a score of sixty straight; Kincaid fifty-nine;
and the others strung out variously in the rear.

At this point, a short recess was taken. The crowd of men lit fresh
cigars; talked out loud; circulated about; and relaxed generally from
the long strain. Some scattered out into the grass to help the trapper
to look for unbroken balls. Ordinarily Bobby loved to do this; but
to-day he sidled up to where his friend was stooping over the japanned
box. Bobby watched him a moment in silence, methodically laying away
the used brass shells, one up and one down in regular succession.

"It's too bad you got beat," he ventured timidly at last.

Mr. Kincaid ceased his occupation, removed his pipe from his mouth, and
looked up at Bobby searchingly.

"Youngster," he said kindly, "I'm not beat."

"You're behind," insisted Bobby, "and Newmark never misses."

Mr. Kincaid arose slowly, and without a word took Bobby by the arm and
led him around the tree. He stopped and raised Bobby's chin in his
gnarled brown hand until the little boy's eyes looked straight into his
own. Bobby noticed that the twinkle had--not disappeared--but drawn far
back into their gray depths, which had become unaccountably sober.

"Bobby," said Mr. Kincaid gravely, "always remember this, all your life,
no matter what happens to you; a man is never defeated until the very
last shot is fired."

He paused.

"And remember this, too: that even if he is defeated, he is not beaten,
provided he has done the very best he could, and has never lost heart."

He looked a moment longer into Bobby's eyes; and the little boy saw the
gray twinkle flickering back to the surface, and the crow's-feet
deepening good-naturedly.

"That's all, sonny," he said, and withdrew his hand from Bobby's chin.

"So you want to see me win the rifle, do you?" asked Mr. Kincaid, as
they turned away.

"Yes, sir," replied Bobby.

"Why?"

"Because you're a friend of mine," replied Bobby with simple dignity.

"And that's the very best reason in the world!" cried Mr. Kincaid
heartily.

The shooting at the doubles began. Two balls were placed in the trap at
once--it will be remembered that it was provided with double arms--and
thrown in the air together. At this game many good scores fell into
disintegration, for it required great quickness of manipulation to catch
both before one should reach the ground. Mr. Newmark's snap method here
stood him in good stead. When Mr. Kincaid stepped to the trap, the
stranger turned to his friend.

"Here's where the old fellow falls down, I'm afraid," said he a trifle
regretfully. "He's too deliberate for this business. I'm sorry. I'd
like to see him give Newmark a race for it."

"Deliberate!" snorted the local man.

Mr. Kincaid's preparations were as careful and as wasteful of time as
ever. But when he enunciated his famous "pool!" the stranger was treated
to a surprise. The first ball was literally snuffed into nothingness
before it had risen five feet above the trap! Then quite slowly Mr.
Kincaid followed the second to the top of its flight and broke it as
though it had been a single.

"Lord!" gasped the visitor. "He surely can't do that with any
certainty!"

"Can't he!" said the other grimly, "Watch him."

Interest soon centred on Newmark and Kincaid, as those who had made
straight scores on the singles now dropped one or more. Both the
contestants named broke their nine pair straight. Bobby sent strong
little waves of hope for a miss after each of Mr. Newmark's targets, but
without avail. Only one pair apiece remained to be shot at; and in order
that Mr. Kincaid should win the match, it would be necessary that
Newmark should miss both. This was inconceivable. Bobby threw himself
face downward in the grass, sick at heart. He made up his mind he would
not look. Nevertheless when Mr. Newmark's name was called, he sat up.

"Pull!" came Mr. Newmark's dry, incisive voice.

The balls sprang into the air. A sharp _click_ followed. Evidently a
misfire. The referee, imperturbable, stepped forward to examine the
shell. He found the primer well indented; so, in accordance with the
rules, he announced:

"No bird!"

Mr. Newmark reloaded.

"Pull!" he called again.

On the first bird he scored his first miss of the day.

"Misfire threw him off," exclaimed the spectators afterward.

And then, curiously enough, a queer current of air, springing from
nowhere, utterly abnormal, seized the dense powder smoke and whirled it
backward, completely enveloping the shooter. The obscuration was
momentary, but complete. By the time it had passed the second ball had
fallen almost to the ground. Newmark snapped hastily at it.

"Lost! Lost!" announced the scorer.

A deep sigh of emotion swept over the crowd. Bobby gripped his hands so
tightly that the knuckles turned white. He resented the intervention of
a half-dozen other contestants before Mr. Kincaid should be called; and
rolled about in an agony of impatience until his friend stepped to the
mark.

The men unconsciously straightened and removed the cigars from their
lips. Two hits would win; one miss would tie. Bobby stood up, his breath
coming and going rapidly, his sight a little blurred. But Mr. Kincaid
went through his motions of preparation, and broke the two balls, with
no more haste or excitement than if they had been the first two of the
match.

A cheer broke out. Others were still to shoot, but this decided the
winner.

"Congratulations!" said Newmark dryly as his rival stepped from the
mark.

"That's all right," replied Kincaid, "but it was sheer rank hard luck
for you."

On the way home just about sunset many teams passed the old white horse
with his old yellow cart, and his driver hunched comfortably over the
reins. Everybody shouted final chaffing, kindly congratulations as they
sped by.

Bobby, hunched alongside in loyal imitation of his companion's
attitude, glowed through and through.

"My! I'm glad you won!" he repeated again and again.

Kincaid looked straight ahead of him, his gray eyes pensive, the short
pipe shifted to the corner of his mouth. Finally he glanced down
amusedly at his ecstatic companion.

"You see, Bobby?" he said, "--until the last shot is fired."




VIII

THE FLOBERT RIFLE


Thus Bobby had passed through the extremes of hope, of anticipation, of
disappointment and of despair. The Flobert Rifle on which he had set his
heart, which he had firmly made up his mind to buy as soon as he could
save up enough on an allowance of one cent a day, had been withdrawn
from sale and offered as prize for the fall trap shooting. This had been
a severe blow, but from it Bobby had finally rallied. His father would
participate in the shoot; his father was omnipotent and invincible.
After winning the Flobert Rifle, he would undoubtedly give it to Bobby.
Then, just before the shoot Mr. Orde had been called west on business.
Bobby had been vouchsafed only the melancholy satisfaction of seeing Mr.
Kincaid, whom he liked, win out over Mr. Newmark, whom he disliked. The
rifle was in good hands; that was all any one could say about it.

But one afternoon, returning home about two o'clock, he was surprised
to find Bucephalus and the yellow cart hitched out in front, and Mr.
Kincaid sitting on the porch steps.

"No one home but the girl; so I thought I'd wait," he explained, shaking
hands with Bobby very gravely. "I brought around the new rifle," he
added further. "What do you say to driving up over the hill somewhere
and trying her?"

They drove slowly up the road of planks that gave footing over the
sand-hills. The new shiny Flobert Rifle with its gold-plated locks and
trigger guards rested between Mr. Kincaid's knees. He would not permit
Bobby to touch it, however.

When the old white horse had struggled over the grade and into the
stump-dotted country, Mr. Kincaid hitched him to the fence, and,
followed closely by the excited Bobby, climbed into a field. From his
pocket, quite deliberately, he produced a small paper target and a dozen
tacks wrapped in a bit of paper.

"We'll just nail her up against this big stub," he said to Bobby,
tacking away with the handle of his heavy pocket-knife; "and then you
can get a rest over that little fellow there."

He stepped back.

"Now let's see you open her," he said, handing over the rifle.

Bobby had long since acquired a theoretical familiarity with the
mechanism. He cocked the arm and pulled back the breech block, thus
opening the breech with its broken effect due to the springing of the
ejector.

"That's all right," approved Mr. Kincaid, pausing in the filling of his
pipe, "but you have the muzzle pointing straight at Duke."

"It isn't loaded," objected Bobby.

"A man who knows how to handle a gun," said Mr. Kincaid emphasizing his
words impressively with the stem of his pipe, "never in any
circumstances lets the muzzle of his gun, loaded or unloaded, for even a
single instant, point toward any living creature he does not wish to
kill. Remember that, Bobby. When you've learned that, you've learned a
good half of gun-handling."

"Yes, sir," said Bobby.

"Keep the muzzle up," finished Mr. Kincaid, "and then you're all right."

He led the way to the smaller stump; and nonchalantly, as though it were
not one of the most wonderful affairs in the world to own such a thing,
produced a little square red box containing the cartridges. This he
opened. Bobby gazed with the keenest pleasure on the orderly rows of
alternate copper and lead dots.

"Now," said Mr. Kincaid, "kneel down behind the stump." He rested the
rifle across it. "You know how to sight, don't you? I thought likely.
When you pull the trigger, try to pull it steadily, without jerking. Get
in here, Duke!"

Bobby knelt, and assumed a position to shoot. To his surprise he found
that his heart was beating very fast, and that his breath came and went
as rapidly as though he had just climbed a hill. He tried desperately to
hold the front sight in the notch of the hind sight, and both on the
black bull's eye. It was surprisingly difficult, considering the
simplicity of the theory. Finally he pulled the trigger for the first
time in his life.

"Snap!" said the rifle.

"Now let's see where you hit!" suggested Mr. Kincaid.

Bobby started up eagerly; remembered; and with great care laid the
Flobert, muzzle up, against the stump.

"That's right," approved Mr. Kincaid.

The bullet had penetrated the exact centre of the bull's eye!

"My!" cried Bobby delighted. "That was a pretty good shot, wasn't it,
Mr. Kincaid? That was doing pretty well for the first time, wasn't it?"

But Mr. Kincaid was lighting his pipe, and seemed quite unimpressed.

"Bullet went straight (_puff, puff_)," said he. "That's all you can say
(_puff, puff_). No _one_ shot's a good shot (_puff, puff_). Take's two
to prove it (_puff, puff_)."

He straightened his head and threw the match away.

"It's too good, Bobby, to be anything but an accident," said he kindly.
"Now come and try again."

Bobby was permitted to fire nine more shots, of which three hit the
paper, and none came near the bull's eye. He could not understand this;
for with the dead rest across the stump, he thought he was holding the
sights against the black. Mr. Kincaid watched him amusedly. The small
figure crouched over the stump was so ridiculously in earnest. At the
tenth shot he put the cover on the box of ammunition.

"Aren't we going to shoot any more?" cried Bobby, disappointed.

"Enough's enough," said Mr. Kincaid. "Ten shots is practice. More's
just fooling--at first, anyway. You can't expect to become a good shot
in an afternoon. If you could, why, where's the glory of being a good
shot?"

"I don't see what made me miss," speculated Bobby.

"I think I could tell you," replied Mr. Kincaid, "but I'm not going to.
You think it over; and next time see if you can tell me. That's the way
to learn."

"Next time!" cried Bobby, his interest reviving.

"You aren't tired of it, are you?" enquired Mr. Kincaid with mock
anxiety. "Because I've got ninety cartridges left here that I wouldn't
know what to do with."

"Oh!" cried Bobby.

"Well, then," proposed Mr. Kincaid, "I'll tell you what we'll do. You
and I will organize the--well, the Maple County Sportsman's Association,
say; and we'll hold weekly shoots. These will be the grounds. You and I
will be the charter members; but we'll let in others, if we happen to
want to."

"Papa," breathed Bobby.

"Moved and seconded that Mr. John Orde, alias Papa, be elected. Motion
carried," said Mr. Kincaid. "I'll be President," he continued. "I've
always wanted to be president of something; and you can be secretary.
You must get a little blank book, and rule it off for the scores. Then
maybe by and by we'll have a prize, or something. What do you think?"

Bobby said what he thought.

"Now," said Mr. Kincaid, opening the wooden box that ran along the floor
of the two-wheeled cart where the dashboard, had there been one, would
have been placed, "this is the next thing: when you're through shooting,
clean the gun. If you leave it over night, the powder dirt will make a
fine rust that you may never be able to get out; and rust will eat into
the rifling and make the gun inaccurate. No matter how late it is, or
how tired you are, _always clean your gun_ before you go to bed. It's
the second most important thing I can teach you. You'll see lots of men
who can kill game, perhaps, but remember this; the fellow who lets his
gun point toward no living thing but his game, and who keeps it bright
and clean, is further along toward being a true sportsman--even if he is
a very poor shot--than the careless man who can hit them."

He gave Bobby the steel wire cleaning-rod, the rags, and the oil can,
and showed him how to get all the powder residue from the rifling
grooves in the barrel.

"There," said Mr. Kincaid, folding back the half-seat, "climb in. That
settles it for to-day."

Bucephalus came to with reluctance. Going down hill he settled into a
slow steady jog, which soon covered the distance to the Orde house.
Bobby climbed out and turned to utter thanks.

"That's all right," said Mr. Kincaid. "Next time I'm going to shoot,
myself; and you'll have to rustle to beat me. Don't forget the score
book."

"When will it be?" asked Bobby.

"Oh, Thursday again," replied Mr. Kincaid. He disengaged the Flobert
from between his knees. "Here," said he; "you take this and put it away
carefully. I'll keep the ammunition," he added with a grim smile.
"Remember not to snap it. Snapping's bad for it when it is empty.
Good-bye."

He drove off down the street beneath the over-arching maples, the old
white horse jogging sleepily, the old yellow cart lurching. Over his
shoulder floated puffs of smoke from his pipe.

Bobby carried the new rifle into the house, ascended to his own room,
and sat down to enjoy it to its smallest detail. The heavy blued octagon
barrel bore an inscription which he deciphered--the maker's name, and
the patents under which the arm was manufactured. He examined the
sights, and how they were fastened to the barrel; the fall of the
hammer; the firing-pin; the mechanism of the ejector, the butt plate,
the polished stock and the manner in which it was attached to the
barrel. Over the fancy scroll of the gold-plated trigger-guard he passed
his fingers lovingly. The trigger-guard extended back along the grip of
the stock in a long thin metal strip--also gold-plated. It, too, bore an
inscription. Bobby read it once without taking in its meaning; a second
time with growing excitement. Then he rushed madly through the house
shrieking for his mother.

"Mamma, Mamma!" he cried. "Where are you? Come here!"

Mrs. Orde came--on the run--likewise the cook, and the butcher. They
found Bobby dancing wildly around and around, hugging close to his heart
the Flobert rifle.

"Bobby, Bobby!" cried Mrs. Orde. "What is it? What's the matter? Are you
hurt?"

She caught sight of the gun, leaped to the conclusion that Bobby had
shot himself and sank limply into a chair.

"See! Look here!" cried Bobby. He thrust the rifle, bottom up into her
lap. "Read it!"

On the plate behind the trigger-guard, carved in flowing script, were
these words.

_To Robert Orde from Arthur Kincaid. September 10, 1879._




IX

MR. DAGGETT


The printing press, too, was now a success. What time Bobby could spare,
he spent over his new work. In fact he would probably have printed out
all his interest in the shape of cards for friends and relatives, did
not an incident spur his failing enthusiasm. The little tin box of
printer's ink went empty. Bobby tried to buy more at Smith's where other
kinds of ink were to be had. Mr. Smith had none.

"You'd better go over to Mr. Daggett's," he advised. "He'll let you have
some."

Bobby crossed the street, climbed a stairway slanting outside a square
wooden store building and for the first time found himself in a printing
office.

Tall stands held tier after tier of type-cases, slid in like drawers.
The tops were slanted. On them stood other cases, their queerly arranged
and various-sized compartments exposed to view. Down the centre of the
room ran a long table. One end of it was heaped with printed matter in
piles and in packages, the other was topped with smooth stone on which
rested forms made up. Shelves filled with stationery, cans and the like
ran down one side the room. Beyond the table were two presses, a big and
a little. In one corner stood a table with a gas jet over it. In another
was an open sink with running water. A thin man in dirty shirt-sleeves
was setting type from one of the cases. Another, shorter man at the
stone-topped table was tapping lightly with a mallet on a piece of wood
which he moved here and there over a form. A boy of fifteen was printing
at the smaller of the presses. A huge figure was sprawled over the table
in the corner. In the air hung the delicious smell of printer's ink and
the clank and chug of the press.

Bobby stood in the doorway some time. Finally the boy said something to
the man at the table. The latter looked up, then arose and came forward.

He was of immense frame, but gaunt and caved-in from much stooping and a
consumptive tendency. His massive bony shoulders hung forward; his head
was carried in advance. In character this head was like that of a Jove
condemned through centuries to long hours in a dark, unwholesome
atmosphere--the grand, square, bony structure, the thick, upstanding
hair, the bushy, steady eyebrows, the heavy beard. But the cheeks
beneath the beard were sunken; the eyes in the square-cut caverns were
kind and gentle--and very weary.

"I want to see if I can get some ink of you," requested Bobby, holding
out his little tin box.

Mr. Daggett took the box without replying; and, opening it, tested with
his finger the quality and colour of what it had contained.

"I guess so," said he.

He led the way to one of the shelves and opened a can as big as a
bucket. Bobby gasped.

"My!" he cried; "will you ever use all that?"

Mr. Daggett nodded, and, dipping a broad-bladed knife, brought up, on
merely its point, enough to fill Bobby's tin box.

"How much is it?" asked Bobby.

"Let's see, you're Jack Orde's little boy, aren't you?" asked Daggett.

"Yes, sir."

"Well, that's all right, then. It's nothing."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Bobby, overwhelmed. The man nodded his massive
head. "Please," ventured Bobby, hesitating, "please, would you mind if I
stay a little while and watch?"

"'Course not," assured Mr. Daggett. "Stay as long as you want."

He returned to his table and forgot the little boy. An hour later he
looked up. Bobby was still there standing in the middle of the floor,
staring with all his might. Mr. Daggett pulled together his great frame
and arose.

"Have you a printing press?" he asked Bobby.

"Yes, sir," replied Bobby--"it's only a little one--to print two lines,"
he added.

"Do you like printing?"

"Oh!" burst out Bobby enthusiastically, "it's more fun than anything!"

"I'd like to see some of your work," said Mr. Daggett a flash of
amusement flickering in his deep eyes.

Bobby felt in his pocket and gravely presented a card.

   _"Mr. Robert Orde.
   Job Printer."_

"Why," said Mr. Daggett, surprised, "this is pretty well done. I didn't
know you could make ready so well on those little presses."

"What's 'make ready'?" asked Bobby.

"Why, regulating the impression so that all the letters are printed
evenly."

"They didn't for a long time," sighed Bobby. "I had lots of trouble."

"How did you make it go?" asked Mr. Daggett, interested.

Bobby explained the pasting of the slips of paper.

"Who taught you that?" asked Mr. Daggett sharply.

"Nobody; I just thought of it."

Two hours later, when the noon whistles blew, Bobby said good-bye to his
friend after a most interesting morning. Mr. Daggett had showed him
everything. He explained how in the type-cases the capital letters
occupied little compartments all alike and at the top, but how the small
letters were arranged arbitrarily in various-sized compartments.

"You see," said he, "we use the _e_ oftenest, so that is the largest and
is right in the middle. And here is the _a_ near it, but a little
smaller. A man has to learn where they are."

Then they watched the compositor setting type in the metal "stick" with
the sliding end. The compositor showed Bobby how he could tell when the
letters were right side up by feeling the nicks in the type, without the
necessity of looking; how he used the leads to space between the lines.
His hands flew from one compartment of the type case to the other and
the type clicked sharply. In a moment the stick was full. All three
walked over to the "composing table" of stone. Here Bobby watched the
type placed in the huge iron frame, which was then filled in with the
wooden blocks. The wedge-shaped irons locked it. Finally the block and
mallet went over the whole surface to even it down.

Bobby saw proof taken. He watched the small press in operation. It was
worked by a foot lever. The round ink plate which automatically made a
quarter turn at each impression and the double automatic ink-rollers
were a revelation to him. All the boy had to do was to insert and
withdraw the paper and push down with his foot. And the pressure was so
exact and so delicate and so brief--as though the type and the platen
coquetted without actually touching; and the imprint was so true and
clear! Even on the thin paper, the shape of the type did not stamp
through!

He could have watched for an hour, but shortly the job was finished, so
he moved on to look at the coloured inks and the fascinating variety of
papers and cards and envelopes.

This latter occupation kept him busy for a long time. He had not
realized that so many shapes and kinds of letters could exist. Mr.
Daggett told him their names and sizes--nonpareil, brevier, agate, pica,
minion and a dozen others which Bobby could not remember but which he
found exotic and attractive. Especially was he interested in the poster
type, made of wood. One letter was bigger than the whole form of his
little press.

When he left, Mr. Daggett gave him a small heavy package.

"Here you are," said he. "Here's an old font of script. It's old and too
worn for my use, but you can fool with it."

Bobby was delighted. He could hardly wait to get home before undoing the
package. The font formed a compact quadrilateral wound around the edges
with string. The letters were all arranged in order--four capital A's--A
A A A--then the Bs, and so on. It differed from his own font. The one
that came with his press had just three of each letter--large or small.
This varied. For instance, there were twenty _s_s, and only two _q_s.
Bobby procured his tweezers and began to set up his own name. He had no
stick so he got out the form with the two narrow wooden groves. To his
dismay the type would not fit. They were at least a quarter inch longer
than his own.

"Why so solemn, Bobby?" enquired his father at lunch a few minutes
later. "What's wrong?"

"My printing press isn't a real one," broke out Bobby. "It's a _toy_
one! I don't _like_ toys!"

"Oh, ho!" cried Mr. Orde. "Don't like toys, eh! How about the engine and
cars, and the tin soldiers?"

"I don't like them any more, either," insisted Bobby stoutly.

"All right," suggested Mr. Orde, winking at his wife. "Of course then
you won't want them any more: I'll just give them away to some other
little boy."

"All right," assented Bobby with genuine and astonishing indifference.

Bobby laid the little press away, but he could not resist the
fascination of Mr. Daggett's printing office. One day he came from it
bearing an inky and much-thumbed catalogue. He fairly learned it by
heart--not only the machines, from the tiny card press to the beautiful
fifty-dollar self-inker beyond which his ambition did not stray, but
also all the little accessories of the trade--the mallet, the patent
quoins, the sticks, the type-cases, the composing stones, the roller
moulds and compositions, the patent gauge-pins, the lead-cutters, the
slugs. And page after page he ran over the type in all its sizes and in
all its modifications of form. These things fascinated him and held him
with a longing for them, like revolvers and razors and carpenter's
chisels and peavies and all other business-like tools of a trade. Their
very shapes were the most appropriate and romantic shapes they could
possibly have assumed. He made lists. At first they were elaborate, and
included the big foot press and four fonts of type and three colours of
ink and fixings innumerable. They then shrank modestly by gradations
until they stuck at the 5×7 form. Bobby would not have cared for a press
smaller than that, for he wanted to print real things, like bill-heads
and whist cards and perhaps a small newspaper. His little heart throbbed
with a complete enthusiasm.

"When I grow up I think I'd like to be a printer like Mr. Daggett," he
said wistfully.

"Oh, no, you wouldn't," said Mr. Orde. "It's a poor trade--no money in
it here--and you'd have to stay in the house all the time. You wouldn't
want to be a printer, Bobby."

"Yes I would," repeated Bobby positively.




X

THE SPORTSMAN'S ASSOCIATION


The Maple County Sportsman's Association held its weekly shoots with
regularity. It consumed a great deal of Bobby's time and attention. You
see, each event was to be anticipated, and then remembered; the score
was to be rejoiced over or regretted; and the great question of how to
do better was to be considered prayerfully and long. Bobby found it to
be a more complicated problem than he would have believed possible. He
used to lie awake in bed thinking it over. Regularly before Thursday
came around he hit on a complete solution of the difficulty; and as
regularly he discovered by the actual test that something, whether of
theory or practice, still lacked.

Mr. Kincaid always listened to his ideas non-commitally.

"I've found out what it is!" cried Bobby as soon as Bucephalus had
approached within hearing distance. "You got to practise until your
forefinger works all by itself--entirely separate from the rest of your
arm. Then the rifle won't jerk sideways so much."

"All right," Mr. Kincaid responded, as Bobby climbed laboriously into
the cart. "Try it."

Bobby tried it; found it difficult to accomplish, and not altogether
effective. The bullets still scattered more or less like a shotgun
charge. Mr. Kincaid's score more than doubled his. Mr. Kincaid always
shot the best he could; and entered a grave negative to Bobby's
tentative suggestion for a handicap.

"No, Bobby," said he, "don't believe in 'em. It really doesn't matter
whether you defeat me or not; now does it? But it does matter whether
you get to be a good enough shot to win."

After each demolition of his ideas, Bobby returned a trifle dashed, but
with undaunted spirit. Again his busy brain attacked the puzzle. In a
week he had another hypothesis ready for the test.

Thus he edged slowly but surely toward marksmanship. The sight must be
held on the mark for an instant after the discharge; the trigger must
be squeezed steadily, not pulled; the independent command of the
forefinger is helped by as inclusive a grasp of the stock as possible;
holding the breath is an aid to steadiness--these, and a dozen other
first principles, Bobby acquired, one after another, by the slow
inductive process. Each helped; and Mr. Kincaid appreciated that his
pupil was learning intelligently, so that in the final result Bobby
would not only be a good shot, but he would know why.

In the meantime various changes were taking place in the seasons, which
Bobby noted in his own fashion. The little green apples of summer--just
right for throwing and for casting from the end of a switch--were now
large and rosy. Under the big hickory tree in the Fuller's yard were
already to be found occasional nuts. The leaves were turning gorgeous;
and enough were falling to make it necessary that the householder
search out his broad rake. In the country the shocks of corn stood in
rows like so many Indian chiefs wrapped each in his blanket, his plumes
waving above. The night was weird with the notes of birds migrating.

To each of these things Bobby, like every other boy in town, gave his
attention. Apples and grapes there were everywhere in abundance. The
early pioneer planted always his orchard and his arbours. The town,
taking root on the old riverside farms, preserved, as far as it could,
the fruit-trees. Every one who had a yard of any size about his house,
possessed also an apple tree or so and a grape vine--sometimes a chance
peach or pear. Bobby could not go amiss for fresh fruit; but he liked
best of all the sweet little red "Delawares" that grew back of Auntie
Kate's kitchen garden. These he picked, warmed by the sun. The satiny
"Concords" from the trellis, however, were better dipped in cool water,
which, with some labour, he caused to gush sparkling from an
old-fashioned wooden pump. Auntie Kate's apple trees, too, were of
selected varieties. Early in the season were the soft yellow sweetings;
then the streaked red and green "Northern Spies"; and last of all the
snow-apples with their contrast of deep crimson outside and white flesh
within. The windfalls covered the ground ready to the hand; and the
branches bent under their burden. It was the season of apple-sauce with
cinnamon, and baked apples with a dab of jelly where the core ought to
be, and apple-tapioca and Brown Betty. And these tasted wondrous good,
even to youngsters already gorged with raw fruit.

In every front yard and along every street front the householders were
busy raking the crisp autumn leaves into great heaps and long piles.
Bobby and his friends liked solemnly to "swish" their little legs
through them; to roll in them; to hide beneath them by burrowing like so
many squirrels. If this was the season of fruit, it was also the season
of bonfires. Every one burned leaves in those days, blissfully
unconscious of future city ordinances. A thin sweet haze of smoke hung
constantly in the air mellowing the blue of the sky, softening the
outlines of the hills, aromatic as an incensed cathedral. In the
evenings the fires winked bravely on both sides the streets. Figures
with rakes were silhouetted against them. Smaller figures careered
wildly in and out the dense smoke. It was a great "dare" to run and jump
directly through the fire! Now the sun was getting lazy; and sometimes
Bobby was allowed the indulgence of a half-hour of this delicious wild
fun. He always came in smoky and overheated; and always Mrs. Orde vowed
that it should not happen again.... it did.

Then there were the hickory nuts to be gathered in pails and sacks and
spread out on the garret floor to cure. Unfortunately the hickory tree
was very tall, so the boys had patiently to await the pleasure of the
wind. Walnuts and butternuts, on the contrary, were to be knocked down
with well-aimed clubs; hazelnuts to be stripped from the bushes; and
beech-nuts to be shaken down by a bold and practised climber. And in the
woods the squirrels were busy laying away their winter stores.

Mr. Kincaid and Bobby were often afield on the beech ridges. Mr. Kincaid
carried his gun, but he did not use it. They looked for squirrels. The
woods were carpeted with dead leaves on which the sun lay golden. They
had to move very quietly and keep a very sharp lookout. When the game
was sighted, the matter was by no means resolved. Squirrels are lively
people, and expert at hiding. Bobby and Mr. Kincaid chased hard and
breathlessly to force their quarry up a tree. When that was
accomplished, it was by no means easy to get a shot. The squirrel leaped
from one tree to another as fast as his enemies below could run. Finally
he climbed to the top of a tall beech whose trunk he immediately put
between himself and the hunters. It became necessary first to see him,
second to get a shot at him, third to hit him, and last to bring him
down. Bobby, shooting the heavy barrelled Flobert at unaccustomed
ranges, and at an elusive mark, discovered the appetite of atmosphere
for lead. Nevertheless it was the most exciting, breathless, tingling
game he had ever played. The air was biting cold, especially after the
sun began to sink through the trees, but it had the effect merely of
nipping Bobby's nose and cheeks red--his little body was tingling and
aglow. On his banner day he brought down two fox-squirrels, and one of
the beautiful black squirrels, then not uncommon, but now practically
extinct. In the process he used up his box of cartridges.




XI

THE MARSHES


"Real fall weather," that season of 1879, seemed to delay long beyond
the appointed time. During each night, to be sure, it grew cold. The
leaves, after their blaze and riot of colour, turned crisp and crackly
and brown. Some of the little still puddles were filmed with what was
almost, but not quite, ice. A sheen of frost whitened the house-roofs
and silvered each separate blade of grass on the lawns. But by noon the
sun, rising red in the veil of smoke that hung low in the snappy air,
had mellowed the atmosphere until it lay on the cheek like a caress. No
breath of air stirred. Sounds came clearly from a distance. Long
V-shaped flights of geese swept athwart the sky very high up, but their
honking carried faintly to the ear. Time seemed to have run down. And
yet when the sun, swollen to the great dimensions of the rising moon,
dipped blood-red through the haze, the first faint premonitory tingle
of cold warned one that the tepid, grateful warmth of the day had been
but an illusion of a season that had gone. This was not summer; but, in
the quaint old phrase, Indian summer. And its end would be as though the
necromancer had waved his wand.

In the meantime the barges and schooners continued to take chances in
order to market the last of the year's lumber crop; the small boys and
squirrels made the most of the nut crop; the grouse remained scattered
in noisy cover; and the ducks frequented the open stretches where they
were quite out of reach.

But at last Bobby Orde, awakening early, heard the rising and falling
moan of wind past the eaves' corner outside his windows. He hopped out
of bed, thrust his feet into a pair of knit socks and ran to the window.
The sun was not yet up; but the wild barbaric gold of it was flung
abroad over flat, hard-looking clouds.

   _"'Bright sunrise at morning,
   The sailor takes warning,'"_

murmured Bobby.

In the yard below, the brown leaves were chasing themselves madly around
and about, back and forth, like restless spirits. Others slanted down
from the trees in continuous flocks. The maples tossed restlessly. In
the air was a deep bitter chill which sent Bobby scurrying back to his
warm nest in a hurry.

After breakfast he was glad of his heavier suit. The sun rose and shone,
it is true; but its rays possessed no warmth. The light of it appeared
to be a cold silver, like the sheen on stubble. All the landscape seemed
to have paled. Gone were the rich glowing reds, the warm browns. A gray
cast hung over the land.

From school Bobby hurried home to be in time for an early lunch as Mr.
Orde wanted to go up river. He found Bucephalus in front; and Mr.
Kincaid about to sit down to the lunch table. The latter had on his old
gray suit and cardigan jacket.

"Hullo, youngster!" he greeted Bobby, "Looks like pretty good weather
for ducks. Want to go for a shoot?"

That settled lunch for Bobby. He could hardly stay at table until the
others had finished; and heard with enraptured joy his mother's voice,
as she rose from the table, asking Mr. Kincaid about provisions.

"I have all that," replied Mr. Kincaid, "and there's lots of bedding and
such things."

Nevertheless Mrs. Orde slipped away after a moment to wrap up a loaf of
"salt-rising bread," and one of "dutch bread." The two-wheeled cart
Bobby found, when finally he and Mr. Kincaid emerged from the house
carrying his valise, to be well packed with the shell-box, gun, bag and
a lunch basket. Mr. Kincaid's duck-dog, named Curly, lay crouched in the
bottom like a soft warm mat. Bobby had met Curly before. He was a
comical seal-brown dog, covered with compact tight curls all over his
body. When Bobby petted him, they felt springy. His face, head and ears,
however, were smooth and silky. He had yellow eyes, and an engaging
disposition. To the touch his body, even through the tight curls, felt
unusually warm. Though Curly's tail was a mere stump he wagged it
energetically when his master appeared, but without raising his nose
from between his forepaws.

Duke pranced out, eager to go, but was called back by Mrs. Orde and
ignominiously held. Bucephalus got under way. Bobby hugged the cold
barrel of his little rifle between his knees. He had on his "pull-down"
cap, and his shortest and heaviest cloth over-jacket, and knit woollen
mittens. The actual temperature was not as yet very low, but the wind
from the Lake was abroad, and growing in strength every minute. From the
flag-pole of the Ottawa they could see the square red storm-flag with
the black centre standing out like a piece of tin.

Bucephalus made surprising time. His gait on the open road was a long
awkward shamble, but it seemed to cover the ground. Mr. Kincaid humped
his shoulders and drove in a sociable silence, his short pipe empty
between his teeth. Curly retained his flattened attitude on the bottom
of the cart; only occasionally rolling up his yellow eyes, but without
moving his head. The wind tore by them madly.

About half a mile beyond the last mill Mr. Kincaid left the main road to
turn sharp to the right directly across the broad marshes. Here a
makeshift road had been constructed of poles laid in the corduroy
fashion. The cart pitched and bounced along at a foot pace. Bobby had no
chance to look about him, and could see only that on both sides
stretched the wide cat-tails and rush flats; that near them was water.
The sun was setting cold and black in hard greasy-looking clouds.

By and by the cart gave one last bump and rose to a little dry knoll
like an isla