Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

SEPTEMBER, 1896

VOL. L
No. 9




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  THE JUBILEE MEETING--UP TO DATE                273
  ONLY THIRTY DAYS MORE                          274
  JUBILEE SHARE FUND--PARAGRAPHS                 275

THE SOUTH.

  A NEGRO UPON SELF-HELP AND SELF-SUPPORT        276
  BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.,                279
  BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.              280
  BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL, GREENWOOD, S. C.         281
  TALLADEGA COLLEGE COMMENCEMENT                 282
  SNAP SHOTS AT TALLADEGA STUDENTS               283
  ALBANY NORMAL SCHOOL, ALBANY, GA.              285
  CHANDLER NORMAL SCHOOL, LEXINGTON, KY.         286
  EXTRACTS FROM LETTER OF A SOUTHERN PASTOR      288
  LETTER FROM A FORMER STUDENT                   289
  GRAND VIEW CHURCH                              291

THE CHINESE.

  VISITS TO THREE MISSIONS                       292

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  THE ASSOCIATION JUBILEE                        295

SHARES JUBILEE YEAR FUND.                        298

RECEIPTS.                                        299

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House. N. Y._
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.

  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.

  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "The American Missionary," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of
thirty dollars constitutes a Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I give and bequeath the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY


Vol. L. SEPTEMBER, 1896. No. 9.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE JUBILEE MEETING.

The semi-centennial of the American Missionary Association will be
celebrated in Boston, October 20-22, opening at three o'clock Tuesday
afternoon. A great and inspiring convocation is anticipated. Speakers
of national reputation have been secured. A large and interesting
industrial exhibit will be opened. Representatives from our mission
fields and a new band of Jubilee Singers will be heard throughout the
meetings.

Directions as to membership and correspondence will be found on the
last page of the cover. Fuller details as to the entertainment of
delegates, reduced rates at hotels and in traveling fares, will be
given in due time through the religious press.

       *       *       *       *       *

UP TO DATE.

For the first ten months of our current fiscal year our expenditures
have been $53,000 less than for the corresponding ten months three
years ago. They are $37,000 less than for the first ten months of the
next year. They are $13,000 less than last year. These facts indicate
the severity of our retrenchments.

We have most earnestly hoped for such a large increase of benefactions
as would greatly reduce our debts. Up to this time our receipts are
nearly $25,000 greater than at this date last year, but they are
$11,000 less than at this time year before last. That year closed with
a debt on its operations of $66,000, and last year with an additional
debt of $30,000. Thus far this year we have not only saved ourselves
from debt, but have gained $8,000 on the debts of the previous two
years.

This is a favorable difference of $38,000 between our financial
standing now and that at this date last year. This advance has been
made possible only by the sympathetic and generous responses from many
givers and churches which have cheered the presentation of our work.
Very many others have promised future aid which will lift the burden.
But, for the time being, we have had to maintain our standing chiefly
by making continued reductions of expenditures. This has been a
difficult and sorrowful task. In answer to numberless appeals in
behalf of the ignorant and suffering, we have had to explain
constantly that the refusals of the Association were due, not to lack
of sympathy, but to lack of means. In general, the Association can
administer only the means confided to its charge. Its historic and
permanent policy has been against incurring a debt. Its careful and
conservative forecast two years ago encountered, like all similar
benevolent work in all the denominations, a sudden and serious
reduction of receipts. The next year it provided a much diminished
schedule of expenditures, but this was met with a further additional
reduction of support.

Therefore, the task now set to the Association is to carry on only
what work it can while recovering what has been already expended in
these mission fields. We believe this recovery can be made. We are
most grateful to the churches, mission societies, and individual
givers who have so generously come to our help in this difficult and
trying year. From the promising responses which reach us, we can but
believe that very many more are planning for the relief of these
missions in their distress. Just now public attention is concentrated
on national issues of so perplexing and doubtful a character that
every enterprise, whether of business or of benevolence, waits upon
their settlement. We hope and pray that the coming months may lift the
clouds and pour prosperity again throughout all these vast mission
fields.

       *       *       *       *       *

ONLY THIRTY DAYS MORE.

At the time these lines reach the eyes of most of our readers, only
thirty days will remain of the fiftieth year in the work of the
American Missionary Association.

We look forward to these few days with anxious hope. Pastors, officers
of churches and missionary societies, and individual givers have
intimated to us that they will co-operate in making this fiftieth year
a Year of Jubilee. Again and again our anxious inquiries have received
the kind assurance that the year shall not close without the uplift of
special help to the Association.

Many churches and many givers have fulfilled this purpose. If all had
done as well, we should now be rejoicing over emancipation from all
indebtedness.

We earnestly plead for personal contributions from individual givers.
After all, it is upon the many individual gifts, however small each
one may be, that the success of this work must now mainly depend.

We ask as earnestly that each church which has not hitherto
contributed to the support of this mission work will do so now.

We respectfully request that the treasurers of churches and mission
societies will now send us contributions already taken in behalf of
the American Missionary Association, or balances remaining in their
hands according to church plans, of proportionate contributions.

Shall not these thirty September days in the book of life record the
special consecration in thousands of hearts of sacrificial service in
gifts to God's poor?

       *       *       *       *       *

JUBILEE SHARE FUND.

It will be seen in the record of this month that the Jubilee Share
Fund now aggregates pledges of over $14,000. This is a beginning, a
good beginning, but a beginning only. We hope these coming September
days which close our fiscal year will bring a vast increase of pledges
to the Jubilee Share Fund. We know that numbers of our friends have
been planning for it and looking forward to taking their part in this
great and useful Christian service. "Now is the accepted time."


_From Massachusetts_--"Please find inclosed check for $50 for the
Jubilee Year Fund, in memory of my dear father. His heart was ever
with your good work to the very end of his life."

_From a Tennessee A. M. A. Missionary_--"Wife and I join the Jubilee
contributors. Find $50 for one share. We wish we could multiply this
by a hundred."

_From Massachusetts_--"Please find from two friends in Boston $50
each, which has been intrusted to my care for the share fund; and I
gladly send it to help on the share fund."

_From Connecticut_--"It gives me pleasure to send you $2,000, as a
donation from our church to the American Missionary Association. Also
inclosed $785 as our annual contribution for the current expenses of
the Association, not for the debt."

_From Iowa_--"Inclosed find $18, my donation to the work of the
American Missionary Association. It is probably my last donation as
my age (past fourscore) and poor health warn me my time is short in
which to serve the Lord in this world."

_From Connecticut_--"I was not home last Sunday when the annual
contribution for the American Missionary Association was taken up, and
as I do not wish to miss having a little share in the good work of
your society I will inclose my check for $10 for the work."

_From New Jersey_--"I am glad to be able to send the inclosed amount
from the Presbyterian Sunday-school of this place. For several years
we have been giving to the work of the American Missionary
Association, and each year is an advance on the previous year in
amount. May you all be abundantly blessed in your spiritual as well as
your financial welfare."

_From Massachusetts_--"Inclosed find $5, which my sister before her
death desired me to send to the cause she labored for so many years,
and which was dear to her when her heavenly Father called her home."

_From Ohio, inclosing $5_--"It is a pleasure to be able to carry out
the wish of my dear husband. Ever since the organization of the
American Missionary Association we have been small contributors,
though Baptists. God bless and support your work."

       *       *       *       *       *

The South.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEGRO UPON SELF-HELP AND SELF-SUPPORT.

BY REV. ORISHATUKEH FADUMA, TROY, N. C.


One reason why the question of self-help as it relates to the Negro is
so difficult of solution, is his previous condition of slavery.

Slavery was first and last selfish. The training received by the Negro
under forced labor had no ethical meaning. The Negro labored, but was
not taught the dignity of labor; he did not find any dignity in it. If
there was any, his masters would have labored as he did, but the Negro
served as the cat's paws to get the nuts from the fire. The fire burnt
him severely, but he had not the benefit of the nuts. Thus the moral
and ethical benefit which he might have received from labor was lost.
Let our moralists ponder over this. The Negro's masters did not
believe in self-support during slavery; they were supported. Now that
his freedom is secured, the Negro also would like to have and hold as
the masters did.

The result of this forced selfish labor may be briefly summed up thus.
The Negro by training and example became prejudiced against severe
struggle and toil, physical or intellectual. He is now distrustful of
attempts made to induce him to labor. He is willing to let somebody
else do the work while he reaps the benefit, just as his masters did
during slavery. Thus slavery became a foe to true Christian manliness,
self-respect, and faith in one's self and others. It took 200 years to
force these traits into the Negro's being. It was destructive of all
that is uplifting to his soul. There is now a reaction going on.
Unless the forces of the Christian schools and churches are applied
with energy, the work of construction will not soon overcome that of
200 years of destruction.

Foremost in the education of the Negro along the line of self-support
is the American Missionary Association. That the policy of the
Association regarding self-help is not theoretical, but practical, may
be seen in the statement of Rev. Dr. Beard concerning the work in the
South, before the National Council for 1895. He says: "We are
realizing also that the independent methods of Congregational polity
develop self-help. These churches each year are bearing a larger part
of their own support. When it is remembered that formerly their
preachers were seldom paid anything, it can be understood that this
new way of church life is full of meaning."

The Association states in emphatic and unequivocal language its
belief, founded on long experience, in an indigenous ministry. As Dr.
Beard says: "Our general policy has been to prepare the race to save
the race. This is based upon the conviction that in the long run, and
in the large view, the most effective way to lift up the masses is to
do what we can to help the relatively few to climb into higher
intellectual and moral power."

One means toward the solution of this problem of self-help is the
industrial solution. Many overlook it because they think the Negro has
already had _much_ of it in his past history. But the Negro has never
had the _best_ of it. His industrial training before the war was
immoral as well as unscientific. The industrial education of the Negro
then was carried on without mental and moral culture; now the head,
the hands, and the heart are the triplets which must control his
development. Before the war he was simply a machine in industry; now
he is to be trained as a living soul. Before the war he had some
restraint through industrial work, but it was physical, not moral. The
education which the coming twentieth century requires of the Negro
through industry will be imperfect unless it shall be permeated with
the best and purest of ideals. It is also a recognition of the fact
that man is more than a physical creature; he is a combination of the
physical and the spiritual. It must be two natures working in harmony
with each other's development.

The modern industrialism is a combination of preaching and practice.
It has in it a larger conception of God's Kingdom as seen in the world
of matter. If it is not the highest conception, it is not the lowest,
and should not be despised in the education of a race just emerging
from ignorance. One has only to see the Negro in the plantations of
the South, and observe his methods of work, to be convinced of the
necessity of industrial training as a means toward self-help. Look
throughout these farming districts and you will see houses fit for
pigs to dwell in rather than men; you will eat food the mode of
preparation of which is unworthy of a human being; you will see women
in laundry work who have never seen a washing-machine all their life;
and gradually the idea will flash into your mind that industrial
training is needed.

The question may be asked, What is the American Missionary Association
doing along these lines of self-help and independence? Much has been
done, and is being done. The Association has not said much, but it is
doing much. This is better than saying much and doing little. At the
present time, when much is said about the industrial development of
the South, there is danger of following the crowd whose ideals are not
the highest. The popular cry is for a rejuvenated South, a South with
prosperous mills and factories, and the Negro with it. The Association
has wisely kept out of this, and yet has done more than any other
organization toward the industrial independence of the people. It was
the first to start industrial schools for the Negroes. Its first
industrial school was founded at Talladega, Ala., in 1867, where it
now works about 300 acres of land. Modern farming in its most
important branches is taught here. In connection with the school are
popular lectures, which are listened to, and scattered by the students
throughout the country. White and black farmers are being improved by
them. The instructor in farming, a graduate of the Amherst
Agricultural College, is both scientific and practical. In the same
school, at Talladega, young men and women are taught various other
branches of industry.

Tougaloo Institution, in Mississippi, has a farm of 500 acres, which
supplies cities in the Northwest with her produce. There are no less
than fifty industrial schools under the American Missionary
Association, not to mention independent schools, which are largely
fostered by Congregational influence. The reflex influence of these
industrial schools upon the whites is marvelous.

While we labor to plant seeds of true manhood in the hearts of the
people, we recognize the fact that there must be a going-out and a
taking-in. The involution of the race must precede its evolution. It
therefore requires time to see fruits. Time will tell; it is already
telling. With boards devising, and schools, churches, and pastors
formulating, methods to bring about the solution of the problem, we
shall reap an abundant harvest. When it is known that the larger
portion of the colored race in the South is still living on the
plantations, practically untouched by the Christian influences of this
century, living without God and not touched by our mission work, it
accentuates the imperative duty of the churches and pastors of
churches to hasten the work of self-support. In concluding, I
emphasize the following points:

1. That the work of educating a race to manly independence requires
time as well as energy.

2. That it behooves all teachers of the race to do their utmost to rid
the minds of the people of those ideas of slavery which strike a blow
at their independence.

3. That the position taken by the American Missionary Association is
the true one in preparing the people for self-support, and thus toward
the self-support of our churches.

4. That while recognizing the difficulties in the way of self-help and
self-support, many, if not all, can be removed if all the churches put
their shoulders to the wheel, and both teach and practice this, and do
all they can for their own support, rather than seek to have
everything done for them.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.

MISS JULIA B. FORD.


After another all too swiftly fleeting school year, the commencement
season is ushered in by the very able baccalaureate sermon delivered
to a large and appreciative audience by the Rev. J. J. Durham, one of
the colored pastors of Savannah.

On Tuesday there are oral examinations in the classrooms. On
Wednesday, palms, magnolias, cape jasmine, and wild bamboo-vine have
lent their charm to render the chapel a fragrant abode of beauty. "Old
Glory" hangs here and there upon its walls. The large flag which each
morning through the year has received, after the singing of a
patriotic song, the salutations of the assembled students, has given
place for this occasion to the inspiring words of the Latin motto,
"_Ad astra per aspera_," which in bold relief gleam out from a
star-bespangled field of blue above the platform.

Through the dense crowd which overflows the chapel and throngs the
adjoining rooms, to the notes of a march on the piano, the Ninth Grade
enters and stands to receive the graduating class, who file to their
places on the platform. With what swelling of heart are they silently
greeted, and how dear and noble a band do they seem to fond,
self-sacrificing parents, and to the teachers who have labored to
bring them to this the proudest day of their young lives. The class is
one of the largest which the Beach has ever graduated--four youths and
thirteen girls. The salutatory and essay, "What Can a Woman Do?"
earnest, suggestive, and pleasingly delivered, was followed in due
order by recitations, all rendered with spirit and grace, and winning
enthusiastic applause. The declamation by one youth, of President
Lincoln's address at Gettysburg, and the orations, by two others, on
race questions, receive due meed of appreciation.

In the cantata, "The Ivy Queen," all the girl graduates take part, and
the ivy crown is placed on the brow of the valedictorian, who is a
keen-minded young girl of the pure Negro type. Her essay and
valedictory, "Character-building," is a worthy production. It was an
inspiring thing to look into the dark but perfectly radiant faces of
her father and mother, when, after the exercises, they came, all too
full for verbal expression, to grasp the hands of teachers.

After the class song is sung, diplomas bestowed, the in-coming senior
class welcomed, and the announcement made as to the one whose rank in
her studies entitles her to a free scholarship for the ensuing year, a
brief but most excellent address is given by a young colored physician
of Savannah, whose ability, culture, high moral worth, and nobly
unselfish ambitions fit him to stand as a model to our students. The
newly made alumni meet teachers and friends in the Teachers' Home for
refreshments and a good, happy time generally; and in the midst of it
all one of the workers of Beach is surprised by a token of
appreciation in the form of a beautiful gift from the graduating
class. Our orator of the day, after some consultation, proposes to the
class of '96 the forming of an alumni association at the opening of
the next year, and then soon all disperse and a successful school year
is reckoned with the past.

       *       *       *       *       *

BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

BY MISS LINCOLNIA C. HAYNES.


The Commencement Exercises of Ballard Normal School began with the
Junior Exhibition. At the time appointed every seat was taken and
there was scarcely standing room. The greatest interest was manifested
by all present, and at the close of the evening, when anxious parents
and interested friends crowded around with beaming faces to express
their satisfaction and appreciation, each teacher felt amply rewarded
for the arduous labor and effort put forth.

The "Jubilee Songs," and especially the "Jubilee Medley," attracted
great attention. To hear "Steal Away," "Get on Board," "Swing Low,"
and all the other old-time songs, wound into one, and yet fitting into
each other so perfectly and harmoniously, seemed almost a wonder.

The annual sermon was preached the following Sunday by Rev. J. R.
McLean, pastor of the Congregational Church. In addressing the
graduates he urged a practical use of the knowledge gained; he
emphasized the fact that philanthropy is giving one's self, and he
impressed upon them the necessity of co-operating with Christ in all
things if success is desired in anything.

Wednesday was Visitors' Day at the school, and a larger number was out
this year to witness the examinations and inspect work than for
several previous years. Wednesday night the alumni held their regular
meeting in the chapel.

Thursday, Commencement Day, dawned gloriously, and long before the
time for the exercises to begin, people were wending their way toward
the building in order to obtain a comfortable seat. There were three
graduates, all girls, and they made a pretty sight as they marched
slowly up the aisle and took their places upon the platform.

The Annual Address was delivered by Rev. S. A. Peeler, of the M. E.
Church. He did not go back thirty years and tell the condition of the
Negro at that time, and extol him for the rapid stride he has made,
etc. He did not enumerate the things the Negro can do, but he simply
and plainly stated, so that all who heard might clearly understand
him, what the Negro, and every one else who desires success, _must_
do.

       *       *       *       *       *

BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL, GREENWOOD, S. C.

BY PRINCIPAL J. M. ROBINSON.


On the afternoon which witnessed the closing exercises of the Brewer
Normal School, notwithstanding a promised storm, the chapel was well
filled. The platform was tastefully decorated with flowers, ferns, and
the national colors. We feel keenly the need of a large flag, and
should some friend who sees this be moved to donate us one it would be
very gratefully received.

The class of '96, composed of two young ladies and two young men,
acquitted themselves well. The essay, "We Girls," by Miss Annie Laurie
Fuller, was full of good thoughts, and pointed out very forcibly to
the girls of the colored race their present advantages, and what as a
result their responsibilities are.

Rev. H. H. Proctor, pastor of the First Congregational Church, of
Atlanta, Ga., gave an able address on "Racial Contributions to
American Civilization," which, while stating plain truths very
plainly, gave no offense to the white friends present. For the first
time in our knowledge of the school there were a number of white
ladies in the audience, which we felt was quite a point gained. All
expressed themselves as very much pleased with the address, the parts
of the graduates, the music, and in fact with all the exercises.

Mr. Proctor's presence with us was an inspiration to all, both
teachers and pupils. On the whole, the year was closed with
hopefulness for the future and a greater desire to do work that should
tell for the uplifting of the needy people with whom we are
associated.

       *       *       *       *       *

TALLADEGA COLLEGE COMMENCEMENT.


Talladega College, Ala., observed its twenty-ninth anniversary at the
usual time.

The first public exercise was by the preparatory students who had
completed the course which entitled them to enter upon the collegiate
studies in the fall. Four young men received diplomas at this
exhibition.

The display by the industrial departments was unusually interesting.
The sewing-room had on hand plain and fancy needle-work, finished
garments for both sexes, among which were children's clothes made over
from those previously worn by adults. This latter feature will commend
itself to many homes where the custom of "making over" old clothes is
one of the necessities. Girls taught in the sewing-room are able to
make a livelihood by taking orders for work in this line. There is
also a nurse-training department which is not only patronized by
pupils in the required course, but volunteer classes have been formed
consisting of the older male students and of mothers living near the
college. A hospital bed was exhibited, and also the various sorts of
bandages required in special cases. The boys' mechanical department
furnished a large display in carpentry--mostly of a technical
character. Then there were geometric and scale drawing, building plans
of a varied character, and other work. The farm was represented in an
appropriate way. Convenient appliances for care of stock, for housing
farm products, etc., were shown, and live stock of various sorts was
there--some varieties of which are giving to the college a wide
notoriety for their excellence.

Public examinations were held in studies of grammar and advanced
grades. The class in trigonometry gave evidence of the practical
character of its labors by exhibiting a plat of the college
property--some 270 acres in all--drawn to a scale and neatly
lettered.

The literary and musical exercises of the commencement were very
generously patronized by the white citizens. It is to be regretted
that the college chapel is not sufficiently large to accommodate the
audiences, and that scores were unable to get a sitting at the concert
of Monday night. There is a hope that a more commodious chapel will
soon be built.

There were present two distinguished gentlemen from abroad--members of
the college trustee board, Dr. Beard, of New York, and Dr. Cooper, of
Connecticut. The former spoke most felicitously on several occasions,
and the latter delivered a very able baccalaureate sermon and the
literary address. Rev. J. R. McLean, of Macon, Ga., preached Sunday
night.

The graduates and the subjects of their themes were as follows:

NORMAL DEPARTMENT.

  The Uses of the Imagination                  Louise M. Johnson, Talladega
  Folk-lore                                     Marietta G. Kidd, Talladega
  True Womanhood                            Annie B. Williams, Jacksonville
  The Times that Try Men's Souls                Robert A. Clarke, New Berne
  There is More Beyond                               Wade A. Jones, Vincent

THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT.

The Condition and the Value of Definite Preaching,
                                             Manuel L. Baldwin, Troy, N. C.

The Conquest of Alexander the Great in its Relation
  to the Spread of Christianity,             John I. Donaldson, Paris, Tex.

The Relation of Infant Baptism to the Kingdom of God,
                                           Robert W. Jackson, Durant, Miss.

Dr. Andrews presided at the exercises and delivered the diplomas.

Two representatives of the alumni also presented original exercises:

Leaders Demanded by this Epoch,
             Rev. H. E. Levi, B.D., Talladega (Normal '87, Theological '95)

Alumni History,                     Miss Eliza A. Jones, Selma (Normal '91)

The Alumni dinner and business meeting followed, and the address on
"Manhood," by Dr. Cooper, at night, closed the series.

       *       *       *       *       *

SNAP SHOTS AT SOME TALLADEGA STUDENTS.

BY PROF. E. C. SILSBY.


One day last year there came unannounced a boy who had walked fifty
miles to get here. He was an orphan, had been working until he had
secured a good outfit of clothing, and, having been told of this
school by one of our pupil-teachers laboring in his neighborhood,
concluded to come, "work his way," and get an education. There seemed
to be nothing to do but to reward his faith by receiving him into
boarding-hall and school-room. He was an apt scholar, worked
diligently, and is still doing well.

Not long ago a young man, twenty years old, appeared with a diminutive
satchel and applied to enter school. Upon inquiry a college official
discovered that he lived some thirty miles distant, that he had only
$3.50, no expectation of getting any more money, and that his
scholarship was very poor. He stated that he had been converted about
four years before and sometime afterward had a "call to preach."
Later, he explained the nature of this "call" thus: "One morning just
before day, as I lay in my bed, I heard a voice. It said, 'Does you
remember what the Lord Jesus Christ said to his disciples just before
He descended into heaven? Go ye into all the world and preach the
gospel to every creature.' I studied about this, and finally asked the
Lord did He mean for me to preach. He gave me a feeling that He did. I
tried to get the idea out of my mind, but it kept coming back, and
here I am." He was advised to stay out until he could earn money
enough with which to make a beginning. But he wanted to enter school
even if he could stay in but two weeks. He was therefore examined,
placed in the second reader room, given a book and a Testament, and
the promise of work to pay his tuition. He found a boarding place, and
for a brief period of time enjoyed the privileges of the school room
according to his request.

A young woman, daughter of an early friend of the College, is here.
Her father (now in heaven) had experienced the conditions both of
slavery and of freedom, and his children have inherited that father's
interest in education to a large degree. This, his youngest daughter,
is cared for by her brothers, and the solicitude they exhibit in her
welfare is very touching. May she finish her course with honor, and
perform a noble work "for Christ and humanity."

A few years ago a man and his wife left the service of their employer
in a neighboring city, rented a little cottage in Talladega, and
entered the same class in one of our lower grades. By prudence and
economy they had saved some money and were able to live comfortably
while prosecuting their studies. They have passed regularly up the
grades and are happy in the progress they are making. During the long
summer vacation they find employment, and are on hand promptly at the
fall opening of the school. They are both active church members, and
the man expects to study for the ministry after sufficient preparatory
training.

Here is a case several times repeated. It is that of a girl who is
making her way unaided by parental effort. She spends the long summer
vacation teaching a country school. The pay is small, board must be
paid out of her wages, and her scanty wardrobe must be replenished.
She has made a deposit with the treasurer, and has arranged for work
at the boarding hall to help out in the matter of college bills. She
has no time for play, no money for luxuries, but she is plucky and is
bound to have an education, and it looks as if she would succeed.

A young man is here. He came with plain clothes, although they were
clean and new. Out of wages--less than ten dollars a month and
board--he had saved an amount which, with work out of study hours
would insure him a year in school. Once he came without money, but we
could not receive him. He therefore determined to come next time
_with_ money, and his success we note above. Promotion for good
scholarship came soon. Religious influences were strong, and he became
a Christian. He is now among the most trusted and valued pupils.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALBANY NORMAL SCHOOL, ALBANY, GA.

BY MRS. ALICE L. DAVIS.


One finds that every year the enrollment grows larger. The people are
increasingly appreciating the work done by the school. Every one who
can afford it usually sends his children to our school, but there are
others who are extremely poor but who are equally anxious to send
their children also, and in order to do this they make great
sacrifices. Many mothers work at the washtub from Monday morning till
Saturday night, and do all kinds of manual labor, to obtain the money
with which to keep their children in school. Some of our neediest
pupils prove to be the best in their classes. One boy, whose widowed
mother is unable to keep him in school, may be seen every day before
and after school going in search of odd jobs to obtain money with
which to pay his tuition.

This boy is one of the brightest pupils we have. There are others who
are equally anxious to obtain an education. Many will walk distances
ranging from three to seven miles to school every morning. The
interest in the school increases yearly to such an extent that the
building, which at first was thought to be large enough to accommodate
all who would come, is now entirely too small to accommodate the
pupils that we have. It will be almost impossible to get along next
year without more room. We are greatly in need of a chapel where we
can hold our devotions and have our public exercises. Without more
room the work will be greatly hampered.

The third anniversary of our school was held last week. These
exercises are always looked forward to with the greatest interest and
pleasure by both parents and pupils. On June 4 was our exhibition of
the primary and intermediate grades. The audience was made up of the
fathers, mothers, and friends of the students. They seemed anxious to
have each pupil acquit himself well, and the pupils seemed equally as
eager to do their best to please the audience. The programme, which
was well rendered, was made up of essays, declamations, solos, duets,
and choruses. "Bernardo del Carpio" and the quarrel between Brutus and
Cassius were rendered in a manner worthy of more experienced pupils.

On June 5 were the exercises of the grammar grades. The programme was
made up of essays by two young ladies, who had completed the grammar
grades; instrumental solos by the music-pupils, trios, and choruses;
also an address by Rev. Mr. Sims, of Thomasville, Ga., who spoke on
the subject "Wanted." He pointed out the need of education, of
religion, of wealth, and especially of sterling morality in character.
This address was highly appreciated by the large and enthusiastic
audience.

Could my reader have been present he would have realized that the
people are hungering and thirsting after knowledge, and are beginning
to regard our school as a well-spring to supply them.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHANDLER NORMAL SCHOOL, LEXINGTON, KY.

MISS F. J. WEBSTER, PRINCIPAL.


In reviewing the history of Chandler Normal School for the past year,
we find more reasons than usual for courage and gratitude. In all
departments of our work we see evidences of the mental and moral
advancement of our pupils. The year has been one of progress and
prosperity. Nothing has occurred to hinder the work. The conscientious
performance of duty has been the rule of the school, and the students
who entered with any other purpose in view soon discovered their
mistake and saw that they did not have the approval of their
companions.

The forerunner of the closing exercises was the presentation of the
cantata "Little Red Riding-hood," by the pupils of the intermediate
grades. This entertainment drew as large an audience as the chapel, a
room that has a seating capacity of 600, could accommodate. The music,
both vocal and instrumental, was excellent, and illustrated most fully
the remarkable progress that has been made in this department within
the past three years.

Two days were devoted to the annual written examinations, momentous
occasions, that were crowned with success so far as the majority of
the pupils were concerned. The ordeal of examinations closed with the
public oral ones on Friday morning. On the afternoon of the same day
occurred the exhibition of the eighth grade, the class finishing the
grammar course. The essays presented on this occasion were all upon
subjects suggested by the pupils' study of United States history.

The exercises of Monday morning were wholly musical. The first part of
the programme consisted of the cantata "The Musical Enthusiast," and
the second part of a piano recital. All the music presented was of a
high order, most of it being classical.

On Tuesday a declamatory contest was given by the young women of the
normal department. The prize offered by a friend of one of the
teachers was a year's tuition in Chandler School. The selections were
from standard authors, and were chosen with the purpose of testing to
the utmost the ability of the young contestants. During the past year
much interest has been manifested by the pupils in work of this sort,
and most noticeable progress has been made by many of them.

At the close of the contest a very interesting and eloquent address on
the subject of temperance was given by Rev. J. S. Jackson, pastor of
the Congregational Church in Lexington. The thoughts presented were
full of inspiration for all who heard them.

On Wednesday morning an intelligent and appreciative audience
assembled in the chapel to listen to the commencement exercises. Three
young men presented orations, and three young women essays, on this
occasion. There was but one graduate from the higher normal course. An
oration on the subject "Frederick Douglass," presented by a young man
who had completed the tenth grade, was considered an unusually
creditable student production and elicited much applause.

The commencement address was given by the Rev. W. T. Bolling, D.D.,
pastor of the Southern Methodist Church of Lexington. The speaker
prefaced his remarks by saying that much surprise had been expressed
by many of his friends that he, a former slaveholder and an
ex-Confederate soldier, would consent to deliver the commencement
address for a school devoted to such a purpose as was Chandler. He
assured these individuals that our school had no warmer friend than
he, nor one more in sympathy with its work. No address could have been
more helpful and stimulating than was his. All who had the privilege
of listening to it were cheered and edified.

At the close of each day's literary exercises the majority of the
audience accepted the invitation to examine the work of the
sewing-classes on exhibition in one of the recitation-rooms. A large
number of articles, all carefully made by hand, gave abundant evidence
of the industry and skill of the girls of both schools.

The closing entertainment of commencement week took place in the
chapel on Wednesday at 8 P.M. The programme for that occasion
consisted of a cantata entitled "The Cadets' Picnic," presented by
the little pupils of the Hand School. The night was stormy, but for
all that the large chapel of Chandler School was comfortably full.
Fifty small children, carefully trained and displaying perfect
self-possession, took part in this entertainment. The teachers of the
Hand School had every reason to feel gratified with the results of
their work.

The teachers of both the Chandler and Hand schools have labored
diligently for the moral and spiritual upbuilding of their pupils
during the past year. The meetings of the Christian Endeavor Society,
held each Friday morning at 9, have been productive of the best
results.

The Sunday-school work has been very encouraging. Chandler and Hand
Mission Sabbath-schools together numbered more than two hundred pupils
at the close of the year. Nearly all of these children were from
communities destitute of every other Christian influence.

       *       *       *       *       *

EXTRACTS FROM A LETTER OF A SOUTHERN PASTOR.


I desire to explain to you some features of what I conceive to be the
most interesting scheme I have witnessed in the South for a long time.
You have, I suppose, received one or two copies of our little paper.
Let me give you a bit of history concerning it.

It was a short while after the "local option" election, in which the
friends and advocates of temperance and good government went down in
inglorious defeat before the red-faced saloon-keepers and other
votaries of vice, when the executive committee of the "Prohibs"
saddled the cause of defeat on the Negroes' shoulders. The cause of
defeat agreed upon, a few generous-hearted men thought it would be
much better to make some kind of effort to elevate the Negro than to
grieve about what was already done. So the idea of a manual
training-school was advanced by two gentlemen, one of whom is a stanch
Southerner, who for a long time had the unenviable reputation of
believing and openly advocating the strange and illogical theory that
the Negro has no soul; the other is a minister of Southern birth, but
of Northern education. Infatuated with the prospects of ultimate
success, and having, it seems providentially, come upon a man who was
a printer and owned an outfit, they talked with him, and he, needing
work, was evidently smitten with the idea. Thoroughly understanding
themselves, they sought a conference with a few representative colored
men. I was among the first to be interviewed. The minister put the
matter before me, and I saw nothing unworthy in it, and it drew out my
sympathy immediately. After talking the whole matter over we agreed to
call a meeting. The meeting was called in the well-furnished office of
a colored man. There were six present--three white men and three
colored men. We talked over the matter again, each one stating his
limitations in the affair. I asked the white gentlemen present if they
thought they could stand the sentiment that would doubtless be brought
to bear upon them. They said, "While we anticipate opposition, we are
sure we can withstand all assaults." "Then," said I, "we have nothing
to lose." The whites were to have a part of the paper and the colored
a part--a quarter or a half, as they might desire. I was asked to take
charge of the colored department, and with reluctance I agreed. The
paper went through eight issues. The whites interested in it found the
pressure too great for them, and the owner of the outfit found the
support entirely too meager. The white editor while in attendance at a
church convention was in some cases refused the courtesy of a
Christian introduction. One young woman who was a friend of the editor
refused to introduce him to her friend because he was in the newspaper
business with a "nigger." A banker was asked to subscribe, but
refused, saying there was too much ---- "nigger" about that paper for
him. The merchants generally refused to advertise in it. After an
existence of about eight weeks the paper ceased temporarily or
permanently, I know not whether the former or the latter. When I
talked with the originator of the idea he candidly confessed: "I was
born in the South, held slaves in the South, have lived in the South
all my life, but the prejudice among the white people against the
Negroes is greater than I thought. While I am entirely independent of
public opinion, the reflection on my friends Mr. ---- and Dr. ---- has
been very great."

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM A FORMER STUDENT AT MOBILE.


Dear Friend: I entered Emerson Institute the first Monday in October
of 1892, but long before that time I had contemplated going there to
school, though not having any immediate support I could not attend
until the above-named time. Just two days before I entered the school
I had accepted a position as clerk, but seeing the great need of an
education I quit immediately and entered school. When I entered
Emerson I had not been in school for about seven years, but had to
some extent been engaged in study. I had no sure means of support, but
was determined to educate myself.

Our principal, seeing my earnestness, gave me the privilege of living
at the "Home," which enabled me to work out my board and tuition. I
gladly accepted. And it is here the lasting influence began its effect
upon me. Indeed, I cannot state the first impression made, but I do
know the best; that is, it was here I became a Christian and was made
to accept Christ as my Saviour. I think I professed religion in March
of 1893, during Mr. Moore's work there. From this step I began to
build a principle that would be able to stand the many temptations
that would come upon me. The next best thing, it was here (at Emerson)
I was made to realize the evil effect of alcoholic liquors, and when,
as before that time, I had some toleration for wine, etc., I pledged
myself against it and became a strong defender of "Prohibition." I was
fortunate in being awarded a prize for the best-made speech on
Prohibition in a contest given by Emerson Institute on May 22, 1894;
and I almost decided to become a temperance lecturer.

It is impossible for me to enumerate the myriad of good influences
that have surrounded me by being a student in Mobile. But permit me to
say that if there is any one thing in earth that I owe for my
stableness in that which is right, it is my having been immediately
under the good influences of Emerson Institute and its earnest
teachers. I have been made to see the power of a good education. My
mind, heart, and soul have been broadened; and now I am able to look
upon humanity from a broader point of view. It has certainly given me
a more congenial spirit, and wherein I may have been conceited, I am
not now. One very important influence is that I have decided to never
stop short of the very best possible education. I have been made to
believe that morality is the only standard for ideal Christianity.

A few words of what I am doing and shall do. I shall soon be teaching
my motto, "A high moral standard," pure and upright, to benefit the
largest possible number in shortest possible time. I shall endeavor by
God's assistance to instill in my pupils these true principles of
right doing and the possibilities brought through education. And as I
have been influenced by Emerson Institute and its teachers, I shall
try and do likewise to those whom I shall assume authority over.

I think that you will be able to get an idea of how I have been
influenced by Emerson Institute by the narrative which I have given,
although scattering.

I trust that you will pray for my success, and that I may be able to
stand the _test_. I have endeavored to give veracity in this matter,
with no exaggeration. Neither have I spoken in hyperbolical terms, to
make the wrong impression. Trusting that this is the question that you
asked me, properly answered, I am hopeful that your stay with us this
year has been crowned with success, and that you may return next year
with even greater determination, and that the results may be a
hundred-fold. Kind wishes to all the teachers. I am,

Yours sincerely,

W. L. Jones.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAND VIEW CHURCH.

REV. W. W. DORNAN.


The Grand View Congregational Church is situated on Waldon's Ridge,
overlooking the pleasant valley of Tennessee. The outlook on the
southern side reaches to the Unaka chain of mountains in North
Carolina, a distance of about seventy miles. Westward and northward
rise in the background of the forest the mountains of the Cumberland
plateau. On the east, the trees shut out everything but the sky.

We are about 800 feet above the sea-level, giving a most delightful
and salubrious atmosphere. The moral atmosphere is equally good. The
nearest place for liquors and their accompanying vices is in the
valley beneath.

The Congregational Church was organized at this place on October 15,
1885, under the superintendency of the American Missionary
Association. The congregation was composed wholly of people from the
Northern States, who had come to the mountains seeking health. These,
to the number of about twenty-five families, form the neighborhood of
Grand View. Outside of this place are to be found the people of the
mountains, scattered across the mountain-top, in a little clearing
here and another there. In the midst of the woods, during the summer,
it is a "discovery" to find the log house, the home of the
mountaineer. The occupation of all is farming. There is no other means
for a livelihood.

Many of the church members own their own homes; usually two-story
frame buildings.

During the present pastorate twenty-one have united with the church;
fourteen by letter, seven by confession. Out of this number we have
nine who are mountaineers, the first acquisition of the native element
to the church. We have a small but neat building, seating 150, in
which services are held every Sunday morning and evening. A Christian
Endeavor Society embraces a large number of the young people for whom
we labor.

This church is in connection with a large and flourishing school. The
students come to us from three States, and thus the influence of the
American Missionary Association is scattered far and wide. We are the
center of a large but poor class of people who have no means to help
themselves. If they are ever to help themselves, they must receive a
start from outside. When they do get a chance they usually go ahead.

We have among our students many teachers of the public schools lifting
the tone of the whole mountain. Last year about sixteen of the
students taught school during the vacation, covering a territory from
Red Belt, Georgia, to Cumberland Plateau, Tennessee. Several lawyers,
former students, are now practicing at the bar in Tennessee and other
States. To our honor one of our graduates is a missionary in China;
many have gone forth to usefulness. Many, if not all, of these would
have been unable to do anything for themselves but for the benevolence
of the churches and the planting of the school and church in this
place. The ideas with which the Association set out to work are no
longer theories, but established facts.

The success of the Association, I believe, lies, next to God's
blessing, in the fact that they realized that not only the school is
needed to make better men and women, but also the church to fit these
men and women for the struggles of life. Both together are needed to
do the work.

In this place, where "the work which this society is doing touches
every fiber of our national life," that which produced the sterling
manhood of New England in the past days, and made our national life a
possibility and then a fact, can, in a like manner in the future,
produce such men and women on the mountains and in the valleys of the
South.

Such a work should give hope and courage to every friend of this
Association, and I believe that in the last day it will be a great
surprise to many to know how many homes they have helped to brighten,
and how many lives they have helped to bless, and how many souls they
have helped to save.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese.

       *       *       *       *       *

VISITS TO THREE MISSIONS.

BY REV. JEE GAM.


The missions visited were those at Marysville, Oroville, and
Watsonville. At each place an anniversary was held, at which Dr. Pond
wished me to make an address. But I felt that I had other duties to do
besides this:

1. To see that those brethren who had not been baptized should come to
baptism.

2. To urge those scholars who ought to join the Congregational
Association of Christian Chinese to do so at once.

3. To strengthen and stimulate the brethren, not only to stand firm in
their faith, but to press forward to save men through Christ.

4. To urge them to give generously to our work.

5. To preach on the street, that I might lead some one or more to
Jesus.

At Marysville I lost no time in getting the names of those who had not
been baptized, and who seemed ready for baptism; then the names of
pupils who ought to join the association. Then I enlisted the
co-operation of the baptized Christians. We just _surrounded_ four of
our brethren and urged them to give themselves publicly and wholly to
Christ. They objected that they would like just to know more, but they
had been under instruction between one and two years, and had
confessed themselves believers six or more months ago by joining the
association. We thought them well qualified to receive baptism.
Finally they consented, and then we all shook hands and rejoiced. They
were baptized by Dr. Pond the following Sunday evening, when after the
anniversary we received the Lord's Supper and listened to Dr. Pond's
sermon on our motto for the year, "Ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost."

The method of winning the three pupils for the Association was the
same only with the added efforts of all present.

The contribution was generous. At my first mention of this matter they
all held up their pledge-cards, duly signed, and with the amounts they
were able to give written upon them.

On Sunday afternoon we held a street meeting, which all the brethren
who could attended, and all helped.

The next day (Monday) two Marysville brethren went with us to Oroville
at their own expense. The weather was intensely hot, but this did not
prevent a cordial welcome to us, both at the depot and at the Mission.
And here we settled down to work just as we did at Marysville. The
result was that three brethren were baptized and one scholar joined
the association. The new brother is an educated young man, but was a
great devotee of gambling, at which he has generally lost money. On my
first visit to Oroville, two years ago, I admonished him to quit this
bad habit and become a Christian. He frankly acknowledged the sin, but
was reluctant to cease from it till he could win back what he had
lost. So I could not persuade him. And when I reached Oroville this
time I was made sad at hearing that he was still a gambler, though
still a pupil in the school. He came to the Mission house that evening
at about 10 o'clock, and, after hand-shaking, sat down in a corner of
the room. Seeing in this a fine opportunity, I said to the brethren
present, "Let us gather about Jee Loy and win him to Christ to-night."
There were six of us, myself included. We asked him what objection he
had to becoming a Christian. He mentioned many, but we disposed of
them all, not, however, without talking for nearly two hours. During
the brethren's turns to speak I prayed in my heart many times,
invoking God's help on our words, and begging that his heart might be
opened to the truth and to Christ.

But he still refused. I then said to him, "Will you go home and think
the matter over very carefully and let us know to-morrow evening?" He
said that he would. A prayer was offered and he went home. We were
overjoyed when he came the next evening to tell us that he had decided
for Christ and would join the association, which he did at once. We
were all filled with thanksgiving.

Three other things made us glad: (1) The addition of three brethren to
our Bethany Church in Oroville; (2) the steadfastness and boldness of
our brethren as shown at the street preaching service; and (3) their
generosity. For when I spoke to them about Senator George C. Perkins
and his allowing them to occupy this building for twenty years without
charging a cent of rent, or even our paying the taxes upon it, and
suggested that they make him a life member of our California Chinese
Mission, as quick as lightning "Yes," "Yes!" was heard all over the
room. In a very short time the whole amount of $25 was subscribed; and
they intend, with God's help, to make Mrs. Perkins a life member next
year.

The anniversaries at Marysville and Oroville were the best we ever had
in either place. The Lord's Supper, in each case, was observed at the
mission after the anniversary service closed, and this was followed by
Dr. Pond's discourse, so that the services did not end till about
11.30 o'clock.

At Oroville, even after this, a pleasant social was held, and we tried
to bring another to Christ, but did not succeed; and finally, the
night being so nearly gone, and the morning train for San Francisco
starting at 4 o'clock, we did not go to bed at all, but strolled
through Chinatown and enjoyed the cool night air after a hot,
laborious day.

At Watsonville we had similar exercises, and the joy of extending our
fellowship to Dr. Quon Hun, a highly educated Chinese physician, who
had attended our school for several months, and who, after studying
the Lord's Prayer all alone, was led into the light of Christ, and
composed a beautiful Chinese poem upon it. He had charge of the
tablets of one of the Tongs, and had also his own private shrine in
his office. But he returned the tablets and destroyed his own idols.
He is a man greatly respected, and will be able to do a great work for
Christ, though doubtless he will encounter much odium and
persecution.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bureau of Woman's Work.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ASSOCIATION JUBILEE.

BY SEC. D. E. EMERSON.


Not long after emancipation a freed-woman, about 50 years old, who was
learning to read, came to the word "unbound" in her lesson, and
exclaimed, rapturously, "How good, to feel unbound!"

If the American Missionary Association, its work, principles, and all
that it represents, could be expressed in one word, that word would be
_emancipation_--deliverance from bondage, deliverance from caste
prejudice, from ignorance, superstition, and darkness. Its mission is
to preach the gospel to the poor, to loose the chains of the bound, to
proclaim "The truth shall make you free."

It was a little company of earnest men and women that gathered in
Albany, N. Y., in September, 1846, to form this organization. Its
early history was not only of works, but of "witness," fearless and
undaunted. It had a God-given mission, and this conviction sustained
its brave adherents during those years of severe trial and testing.
Yet all was not discouragement. Every year brought added strength in
numbers and in funds. Every year showed more plainly that the hand of
the Lord was in this movement.

So it worked for fifteen years, gaining varied experience in
industrial, educational, evangelistic, and church work, in methods of
administration, in wise use of funds. At the close of this period it
was conducting prosperous missions at thirty-seven stations in its
foreign field, and in the home field it had under its care 120
churches. Then came the rebellion and war, and the unmistakable call
of Providence to the rapid development of missions southward.
Immediately the Association, now encouraged and supported by all the
churches, moved in the wake of the Union army, beginning in 1861 to
work for the contrabands at Fortress Monroe, where 1,800 colored
people had sought the protection of the American flag. All its
varieties of experience and resources were called into action. It
became a philanthropic society to feed and clothe the suffering, a
Bible society to distribute the word of God. It became an industrial
society to help people to homes and teach practical farming, trades,
and housewifery. It established social settlements, with groups of
missionary teachers living in one household among the degraded and
despised people, to whom they ministered; an educational society with
its system of schools; a church society, seeking always the salvation
of souls and gathering of converts into churches.

Now it was that the wisdom, the heroism, the unfaltering faith of this
Association, strengthened by fifteen years of valorous adherence to
the gospel principles of emancipation, prepared it to launch out upon
its great mission. The demands were almost overwhelming in extent and
variety.

First, Fortress Monroe, then Norfolk and all eastern Virginia, Newport
News, and Port Royal; then the Carolinas, Mississippi, and Tennessee.
So closely did the missions follow the victorious armies that by the
time the war-storm had fully cleared away, the American Missionary
Association had 320 missionaries preaching and teaching the gospel to
the freedmen, with 16,000 pupils in its schools. No wonder that it was
said, "Behold how God has fitted this Association for this vast and
mighty work."

The development of this marvelous work has many thrilling chapters
among the forty-nine that have been already written. They tell the
story briefly of the devoted men and women who have been carrying on
the blessed work of emancipation. They show how not less than 3,000
women have given of their best talent and strength to this Christ-like
service. They speak of the perils by shotgun and by fire; of
imprisonment, ostracism, and scorn; of persecution, that it was
believed the progress of the age had made impossible in these later
days, but which the State of Florida has been able to revive. But
these chapters tell also how the truth has been setting many free,
blacks and whites alike, bringing them into a truer conception of
God's fatherhood, man's brotherhood through sonship by Jesus Christ.

The American Missionary Association finds its highest testimonial in
the work itself, in its system of Christian schools, including graded
primaries, academies, normal and industrial schools, in its colleges
in each of five states, and in its advancing church work. Nay, its
best testimonial is in the product from these schools and churches,
the teachers and preachers, lawyers and doctors, the good farmers and
mechanics, the upright mothers and fathers, the sweet though humble
homes, the conscientious Christian citizens, in whose influence and
leadership lies the hope of the African race. It finds its testimonial
in the loyalty and devotion of its missionaries, their self-denial for
the cause they love. It has seen a gifted woman from a home of comfort
going year by year for twenty years to this work of emancipation for
the "bound" in Georgia and Tennessee, among a despised people, and,
when called from earth and earth's opportunities, leaving a liberal
sum to continue the work of Christian education. It has seen many
another consecrated missionary take from the savings of a lifetime, to
enable the Association to light one more lamp for the dark places of
the South, and not a few turn back three-fourths of their small
salaries to help in sustaining the work. The liberality of the
missionaries testifies not only to the genuineness of the work, but to
the importance of the field and its irresistible appeal.

With such a history the American Missionary Association stands before
the churches in this, its fiftieth, year. God has graciously widened
the fields before it. The 4,000,000 of freed slaves are a race of
8,000,000 in our midst. "Never since the apostolic age has there been
open to the church a field so vast, so urgent, so hopeful."

God has graciously widened the mission fields of the Association; the
mountain regions of the South have been opened, and the gospel,
carried with such personal risk fifty years ago, reaching only here
and there a few, may be carried freely to the 2,000,000 of our
mountain countrymen mentally and spiritually bound. God has graciously
widened the fields. The Indian missions present their claim, for
wherever a pagan Indian tribe remains there may the gospel be carried
quickly and without personal harm. The providential call has been
heard also, and answered by this Association, for the Chinese within
our borders and the Eskimo on the Alaskan coast. The work of this
Association may well be the glory of the churches. God has done His
part. He has opened the fields, He has richly blessed every effort
toward enlightenment and Christian civilization. The missionaries have
done their part in prayer, in labor, in gifts, in voicing the earnest
appeal of these poor, whose greatest need is Christian education and a
pure gospel.

Now, the Association has come to its fiftieth year, the fiftieth
chapter in its serial history. Standing always for emancipation, it is
itself enthralled in the toils of a terrible debt. It trusted the
churches; it believed that the action of the churches in separating
their Indian work from the government, relinquishing $22,000, would be
followed by $22,000 additional gifts from the people of God, that the
Indian missions should not suffer loss. It believed that the growing
claim of the Southern mountain work and the claim of this great
African race in our midst would not be disregarded. It still believes
in the churches. There has been only a temporary withholding. In the
sisterhood of missionary societies, two have been freed from debt. Now
by one grand concentration of gifts to the Jubilee Fund of the
American Missionary Association, shall it not be enabled to celebrate
a remarkable record, a marvelous work, a divine call to present
widening fields of usefulness and a jubilee of financial freedom that
by the grace of God shall last? May we not then confidently look for
the opening of the windows of heaven, and the outpouring of such a
blessing on home churches and mission fields as shall summon the
attention of an indifferent and unbelieving world to the certain and
rapid progress of the kingdom of God?

Jubilee Year Fund, Additional Shares.

  EMELINE J. KELLOGG, Manchester, Vt.
  ANDRUS MARCH, Charlton City, Mass.
  CAROLINE CROWELL, Haverhill, Mass.
  CHRISTIAN UNION CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Upper Montclair, N. J.
  Mrs. S. M. COWLES, Kensington, Conn.
  Mrs. M. A. BACHELOR, Whitinsville, Mass.
  Mrs. C. A. RANSOM, Wellesley, Mass.
  CENTRAL UNION SOUTH CHURCH, Concord, N. H.
  TWO FRIENDS, Wellesley, Mass., two shares.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY SOCIETY, River Falls, Wis.
  FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Great Barrington, Mass.
  Rev. JAMES W. BIXLER, Trustee, New London, Conn.
  FRANK L. ANDREWS, Fall River, Mass.
  Mrs. R. S. CURTIS, Hampden, Me.
  SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Manchester, Conn.
  PLYMOUTH CONGREGATIONAL SUNDAY-SCHOOL, Worcester, Mass.
  TABITHA L. CUSHMAN, East Los Angeles, Cal.
  CONGREGATIONAL SUNDAY-SCHOOL, Greenville, N. H.
  "DEBTOR TO THE A. M. A.," Auburndale, Mass.
  Mrs. ELLEN M. WELLMAN, Malden, Mass.
  W. H. M. A., AUXILIARY OF CHURCH OF THE PILGRIMAGE, Plymouth, Mass.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Yankton, S. D.
  WALNUT HILLS WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY, Cincinnati, O.
  JOHN M. WILLIAMS, Evanston, Ill.
  PLYMOUTH CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Lawrence, Kan.
  Mr. and Mrs. GAYLORD THOMSON, Medina, O.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Granby, Mass.
  Mrs. LOTA B. WHITE WALES, in memory of Rev. O. H. WHITE, D.D.,
    Dorchester, Mass.
  A FRIEND, New Britain, Conn.
  FRIENDS, Milford, N. H., two shares.
  LADIES IN SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, West Winsted, Conn.
  Miss ANNA E. FARRINGTON, through WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION
    OF NORTH CAROLINA, Oaks, N. C.
  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY SOCIETY, Hancock, Mich.
  A FRIEND, Concord, N. H., two shares.
  Mrs. S. A. PRATT, Worcester, Mass.
  EVANGELICAL CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Westboro, Mass.
  CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Oakham, Mass.
  TWO FRIENDS, Park Street Congregational Church, Boston, Mass.
  INDIVIDUALS IN CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Cumberland Centre, Me.
  BELLE OLINGER, Williamsburg, Ky.
  Mrs. W. H. CATLIN, Meriden, Conn.
  WOMAN'S ASSOCIATION, First Church, Detroit, Mich.
  RESIDENTS, Cumberland Gap, Tenn.

                         Previously reported,                 238
                         Subscriptions reported above,         46
                                                           ------
                         Total number of shares reported,     284

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JULY, 1896.

       *       *       *       *       *

_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

_For the Education of Colored People._

  Income for July                   $7,920.00
  Previously acknowledged           47,663.09
                                  -----------
                                   $55,583.09
                                  ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS


MAINE, $371.59

  Albany. J. E. Bird                                               $4.00
  Auburn. Mission Band High St. Ch., _for Talladega C._             2.50
  Calais. First Cong. Soc.                                         20.00
  Centre Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.60
  East Madison. "A Friend"                                          4.00
  Gardiner. First Cong. Ch.                                        28.14
  Hampden. Mrs. R. S. Curtis, _for Share Jubilee Fund_             50.00
  North Bridgton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   4.25
  Rockland. Cong. Ch.                                              42.57
  South Freeport. Miss Fannie E. Soule, _for Moorhead, Miss._      10.00
  Wells. B. Maxwell, _for Share Jubilee Fund_                      50.00

  Maine Woman's Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas.:
      Biddeford. Second Ch. Ladies' Miss'y Aux.       45.25
      Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.      6.28
      Harpswell Center.                               10.00
      Minot Center. Bal. to const. MRS. OLIVE D.
        SHAW L. M.                                    23.00
      Pownal.                                          5.00
      Skowhegan.                                      21.00
      Somerset. Conference Coll.                       3.00
      Troy.                                            7.00
      Turner.                                         17.00
      Winthrop.                                        5.00
      Woodfords. S. S. Primary Dept.                   1.00
                                                     ------       143.53


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $857.10.

  Alsted. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                5.70
  Boscawen. Mr. and Mrs. S. N. Allen (1 of which _for debt_)        3.00
  Candia. Cong. Ch.                                                15.79
  Concord. South Cong. Ch.                                         63.18
  Derry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  27.63
  Dover. First Cong. Ch.                                          100.00
  Greenville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_        50.00
  Hanover. Mary A. Fletcher, _for Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._     10.00
  Haverhill. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Box C. and Bedding, Val.
    22.45, _for Savannah, Ga._
  Laconia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      20.00
  Lyndeboro. Cong. Ch.                                             11.00
  Manchester. Class of Young Girls, Sab. Sch. of Franklin
    St. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_                        50.00
  Plainfield. Mrs. S. R. Baker                                     10.00
  Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                                15.00
  Swanzey. Y. P. S. C. E., 8 _for Fort Berthold, N. D._;
    5 _for Fort Independence, N. D._                               13.00
  Walpole. Cong. Ch.                                               28.63
  ----. "A Friend," for a Life Membership                          30.00

  New Hampshire Female Cent. Inst. and Home Missionary Union,
    by Miss Annie A. McFarland, Treas.:
      Boscawen. Cent. Union, _for Salary,
        Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                        8.67
      Concord. Cent. Union, First Ch.,
        _for Share Jubilee Fund_                    50.00
      Concord. "A Friend," First Ch.,
        _for Share Jubilee Fund_                    50.00
      Concord. Cent. Union, South Ch.,
        _for Share Jubilee Fund_                    50.00
      Derry. Cent. Union, First Cong. Ch.,
        _for Salary_                                25.00
      Epsom. Cent. Society                           4.00
      Hebron and Groton. Homeland Circle
        (3.78 of which _for debt_)                   7.57
      Keene. Sab. Sch. Prim. Dept., Second Ch.       5.00
      Manchester. L. H. M. Soc. of Franklin
        St. Ch.                                     68.00
      Tamworth. Mrs. Mary K. Gannet,
        _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_              100.00
                                                  -------         368.24
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $821.17

  ESTATE.

  New Ipswich. Estate of Dea. Leavit Lincoln, by Trustees          35.93
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $857.10


VERMONT, $626.39.

  Barnet. Y. P. S. C. E., by R. L. Laughlin, Cor. Sec.             $2.50
  Bradford. Cong. Ch.                                              13.10
  Burlington. College St. Cong. Ch.                                84.33
  Burlington. Sab. Sch., College St. Ch.,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            20.00
  Granby. "A Friend"                                               15.00
  Manchester. Miss Emeline J. Kellogg,
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       50.00
  Newbury. Bbl. for Christmas, Freight 2.46,
    _for King's Mountain, N. C._                                    2.46
  North Bennington. Cong. Ch., adl.                                 1.50
  Queechee. Cong. Ch., adl.                                        11.80
  Randolph. First Cong. Ch.                                         9.15
  Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                             13.92
  Saint Albans. Cong. Ch.                                          35.00
  Saint Johnsbury. "In Memoriam, Z.W." _for Share
    Jubilee Fund_, 50; "B.," 25; "H.," 25                         100.00
  Townshend. Miss E. Ballard                                        5.00
  Wallingford. "A Friend"                                           1.00
  West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                                      32.97
  Westford. Y. P. S. C. E., by Luna M. Osgood, Cor. Sec.            2.50
  West Hartford. Mrs. E. M. Copeland, _Jubilee Offering_            1.00
  West Randolph. Mrs. Sidney Howard                                 6.00
  Windsor. Old South Cong. Ch.                                      4.75
  Woodstock. Cong. Soc.                                            25.53
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $437.51

  ESTATE.

  Charlotte. Estate of Lydia Ann Hicks                            100.00
  Swanton. Estate of C. C. Long, by D. G. Furman, Executor         88.88
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $626.39


MASSACHUSETTS, $4,016.10

  Abington. First Cong. Ch.                                        $7.60
  Andover. Abbot Academy, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ and
    to const. MISS LAURA S. WATSON, Principal, L. M.               50.00
  Andover. Sab. Sch., South Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                                  50.00
  Ashby. Ortho. Ch.                                                10.61
  Auburndale. "One who is a Debtor to the A. M. A.,"
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       50.00
  Beverly. Dane St. Cong. Ch.                                      87.92
  Beverly. Mrs. Ann V. Bailey, _for Share Jubilee Fund_            50.00
  Blandford. First Cong. Ch.                                       18.00
  Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                                     88.96
  Boston--Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch.                  108.41
    Dorchester. Pilgrim Ch., adl.                         1.00
    Roxbury. H. M. Soc. Walnut Av. Ch., Mrs. Esther G.
      Thomas, _Jubilee Offering_                          5.00
                                                        ------    114.41
  Cambridge. North Av. Cong. Ch.                                  161.73
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                 28.16
  Campello. South Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
  Charlton City. Andrus March, _for Share Jubilee Fund_            50.00
  Concord. Cong. Ch., adl.                                           .50
  Cummington. Cong. Ch.                                            20.00
  Curtisville. Cong. Ch., 17; Mite Boxes Sab. Sch.,
    Cong. Ch., 18.88, _for McIntosh, Ga._                          35.88
  Dalton. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.                                25.00
  Douglas. First Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
  Easthampton. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                   27.41
  Enfield. Cong. Ch.                                               25.00
  Fall River. Frank L. Andrews, _for Share Jubilee Fund_           50.00
  Fall River. Central Cong. Ch., Ladies' Benef.
    Soc. and Y. L. Aux., _for Share Jubilee Fund_                  50.00
  Foxboro. "M. N. P.," 30 of which to const. MRS.
    ESTHER N. CADWELL L. M.                                        50.00
  Gardner. W. B. M. Aux., by Mrs. E. A. Rolfe                      50.00
  Gloucester. Trinity Cong. Ch.                                    40.00
  Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch., 30, to const.
    REV. LEON D. BLISS L. M; First Cong. Ch., Sunday
    Sch. Class and Other Friends, 30, to const. MRS.
    EMILY A. VAN LENNEP L. M. (50 of which _for Share
    Jubilee Fund_)                                                 60.00
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., 41.24; Mrs. Dwight
    R. Tyler, 12.00                                                53.24
  Greenfield. First Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Alaska M._                                                      5.06
  Haverhill. Mrs. Caroline Crowell, _for Share Jubilee Fund_       50.00
  Holliston. First Cong. Ch.                                       49.05
  Holliston. S. S. Class of Boys, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   2.00
  Huntington. Rev. Edward C. Haynes                                 1.56
  Hyde Park. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._            10.00
  Lenox. Mrs. Anson Phelps Stokes, 50; Mrs. Geo.
    Westinghouse, 50; George Higginson, 50, _for
    Life Membership_ and _for 3 Shares Jubilee Fund_              150.00
  Littleton. Ladies' Sewing Circle                                 14.00
  Lowell. Eliot Ch., W. H. M. A., Box Sch. Supplies
    _for Tougaloo U._
  Lynn. Chestnut St. Cong. Ch.                                      2.15
  Lyonsville. "A Friend of Missions"                                5.00
  Malden. Mrs. Ellen M. Wellman (50 of which _for
    Share Jubilee Fund_)                                          100.00
  Middleboro. Thomas P. Carleton, _for Gospels,
    for Colored Children_                                           1.50
  Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Theo. Student Aid,
    Howard U._                                                     25.00
  Millers Falls. First Cong. Ch.                                    2.50
  Mittineague. Southworth Co., Box of Paper _for
    Talladega C._
  Newburyport. First Cong. Ch.                                     17.31
  Newton. Eliot Ch.                                               100.00
  Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.                                   85.66
  Northampton. "Friends," 15; Miss M. F. Andrews, 10,
    _for Theo. Student Aid, Howard U._                             25.00
  North Amherst. North Cong. Ch., Martha E. Harrington,
    20; Frank W. Harrington, 5                                     25.00
  North Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         50.00
  North Andover. Mrs. Wm. A. Russell, _for Theo.
    Student Aid, Harvard U._                                       25.00
  North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       25.52
  North Wilbraham. Grace Union Ch.                                 18.10
  Oxford. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. MISS MABEL E.
    TYLER and MISS LUCY J. KING L. M.'s                            40.00
  Palmer. Second Cong. Ch., _for Theo. Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  67.68
  Princeton. First Cong. Ch.                                       70.00
  Richmond. King's Daughters, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           15.00
  Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                             12.00
  Springfield. Edward O. Sutton, 40; Faith Ch., by
     W. I. Morse, Treas., 12                                       52.00
  Sunderland. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
  Taunton. West Cong. Soc.                                          4.11
  Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                                             21.78
  Wareham. "Two Friends"                                           15.00
  Wellesley. "Two Friends," _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_         100.00
  Wellesley. Mrs. C. A. Ransom, _for Share Jubilee Fund_           50.00
  Wellesley Hills. Cong. Ch.                                       38.00
  Whitinsville. Mrs. M. A Bachelor, _for Share Jubilee Fund_       50.00
  Williamsburg. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
  Winchester. First Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  West Yarmouth. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
  Worcester. Central Ch., 125; Union Ch., 67.70;
    Piedmont Ch. (quarterly), 30                                  222.70
  Worcester. Sab. Sch., Plymouth Cong. Ch.
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       87.83
  Worcester. Park Cong. Ch., _for Theo. Student Aid,
    Howard U._                                                      5.00
  Worcester. "A Friend." by N. Scammon                             10.00
  Worcester. "A Friend in Mass."                                   35.00
  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and R. I.,
    Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas:
      Auburndale Aux.                          25.00
      Plymouth Aux., _for Share Jubilee Fund_  50.00
                                              ------               75.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $3,253.23

  ESTATES.
    Boston. Estate of Lucinda J. Hartshorn                        747.87
    Boston. Estate of Elizabeth C. Parkhurst                       15.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $4,016.10


RHODE ISLAND, $120.49.

  Newport. United Con. Ch. (quarterly)                            $13.53
  Pawtucket. Pawtucket Cong. Ch.                                   90.00
  Providence. N. W. Williams, 15; Y. P. S. C. E.
    of North Cong. Ch., 1.96                                       16.96


CONNECTICUT, $2,297.56.

  Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.                  $10.00
  Bristol. Mrs. S. P. Newell and Mrs. Harry W. Barnes,
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       50.00
  Clinton. L. L. Hull                                              10.00
  Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    100.00
  Danielson. Mrs. H. N. Clemons                                     1.00
  East Canaan. Cong. Ch.                                            5.61
  Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                           200.00
  Farmington. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                          50.00
  Glastonbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 25, _for
    Student Aid, Tougaloo U._, and 25 _for Student
    Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                     50.00
  Guilford. Miss Clara I. Sage, _for Two Shares Jubilee Fund_     100.00
  Hartford. Wethersfield Av. Cong. Ch.                             10.00
  Kensington. Mrs. S. M. Cowles, _for Share Jubilee Fund_          50.00
  Kensington. Cong. Ch., Coll. at Rally Meeting                     6.30
  Killingworth. Cong. Ch.                                           6.00
  Lisbon. The Sunbeam Mission Circle, _for Student Aid,
    A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._                                    6.00
  Manchester. Second Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_           57.05
  Manchester. Miss M. H. Hilliard, _for Share Jubilee Fund_        50.00
  Middletown. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Useful Articles;
    Cash, 2; _for Talladega C._                                     2.00
  Milford. Plymouth Ch., 20.28; First Cong. Ch., 14.02             34.30
  Morris. Cong. Soc.                                                9.20
  New Britain. First Ch. of Christ                                125.00
  New Britain. Union Service, by Rev. J. W. Cooper, D.D.,
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       50.68
  New Haven. Mrs. James H. Foy, 25; F. R. Bliss, 5,
    _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._                                30.00
  New London. Rev. James W. Bixler, _for Share Jubilee Fund_       50.00
  New London. First Ch. of Christ                                  45.44
  New Milford. Grace H. Turrill                                     5.00
  Northfield. Cong. Ch., 18.26; C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 1.08      19.34
  North Greenwich. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                               6.22
  Plainfield. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                                  9.67
  Plainville. "Church Member," _for Share Jubilee Fund_            50.00
  Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00
  Prospect. B. B. Brown, _for Share Jubilee Fund_                  50.00
  Putnam. Edgar Clark                                                .50
  Ridgefield. First Cong. Ch.                                      17.24
  Rockville. G. L. Grant                                            2.00
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                             60.40
  Shelton. Cong. Ch.                                               24.18
  Southington. Cong. Ch.                                           17.41
  Stony Creek. Ch. of Christ, _Jubilee Offering_                   12.00
  Torrington. Third Cong. Ch.                                      80.78
  Wapping. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                                    11.49
  Waterbury. Mrs. Ruth W. Carter, deceased, Trust Fund,
    by Samuel Holmes, _for Douglass Hall, Cappahosic, Va._        500.00
  Woodbury. First Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
  Woodstock. First Cong. Ch.                                       16.41
  West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 98.41;
    Rev. H. A. Russell, 5.                                        103.41
  Weston. Norfield Y. P. S. C. E., by Anna E. Fitch,
    Cor. Sec.                                                       5.00

  Woman's Congregational Home Missionary Union of
    Connecticut, Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, Treas.:
      Bridgeport. No. Ch. Aux.
        _for Grand View, Tenn._                 1.43
      Cromwell, Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
        _for Thomasville Sch._                 13.50
      Hartford, Friend in Asylum Hill Ch.,
        _for Fort Berthold, N. D._              2.00
      Kensington, Aux., _for Share Jubilee
        Fund_ and to const. MRS. S. A.
        HART L. M.                             50.00
      Richville. Union Ch., Jr. C. E. Soc.,
        _for Grand View, Tenn._                10.00
                                             -------               76.93
                                                              ----------
                                                               $2,197.56

  ESTATE.

  Clinton. Estate of Harvey Stevens, by R. R.
    Stannard, Trustee                                             100.00
                                                              ----------
                                                               $2,297.56


NEW YORK, $3,082.77.

  Angola. Cong. Ch., 10; Y. P. S. C. E., 2                        $12.00
  Angola. Miss A. H. Ames                                           5.00
  Binghamton. First Cong. Ch., Bible Sch.,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                     25.00
  Brooklyn. Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for The
    Joseph K. Brick Normal and Agricultural School,
    Enfield, N. C._                                             2,000.00
  Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. Miss'y
    Soc., _for Salary of Teacher, Indian M._, 75;
    Sab. Sch., Central Cong. Ch., _for Indian M.,
    Santee, Neb._, 37.50; Rev. J. M. Whiton, Ph.D.,
    _for Whiton Prizes, Talladega C._, 15; Bushwick
    Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 5               132.50
  Cold Brook. Mrs. A. J. Burt, _for Gloucester Sch.
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                2.00
  Crown Point. First Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
  Danby. Cong Ch.                                                   5.00
  East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc                               25.00
  Elbridge. First Presb. Ch                                         5.80
  New York. W. E. Dodge, Educational Fund, _for
   Theo. Dept., Talladega C._                                     100.00
  New York. Miss D. E. Emerson, _for repairs,
    Moorehead, Miss._                                              20.00
  New York. (Tremont) Trinity Cong. Ch.                            10.00
  Northfield. Y. P. S. C. E., by W. S. Webb                         9.96
  Pattersonville. Mrs. Freeman Milmine, _for Talladega C._          5.00
  Perry Centre. "In Memoriam Martha B. Sheldon,"
    by Milton A. Barber, _for Debt_                                75.00
  Phoenix. L. J. Carrier, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._            3.00
  Rushville. Rev. F. T. Hoover, Bbl. Potatoes, _for
    Greenwood, S. C._
  Saratoga Springs. Mrs. E. B. Ripley, _for Share Jubilee Fund_    50.00
  Sherburne. Miss Fannie Rexford, _for Talladega C._               10.00
  Sherburne. Mrs. J. C. Harrington                                  5.00
  Syracuse. Geddes Cong. Ch.                                       13.26
  Utica. Plymouth Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                          5.00
  Westmoreland. Miss S. A. Dann                                     2.00
  West Winfield. "G. W."                                           10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of New York, by
    Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, Treas.:
      Brooklyn. Tompkins Av. Ch., S. S. Class
        C, _for Student Aid, Lincoln Acad._     3.50
      Carthage. W. M. S.                        5.00
      Clifton Springs. "Mrs. A. G. W.,"
        _for Jubilee Fund_                      8.00
      Morrisville. C. E., _for Central
        Ch., New Orleans, La._                  5.00
      Rutland. Aux.                             8.75
      Syracuse. Danforth Ch., L. U.,
        _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             10.00
                                             -------               40.25
                                                              ----------
                                                               $2,582.77

  ESTATE.

  Amsterdam. Estate of David Cady: T. H. Benton
    Crane, Executor                                               500.00
                                                              ----------
                                                               $3,082.77


NEW JERSEY, $343.92.

  Chester. J. H. Cramer                                           $30.00
  East Orange, First Cong. Ch., Y. P S. C. E.,
    _for Grand View, Tenn._                                        25.00
  Hoboken. John E. Merrill, _Jubilee Offering_                     10.00
  Lyons Farms. Sab. Sch. Presb. Ch.                                22.92
  Orange. The Armstrong Club, _for Gloucester
    Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                                          5.00
  Newark. First Cong. Ch., Jun. Y. P. S. C. E.,
    _for Indian M._                                                 5.75
  Plainfield. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton to const.
    MIRIAM F. CHOATE L. M.                                         30.00
  Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch.                                      19.31
  Upper Montclair. Christian Union Cong. Ch.
    (50.00 of which _for Share Jubilee Fund_)                     150.00
  Vineland. Jun. C. E. Soc., First Bapt. Ch.,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                                 4.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of the N. J.
    Association, by Mrs. J. H. Denison, Treas.:

      Plainfield. Cong. Ch., W. H. M. S.,
        _for Salary_                           25.00
                                            --------               25.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $75.00

  Germantown. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
    _for Share Jubilee Fund_                                       50.00
  Philadelphia. W. Graham Tyler                                    25.00


OHIO, $550.80.

  Akron. First Cong. Ch., adl.                                     60.00
  Ashtabula. Mr. and Mrs. E. L. Morris, _Jubilee Offering_          2.00
  Atwater. "A Friend"                                             100.00
  Bellevue. S. W. Boise, 10; First Cong. Ch., 4                    14.00
  Cleveland. Bethlehem Cong. Ch., 38.60; Euclid Ave.
    Cong. Ch., 25.00; C. E. Soc., East Madison Ave.
    Cong. Ch., 5.00                                                68.60
  Cleveland. Hough Ave. Cong. Ch., "A Friend,"
    _for Mountain Work_                                             1.00
  Columbus. Rev. B. Talbot, _for Debt_                              1.00
  Cuyahoga Falls. First Cong. Ch.                                  18.65
  Dover. Mrs. R. Hall                                               5.00
  Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                                10.00
  Lodi. Cong. Ch.                                                   7.17
  North Bloomfield. Dea. and Mrs. J. M. Knapp,
    _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._                                 5.00
  Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 39.93; Mrs. Hannah
    S. Lewis, 5.00                                                 44.93
  Oberlin. Mrs. M. A. Keep, _for Share Jubilee Fund_ in part       25.00
  Painesville. Class of Girls, Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
    _for Macon, Ga._                                                3.20
  Rootstown. W. J. Dickinson                                       20.00
  Senecaville. Rev. Evans Thompson                                  1.00
  Tallmadge. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                   24.08
  Thorndyke. Adelaide E. Whetmore                                   2.00
  Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                          4.30

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Geo.
    B. Brown, Treas.:

      Austinburg. W. M. S., _for Salaries_     15.00
      Chardon. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
        Salary_                                 3.00
      Cincinnati. Walnut Hills, W. H. M. S.,
        _for Share Jubilee Fund_               50.00
      Cleveland. First, W. H. M. S.,
        _Jubilee Offering_                      5.00
      Cleveland. Pilgrim J. C. E., 6
        _for Salaries_; 3.20, _for Student
        Aid, Dorchester Acad._                  9.20
      Dayton. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Salary_      3.00
      North Fairfield. W. M. S., 2.50;
        S. S., 1, _for Salaries_                3.50
      Oberlin. First, L. A. S., _for
        Salary_                                10.00
      Ravenna. F. & H. M. S.,
        _for Salary_                           10.17
      Springfield. First, Y. P. S. C. E.,
        _for Salary_                            5.00
      Wauseon. C. W. A., _Jubilee Offering_    15.00
      Zanesville. W. M. S., _for Salary_        5.00
                                             -------              133.87


INDIANA, $20.50.

  Fort Wayne. Plymouth Cong. Ch., _for Freedmen and Indian M._    $20.50


ILLINOIS, $616.01.

  Aurora. New England Cong. Ch.                                    $4.01
  Belvidere. Mrs. M. C. Foote                                       5.00
  Canton. Cong. Ch.                                                27.63
  Clifton. Cong. Ch.                                                1.90
  Elburn. Cong. Ch.                                                20.00
  Elgin. Mrs. M. C. Town, _for Share Jubilee Fund_                 50.00
  Evanston. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_                    50.00
  Galesburg. Central Cong. Ch., Mrs. Martha A.
    Hitchcock, in part _for Share Jubilee Fund_                    25.00
  Glencoe. Cong. Ch. of Christ, 67.91; Sab. Sch. Cong.
    Ch. of Christ, 25.71                                           93.62
  Glen Ellyn. First Cong. Ch.                                       6.20
  Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                              12.95
  LaGrange. Cong. Ch.                                              14.82
  Mazon. Cong. Ch.                                                  6.71
  Moline. Cong. Ch.                                                45.00
  Normal. First Cong. Ch.                                           6.50
  Oak Park. Second Cong. Ch.                                       30.84
  Oneida. Cong. C. E. Soc.                                          2.50
  Paxton. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                        5.00
  Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens                                        2.50
  Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                             17.98
  Rio. Sab. Sch., Second Cong. Ch.                                  2.15
  Rockford. Sab. Sch., Second Cong. Ch.                            15.00
  Sannemin. Mrs. M. E. Knowlton                                     1.00
  Stark. Missionary Soc., by Mrs. Wm. Kleffer, Treas.               4.00
  Sterling. Mrs. Catharine McKinney                                10.00
  Toulon. Miss Addie M. Smith, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._      4.00
  ----. Cash                                                         .50

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A.
    Field, Treas.:
      Chicago. New England, W. M. S.           31.70
      Chicago. Lincoln Park, W. M. S.           5.00
      Lockport. W. M. S.                        4.25
      Peoria. Plymouth, Jr., C. E.               .30
      Rockford. First, W. M. S.                 4.95
      Saint Charles. W. M. S.                   5.00
                                             -------               51.20
                                                                --------
                                                                 $516.01

  ESTATE.

  Freeport. Estate of L. A. Warner, by A. C. Warner, Executor     100.00
                                                                --------
                                                                 $616.01


MICHIGAN, $78.44.

  Benzonia. First Cong. Ch.                                         9.00
  Hancock. First Cong. Ch.                                         39.98
  Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Student Aid, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                              6.85
  Olivet. Olivet Benev. Soc., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._       3.00
  Saint Joseph. First Cong. Ch.                                     5.61
  Vicksburg. Rev. J. and Mrs. L. A. Van Antwerp                     2.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas.:
      Detroit. First Ch., Primary Dept.,
        _for Chapel Building, Chinese M._       2.00
      Litchfield. L. M. S., _for Salary_       10.00
                                             -------               12.00


IOWA, $249.34.

  Alden. Cong. Ch.                                                  2.95
  Algona. First Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., 25; Mrs. H. E.
    Stacey, 10; _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                         35.00
  Anita. Ladies' M. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               15.00
  Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                         3.70
  Cedar Falls. Cong. Ch.                                           50.00
  Council Bluffs. N. P Dodge, _for DeF. Mem. Chapel,
    Talladega C._                                                  25.00
  Danville. Lee W. Mix.                                             5.00
  Hartwick. Cong. Ch.                                               3.44
  Lewis. Cong. Ch.                                                 12.00
  Otho. Cong. Ch.                                                  10.00
  Ottumwa. First Cong. Ch.                                         15.36
  Waverly. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                   3.00
  Wayne. Cong. Ch.                                                  5.50

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L.
    Bentley, Treas:
      Decorah. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.
        _for Indian M., Salary_                 1.52
      Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                     2.18
      Iowa City. W. H. M. U.                   11.25
      Lake View. L. M. S.                       2.50
      Mason City. Y. P. S. C. E.,
        _for Indian M., Salary_                 4.00
      Muscatine. Jr. C. E., _for
        Talladega C._                           5.00
      Old Man's Creek. Cong. Ch.                5.39
      Old Man's Creek. Sab. Sch.
        _for Indian M., Salary_                 2.75
      Osage. W. M. S.                          28.80
                                              ------               63.39


WISCONSIN, $246.60.

  Beloit. First Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_                62.75
  Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
  Durand. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 3.50; Pilgrim Cong. Ch.,
    L. M. Soc., 5.00                                                8.50
  Eau Claire. First Cong. Ch.                                      37.50
  Fulton. Rev. A. S. Reid                                           2.00
  Janesville. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Talladega C._                                              2.00
  Lake Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                                     16.00
  Oconomowoc. Cong. Ch.                                             2.16
  Sparta. Cong. Ch.                                                27.10
  Sun Prairie. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   3.00
  West Salem. Cong. Ch. to const. CLYDE M. SHANE L. M.,
    32.77; Cong. Ch. C. E. Soc., 9.06                              41.83

  Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. C. M. Blackman,
    Treas.:
      Appleton. W. H. M. U.                    17.09
      Arena. W. H. M. U.                        1.45
      Eau Claire. W. H. M. U.                   4.00
      Stoughton. S. S. Birthday Box             3.50
      Sun Prairie. W. H. M. U.                  1.72
      Wauwatosa. W. H. M. U.                    6.00
      Wauwatosa. W. H. M. U., _for Debt_        5.00
                                              ------               38.76


MINNESOTA, $117.12.

  Alexandria. First Cong. Ch.                                      11.95
  Austin. Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch.                                5.04
  Minneapolis. Como Av. Cong. Ch.                                   5.17
  New Richland. Cong. Ch.                                           1.58
  Robbinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                            8.82
  Winona. Cong. Ch.                                                32.00
  Worthington. Union Cong. Ch.                                      2.56
                                                                --------
                                                                  $67.12

  ESTATE.

  Hawley. Estate of Adna Colburn, Sen., by Walter
    Tanner, Executor                                               50.00
                                                                --------
                                                                 $117.12


MISSOURI, $3.00.

  Saint Louis. Bethlehem Cong. Ch.                                  3.00


NEBRASKA, $38.30.

  Linwood. Cong. Ch.                                               14.00
  Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                               4.30
  Santee Agency. Young Woman's Missionary Society of
    Santee Normal Training Sch., by Mary T. Morris, _for Debt_     20.00


NORTH DAKOTA, $3.00.

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of North Dakota, by Mrs.
    J. M. Fisher, Treas.:
      Cummings. Mission Band                                        3.00


SOUTH DAKOTA, $57.00.

  Beresford. Cong. Ch., 2.65; W. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 2.35         5.00
  Yankton. Cong. Ch., _for Share Jubilee Fund_                     50.00
  Pioneer. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00


COLORADO, $6.00.

  Fort Logan, Charlotte E. Parish                                   6.00


ARIZONA, $2.00.

  Nogales. Soc. of C. E., by Mrs. O. E. Mix                         2.00


CALIFORNIA, $59.25.

  Avalon. Rev. Ewing Ogden Tade                                     2.50
  Lodi. Cong. Ch.                                                   4.50
  East Los Angeles. Mrs. Tabitha I. Cushman, _for Share
    Jubilee Fund_                                                  50.00
  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Southern Cal., by Mrs.
    Mary M. Smith, Treas.:
      San Jacinto. L. A. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                          2.25


OREGON, $5.00.

  Ashland. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00


WASHINGTON, $10.06.

  Snohomish. Cong. Ch.                                             10.06


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $258.22.

  Washington. Rev. J. E. Rankin, Prof. J. L. Ewell and
    Prof. Isaac Clark, 100; First Cong. Ch., 75; Prof.
    J. L. Ewell, 32.61; Prof. Isaac Clark, 18.61; Rev.
    J. E. Rankin, 12; Mount Pleasant Cong. Ch., 10; Rev.
    H. P. Johnson, D.D., 10, _for Theo. Student Aid,
    Howard U._                                                    258.22


MARYLAND, $100.00.

  Baltimore. D. D. Mallory, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                              100.00


VIRGINIA, $3.50.

  Cappahosic. John Boyd, _for Gloucester Sch._                      1.00
  Saint Stephen's Ch. Rev. W. H. Taylor, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                2.50


KENTUCKY, $10.47.

  Campton. Rev. J. W. Doane, _Jubilee Offering_                     5.00
  Evarts. Cong. Ch., 2.05; Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., 42c.               2.47
  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                                3.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $3.25.

  Woman's Missionary Union of North Carolina, by Miss
    A. E. Farrington, Treas.:
      Oaks. Free-Will Workers                   2.00
      Oaks. Jr. C. E. S., _for Indian M._       1.25
                                             -------                3.25


SOUTH CAROLINA, $5.00.

  Charleston. Miss I. C. Chapin, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._    5.00


GEORGIA, $5.50.

  McIntosh. Rev. J. A. Jones, _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._       5.00
  Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke                                .50


ALABAMA, $18.84.

  Ironaton. Rev. P. O. Wailes, _for De F. Mem. Chapel_, 4;
    _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._, 2.                             6.00
  Talladega. Abraham Lincoln Cent. Soc., by Mrs. E. G.
    Snell, Treas.                                                  12.84


MISSISSIPPI, $20.50.

  Moorhead. Miss E. L. Parsons, _for Moorhead_                     20.00
  Tougaloo. F. H. Ball, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._               .50


----, $17.25.

  ----. Anonymous, _for Talladega C._                              10.00
  ----. D. H. Holmes                                                5.00
  ----. "A Friend"                                                  2.25


HAWAII, 200.00.

  Kohala. "A Friend"                                              200.00


                                                             -----------
  Donations                                                   $12,758.19
  Estates                                                       1,737.68
                                                             -----------
                                                              $14,495.87


INCOME, $335.00.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                            202.00
  Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                           50.00
  General Endowment Fund                                 50.00
  General Endowment Fund, _for Freedmen_                  7.50
  LeMoyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                     11.25
  Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                     3.75
  Tuthill King Fund, _for Atlanta U._                     7.50
  Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                   3.00
                                                      --------    335.00


TUITION, $1,294.14.

  Evarts, Ky. Tuition                                    25.28
  Lexington, Ky. Tuition                                 17.05
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                             151.75
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                              281.45
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                                10.50
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                             350.15
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                               71.57
  Marietta, Ga. Tuition                                    .45
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                               282.54
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                               13.00
  Austin, Tex. Tuition                                   90.40
                                                      --------  1,294.14
                                                              ----------

Total for July                                                $16,125.01
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY

  Donations                                                  $150,640.92
  Estates                                                      80,788.22
                                                            ------------
                                                             $231,429.14

  Income                                                       11,386.51

  Tuition                                                      38,514.36
                                                            ------------
   Total from Oct. 1, to July 31                             $281,330.01
                                                            ============


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for July                                          $19.25
  Previously acknowledged                                         442.10
                                                                --------
  Total                                                          $461.35



  H.W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N.Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 09, SEPTEMBER, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.