Produced by Alicia Williams, Sam W. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









Transcribers Note

Text enclosed in curly brackets {like this} has been added by the
transcriber. Bold text is indicated with = signs, =like this=.




  THE TATLER

     1926




[Illustration: {Signatures and messages from students}]




_The 1926 Tatler_




[Illustration: {A group of riders on horseback}]




FOREWORD


School days are joy days; days filled with the pleasures of
friendships and the gladness of intimacy, with the satisfaction of
work well done and the pride in having done it for one's school. And
we at Northrop School have been blessed with such days from the time
of four entering as kindergarteners, up through grammar school and our
subsequent joining of the League; on through these last days when, as
high school girls, we took a real part in the activities of school
life, and felt ourselves to have each one a share, however small, in
the great whole, our Alma Mater. And it is to recollection of these
joys and to the memory of our school days that we of the senior class
wish to dedicate the 1926 Tatler.




  EVELYN MCCUE BAKER
  President of the Senior Class

  _"She's as good as she is fair"_

[Illustration: {Evelyn McCue Baker}]

[Illustration: {Evelyn McCue Baker as a young child}]


  MARY BARBER EATON
  President of the League

  _"She who feels nobly, acts nobly"_

[Illustration: {Mary Barber Eaton}]

[Illustration: {Mary Barber Eaton as a young child}]


  MARGARET LOUISE NEWHALL
  Editor of 1926 Tatler

  _"Young and yet so wise"_

[Illustration: {Margaret Louise Newhall}]

[Illustration: {Margaret Louise Newhall as a young child}]


  VIRGINIA JOSEPHINE LEFFINGWELL
  Vice-President of League

  _"The soft, bright curl of her hair and lash
  And the glance of her sparkling eye
  I saw, and knew she was out for a dash
  As her steed went prancing by."_

[Illustration: {Virginia Josephine Leffingwell}]

[Illustration: {Virginia Josephine Leffingwell as a young child}]


  BERNICE ALYNE BECHTOL

  _"Her hair is not more sunny than her heart"_

[Illustration: {Bernice Alyne Bechtol}]

[Illustration: {Bernice Alyne Bechtol as a young child}]


  MARY ELIZABETH BRACKETT

  _"She has a natural wise sincerity and a merry happiness"_

[Illustration: {Mary Elizabeth Brackett}]

[Illustration: {Mary Elizabeth Brackett as a young child}]


  ESTHER MABEL DAVIS

  _"The glass of fashion and the mold of form"_

[Illustration: {Esther Mabel Davis}]

[Illustration: {Esther Mabel Davis as a young child}]


  LYDIA MORTIMER FOREST

  _"She giggles when she's happy, and one might even say
  That when there is no reason, she giggles anyway"_

[Illustration: {Lydia Mortimer Forest}]

[Illustration: {Lydia Mortimer Forest as a young child}]


  MARION JOSEPHINE HUME

  _"For she's a jolly good fellow,
  Her school mates all declare,
  She's out for all athletics,
  There's nothing she won't dare"_

[Illustration: {Marion Josephine Hume}]

[Illustration: {Marion Josephine Hume as a young child}]


  ANN WILDER JEWETT

  _"True worth cannot be concealed"_

[Illustration: {Ann Wilder Jewett}]

[Illustration: {Ann Wilder Jewett as a young child}]


  BEATRICE MYRTICE JOSLIN

  _"There is mischief in that woman"_

[Illustration: {Beatrice Myrtice Joslin}]

[Illustration: {Beatrice Myrtice Joslin as a young child}]


  MARION HARRIET MCDONALD

  _"Happy I am, from care I'm free;
  Why aren't all the rest contented like me?"_

[Illustration: {Marion Harriet McDonald}]

[Illustration: {Marion Harriet McDonald as a young child}]


  JOSEPHINE REINHART

  _"Nothing is impossible to a willing heart"_

[Illustration: {Josephine Reinhart}]

[Illustration: {Josephine Reinhart as a young child}]


  MARION JEAN SAVAGE

  _"The will can do
  If the soul but dares"_

[Illustration: {Marion Jean Savage}]

[Illustration: {Marion Jean Savage as a young child}]


  NANCY MORRIS STEVENSON

  _"A perfect woman, nobly planned,
  To warn, to comfort, to command"_

[Illustration: {Nancy Morris Stevenson}]

[Illustration: {Nancy Morris Stevenson as a young child}]


CLASS HISTORY

A shiver ran down my back as the last chords of the Ivy Song were
played. It was actually a reality--our dream had come true for we were
at last garbed in those precious white robes for which we had been
striving for four years. Memories of these years rushed over me. How
burdened we were with our importance in being Freshmen; Seniors seemed
very old and distant. Suddenly we slipped from cock robins to
conscientious Sophomores. By this time rumors were heard of a
financial problem that we, as Juniors, must meet. Immediately we began
to save all our pennies in order to startle the Faculty and the
Seniors of 1925 with a luxurious Junior-Senior ball. So our Sophomore
year closed with many peeks into the class treasury.

Dancing, fortune telling, freaks, and so on, came to our rescue in
preparation for the J. S. We Juniors, as financiers, staged a Junior
carnival--and it was successful.

May the twenty-ninth, in the year of our Lord, one thousand-nine
hundred and twenty-five, was the red letter day of our Junior year.
Our hopes, not our fears, were realized. Gayly we danced to "Tea for
Two" in the green and white decked ballroom (alias the dining room)
and promenaded in a garden in Japan, otherwise the roof garden.
Sadly--ah, yes--the music hesitated and then ceased--as we unitedly
sighed, perhaps with relief, perhaps with weariness. Who knows? Our
Herculean task had passed, and our eyes were turned to the magnetic
red ties. Honored beyond recognition we were the first to abide in the
new Senior room, south-west parallel room 40, on the third floor. June
quickly slipped near and we fixed our hopes and ambitions on the now
approaching goal, graduation.




THE CLASS PROPHECY


    In nineteen hundred and fifty-six
    The year of our Lord, A. D.,
    I sat me down, and put my specs on,
    An epistle of length to see.
    And that you may understand this better,
    I'll herewith disclose the news of the letter:

    "Dear Mike," the writer began, "you know
    I'm feeling that life is far from slow.
    As Mary B. Eaton, instructor in war,
    My military academy's not such a bore;
    Between drills, and luncheon, and chapel, it seems
    That this life is not all that it was in my dreams.

    "And Nance, instead of teaching the boys how to ride,
    Prefers to smuggle them food, and candy beside.
    By the way, did you know that Virge Leffingwell
    Has given up art and horses as well?
    She's opened a school, the dear old scamp,
    To teach all the young ladies the best ways to vamp.

    "The other day, as I drove in my hack,
    I passed a familiar figure in black;
    'Twas irresponsible Lydia, our giggler so jolly,
    Gone into seclusion to atone for past folly.
    She lives all alone, without any noise,
    Without any jazz, and without any boys!
    She told me with horror and pain in her gaze
    That Bee had turned actress, in movies (not plays)
    And that very same week was playing down town
    With R. Valentino in the 'Countess's Frown.'

    "I didn't tell Lydia, but I thought 'twould be great
    To go to Bee's movie and see how she'd rate.
    So I left Lyd and started, and the first thing I met,
    Or rather bumped into, was a fair suffragette,
    Covered with signs 'E. Baker for Mayor'.
    So many there hardly was room
    To see our progressive young democrat Hume!
    Yes, 'twas none other than Marion, our businesslike girl;
    She's adopted the slogan of 'Death to the curl!'
    And she's canvassing the city, with a terrible row,
    To get votes for Ely, who's in politics now.

    "And Bernice and Andy, have you heard of their fate?
    The last thing I know they had each found a mate.
    One of them's handsome and young, but no money,
    The other one's rich, but crabby and funny.
    But each one is happy in marriage, they say;
    And that's what really counts, say what you may.
    For Bernice is proud of her good-looking guy,
    And Andy knows the old man will soon die!

    "Did you see in the paper Mary Brackett's new fad?
    As Sunday School superintendent I'll bet she's not bad.
    And, Mike, yesterday on some errands,
    I encountered another of our old friends.
    I'd hired a cab because I was tired.
    I thought the driver was reckless and ought to be fired;
    So I leaned over to express my opinion, you know,
    And if it wasn't our Esther, the pedestrian's foe!

    "Did you know Marion MacDonald is engaged again?
    That makes five times now, oh, woe to the men!
    Jean's spoken to her now, a couple of times,
    Of reforming herself, but do you think Marion minds?
    Jean's slumming committees have had lots of work,
    Directed by Joey, who won't let them shirk.

    "Well, Mike, how're your orphans, from Johnny to Bill?
    Are there exactly nine hundred and nine of them still?"
    And with this, Tony closed, and Ted
    Henry, Oswald, etcetera, I sent up to bed.

        --M. L. N.




ELEVENTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Dorothy Sweet_, _Barbara Bailey_, _Shirley Woodward_, _Betty
         Smith_, _Mary Louise Griffin_

MIDDLE ROW--_Polly Sweet_, _Virginia Little_, _Louise Gorham_, _Betty
            Fowler_, _Mabel Reeves_, _Grace Helen Stuart_

FRONT ROW--_Janet Marrison_, _Frances Baker_, _Betty Long_, _Anne
           Healy_, _Charlotte Williams_

                _Jane Thompson_




FRIDAY, THE THIRTEENTH


We worked feverishly and hoped that there would be no more disputes
concerning the chairs. Some thought the ones from the dining room
ought to be used; others thought not. The chairs were brought down and
then taken back with much strife along the way. Would anyone want to
play bridge? We wondered. Would anyone bring cards to play bridge
with? We wondered again. The fact that wax was being applied to the
floor caused a good deal of worry, for we were afraid we would fall
and break our necks if too much was put on. However, even in that
predicament, we were determined to be gracious and smiling. Did
everyone know that all the autumn boughs in blue and silver were tied
on with red string? We fervently hoped they didn't, for we were in no
condition to do anything about it if they did. Thus our thoughts ran
as we slammed down tables, tied on table cloths, and practised our
Spanish dance in uniforms and low heeled shoes. At five-thirty we went
home, thankful that we didn't have to wash the windows and clean up
the furnace room.

Much credit must be given to those few guests who realized that the
gym was supposed to represent a cabaret. We greatly appreciate their
penetration. They perhaps didn't know that fortune-telling and fishing
for tin automobiles in the telephone booth were a part of the
procedure at a cabaret dance. But if they didn't know these things,
they had much to learn, for that's what they did at our party and who
were we to spurn their filthy lucre? They also danced and ate heartily
of the ice cream and cake we served. Many thought the popcorn balls
were a holdup, but they refrained from throwing them at us when we
asked ten cents.

An attempt was made at amusement when we gave two dances; one with
castanets and tambourines and much swirling and swooping; another with
Spanish shawls draped on us. This latter one was more or less of a
failure, for we couldn't seem to get into step when we did it a second
time. The audience, however, applauded, regardless of the fact, and
didn't see that the dance was any worse than it had been the first
time. About eleven-thirty it was gently hinted that the time had come
for the party to break up. We went on aching feet, hoping that since
the party had been a success financially, the guests were not making
too many derogatory remarks about it as a social function.

Dawn broke, and blushed to see the sight at Northrop School: packs of
cards scattered in fifty-two different places, tables every which way,
covers off, cake and popcorn balls scattered liberally on the floor. A
few of us came to clean up, and cleaned with many yawns. After a few
hours the gym began to take on its natural air of bleakness, and we
left it to the tender mercies of Clyde and Mullen, hoping that the
Junior-Senior would be a good one.




TENTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Dorothy Stevens_, _Louise Jewett_, _Ethel Conary_, _Jean
         Crocker_, _Elizabeth Dodge_, _Kate Velie_, _Elizabeth Jewett_,
         _Jane Bartley_, _Anna Margaret Thresher_

MIDDLE ROW--_Dorothy Owens_, _Nita Weinrebe_, _Helen Dietz_, _Jane
            Davenport_, _Gloria Congdon_, _Martha Jean Maughan_,
            _Priscilla Brown_, _Florence Roberts_, _Eylin Seeley_

FRONT ROW--_Jane Strong_, _Mayme Wynne Peppard_, _Eugenia Bovey_, _Mary
           Louise Sudduth_, _Eleanor de Laittre_, _Emily Knoblaugh_,
           _Elizabeth Pray_, _Maude Benjamin_

                _Jane Woodward_




SOPHOMORE GIRLS' GAZETTE

Seven Shekels in St. Paul      Published once in a while


GENERAL NEWS

The other day several members of the Sophomore class visited the
studios of the famous Mesdames Dodginsky and DeBartley, where they
were told their secret ambitions; and by special permission we have
been allowed to print them. It appears that Annah Margaret Thresher
would like to swim the English Channel. Jean Crocker longs to be a
Professor of Music at Oxford, while Florence Roberts would receive all
possible degrees at Columbia. Others seem to desire athletic
professions. Helen Dietz would like to be the Football Coach at the
"U," Jane Woodward to be the World's Greatest Lightweight Forward, and
Kate Velie to be on the Olympic Sprinting Team. Mayme Wynne has a
morbid desire to be a designer of Curious Coiffures in Paris.


WEATHER REPORT

By E. B.

The Sophomores suggest a soaking spring if the snow smelts. If it
rains sufficiently to suit Miss Svenddahl, they forecast dancing in
the Gym. The spring days will be either cloudy, partly cloudy, or
clear. It will rain dogs and cats or hail taxicabs, although we may
have snow, a tornado, a cyclone, a blizzard, a squall, a typhoon, a
tidal wave, or a forest fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Last Friday evening the Sophomore Select Sewing Society met at the
home of Miss Jane Bartley. A pleasant time was had by all, making
rackets and nightcaps for the poor. Refreshments were served.


[Illustration: {flea}] BRAIN TICKLER [Illustration: {flea}]

One of these fleas has been magnified 439 times, the other 438½
times. Which was originally the larger? Take 39 seconds in which to do
this.


MISCELLANEOUS

Dr. Ailment's Post Box

Question: Dear Doc: What can be done to keep up one's hair when it is
not entirely grown out?--A. M. T. B. D. B. I.

Answer: Cut it off, my dears.

       *       *       *       *       *

Question: Dear Doc: What can be done for eye-strain caused by drawing
maps of the Aegean Sea?--Sophomore Class.

Answer: Don't do 'em. You will flunk anyway.


ADVERTISEMENT

Take my three minute course and learn to study successfully. Astound
your teachers in any way. See me about it.--J. Crocker.

Learn the art of putting up your hair in two minutes between bells.
Don't be late for your classes. Follow my example. Easy lessons. Apply
to B. Dodge.




NINTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Jane Robinson_, _Martha Eurich_, _Mary Elizabeth Case_,
         _Catherine Colwell_, _Caroline Doerr_, _Donna McCabe_, _Nancy
         Adair Van Slyke_, _Catherine Moroney_

MIDDLE ROW--_Edna Louise Smith_, _Margaret Maroney_, _Victoria Mercer_,
            _Mary Morison_, _Jean Adair Willard_, _Virginia Lee
            Bechtol_, _Elizabeth Heegaard_, _Mary Atkinson_

FRONT ROW--_Alice Tenney_, _Ann Beckwith_, _Carol Hoidale_, _Helen
           Tuttle_, _Marion Wood_, _Beatrice Wells_, _Mildred O'Brien_




GIANT TRANS-ATLANTIC AIR SHIP DOWNED

(Minneapolis Morning Tribune, June 21, 1932)


The giant airship _Coolidge_ was downed last night in a hurricane on
the Atlantic. A terrific wind arose, which broke one of the huge
wings. The ship dropped abruptly, and though the captain fired
distress signals, nothing could possibly have saved the passengers but
the timely arrival of the _Admiral Sims_, a destroyer, captained by
Helen Tuttle, and the ship, _The Roosevelt_, captained by Caroline
Doerr. The two crews worked feverishly, and in less than an hour
everyone was off the sinking ship. Miss Tuttle and Miss Doerr were the
heroines of the hour, keeping their heads and directing their crews
with a coolness equal to any man's. Several Minneapolis people were on
board. Among them were Miss Carol Hoidale, famous sportswoman, who was
going to England to be in the Leicestershire horse show; Miss Marion
Wood, accomplished pianist; and Miss Elizabeth Heegard, a well-known
actress. Miss Doerr, Miss Tuttle, and these three ladies were
classmates at Northrop Collegiate School and graduated in 1929.


FORMER NORTHROP STUDENTS CAPTURING TITLES IN EUROPE

Miss Nancy Van Slyke and Miss Mary Morison are capturing all the
tennis titles. Recently at the tournament at Nice the two Americans
defeated Mlle. Isabelle Lenglen, daughter of the famous Suzanne, and
Mlle. Pavol, winning both sets, 6-3, 6-0. This gives them the world's
doubles championship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Last night Miss Beatrice Wells was proclaimed world's amateur champion
fancy skater at the St. Moritz artificial rink.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Jane Robinson and Miss Alice Tenny, the young American athletes,
are doing well in the Olympics. Miss Robinson has set a new mark for
high jumping. Miss Tenny has shattered all previous breaststroke
records.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dee," or Donna McCabe, won the Sanford cup yesterday with her Packard
straight eight. She lowered her previous record by several minutes.
The distinguished monogram on the hood was designed by Mary E.
Atkinson.


BACK FROM MARS

Miss Martha Eurich and Miss Margaret Maroney, famous artists, returned
today from Mars, where they went to make sketches of an improved type
of building that has airplane parking space on the roof. They were
sent by Miss Mary E. Case, president of the Animal Rescue League, who
contemplates building a new sky-scraper for animals.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Catherine R. Mount, the well-known New York designer, says trains
are coming back. She bases her claims on the present length of skirts.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Same Old Story," written by Miss Anne Beckwith, is a delightful
book. The plot is very new and the book is very original. It is
pleasantly illustrated by Miss Catherine Colwell, who is so famous for
her drawings, and is dedicated in verse by Virginia Lee Bechtol to
Miss Cordelia Lockwood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Edna Lou Smith will be the soloist for tomorrow's concert, that
is if she doesn't disappear in the meantime.


TO MAKE DEBUT

Miss Mildred O'Brian will make her debut tomorrow at a tea given by
her mother. Miss O'Brian will wear a corsage bouquet given by her
mother, the first part of the afternoon. After that she will wear the
corsages given by her admirers, a minute each.

       *       *       *       *       *

Judge Victoria Mercer sentences Hard Boiled Egg for life.




EIGHTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Muriel Miner_, _Frances Lee_, _Betty Stroud_, _Harriet
         Kemp_, _Lorraine Stuart_, _Alice Wright_, _Betty Bean_

MIDDLE ROW--_Betty Strout_, _Grayce Conary_, _Mary Elizabeth Ricker_,
            _Esther Hazlett_, _Mary Elizabeth Thrall_, _Inez Colcord_,
            _Edna Nagell_, _Ruth de Vienne_

FRONT ROW--_Marian Murray_, _Marjorie Osgood_, _Virginia Cook_,
           _Eleanor Bellows_, _Anne Winton_, _Louise Partridge_,
           _Miriam Powell_

                _Mary Eleanor Best_, _Ruth Alberta Clark_, _Aileen
                Stimson_




THE EIGHTH FORM PRIMER


    _Lest the history of our year
      Through passing time grow dimmer,
    We've gathered the choicest bits
      And put them in a primer._


    =A= stands for Athletics, Ambition, and Art,
    Since they're packed full of Action we're glad to take part.

    =B= is for Bumps, got when sliding at noon;
    We often see stars and sometimes the moon.

    =C= for Captain ball games, two of which we have won,
    And we all agree they are jolly good fun.

    =D= is le Duc whose French we found charming,
    But a sky downstairs we think most alarming.

    =E= is for Eighths. What else could it be?
    Energetic, ecstatic, emphatic are we.

    =F= is Friar Tuck. In our Robin Hood play
    He was bluff, fat, and hearty in quite the right way.

    =G= for Graham crackers. They're indeed simple fare,
    But they keep us from getting too much outside air.

    =H= is the Hill, so covered with sleet
    That when we come down, we can't stay on our feet.

    =I= stands for Icelandic. Though amusing to hear,
    We think we'll not speak it each day in the year.

    =J= is for Joking. That is our folly
    For rather than sad we choose to be jolly.

    =K= for Kicker Sleds. They arrived last December
    And furnished good sport for every class member.

    =L= is for Luther--Burbank we were told,
    Who started the Protestant reformation of old.

    =M= is the Mascot that brings us our luck,
    And we surely need him to combat Sevens' pluck.

    =N= for "Noblesse Oblige," our chosen class aim.
    Though sometimes we slip, we strive on just the same.

    =O= is Old Girls' Party, to which we escorted
    The whole seventh grade; a gay time was reported.

    =P= is for Pageant we held Columbus Day,
    To tell how brave sailors to our land made way.

    =Q= for the Quest the whole class did make
    When told to make rhymes for our Tatler's sake.

    =R= for Radiators to which we all swarm
    To dry off our stockings and get our toes warm.

    =S= is for Silver, that coupled with blue
    Is the symbol to which we shall ever be true.

    =T= is for Tourney 'twixt the White and the Gold.
    But 'tis fought with balls instead of swords bold.

    =U= is uniform. When that badge we wear
    We must look to upholding Northrop's standards so fair.

    =V= for Valentine party, which the seventh form had.
    Favors, verses, and dancing made our hearts glad.

    =W= for Winter Sports. There's no fun more thrilling,
    Whether skating or sliding or in the snow spilling.

    =X= is unknown, so why trouble with it.
    We'll leave it alone and not wear out our wit.

    =Y= is for Yells. We give them with vim
    When sports are on foot in our lower gym.

    =Z= for Zipper boots, our greatest delights.
    Zip off the last minute and fly up two flights.




SEVENTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Katharine Simonton_, _Barbara Newman_, _Betty Goldsborough_,
         _Marjorie Williams_, _Louisa Hineline_, _Betty Miller_

MIDDLE ROW--_Laura Van Nest_, _Alice Benjamin_, _Pauline Brooks_,
            _Catherine Wagner_, _Catherine Piper_, _Ann Lee_

FRONT ROW--_Betty Thomson_, _Elizabeth Junkin_, _Jane Helm_, _Virginia
           Helm_, _Peggy Gillette_, _Emily Douglas_




SEVENTH FORM EVENTS


SPORTS

Early in the fall the sevenths and eighths had a number of baseball
games. Although the sevenths tried very hard, they were always
defeated. However, spring is coming, and they may have better luck.

In midwinter when games are indoors, captain ball is the popular
sport. The two classes always play two games. In the first one the
sevenths were badly beaten, but in the second they came close to
victory with a score of 3 to 2.

The winter outdoor fun is on a bumpy, crooked hill back of school used
for sliding. Down it goes a continuous stream of sleds, toboggans, and
skis. Sometimes an overloaded sled drops a passenger on the way, and
sometimes a load lands upside down in a drift, but it's all part of
the fun.


PARTIES

At the beginning of school the seventh form were guests of the eighth
form at the opening League party. We danced a great deal, and we
laughed at the Wild West show and the autoride of by-gone days. Then
we climbed to the top floor for refreshments and more laughing.

On the eleventh of February to return the courtesy, we invited the
eighths to a valentine party. After decorating our guests with gay
caps, we danced for a while. The event of the day, however, was the
valentine boxes. There were three fat ones stuffed with valentines for
us all. By the time we had exclaimed over them, we were ready to have
refreshments. Cheers of appreciation ended the party.


CHAPEL PROGRAMS

This year we have been visited by both a princess and a duke. The
princess came from Damascus and gave us an ancient story of her
city--the story of Naaman the Leper. The duke, who was from France,
showed us pictures of beautiful old French buildings, which he is
trying to keep from being destroyed.

Early in March our own class took part in a chapel program by
demonstrating some lessons in musical appreciation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Piping merrily _William_ the _Piper_ floated down the meadow _Brooks_
seated at the _Helm_ of his boat. Being a _New-man_ in this country he
stopped to ask his way of a _Miller_. The miller directed him across
the _Lee_ to a little town called _Goldsborough_. There he stopped at
the inn of the _Van Nest_. After a good sleep, a shave with his
_Gillette_, and a hearty meal of _Thomson's_ baked beans and
_Wagner's_ canned _Pease_, he was much refreshed.

The next morning he continued his wanderings, but unwittingly he
trespassed on the land of a farmer named _Hineline_, who threatened to
take him to the village of _Simonton_ and throw him and his _Junk-in_
jail. Finally he made his peace, but he had to leave his boat behind.

"However, I'm not so unlucky," said he, "for I have stout _Douglas_
shoes to tramp in, and my faithful dog, _Benjamin_, to bear me
company."

    JANE HELM AND CATHERINE PIPER.




SIXTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Mary Louise Parker_, _Miriam Lucker_, _Isabel McLaughlin_,
         _Mary Rogers_, _Betty Short_, _Janet Bulkley_, _Jane Fansler_

MIDDLE ROW--_Rosemarie Gregory_, _Carolyn Belcher_, _Sally Louise
            Bell_, _Grace Ann Campbell_, _Barbara Bagley_, _Ella
            Sturgis Pillsbury_, _Marie Jaffrey_, _Elizabeth Mapes_

FRONT ROW--_Betty Lou Burrows_, _Charlotte Driscoll_, _Gretchen
           Hauschild_, _Helen Beckwith_, _Eleanor Smith_, _Peggy
           Thomson_

                _Phyllis Foulstone_




FIFTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Mary Ann Kelly_, _Anne Dalrymple_, _Mary Dodge_, _Barbara
         Healy_, _Harriet Hineline_, _Anne McGill_

MIDDLE ROW--_Barbara Anson_, _Jane Arnold_, _Mary Thayer_, _Mary
            Foster_, _Marian Carlson_, _Edith Rizer_, _Edith McKnight_

FRONT ROW--_Betty Jane Jewett_, _Geraldine Hudson_, _Ione Kuechle_,
           _Virginia Baker_, _Deborah Anson_, _Louise Walker_,
           _Catherine Gilman_




FOURTH FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Martha Miller_, _Martha Bagley_, _Mary Malcolmson_, _Patty
         Greenman_

MIDDLE ROW--_Susan Wheelock_, _Patricia Dalrymple_, _Helen Louise
            Hayden_, _Nanette Harrison_

FRONT ROW--_Mary Partridge_, _Olivia Carpenter_, _Katherine Boynton_,
           _Anne Morrison_, _Dolly Conary_

                _Margaret Partridge_, _Frances Ward_




THIRD FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Elizabeth Lucker_, _Sally Ross Dinsmore_, _Joan Parker_

MIDDLE ROW--_Rhoda Belcher_, _Penelope Paulson_, _Harriet Helm_,
            _Ottilie Tusler_

FRONT ROW--_Elizabeth Williams_, _Susan Snyder_, _Mary Lou Pickett_,
           _Anne PerLee_

                _Charlotte Buckley_




SECOND FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Mary Anna Nash_, _Nancy Rogers_, _Katherine Dain_, _Blanche
         Rough_, _Betty Tuttle_

MIDDLE ROW--_Betty Lee_, _Elizabeth Hedback_, _Elizabeth Ann
            Eggleston_, _Ruth Rizer_, _Jane Loughland_, _Katharine
            Rand_

FRONT ROW--_Janey Lou Harvey_, _Katherine Warner_, _Donna Jane
           Weinrebe_, _Elizabeth Booraem_, _Margie Ireys_

                _Barbara Brooks_, _Helen Jane Eggan_




FIRST FORM


[Illustration: {Group photograph of students}]

TOP ROW--_Melissa Lindsey_, _Dorothea Lindsey_

MIDDLE ROW--_Mary Ann Fulton_, _Laura Booraem_, _Carolyn Cogdell_,
            _Peggy Carpenter_

FRONT ROW--_Bobby Thompson_, _Martha Pattridge_, _Betty King_, _Jane
           Pillsbury_, _Calder Bressler_

                _Whitney Burton_, _Betty June Tupper_, _Jean Bell_




KINDERGARTEN AND JUNIOR PRIMARY


[Illustration: {Group photographs of students}]

TOP ROW--_Jean Clifford_, _Archie Walker_, _Jimmie Wyman_, _Mary Jane
         Van Campen_, _Sally Jones_, _Vincent Carpenter_

MIDDLE ROW--_Morris Hallowell_, _Janet Sandy_, _Ogden Confer_,
            _Beatrice Devaney_, _Ann Carpenter_, _Frederick Jahn_,
            _Barbara Taylor_

FRONT ROW--_Phyllis Beckwith_, _Yale Sumley_, _David Warner_, _Jamie
           Doerr_, _Elizabeth Hobbs_, _Gloria Hays_, _Lindley Burton_,
           _Frances Mapes_, _Henry Doerr_

                _Sheldon Brooks_, _Billy Johns_, _Betty Webster_,
                _Barbara Hill_, _Patty Rogers_, _Emmy Lou Lucker_,
                _George Pillsbury_, _Jane Pillsbury_




COLLEGE NEWS


                                            Smith College,
                                            Northampton,
                                            Massachusetts,
                                            February 23, 1926.

Dear Janet:

When I received your letter asking me to tell Northrop what her
alumnae at Smith have been doing this year, I had a sudden sinking
sensation, since I felt that the achievements accomplished by some of
us have not been startling. However, upon digging for evidence, I have
discovered that Northrop need not feel ashamed of us after all.

Dorothy Wilson sings in the Junior choir, is a member of the Smith
College glee club, and of the Oriental club--one which is connected
with the Bible department--and has been chosen business manager of the
Smith College Handbook--"Freshman Bible"--for the class of 1930.

"Pete" McCarthy, also a Junior, who vehemently claimed that she had
nothing to tell me about herself, I discover is fire captain of her
house, a member of the French club, and chairman of the spring dance
committee.

On Washington's Birthday, at the annual rally day performance, Mary
Truesdell and Lorraine Long, dressed as sailors, with the
accompaniment of the Mandolin Club, clogged for us in multifarious
rhythms, ways, and manners--or however one does clog--to the
astonishment of all of us, who never before dreamed that professional
talent actually existed in Northampton.

Elizabeth Carpenter is president of her house. As for the rest of us,
Lucy Winton, Eleanor Cook, and me, all I can venture to say--and they
agree with me--is that, like the proverbial green freshman, we have
been plodding along at studies occasionally, and at all other times we
have been eating, sleeping, or amusing ourselves to the nth degree.

I can't wait to see the new _Tatler_ to find out what you have been
doing this year.

Please give my love to everyone.

    Very sincerely,
        PEG WILLIAMS

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            South Hadley,
                                            Massachusetts,
                                            February 18, 1926.

Dear Margaret Louise:

If I should attempt to tell you everything we are doing here now, I'm
afraid that I should go far past the limits of my little column, for
our occupations are so multitudinous and varied that there is hardly
an end to them.

Right now, notwithstanding the ever present pursuit of the academic,
the whole college is having the most glorious time hiking over the
countryside on snowshoes, risking its dignity and perhaps its neck in
attempting the ski jump on Pageant Field, and "hooking" rides with the
small village boys on their bob sleds down the long hill on College
Street. South Hadley is such a tiny town, anyway, that it is just like
living in the country with lovely mountains all around.

By now Mount Tom and Mount Holyoke are quite like old friends, for
most of us had a personal interview with one or the other of them when
we hiked one of the ranges last fall on Mountain Day. Mountain Day, by
the way, was a red letter day, for the Freshmen particularly. It was
one of those gorgeous blue October days when we could hardly stand the
thought of having to be inside, and, almost like a gift from Heaven,
Miss Woolley unexpectedly announced in morning chapel that she would
leave it to the students to vote whether they would have their holiday
then, with its incomplete arrangements, or two days later when it was
scheduled, with beautifully laid plans but with possible showers. The
girls were simply bursting with excitement by that time, and the vote
was carried unanimously. Not one class in prospect for that day, but
just a chance to start out with a lunch on your back to "parts
unknown"--oh, it was wonderful!

Another big part of our college social life here in the fall and
spring is college songs and class serenades. During September and
October we had one out by the "College Steps" once a week. I shall
never forget the first time we gathered under a full moon, about nine
o'clock, and our senior song leader started us off by having us sing
all the songs we knew about the moon, with the singing of parts much
encouraged! Even if the harmony was a little doubtful in spots, taken
as a whole the result was "perfectly heavenly"--to one enthusiastic
Freshman. Then a few weeks later the Freshmen were called to their
windows one evening to hear "Sisters, sisters, we sing to you," and
looking down, we saw the whole Junior class assembled underneath the
dormitory windows. Then in due time our turn came to "surprise them,"
but it wasn't, evidently, kept a "deep and dark" secret as we had
hoped, for at the end of the first song we were literally showered
with candy kisses hurled down from above.

These are just a few of the kinds of things we do outside our academic
work; not to mention the picnic breakfasts at "Paradise" in the warm
weather, sleigh rides or hikes to Old Hadley, a quaint old town near
here, Winter Carnival, or all the excitement that comes with Junior
Prom time. Then, you may be sure, the "little sisters" are pressed
into service!

What I think, however, makes Mount Holyoke mean what it does to us is
something that is almost impossible to describe, but something that is
just as real as any phase of our life here--and that is the college
atmosphere. It is created, in part, by Miss Woolley's wonderful chapel
services, in part by the sheer beauty of the country in which we live,
and, lastly, by the fine spirit of the girls themselves, the college
community.

    Very sincerely,
        DORIS DOUGLAS, '25.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Editor of the 1926 Tatler:

We who once formed a goodly part of Northrop's illustrious student
body, but who now attend Vassar College, send our heartiest and most
affectionate greetings, to the pupils, the faculty, the trustees, and
Miss Carse!

In the first part of the year, when those of us who are Freshmen were
busying ourselves with getting adjusted to our new environment, new
studies, and new acquaintances, we had no time to reflect on our past
activities. But now that we have become acclimated, we take great joy
in remembering our years spent at Northrop, and realize, more and
more, all that she did for us. We owe our present life and
opportunities to Northrop's splendid teaching and background. The
Northrop League gave us a moral background which we shall never lose.
Our companionship with each other gave us friendships which can never
be lost, even though we may be separated.

Northrop Alumnae who are Sophomores and the five who are holding up
the honor of Vassar's class of '26, still feel Northrop's influence
very strongly, and are forever singing her praises. They feel that the
training in concentration and in well-divided time received at
Northrop has proved invaluable throughout their college course.

The large number of us here at Vassar, set aside as "Northrop girls"
feel that we have a great responsibility resting on us. We have a
standard to live up to, a standard caused by the good name sent out
into the world by Northrop. May we live up to that name, may we carry
on the standard of Northrop School.

    JOSEPHINE CLIFFORD,
    BETTY GOODELL.




MEMBERS OF LEAGUE COUNCIL FOR 1925-1926


OFFICERS OF THE LEAGUE

    MARY EATON                      _President_
    VIRGINIA LEFFINGWELL            _Vice-President_
    BARBARA BAILEY                  _Treasurer_
    FLORENCE ISABEL ROBERTS         _Secretary_

CHAIRMEN OF STANDING COMMITTEES

    MARION HUME                     _Athletics_
    MARGARET LOUISE NEWHALL         _Publication_
    BEATRICE JOSLIN                 _Entertainment_

CLASS PRESIDENTS

    EVELYN BAKER                    _Form XII_
    BETTY LONG                      _Form XI_
    MARY LOUISE SUDDUTH             _Form X_
    HELEN TUTTLE                    _Form IX_
    ELEANOR BELLOWS                 _Form VIII_
    JANE HELM                       _Form VII_

ATHLETIC COUNCIL

    MARION HUME                     _Chairman_
    JOSEPHINE REINHART              _Form XII_
    CHARLOTTE WILLIAMS
    JANET MORISON                   _Form XI_
    BETTY JEWETT
    JANE WOODWARD                   _Form X_
    VICTORIA MERCER
    NANCY VAN SLYKE                 _Form IX_
    RUTH DE VIENNE                  _Forms VIII and VII_

TATLER BOARD

    MARGARET LOUISE NEWHALL         _Editor_
    JANET MORISON                   _Business Assistant_
    NANCY STEVENSON
    MARION MCDONALD                 _Form XII_
    VIRGINIA LITTLE                 _Form XI_
    MARTHA JEAN MAUGHAN             _Form X_
    NANCY VAN SLYKE                 _Form IX_
    ANNE WINTON                     _Form VIII_
    PAULINE BROOKS                  _Form VII_

FACULTY ADVISERS

    MISS CARSE
    MISS BAGIER
    MISS SADLEY
    MISS FEREBEE
    MISS MCHUGH
    MISS BROWN
    MISS SVENDDAL
    MISS PEASE
    MISS LOCKWOOD
    MRS. ARMSTRONG


THE NORTHROP LEAGUE

It hardly seems necessary in this, the sixth year of the League's
existence, to explain its purpose. I think it is sufficient to say
that the League is an organization which, under Miss Carse's
sympathetic guidance, has come to control the student activities of
the high school and the seventh and the eighth grades. It is true, of
course, that the League is governed by its officers, but the League
itself is what the large body of the girls make it. The pledge, an
expression of its standards, seeks to hold each girl to a high sense
of honor, loyalty, and self-improvement. This, briefly, is the
purpose. As nearer perfection is reached, in the struggle for this
goal, the League gains in power. Thus it is that the League is the
result of the effort of every member.

    MARY EATON.




Report of League Treasurer Given at the Parents' and Teachers' Dinner


Should any girl of Northrop wish to prepare herself for a position
that has to do with the handling of money, I should advise her to
begin campaigning by lobbying for the office of Treasurer of the
Northrop League. However, the reputation of the detailed work of this
office is such that there are few who are ever over-anxious to receive
it. This was my feeling at first, but now when I realize how much I
already know about making out checks, keeping accounts, and the
intricacies of banking, I feel it is all worth while. By Commencement
I shouldn't be surprised if I could fill the important position of
messenger in a bank.

The first thing that comes up at the beginning of each year is the
collection of the annual League dues, which are two dollars and fifty
cents. A total amount of about three hundred dollars was handed in
this year. This is put under the "operating fund," and takes care of
all the League expenditures, except those of the Welfare Committee.

There are four departments of student activities drawing from these
League dues, athletic, entertainment, and printing and stationery.
Also, this year the League voted to back the Tatler board up with one
hundred dollars. At the first council meeting of the year a budget is
made out for the different committees of the League. This budget is
based on the expenditures of that committee for the preceding year.
Until nineteen twenty-five, the Welfare work was taken care of by
collections running through the year as the various needs arose. This
year a new system was adopted, which took care of everything at one
time. We foresaw a need of money for the Thanksgiving, Christmas, and
Community Funds, for the Near East Relief, and the French Orphans;
therefore slips were given to each girl with these different needs
listed. She was expected to put an amount after each, which amount she
pledged to pay in cash or in deferred payments. So far eight hundred
and twelve dollars of the nine hundred and two dollars and thirteen
cents pledged has been handed in. This plan is much more systematic,
and saves the trouble of conducting so many drives.

All money transactions of classes and committees whether receipts or
expenditures go through the hands of the League treasurer. A system of
books is maintained. Each class and committee keeps its own accounts.
Then the League treasurer has a large cash book in which she also
keeps all the receipts and disbursements of the classes and
committees. At the end of each month the balances are put in a
simplified ledger. It is from this that the monthly and annual reports
are made. When a bill is received, it is paid only by the League
treasurer after it has been OK'd by the chairman of the committee
responsible for it. When money is handed in, a receipt is given to the
bearer. At the end of each month the books are balanced and checked
with the bank statement. Also the check book is verified with the bank
balance.

Although the League treasurer is custodian of the class funds, each
class has a treasurer who keeps her own accounts. The classes have
their own dues to pay for all their expenditures. At the end of each
month, after the class treasurer has balanced her book, it is checked
over with the accounts of the League treasurer for that class to see
if they agree.

A checking account is kept at the Northwestern National Bank and the
savings' account at the Farmers and Mechanics Bank. We have had almost
three hundred dollars in the savings account, but two hundred dollars,
which is last year's League gift to the school, has just been
withdrawn and added to the Chapel Fund.

The duties of a treasurer are not over until she has passed to her
successor what she has learned during her treasurership and has
changed the accounts to the new girl's name. After this has been done,
the retiring treasurer is released and must seek new fields in which
to carry on. In case a former Northrop League treasurer ever applies
to any of you for a position, just remember the "big" business in
which she began her training.

    BARBARA BAILEY.




NORTHROP LEAGUE WELFARE BUDGET

    NEAR EAST RELIEF
    1926 FRENCH ORPHAN
    COMMUNITY FUND
    THANKSGIVING FUND
    CHRISTMAS FUND
    EMERGENCY FUND


This year, when Community Fund interests brought to our attention the
need of school collections, of which the Community Fund is but one, we
thought to have a single large drive instead of several small drives.

We called in the expert opinion of one who had long worked in social
agencies, and worked out a scheme and a budget for one drive covering
all our needs. This plan was presented to the League Council and met
with approval.

Sheets containing lists of the various funds for which money was to be
collected, were given to the pupils to take home for conference with
their parents. If a girl wished to give to any one of the various
funds, she was to mark down that amount, also putting down the date of
payment (any time until February 1); or else the money might be sent
right back with the pledges. In this way we tried to make the idea of
voluntary subscription the whole basis of our plan.

The total amount of the entire drive, both pledged and paid, is
$902.13, out of which $359.58 was paid in full to the Community Fund.
The total of the Thanksgiving Fund was $166.10, out of which $106.23
was paid for Thanksgiving baskets which were filled with good,
substantial food, and were delivered by a number of the girls, each
group accompanied by an older person, to eighteen needy families. The
Christmas fund total reached the sum of $180.70. From this, we gave
$75.00 as gifts to the house-staff. The Emergency Fund amounted to
$151.25. From this, we gave $36.00 to help support a French orphan for
whose care we are responsible.

There is also an unapportioned fund. A number of pledges were returned
with only the total amount marked down, none of which was divided
among the funds. These amounts were put down under the unapportioned
fund. From this sum, we drew $30.00 for the Near East Relief. In
addition to all this, we are having a continuous drive for old clothes
which we place where most needed.

After the various distributions were made, we found that our book
balanced with that of the League treasurer.

Handling a situation of this sort has been an interesting task, and I
think that we all have greatly profited by the experience, and believe
that it has been a preparation for future service to the Community.

    VIRGINIA LEFFINGWELL,
        _Chairman_.




[Illustration: {A group of students in costume as shepherds}]




CALENDAR FOR 1925-1926


  _OCTOBER_
     2--Old Girls' Party for the New.
    16--Riding Contest.

  _NOVEMBER_
    10--Book Exhibit.
    13--Junior Carnival.

  _DECEMBER_
    18--Christmas Luncheon.
    19--Christmas Play.

  _FEBRUARY_
     5--Parents' and Teachers' Dinner.
    12--Valentine Party for Grades VII and VIII. Reading by the
        Princess Rahme Haider.

  _MARCH_
     8--Lecture by the Duc de Trevise.
    19--Northrop Entertains Summit.
    25--Athletic Banquet.
    26--Lecture by Dr. Cora Best.

  _MAY_
    20 and 21--Junior Field Day.
    27 and 28--Senior Field Day.

  _JUNE_
     4--The Junior-Senior Dance.
     7--Senior Chapel. Alumnae Luncheon. Class Day.
     8--Commencement.

[Illustration: {A student wearing a costume of robes}]




[Illustration: {Seven photographs of students in 19th century costume}]




The Junior-Senior Dance, 1925


On Friday morning, May 29, 1925, each Junior awoke with the entire
responsibility of the Junior-Senior dance on her shoulders. Ten
o'clock found some of the class in an effort to carry out the green
and white color scheme, robbing the neighbors' bridal wreath hedges of
all their glory. Returning to school they wound the blossoming sprays
in and out of a white lattice work, which a few of their industrious
class mates had made to cover the radiators in the dining room. They
then hung green and white balloons in clusters from the side lights.
While this was being done, others were converting nice-looking
automobiles into furniture vans. The furniture was arranged on the
roof garden, over which Japanese lanterns were hung.

Having finished these tasks, we had by no means completed our work.
The supper tables next occupied our attention. These we arranged in
the side hall. Centering each was a miniature white May pole wound
with green and white streamers. The appearance was festive indeed.

After the lapse of a few hours the weary Juniors returned to welcome
their guests, the Seniors.... As the clock struck twelve, the music
ceased, the building resumed its former tranquility, and the happy
guests filed home.

    EVELYN BAKER AND POLLY DAUNT.




We Entertain Summit School


Every year Northrop and Summit schools come together at one place or
the other for an informal party. This year, it being our pleasure to
entertain the Summit girls, we looked forward to the occasion as one
of our most enjoyable events.

We departed from the usual form of entertainment in presenting the
French play "Le Voyage de Monsieur Perrichon." Although probably not
every one in the audience understood all the speeches, the play went
off well, for the plot is such that it is easily comprehended through
the acting; also to aid the audience a short synopsis was read in
English before the curtain rose, by Shirley Woodward, who looked the
part of a dashing French soldier.

The roles of that amusing pair, Monsieur and Madam Perrichon, were
taken by Betty Long and Barbara Bailey. Henriette, their daughter, was
portrayed by Anne Healy, and the two charming lovers, Daniel and
Armand, by Dorothy Sweet and Janet Morrison.

An additional feature of the program was provided by the faculty
sextet, in the form of several pleasing songs. After the play, the
faculties of both schools had refreshments upstairs, and dancing
followed in the gymnasium.




La Visite Du Duc De Trevise


[Illustration: {A large group of students outdoors with the visitor}]

Le huit mars nous fûmes très heureuses d'avoir avec nous le Duc de
Trévise. Comme Mlle. Carse était dans l'est, Mlle. Bagier le présenta.
Il fit une conférence des plus intéressantes sur la reconstruction de
l'ancienne architecture de la France, accompagnée de projections
charmantes de son sujet. Il expliqua de son ravissant accent français,
les dégâts qu'on fait aux beaux édifices du moyen âge. Il nous soumit
le projet de son organisation pour conserver divers anciens châteaux,
aux villages différents de la France pour chaque ville américaine qui
aura approprié de l'argent pour cette cause, donnant ainsi le moyen
aux citoyens de chaque ville d'avoir un logis quand ils visiteront le
village ou la ville dans lesquels leur château particulier se trouve.
L'argent qu'on a déjà donné a fait beaucoup pour avancer le travail de
la reconstruction. Nous fûmes charmées de découvrir que, quand il
retombait dans sa langue natale, nous pûmes avec peu de difficulté le
comprendre. Après que la dernière projection eut été montrée, le Duc
voulut beaucoup une photographie des élèves de Northrop School. En
conséquence nous nous assemblâmes au côté sud de l'école où Mlle.
Bagier fit deux photographies des jeunes filles avec leur ami
nouveau-trouvé. Comme cela fut une grande occasion pour les plus
jeunes filles, elles démandèrent à grands cris des autographes que le
Duc leur donna avec bonté. Ensuite on nous rappela à nos leçons qui
nous semblèrent plus tristes que d'ordinaire par contraste avec
l'heure très interessante que nous venions de passer avec le Duc.




The Princess Rahme Haider


It would seem that the good angels were plotting in favor of Northrop
School, for this year we have had one delightful entertainment after
another. Foremost among these events was a visit from the Syrian
princess Rahme Haider and her charming companion Miss Burgess, who
gave us a fascinating dramatic reading from the Bible. The entire
school was held spellbound by the art of the princess, who made a very
artistic appearance in her Oriental garb and had a charming
personality. Princess Rahme Haider most assuredly gave us one of the
most interesting and profitable programs of the year.

    GRACE HELEN STUART.

[Handwriting: Sincerely
                Princess Rahme
                  Damascus
                    Syria]




[Illustration: {A group of students in 'peasant' costume}]




ATHLETIC CALENDAR


    October 2--The Riding Contest.

BASEBALL

    November  2--VII, 2; VIII, 22.
    November 19--VII, 3; VIII, 25.
    November 24--VII, 5; VIII, 26.

HOCKEY

    November  9--Senior, 1; Sophomore, 1.
    November 10--Junior, 5; Freshman, 0.
    November 12--Senior, 0; Freshman, 0.
    November 16--Senior, 0; Junior, 6.
    November 18--Sophomore, 8; Freshman, 0.
    November 19--Sophomore, 3; Junior, 0.

CAPTAIN BALL

    March  3--VII, 2; VIII, 10.
    March  9--VII, 2; VIII, 3.
    March 11--Gold, 3; White, 10.
    March 16--Gold, 7; White, 8.

BASKETBALL--INTERCLASS

    February 23--Junior, 13; Sophomore, 6.
    February 25--Freshman, 9; Sophomore, 20.
    March  1--Senior, 8; Sophomore, 10.
    March  2--Junior, 24; Freshman, 11.
    March  4--Freshman 5; Senior 5.
    March  8--Junior, 12; Senior, 19.
    March 11--Tournament--Junior, 11; Sophomore, 8.

BASKETBALL--GOLD AND WHITE

    March 10--Gold I, 7; White I, 8.
    March 15--Gold II, 7; White II, 7.
    March 22--Gold III, 22; White III, 6.
    March 23--Gold IV, 11; White IV, 7.
    March 24--Gold A, 12; White A, 7.

FIELD DAY

    May 21 and 22--Junior Field Day.
    May 27 and 28--Senior Field Day.




HOCKEY


This year a new regulation in regard to hockey practise was
introduced. The girls were required to report twice a week instead of
once, one of these days being given to stick practise.

The first game of the season was played on November ninth between the
Seniors and the Sophomores. It was a very close one resulting in a one
to one tie. On the next day, November tenth, the Juniors beat the
Freshmen by a score of five to nothing. The game on November second
resulted in another tie; this time a scoreless one between the Seniors
and the Freshmen, which was most unsatisfactory to both teams. On
November sixteenth the Senior-Junior game was played which the Juniors
won six to nothing. On the eighteenth the Sophomores won from the
Freshmen eight to nothing, and on the next day the game between the
Juniors and the Sophomores was played. As no one had crossed the
Juniors' goal since the beginning of the '24 season there was a great
deal of interest in the game. It was an exceedingly hard contest, two
girls being more or less knocked out during the game, but the
Sophomores won by a score of three to nothing.

We were fortunate this season in having the weather remain so that we
were able to play all the games on the schedule.




The Riding Contest


The annual riding contest was held on the Parade Grounds, Friday,
October 16, Mlle. Bagier and Betty Fowler acting as managers. Although
it was a cold and wintry day, a large crowd turned out. Dr. E. W.
Berg, Mr. L. McFall, and Mr. William Hindle were the judges, and the
Misses Anderson acted as ring mistresses. Everything went off very
smoothly, beginning with the Junior Cup Class, followed by the Senior
Cup Class, the Pony Class, and ending with Five Gaited Class. After
the contest, tea was served in the gymnasium, where the awards were
given out. The Junior Cup went to Ruth Clark; the Pony Cup, to
Virginia Leffingwell; the Five Gaited Cup to Betty Fowler; and the
much desired Senior Cup to Mary Louise Sudduth.




Base Ball and Captain Ball


On the fall the Sevenths and Eighths had several baseball games. They
were very exciting in spite of the fact that the Eighths always won by
a generous margin. However the Sevenths took the defeats so well that
no one could call them "poor losers." After the snow came, captain
ball began. The two match games were very interesting. The score of
the first was 10-2 in the Eighths' favor, and of the second was 8-7,
the same side being victorious. Then came the Gold and White games,
both of which the Whites won. It was hard, but it was fun, to play
against a girl that one had previously played with as a partner. These
games brought out such good sportsmanship that we all enjoyed them.




[Illustration: {Seven photographs of students participating in sports
events}]




BASKETBALL


The basketball season opened with much enthusiasm as soon as school
began after the Christmas vacation. The attendance at practices was
especially good this year, and the members of every class reported
regularly. In order to arouse some spirit, each class distributed its
colors among its rooters, and there was much competition between the
classes in finding original yells. As a result of these efforts the
crowds at the games were exceptionally good, much larger than in
previous years. The Sophomore-Junior game, the first of the season,
was won by the Juniors after a hard fight. The next two games were the
Sophomore-Freshman and the Senior-Sophomore, which were both won by
the Sophomores. The Juniors then played the Freshmen and were
victorious. The Senior-Freshman game, one of the most exciting of the
season, ended in a tie, much to the disappointment of both sides. The
Seniors in their last game at Northrop played the Juniors and won. As
a result of these games, the Juniors and Sophomores were competitors
in the tournament.

The girls worked hard to make the gymnasium look suitable for the
occasion and were rewarded for their efforts, for cheering and
enthusiastic crowds filled the gym. The best yelling of the evening,
however, was done by the Sophomores, who nearly raised the roof with
their snappy and well-led cheers. Their serious and well performed
stunt of forming and singing, contrasted with the ridiculous showing
of the Juniors made on tricycles. After the stunts, the game began and
certainly proved to be a close one. Although the Juniors were behind
during a good part of the game, they finally won by a score of 11-8.
The tournament closed the inter-class games and those of the Gold and
White teams began.

In order that more girls might take part in the games, the upper
school had been divided into two large teams called the Gold and
White. These teams were in turn subdivided into basketball teams, and
many games were played between these teams. Although the audiences
were not all that might be desired the plan can be called a success
since it interested more girls in the game. The White team won the
first two games and the Gold the next two; therefore the final game
between the two "A" teams would decide whether the Gold or the White
team would win the basketball series. The game was won by the Gold
team, 11-8. This game ended the basketball season, which has been an
unusually good one.




    I strive to wring from my unwilling pen
    A sonnet,--and all ordered thoughts pass by;
    Light as a swirl of mist, too soon they fly
    For my poor wits to capture them again.
    O sonnet unattained! For other men
    So easy to attain, but it is I
    Who struggle, and for me all goes awry,--
    My efforts fond go unrequited then.
    "Why, surely it is but a trifle, this,"
    They cry amazed, in sweet unknowing bliss.
    A trifle, yes, for Shelley or for Blake,
    They had not many extra marks at stake;
    I toil in vain toward a retarding goal,--
    I fear the poet's part is not my role.

        SHIRLEY WOODWARD, '27.




Gardens I Have Read About


Books are the means by which one may travel without moving. It is
through the medium of a book that I was able to visit a garden in
Italy. It happened to be a garden that was typically Italian and a
very charming one. The entrance was through a vine-covered Tuscan arch
at the side of a villa, and down several steps to a wide terrace. The
sun was beating down outside, but inside this walled garden all was
cool and refreshing. At one's feet were clumps of darkest green ferns,
like miniature forests. At the bottom of the terrace there was a
terracotta pool, where water flowers were drifting on their flat green
pads. Around the edge of this pool and through an aisle of tiny
fragrant pink rose bushes was a space enclosed on three sides by
feathery greens. Here a laughing satyr was perched on the top of a
fountain, spouting water in a silvery arc. Through a shaded avenue
could be seen other secluded spots with marble benches in front of
other fountains. In another direction was a grotto where water
trickled down gray, moss-covered stones. Far in the distance were
cypress trees waving their spear-like tops and standing guard over the
coolness and beauty of the garden.

Very different from this is the sunny English garden that next I
visited. It, too, was terraced and had fountains, but the water in
these fountains sparkled in the sun, and the cool dampness of the
Italian garden was lacking. On the terrace were occasional
closely-trimmed yew trees, or box trees clipped in odd shapes. A
curving walk, edged with laurel, led to the ivy-walled inner garden.
Here, in the full sun and warmth, grew, not the delicate rose bush of
my Italian garden, but sturdy, bold rose trees, and apple trees, above
snowdrops, daffodils, and crocuses in round, oblong, and square beds.
These had trimmed herbaceous borders, and gray flag walks lay between
them. Beyond towered great elms, but even these did not shut out any
of the sun, which reached the foxgloves and violets, transplanted from
the moor to the corner of the wall.

Here in America, though I have never been East, I know I should feel
at home in a New England garden. My entire knowledge of them has been
gained from books, but I am sure, from what I have read that these
gardens are quite as charming as the more formal ones of other lands.
Separated from the street by either a white picket fence or a row of
lilac bushes, grow in their seasons nasturtiums, pinks, larkspur,
mignonette, sweet peas, and forget-me-nots, in neat rows. All these
are in such profusion that one sees only the glorious general effect
and fails to notice that the garden has been planted with total
disregard to the blending of colors. At the back, against the fence,
tall sun flowers flaunt themselves, while in front are clumps of
gorgeous peonies, and at the side beds of fragrant mint.

All these gardens I think of when spring comes, and my yearly
gardening fever seizes me. But at the end of two months, when my
radishes go to seed before attaining edible size, and those of my
flowers that are not choked by weeds have been dug up by other members
of the family, I go back to the dream gardens in my books.

    MARY EATON, '26.




DIXIE


An old man, ragged, but with an air of dignity, quickly glanced at his
stop watch as a small figure, crouched over a shining black neck, shot
by. With a thunder of hoofs the black horse whirled past and fought
for her head down the stretch. She would win the following
Saturday--she must! If she didn't then she too would have to go and
leave the ruined old gentleman, who looked so feeble leaning over the
white rail which enclosed the mile track. After much coaxing the black
colt came mincing up to her old master.

The small colored boy, as black as his mount, was bubbling over with
enthusiasm. "Dat dehby, Suh, is going to be won by ma Dixie," patting
the curved neck of the horse.

The old gentleman looked up. "Mah boy, you must remembah that Dixie
will have otheah good hawses to beat. Vixen is the favohite and very
fast, although Ah know mah little black friend heah will do heh best
to honah the purple and white," glancing proudly at the headband of
the black marvel. "Next Satahday will decide it all."

A shadow fell across the colt. Looking up, the gentleman, known as
Colonel Fairfax, saw a man dressed in a checkered suit and orange
socks. On a tie to match was a monstrous, well polished diamond, which
sparkled wickedly in the sun. The man stood staring at the stop-watch.
"Ah beg yoh pahdon, Suh, but theh anything Ah could do foah you?"

The man, hearing the question, looked up, flushing. "Youh horse is a
Derby entry?"

Colonel Fairfax eyed the horse reflectively and answered, "It all
depends on her condition, and only time can answeh that." The man
hurried away, leaving the old gentleman looking after him, a deep
frown on his face.

"Washington, Ah am a bit doubtful about this new-uh-acquaintance," he
addressed the exercise boy.

Each day, no matter how early Dixie was given her exercise, the
stranger was to be seen loitering in the distance or walking briskly
beside the track--seemingly deep in thought. His presence seemed to
trouble the Colonel, who watched his colt anxiously.

At last, the final workout. Colonel Fairfax and the unwelcome stranger
leaned over the rail, intently watching the black horse, which
appeared to have wings. The stranger, who had been seen talking to the
owner of Vixen, the favorite, annoyed the old gentleman; he was
suspicious of this flashily dressed man and did not conceal his
feelings.

Sundown, Friday, found the stable at Churchill Downs buzzing with
excitement. The favorite's stall was surrounded by interested old
racing men, who loved the thoroughbred and his sport, while a few
individuals in gaily checkered suits crowded about, listening to the
many "hunches" for business reasons only. An old man sat before Stall
No. 7. Glancing up, he noticed two men peering in at Dixie. One was
the man who had seemed so much interested in the mare's trial gallops.
Through the half-open door of the box stall could be seen a horse in
faded purple and white blankets. After a hurried conversation the two
men passed on to the favorite's stall, where they smiled at the
jockey, looked in, and walked on.

Long after the one-thirty special night train had whistled at the
Downs crossing, a dark figure could be seen sliding along the stall
doors--"Ten--Nine--; Eight--" Then it came to halt before Stall No. 7,
and slipped through the door. It felt in the dark for the blanketed
horse's neck. The horse jumped as a dagger-like needle was thrust into
its neck. The colored boy, in a drugged sleep at the door of the
stall, stirred in his dreams, but was still again. The door opened
quietly, and the figure slipped out, leaving the horse in No. 7
leaning drunkenly against the side wall. A shaft of moonlight fell
across the intruder's face, revealing the same man who had attended
all of Dixie's trial gallops. Little did this unscrupulous person
realize that the black mare was spending the night in an old deserted
barn near the race track, guarded by an old gentleman whose mouth was
twisted into a whimsical smile, while a "guaranteed-to-be-gentle"
livery horse was leading a life of luxury that evening in Stall No. 7,
Churchill Downs.

Derby day at Churchill Downs! Kentucky was doing homage to the
thoroughbred. As the band played "Dixie," the Derby entries filed
through the paddock onto the field. Proudly leading the string of the
country's best two year olds, was the song's namesake, a true daughter
of the South. With arching neck and prancing feet, Dixie, the pride of
an old man's heart, took her place at the barrier. Her jockey looked
up as he passed an aristocratic old gentleman, dressed in a faded coat
which reminded one of "befoah de Wah" days and whose hat remained off
while the horses passed.

The barrier was up, and the roar shook the grandstand. "They're off!!"
The favorite, Vixen, shot ahead and seemed to be making a runaway
race. Cheer after cheer rent the air. An old man clasped his program a
little tighter and breathed a prayer. Around the turn came Vixen, but
not alone. Crouched to the ground, a small black horse crept up to the
flying tail of the favorite. Down the stretch the two thundered,
fighting for supremacy. "Foah Kentucky, Dixie, and the honah of the
purple and white!" As if she heard this plea from her master, Dixie
bent lower. Then, her black nose thrust ahead, more than a length in
advance of Vixen, she flashed under the wire, bringing "honah" to the
purple and white.

    NANCY STEVENSON, '26.




MY BUREAU DRAWERS


My bureau drawers,--I wonder what their contents could tell! Whenever
I go through them with the firm resolve to clear out everything that I
do not actually use, I always end by saving some things just for the
sake of the memories connected with them.

Take that pink satin hair ribbon, for instance. I wore it for the
first time with a new pink dress at a party in California. It brings
back all the thought of California as I first saw it in nineteen
twenty, memories of stately and haughty poinsettias, of date palms
from which one could pick and eat fresh dates, of a dancing ocean with
its myriads of lovely sea creatures, and its gaily-colored beach
equipment, of an amusement park with the roller coaster on which I
nearly had heart failure.

Then, in another corner, lies a string of green beads. What could
better recall to my mind the night of my graduation from the grade
school? The recollection makes me want to be in grade school once
more. I well remember how one of my classmates forgot to bring the
music to the class song which was to have been one of the attractions
of the program. Disaster marked that evening farther when a tall
Danish boy, looking the picture of selfconsciousness and misery, arose
to give the farewell address. As nearly as I can remember, it ran
thus:

"Ladies and gentlemen, on the evening of our graduation ve vish to
tank de teachers and also de principal for de vork"--a long awkward
pause--"ve vish to tank de teachers and also de principal for de
vork"--a still longer pause, interspersed with rising giggles from the
graduating class--"Ladies and gentlemen, ve vish to tank de teachers
and also de principal for de vork vich they have done in getting us
trough."

Then, there at the back of the drawer, is a black satin sash. It
brings to my mind an entirely different kind of memory. It is one
thing that I have left from the dress I wore at my grandfather's
funeral. I remember all the tragedy of the occasion, lightened by one
spot of comedy, my grandmother's losing her petticoat.

I dare say that some day I shall throw away these things that others
consider rubbish, but I shall never part with the memories for which
they stand.

    POLLY SWEET.




A SURPRISE


It was early in the morning when Nancy Nelson awoke. She got up and
put on her wrapper and one slipper, as she couldn't get the other one
on, though she tried hard. "Ah," she said, "there must be something in
my slipper." So Nancy felt in her slipper and then pulled out her
hand. Why, there was a little package! "Who put it in there, I
wonder," she said, quite surprised. Nancy asked everybody in the
house. Then her mother said, "Nancy, did you forget that it is your
birthday?" Then she opened the little package and found a small silver
thimble, with the name "Nancy Nelson" on it.

    ANNE MORRISON, Form IV.




THE DEPARTURE AND THE RETURN OF THE SHIP


It was a clear, warm day in late spring and a ship was leaving the
harbor, its departure accompanied by a merry clanking of chains as the
anchor was drawn up. The lusty cheers of the sailors floated back in
echoes. The shore was crowded with the wives and sweethearts of these
two hundred sailors, their brightly colored gowns and fluttering
handkerchiefs making a lovely picture against the background of the
green cliffs. On board the men were singing lustily as they performed
their tasks and the last echo of their happiness floated back clearly
to the little group on the shore as the ship dropped below the hill
and out of sight. The women had already settled down to their period
of watchful waiting and were trusting the safety of their loved ones
to God, who had always protected them and brought them home safely
before.

It was a clear, crisp night in late October and the moon was sending
its silvery beams out over the quiet waters. Everything was pervaded
by an air of mystery. Slowly, from far out at sea, a great ship came
slinking into the harbor. As it drew nearer, it glowed with crimson
lights. Then, suddenly every light went out and again the great
mysterious hulk was swallowed up in the darkness. Not a sound was
heard. Could this be the same ship that had sailed away so gayly three
years ago? No one awaited its coming, for it had been long given up
for lost. It came nearer and nearer, and a breeze, which had suddenly
come up, whistled through its thin sails and moved the spars, making a
sound like the rattling of dry bones. Then, as if in response to the
command of a ghostly captain, the great, black hulk sank into the
darkness under the water, leaving only a whirlpool to mark its
existence. It sank as it had sailed in; slowly and mysteriously.

    MARTHA JEAN MAUGHAN, '28.




RAIN


    I love to hear upon the walk
    The rain that comes on nights in spring,
    So warm and soft and pattering
    It seems to fairly talk.

    It tells me of arbutus shy,
    That hides in moss beside a tree,
    Of crocus and anemone
    That peek out at the sky.

    It fills with earthly scent the night,
    And glistens on the new green leaves;
    It drips and drips from shining eaves
    And sparkles in the light.

        MARY BRACKETT, '26.




TROUBLES OF AN AMATEUR


Mary had been assured that "Dolly" was absolutely dependable, would
not shy, had a kind and gentle disposition, and was easy to manage;
but now she was actually gazing upon this amiable annihilator, the
courage oozed out of her suddenly pounding heart and her eyes widened
with fright and suspicion. She wished now she hadn't been so desirous
of tempting fate on such a seemingly ferocious and unnatural brute.

"Dolly," on the other hand, happily unaware of his savageness and
unnatural spirit, drooped his homely, ungainly head in a dejected
manner. To him, Mary was only one more burden, one more wriggling,
gasping infliction, to be jogged slowly about for her first ride. He
snorted in disdain. Mary jumped. Why didn't she use her own feet?
"Dolly" didn't want to be bothered. Finally he rolled an eye back to
survey his passenger.

The groom was gradually coaxing Mary on--onto something terrible. She
just knew it! "Dolly" seemed to assume supernatural proportions as
Mary reached out a hand to grasp the reins which were handed to her.
Someone boosted her on. Goodness! She was going right over on the
other side! But no! She found herself sitting up on the broad back of
"Dolly"; it was a very precarious position. How did one keep one's
balance? She just knew she couldn't stay on. There was nothing to hang
onto, and her....

"Help!" she shrieked, as her steed casually stamped a clumsy foot, in
the endeavor to rid himself of a persistent fly.

The groom, now mounted, led her horse out into the ring. Mary hoped
he'd hang onto the reins. If he didn't.... Mary pictured herself a
mangled, shapeless mass. She shuddered. She'd seen those movie actors
dart gaily about and had thought it would be lovely to learn to dart.
But now--she wondered if they had been tied on!

Oh! they were jogging. Mary didn't seem to understand the nature of
the jog. She was out of breath. Grasping the pommel, she looked
miserably at the long neck swaying in front of her. Two long ears
fascinated her. Up and down, up and down. Ah! why didn't he stop? She
attempted to shriek, but only succeeded in emitting faint gasps as
"Dolly" swerved to avoid a small hole. Inside she seemed to be jolted
to pieces. Her heart shook her chest, and a giddy feeling overpowered
her. Her vision blurred, and her breath came in short gasps.

"Dolly" had now slowed down to a walk, but to Mary this was the
wildest of gaits. Every minute she fully expected to die on the spot.
She couldn't stand it another second. She couldn't--she couldn't!

"Time is up, Miss," announced a cheery voice. "Do you wish to
dismount?"

Mary came up from the depths of agony, and hope lit her face.

"Oh-h-h!" she moaned. "Yes, I--Yes! Yes!"

She was lifted, or rather dragged, off, she didn't know which, didn't
care as long as she was off. The ground seemed to come up to meet her.
Why didn't things stand still? Even the unsuspicious "Dolly" appeared
to be performing grotesque antics. Mary took a step, just one. It was
not necessary for her to take more to realize that she was very stiff.
"Heavens!" She slowly gathered up her coat and hat, and limped
painfully out of the Academy. Now she could realize that an amateur,
in riding anyway, had her troubles in walking!

    VIRGINIA LEFFINGWELL, '26.




TERESA


    Teresa is my aunt's black cat;
    She plays with this, she plays with that--
    A tassel green, a string to tug,
    A fleck of light upon the rug
    Give her imagination fire.

    And then she sleeps all in a ball
    Beside the hearth out in the hall.
    She loves to warm herself this way,
    And dreams, this time, about her play--
    While cuddled up she purrs and purrs.

    When tea time comes, she's always there,
    Beside my aunt's old walnut chair;
    Her big green eyes are bright with glee,
    Her chin sinks in a creamy sea,
    And her ecstasy is complete.

        MARY BRACKETT, '26.




BOOKS I SHOULD LIKE TO WRITE


It is last period on a long, sleepy, particularly humdrum day at
school. Shirley sits trying to concentrate on a history text-book, but
her mind will wander, despite her really noble efforts to distinguish
the Valerian Laws from the Licinian Laws.

"What an idiotic law to have to make!" she mutters resentfully. "But
I'm sure I shouldn't be so dumb in History if I had an interesting
text-book. It seems as though someone could write it, even if we
aren't all Van Loons and H. G. Wellses. I bet I could myself--at least
I'd make it a fascinating book if not a strictly exact one ('Yes you
would,' says her Subconscious, but she pays no attention)! When I
think of the generations of defenseless students to be subjected to
these text-books, my heart aches for them!... The Valerian Law
was...."

The scene changes from this lethargic one to a fireside on a winter
evening. She drops the book in her lap, the yells of the savages are
fainter. She shakes the salt spray from her chair and tries to adjust
herself once more to the prosaic of a land-lubber.

"To write a book like that is my only desire on earth," she murmurs,
as she reaches for a volume of Jane Austen.

Now, completely involved in the career of _Emma_, she says, "Oh, for
that gift of the gods Jane Austen had! Her speech--a rippling stream
of perfect and delicious English, the King's English indeed! Each
phrase is as delicately constructed as a watch, and all her watches
tick together as one."

Thus the incorrigible child goes on, unaware how many fascinating
books she has longed to have written. From _Nicholas Nickleby_ to
_Thunder on the Left_, from _Walter H. Page_ to the _Constant Nymph_,
and from _Chaucer_ to _Edna St. Vincent Millay_! A veritable
gourmande, she is.

But forgive her. Who has not felt that he might improve a text-book?
Who has not longed, in reading a glorious book, for similar
brilliance? What lover of books is unmoved to an occasional effort at
emulation, even if he afterwards destroy it? You who do these things,
sympathize with Shirley, who, by her own hand we do confess, is
bitterly disillusioned every time she tries to write a theme.

    SHIRLEY WOODWARD, '27.




OUR STREET


Three Indians padded softly along through the tall dark pines. Their
errand seemed peaceful, since their number was so small and they came
so openly. Soon the path widened out, and finally led to a small glade
in which stood a rough cabin. The Indians stopped to observe
cautiously before making themselves known. What they saw filled them
with curiosity and awe, for standing before the cabin was a white man
praying, his deep voice echoing through the wild stillness of the
forest. Beside him stood a younger man, whose attention, while
respectful, was not undivided, for he had spied the Indians and waited
restlessly for the "father" to finish his devotions. These done, he
called his superior's attention to the savages lurking on the
outskirts of the glade and beckoned to them to come forward. Both
white men were eager to learn what the Indians might tell them, and
the elder, who spoke the Indian tongue, talked glibly with the
redskins. They, in turn, were curious about several things. First, the
strange contrivance that hung from Father Hennepin's belt. He
explained that it was to help him find his way through the uncharted
country. Save for the compass he would quickly be lost.

"Hugh," grunted one of the braves, "that no good. I lead you,"
surprising the Jesuit by his use of English.

"Good," answered the priest. The two white men went into the cabin,
gathered their scanty baggage, and reappeared at the door. By this
time the other Indians had disappeared down the path by which they had
come. In the opposite direction, without a backward glance, the party
of three men, the Jesuit, his companion, and the Indian guide, set out
to find new thoroughfares.

Now from morning to night traffic rolls along the same trail. The
narrow path that once found its way through the forest with many
turnings and twistings is now a wide, paved avenue. Over it go street
cars carrying busy people, trucks laden with gravel or coal, the
ever-present automobiles of people bent on pleasure. The street is
lined on either side with tall buildings: stores, offices, houses,
churches, museums. As we go down the avenue, we come to what was once
a clearing in the forest. Instead of the simple cabin, there are now a
variety of buildings: a small store whose owner, a French Canadian,
carries on a thriving business; opposite, a restaurant owned by two
yellow Chinese, who specialize in chow-mein; next door, the
establishment of a husky Yankee, who plies his trade by greasing
automobiles and supplying gasoline to motorists demanding that
necessity.

A thriving community now, what will this one time forest clearing be
two hundred years hence?

    JANET MORISON, '27.




A CONVERSATION AT THE DINNER TABLE


At dinner Daddy told us he had seen a prince. I asked him what prince
it was.

Then Mother said, "Didn't you read the paper, Ella Sturgis?"

"No," I replied.

"It was the Prince of Greece," said Daddy, "and he wore a monocle."

Chucky said, "What is a monocle?"

"It is a glass people wear in one eye and squint a little to keep it
in," said Mother.

Then she asked Daddy where he had seen the prince.

"At the club," he replied. "I was invited to have lunch with him, but
I could not accept the invitation because I had promised Ella Sturgis
to do something for her dog, and Ashes is more important than the
Prince."

    ELLA STURGIS PILLSBURY, Form VI.




LORING PARK IN GRANDFATHER'S DAY


In about 1855 Mr. W. H. Grimshaw came to live in Minneapolis where the
Plaza Hotel now stands. Then Loring Park and the vicinity was farm
land, and an Indian named Keg-o-ma-go-shieg had his wigwam at the
corner of Oak Grove and Fifteenth streets. Mr. Grimshaw learned from
him that Indians had lived on this spot for generations, but that
since the land had come under government control, most of the Indians
had gone. Keg-o-ma-go-shieg, because he loved so much the spot where
he was born, returned every summer to fish in the lakes and hunt in
the woods of his beloved birthplace. There is no tablet or monument to
this last Indian in Loring Park, but there is one to Ole Bull facing
Harmon Place. Would it not be more fitting to have a statue of Sitting
Bull?

Also there used to be an old, well-traveled Indian trail through the
Park, of which there is no trace now, although some people have
searched carefully for it. According to Mr. Grimshaw there used to be
countless passenger pigeons, which in the migratory season roosted in
the trees of Loring Park. At noon the sky would be darkened by a cloud
of these birds, the air would be filled with the sound of their wings,
and they would alight on the branches of the trees, nearly breaking
them down by their great weight.

Then there was the old brook that flowed out of Loring Park lake,
across Harmon Place, under the present automobile buildings, and
emptied into Basset's Creek. The old military road from Minnehaha
Falls to Fort Ridgley ran through this section, roughly along Hennepin
Avenue.

West of Hennepin Avenue was Ruber's pasture, where cows and horses
used to graze, and where the Parade Grounds, the Armory, the
Cathedral, and Northrop School now are. Mr. J. S. Johnson was the
first white settler in this part of Minneapolis. In 1856 he bought one
hundred and sixty acres, of which a part is now Loring Park, for one
dollar and twenty-five cents per acre.

    EUGENIA BOVEY, '08.




THE STORY HOUR


"Now if you will be quiet I will tell you a story," said Miss Smith.

"All right," said Tom, "but you must tell us a story about a pirate."

"No!" cried Betty, "tell us a story about a fairy."

"Be quiet or I will not tell you any story," exclaimed Miss Smith.

"Please tell us a 'tory bout 'ittle baby," pleaded baby Ruth.

"All right, the story will be about a little baby. You two older
children ought to know better than to shout," sighed Miss Smith.

"Oh dear, we never get anything now that Ruthie is old enough to let
you know what she wants," groaned Tom.

"Once upon a time," began Miss Smith, "there was a ..."

"Pirate," interrupted Tom.

"No, no," said Miss Smith as she went on with the story. "Once upon a
time there was a ..."

"Fairy," interrupted Betty.

"No, a little baby," cried Ruth.

    JANET BULKLEY, Form VI.




[Illustration: {Nine photographs of students enjoying leisure
activities}]




Spring and Summer


    Spring is coming with the sun;
      The birds are coming too.
    Summer's coming with the grass,
      The flowers with the dew.

        SUSAN WHEELOCK, Form IV.




"AT THE BACK OF THE NORTH WIND"


If you would enjoy a glance at the home of one of the winds, read _At
the Back of the North Wind_, by George MacDonald. Young Diamond, a
little boy, the North Wind, Diamond's father and mother, and Old
Diamond, which is a great and good horse,--these are the characters
you will hear the most about in this story. The story narrates a
series of adventures, in dream form, of Young Diamond and an uncanny
creature who calls herself the North Wind. An unusual part of the
story is the trip to the sea where the North Wind will destroy a ship.
Diamond does not want to perceive this, so North Wind drops him in a
great cathedral, where he wakes to see the moon-lit windows showing
the saints in beautiful garments. If you like fairy tales, I would
suggest that you read this incredible book.

    GERALDINE HUDSON, Form V.




My dear friend:

I do so hope you will like the book _Dandelion Cottage_. It is an
interesting story of four little girls named Betty Tucker, Jeanie
Mapes, Mabel Bennett, and Marjorie Vale, who pay rent for a cottage by
pulling dandelions. They have such interesting adventures and act so
business-like that you ought to love it. I did when I read it. Carroll
Watson Rankin certainly knows what girls like, for she has innumerable
objects in that cottage that I know you would love to have in your
room. It is very clean in the cottage, with not an atom of dirt
anywhere. The part I like best in the story is where Laura Milligan, a
disdainful little girl, moves into the neighborhood. She makes life
miserable for the cottagers. When you read the story, be sure you look
very carefully for the things Laura does, for they are very
interesting. I know you prefer to read the book yourselves, so I will
close now.

    Sincerely yours,
        BARBARA ANSON, Form V.




KRAG AND JOHNNY BEAR


You would be very much interested in the story of _Krag and Johnny
Bear_, by Ernest Thomson Seton. The names are very cute. There are
Nubbins, his mother, White Nose, and his mother. This part of the
story tells about Krag, an extraordinary little sheep, who has many
fascinating adventures. Little White Nose is very lazy, obstinate, and
wary. Every morning Nubbins gets up and tries to wake up White Nose.
When Krag grows up, he has beautiful big horns, and the hunters try to
catch him so they can mount them. At the end of the story he is caught
and his horns are mounted and kept in the king's palace. I know you
would like to read this book if you are fond of animal stories.
Another interesting story is about Randy, an extraordinary sparrow who
is brought up with some canaries and learns to sing. One day the cage
Randy was in fell over with an astounding crash and he escaped. He
built a nest of sticks, which was the only kind he knew, and was very
disconsolate when his mate, who was an ordinary sparrow, threw them
away and brought hay and straw instead. Randy's mate is finally killed
and Randy is caught and put back in his cage. I think you will like
this book if you like animal stories.

    JANE ARNOLD AND LOUISE WALKER, Form V.




USES OF PUMPKINS


It was a cold and frosty morning at Mr. Brown's farm. The pumpkins
were huddled together, and their frosty coats glistened in the morning
sunshine.

"I heard Mr. Brown talking about Thanksgiving," said a little pumpkin.
"I wonder what Thanksgiving is?"

"Long ago," began a big pumpkin, "when the first white people came to
this country, it was in early winter, and these settlers could raise
no food. Many of them died of hunger and cold. But the next year the
settlers planted many crops, and they grew wonderfully. So they had a
day to thank God for the crops they had. The day they celebrated is
called Thanksgiving."

"Oh, I see," said the little pumpkin. "I am sure Teddy was thankful he
had such a nice big pumpkin to make his Jack o' lantern out of on
Hallowe'en."

"I think the cattle are thankful that they have us to eat in winter,"
said a middle-sized pumpkin, trying very hard to look wise, but the
November air was so delightfully chilly and crisp he had to laugh.

"I'm sure Farmer Brown and his family are thankful to have such a nice
pumpkin pie every Thanksgiving," said a big pumpkin.

"I never knew pumpkins were so useful," sighed the little pumpkin
sleepily. Then he turned over and went to sleep.

    HARRIOT OLIVIA CARPENTER, Form IV.




[Illustration: THE SENIOR CLASS

WE JUST SQUEEZED THROUGH]


  +---------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                               |
  |                         CADILLAC                              |
  |                                                               |
  |                                                               |
  |  [Illustration]                                               |
  |                                                               |
  |  Millions of boys and girls of today are eager partisans of   |
  |  the Cadillac--anxious to grow up and have a Cadillac of      |
  |  their own, like Father and Mother.                           |
  |                                                               |
  |  With thousands, the ownership of a Cadillac is a family      |
  |  tradition dating back to the days when Grandfather bought    |
  |  his first Cadillac, a quarter of a century ago.              |
  |                                                               |
  |  All through these 25 years Cadillac has consistently stood   |
  |  in the forefront of all the world's motor cars.              |
  |                                                               |
  |  Eleven years ago Cadillac produced the first eight-cylinder  |
  |  engine--the basic foundation of Cadillac success in          |
  |  marketing more than 200,000 eight-cylinder Cadillac cars.    |
  |                                                               |
  |  Today the new 90-degree, eight-cylinder Cadillac is the      |
  |  ultra modern version of the motor car. Its luxury, comfort,  |
  |  performance and value reach heights of perfection beyond     |
  |  anything ever attained.                                      |
  |                                                               |
  |  Thus once again Cadillac strikes out far in advance,         |
  |  renewing its traditional right to this title, The Standard   |
  |  of the World.                                                |
  |                                                               |
  |                NORTHWESTERN CADILLAC COMPANY                  |
  |                                                               |
  |    LA SALLE TO HARMON ON TENTH                 MINNEAPOLIS    |
  |                                                               |
  +---------------------------------------------------------------+


   +-------------------------------------------------------------+
   |                                                             |
   |               THE STORE of SPECIALIZATIONS                  |
   |                                                             |
   |        _Prescribes for Youth and Summer Holidays_           |
   |                                                             |
   |  _The Girls' Store_--suggests to the fortunate years        |
   |  between 6 and 14, that Wash Frocks have all the style      |
   |  charm, this season, of silks or crepes; that handmade      |
   |  Voiles are cool and always dainty; that white Middy        |
   |  Blouses are jauntier with matching Skirt; that Cricket     |
   |  Sweaters are "Sportsiest."                                 |
   |                                                             |
   |  _The Sub-Deb Shop_--understudies the "Deb" in outfitting   |
   |  the "Sub!" Are your years between 13 and 16--here are      |
   |  Sports Frocks; decorative Georgettes; bright cool Prints   |
   |  for a summer morning; pastel Chiffons or buoyant           |
   |  Taffetas for the evening party. And in Coats--there's      |
   |  the slim "wrappy", the Cape-back.                          |
   |                                                             |
   |  _When Youth Steps Out_--if it's young youth, it chooses    |
   |  for smartness and comfort, a "Felice" Pump--in patent or   |
   |  tan calf, with matching buckles. If it's more              |
   |  sophisticated youth--there's the sophisticated Shoe; the   |
   |  Shoe of high, "Spiked" heel and daringly contrasted        |
   |  leathers--dainty, frivolous, charming!                     |
   |                                                             |
   |  _The Hat Shop Says_--pretty much what you will this        |
   |  Summer! From small Hats of crocheted straw or silk, to     |
   |  pictorial Milans--for the Sub-Deb. From demure "Pokes"     |
   |  or off-the-face Beret-Tams to wide-brimmed, streamer-gay   |
   |  Straws--for the Junior. Here's latitude for choice--and    |
   |  a Hat for every type!                                      |
   |                                                             |
   |                     _The Dayton Company._                   |
   |                          MINNEAPOLIS                        |
   |                                                             |
   +-------------------------------------------------------------+


      +-------------------------------------------------------+
      |                                                       |
      |                   Invest Direct                       |
      |             in Your Community's Growth                |
      |                                                       |
      |                                                       |
      |                 Preferred Shares                      |
      |             Northern States Power Co.                 |
      |                                                       |
      |  _50,000 Shareholders--15 Years of Steady Dividends_  |
      |                                                       |
      |                                                       |
      |          Make inquiry at any of our offices           |
      |                                                       |
      |   MINNEAPOLIS    FARIBAULT    ST. PAUL    MANKATO     |
      |                                                       |
      +-------------------------------------------------------+


  +---------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                               |
  |  _Gainsborough_                                               |
  |          POWDER PUFFS                                         |
  |                                                               |
  |  [Illustration]                                               |
  |                                                               |
  |  Lovely women appreciate the daintiness and perfection of     |
  |  Gainsborough Powder Puffs.                                   |
  |                                                               |
  |  Each puff with its soft, fine texture has the rare quality   |
  |  of retaining exactly the right amount of powder and          |
  |  distributes it evenly.                                       |
  |                                                               |
  |  Gainsborough Powder Puffs retailing from 10c to 75c each,    |
  |  are available in various sizes and delicate colors to match  |
  |  your costume.                                                |
  |                                                               |
  |                    WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTORS                     |
  |                   MINNEAPOLIS DRUG COMPANY                    |
  |                    DOERR-ANDREWS & DOERR                      |
  |                                                               |
  +---------------------------------------------------------------+


       +----------------------------------------------------+
       |                                                    |
       |  [Illustration: VALVE-IN-HEAD _Buick_ MOTOR CARS]  |
       |                                                    |
       |                                                    |
       |               PENCE AUTOMOBILE CO.                 |
       |                   MINNEAPOLIS                      |
       |                                                    |
       |                                                    |
       |            WHEN BETTER CARS ARE BUILT              |
       |               BUICK WILL BUILD THEM                |
       |                                                    |
       +----------------------------------------------------+


                 +-------------------------------+
                 |                               |
                 |       _Compliments of_        |
                 |                               |
                 |                               |
                 |       Miss Minneapolis        |
                 |            FLOUR              |
                 |                               |
                 |                               |
                 |  Minneapolis Milling Company  |
                 |                               |
                 +-------------------------------+


           +-------------------------------------------+
           |                                           |
           |             _Compliments of_              |
           |                                           |
           |                                           |
           |              Winton Lumber                |
           |                 Company                   |
           |                                           |
           |              Manufacturers                |
           |                    of                     |
           |                                           |
           |            _Idaho White Pine_             |
           |                                           |
           |                                           |
           |  Security Building    Minneapolis, Minn.  |
           |                                           |
           +-------------------------------------------+


                  +-----------------------------+
                  |                             |
                  |  JOHN DEERE                 |
                  |      v                      |
                  |      |                      |
                  |      |                      |
                  |      |                      |
                  |      -----> Farm Machinery  |
                  |                TRACTORS     |
                  |                             |
                  |      DEERE & WEBBER CO.     |
                  |         MINNEAPOLIS         |
                  |                             |
                  +-----------------------------+


           +--------------------------------------------+
           |                                            |
           |   JAMES C. HAZLETT      WESLEY J. KELLEY   |
           |                                            |
           |                                            |
           |         JAMES C. HAZLETT AGENCY            |
           |                                            |
           |      Any Kind of Insurance Anywhere        |
           |                                            |
           |      First National-So Line Building       |
           |                                            |
           |                                            |
           |  FIDELITY AND SURETY BONDS      MAIN 2603  |
           |                                            |
           +--------------------------------------------+


                   +----------------------------+
                   |                            |
                   |       ALLEN & KIDD         |
                   |       RIDING SCHOOL        |
                   |                            |
                   |  Toledo Ave. and Lake St.  |
                   |       ST. LOUIS PARK       |
                   |                            |
                   +----------------------------+


          +-----------------------------------------------+
          |                                               |
          |             EDWARD J. O'BRIEN                 |
          |                  REALTOR                      |
          |                                               |
          |          _Real Estate--Investments_           |
          |                                               |
          |                                               |
          |  232 McKnight Building    Minneapolis, Minn.  |
          |                                               |
          +-----------------------------------------------+


                  +------------------------------+
                  |                              |
                  |           Graham's           |
                  |                              |
                  |            _ICES_            |
                  |         _ICE CREAMS_         |
                  |         _MERINGUES_          |
                  |                              |
                  |  Catering for All Occasions  |
                  |                              |
                  |        2441 HENNEPIN         |
                  |         _Ken. 0297_          |
                  |                              |
                  +------------------------------+


     +-------------------------------------------------------+
     |                                                       |
     |  _NOT ONLY NOW, BUT--_                                |
     |                                                       |
     |  For centuries one of the best protections against    |
     |  poverty has been a bank account, and you have every  |
     |  assurance of protection when you make the            |
     |                                                       |
     |                26th Street State Bank                 |
     |                                                       |
     |  _Corner of Nicollet Avenue and 26th Street_,         |
     |  your bank.                                           |
     |                                                       |
     |  _Sometimes the biggest is not the best, but we are   |
     |  the best because we are not the biggest._            |
     |                                                       |
     +-------------------------------------------------------+


                   +----------------------------+
                   |                            |
                   |     _Compliments of--_     |
                   |                            |
                   |                            |
                   |      John F. McDonald      |
                   |       Lumber Company       |
                   |                            |
                   |                            |
                   |  _One piece or a carload_  |
                   |                            |
                   +----------------------------+


               +------------------------------------+
               |                                    |
               |            MELONE-BOVEY            |
               |             LUMBER CO.             |
               |                                    |
               |           4 Retail Yards           |
               |                                    |
               |                 ~~~                |
               |                                    |
               |        MAIN OFFICE AND YARDS       |
               |  13th Avenue South and 4th Street  |
               |                                    |
               +------------------------------------+


                    +--------------------------+
                    |                          |
                    |      OCCIDENT FLOUR      |
                    |                          |
                    |                          |
                    |  _Costs more--worth it_  |
                    |                          |
                    +--------------------------+


                   +----------------------------+
                   |                            |
                   |   Barrington Hall Coffee   |
                   |                            |
                   |     BAKER IMPORTING CO.    |
                   |                            |
                   |           0_---_0          |
                   |                            |
                   |  Minneapolis and New York  |
                   |                            |
                   +----------------------------+


            +-------------------------------------------+
            |                                           |
            |              THORPE BROS.                 |
            |           REALTORS SINCE 1885             |
            |                                           |
            |      _Complete Real Estate Service_       |
            |                                           |
            |                                           |
            |        Owners and Developers of           |
            |       _The Country Club District_         |
            |                                           |
            |                                           |
            |               THORPE BROS.                |
            |                                           |
            |         _Thorpe Bros. Building_           |
            |            519 MARQUETTE AVE.             |
            |                                           |
            |  _In the Heart of Financial Minneapolis_  |
            |                                           |
            +-------------------------------------------+


               +------------------------------------+
               |                                    |
               |          _Compliments of_          |
               |                                    |
               |                                    |
               |         North Star Woolen          |
               |             Mills Co.              |
               |                                    |
               |  _Manufacturers of Fine Blankets_  |
               |                                    |
               |         MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.         |
               |                                    |
               +------------------------------------+


                  +-------------------------------+
                  |                               |
                  |  [Illustration]               |
                  |                               |
                  |  WASHBURN'S GOLD MEDAL FOODS  |
                  |                               |
                  |     _The_ GOLD MEDAL LINE     |
                  |            OF FOODS           |
                  |                               |
                  +-------------------------------+


  +----------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                |
  |  [Illustration]                                                |
  |  _Of flannel and broadcloth in all the smart plain shades,     |
  |  also novel checks and plaids. Made with either roll sport     |
  |  or notched collar and hip bands of either knit wool or        |
  |  self material._                                               |
  |                                                                |
  |                        _Nothing Like a_                        |
  |                                                                |
  |                         POLAR OVERJAC                          |
  |                                                                |
  |                    _playing around outdoors_                   |
  |                                                                |
  |  There's nothing like it for looks or for utility either. The  |
  |  jaunty lines, the natty materials, the exuberant              |
  |  colors--that will all appeal to you, and besides you'll like  |
  |  the easy feel of it on you--the comfortable fit--the way it   |
  |  "gives" to your movements.                                    |
  |                                                                |
  |  Whatever your plans for this summer vacation you'll want a    |
  |  Polar Overjac. It's the handiest thing imaginable to slip     |
  |  into--and just the right weight to give the little extra      |
  |  warmth needed cooler days and evenings. For driving, golf,    |
  |  for "roughing it" and all the rest. Well made, expertly       |
  |  tailored--that accounts for a lot of its good looks.          |
  |                                                                |
  |                   _At Your Neighborhood Store_                 |
  |                                                                |
  |                       Made exclusively by                      |
  |                                                                |
  |                     _Wyman, Partridge & Co._                   |
  |                           MINNEAPOLIS                          |
  |                                                                |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------+


                    +----------------------------+
                    |                            |
                    |      [Illustration]        |
                    |                            |
                    |    FIRST NATIONAL BANK     |
                    |                            |
                    |  _Minneapolis, Minnesota_  |
                    |                            |
                    +----------------------------+


                 +----------------------------------+
                 |                                  |
                 |         _Compliments of_         |
                 |                                  |
                 |        DAVIS _and_ MICHEL        |
                 |        _ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW_        |
                 |                                  |
                 |                                  |
                 |  419 METROPOLITAN BANK BUILDING  |
                 |                                  |
                 +----------------------------------+


             +------------------------------------------+
             |                                          |
             |               _Since 1870_               |
             |                                          |
             |             A SAFE PLACE FOR             |
             |             SAVINGS ACCOUNTS             |
             |                                          |
             |              HENNEPIN COUNTY             |
             |               SAVINGS BANK               |
             |                                          |
             |               511 MARQUETTE              |
             |                                          |
             |  _The Oldest Savings Bank in Minnesota_  |
             |                                          |
             +------------------------------------------+


    +------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                            |
    |  _The following names represent purchasers of advertising  |
    |  space in the Tatler, who have given the space back to us  |
    |  for our own purposes. We are especially grateful to them  |
    |  for this two-fold gift, and wish hereby to acknowledge    |
    |  their contribution._                                      |
    |                                                            |
    |      MR. C. R. WILLIAMS       MR. B. H. WOODWORTH          |
    |      MR. P. A. BROOKS         MR. V. H. VAN SLYKE          |
    |      MR. R. A. GAMBLE         MR. W. A. REINHART           |
    |                    MR. C. M. CASE                          |
    |                                                            |
    +------------------------------------------------------------+


From the Press of the Augsburg Publishing House




Transcriber's Note

Obvious typographic errors (incorrect punctuation, omitted or transposed
letters) have been repaired. Otherwise, however, variable spelling
(including proper names, where there was no way to establish which
spelling was correct) and hyphenation has been left as printed, due to
the number of different contributors.

Page 19 includes the phrase "if the snow smelts." This is probably a
typographic error, but as it was impossible to be certain, it has been
left as printed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 1926 TATLER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.