Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)





The American Missionary

JUNE, 1898.

  VOL. LII.
  No. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  FINANCIAL STATEMENT--SUCCESS IS COSTLY,                           57
  WAR AND ITS RESULTS,                                              58
  COLORED PEOPLES OF CUBA--MISSIONARIES MURDERED                    59
  NEWSPAPERS,                                                       60


THE SOUTH.

  SAMPLES AND EXAMPLES (ILLUSTRATED), SECRETARY A. F. BEARD,        61
  STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS, LA.,                            70
  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, TOUGALOO, MISS.,                             72
  DORCHESTER ACADEMY, MCINTOSH, GA.,                                73
  COLORED TEACHERS IN THE SOUTH (ILLUSTRATED),                      75
  NOTES,                                                            77
  SKETCH OF STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY GRADUATE,                           78
  ITEMS,                                                            81


THE INDIANS.

  NEW TYPE OF INDIAN UPRISING,                                      82


THE CHINESE.

  THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION (ILLUSTRATED),                     85


OBITUARY.

  REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D.,                                       87


RECEIPTS,                                                           88

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK,                                            102

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS,                                       103

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

THE CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

FOURTH AVENUE AND TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as Second-Class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

Fourth Avenue and Twenty-second Street,--New York City.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D.
  Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D.
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D.


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D.


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq.


_Auditors._

  D. C. TIEBOUT.
  CHARLES NEWTON SCHENCK.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE,
  LEWELLYN PRATT,

  _For Two Years._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS,
  EDWARD S. TEAD,

  _For One Year._

  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELIJAH HORR,
  FRANK M. BROOKS,
  CHARLES S. OLCOTT.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  MISS D. E. EMERSON, _New York Office_.


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Fourth Avenue and Twenty-second
Street, New York; or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle
Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars constitutes a Life
Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the tenth of the month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear on the next number.
Please send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the
former address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. LII. JUNE, 1898. NO. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT.


The outlook for the American Missionary Association while hopeful, yet
appeals most earnestly for increased contributions. The debt has been
steadily reduced. At the Annual Meeting in 1895, it was reported to be
$96,147. At the Annual Meeting in 1896 it was $66,572. At the last
Annual Meeting it was $54,945, and now at the close of eight months of
this fiscal year, May 31st, it is $39,527--a reduction from the
highest figure above of $56,620. This reduction is largely due to the
cutting down of expenditures, which has now reached a limit beyond
which no friends of these needy races would wish it to pass. For these
last eight months the total receipts show an increase of $25,800 in
legacies, and at the same time a decrease of $22,800 in collections.

In view of these facts the duty is plain. Further reductions should
not be made. The income from legacies is an uncertain quantity, and an
increase of contributions is the only hope that can be given. Better
times are coming, the responsibility to the poor of our land is
urgent, and the generous response of philanthropic and Christian
givers alone can meet the emergency.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUCCESS IS COSTLY.


When the early Abolitionists entered upon their contest against
slavery, they found that they had no holiday business on hand. Some
faltered, but others grew stronger as they realized the greatness of
the conflict before them. They saw that their warfare would cost much
in reputation, money, and even life itself. They succeeded, but only
because they were willing to pay the cost.

When the next form of the conflict came--the terrible Civil War--the
cost was so great as to be without a parallel in human history. That
great cost was paid and success was won--a crowning success that
could only come because the full cost was paid. And now the third part
of the struggle confronts us--the redemption of the millions of blacks
still in the bondage of poverty, ignorance and vice. This is the
culmination of these past conflicts. If this be not successful, the
rest has been in part in vain. Four millions of slaves were freed, and
now four millions of their descendants are as helpless and hopeless as
they--as great a curse to themselves and as dangerous an element to
the nation. Now this great and crowning struggle is upon us. Other
interests may for a time hide it from view, but it must be met, and
here again, only that which costs will win. It is to be hoped that
prosperity will return and make it easier to raise the needed funds.
But continued depression will not hinder, for, as in the past, so
here, self-denial and self-sacrifice will bear the burden which God
has imposed, and the result will be success. Our appeal, therefore,
for aid in this great conflict is not based on a mere hope of a better
financial outlook in the nation, but on the consecration and
benevolence of those who are ready to win a success that costs.

       *       *       *       *       *

WAR AND ITS RESULTS.


If war is simply to kill people and destroy property, it is an unmixed
calamity. But often there are great and valuable results. Our War of
Independence gave birth to this nation and to its amazing
possibilities. The civil war confirmed the unity of the nation and
wiped away the blot and curse of slavery. The present war with Spain
is waged for the humane purpose of delivering Cuba, our near neighbor,
from manifold forms of oppression, crippling its life, hindering its
industries and impoverishing its people. It is earnestly to be hoped
that the results of the struggle will secure deliverance from these
evils.

Other blessings are already beginning to be realized. The war unites
the North and the South as they have not been for thirty years. Our
diverse peoples are united in enthusiasm under a common flag. The
colored people of the country invited to join the armies are yet in
some portions of the country received coldly or even with taunts and
abuse. But they bear it all cheerfully, devoting themselves to the
interests of our common country. Two brief extracts from papers edited
and published by colored men give evidence of their patriotism and
forbearance under these trials.

From the _Fisk Herald_, Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.:

"The duty of the colored citizens of America in the impending conflict
between our country and Spain is clear, and we are exceedingly glad to
note that they are eager to go to the front to uphold the United
States in its just demands upon Spain for the freedom of Cuba. No
people ought to sympathize more with the oppressed than the negroes of
America."

From the _Christian Recorder_ of the A. M. E. Church:

"At all times the colored citizens of this country have proven loyal
to the Government, and while they smart under the unjust treatment
accorded them here, at no time and under no circumstances have they
shown a lack of patriotism when the conditions demand it.

"In the present crisis the colored citizens are maintaining their past
record for loyalty and devotion, and though our soldiers of color have
been insulted and subjected to great indignities while on their way to
defend their country, still their patriotism is not lessened nor their
ardor cooled."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COLORED PEOPLES OF CUBA.


We understand that about a half a million of the people of Cuba are
Negro or mulatto, making nearly one-third of the population, and we
learn that there is no such race antagonism between these Negroes and
the Creoles as there is with us. The Maceos, who are among the finest
specimens of patriotic manhood on the island, are mulattoes. If now,
Cuba should be made free and become a part of these United States,
these colored people would claim the sympathies and services of the
American Missionary Association in giving to them those educational
and religious advantages so promptly and freely given to the
emancipated blacks of our own land. Such a service would bind these
two peoples together and aid in uplifting both to the intelligence and
privileges of free Christian citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISSIONARIES MURDERED IN WEST AFRICA.


It is with heartfelt sorrow that we chronicle the murder of six
missionaries in West Africa. They were sent by the Society of United
Brethren in Christ, whose central office is in Dayton, O., and which
has for many years carried forward very successful work in the Sherbro
country, Sierra Leone, West Africa. This mission was contiguous to the
Mendi Mission, founded by the A. M. A., and worked with it in
Christian harmony and fellowship. When the Association retired from
foreign mission work, the Mendi Mission was turned over to the Sherbro
Mission, and aid was furnished for a time with funds from our board.

The slaughter of these devoted missionaries was brought about in
consequence of a tax on houses or huts imposed by the Sierra Leone
government. The savage people in the remoter districts pushed forward
a resistance to this tax, and, confounding all white men and women
together as responsible, committed these murders and destroyed mission
property. Redress may come for property destroyed and other
missionaries may take the place of those who have fallen, but we mourn
for those who have been martyrs in the cause of the Master.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORKING, THINKING, WRITING.


To _print_ a newspaper, though it be a small one, requires dexterous
hand work. To _publish_ such a paper demands business gifts to secure
means and to plan the work. To _edit_ such a paper calls for readable
and racy writing. Few forms of business require a greater variety of
manual, skilful and facile ability. For these reasons we are glad to
find that in nearly all our larger schools in the South, monthly
papers are printed and published--with little or no expense to the
Association. The printing office teaches a useful and profitable trade
to the student, the editing is usually done by the professors and
students, and the publishing is managed so that by the aid of
advertising and paid subscriptions, the expense is mainly met. These
periodicals contain much valuable information. The professors
contribute well-written papers, the students furnish articles or
copies of orations or essays delivered on public occasions, and the
graduates write sketches of their life struggles and successes since
leaving the institutions. Well selected items from the world outside
enrich these pages, and brief, personal paragraphs give varied and
useful local information. We present below a partial list of these
publications, giving their name, place of publication, size, etc.

THE FISK HERALD, published by the literary societies of Fisk
University, Nashville, Tenn., is a pamphlet of 24 pages, with an
editor-in-chief and assistants selected from the students. The price
is 75 cts. a year.

THE OLIO is published by the printing department of Straight
University, New Orleans, La. This also is a pamphlet, of 20 pages.
Price, 25 cts. a year.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE RECORD, published by the printing department of
Talladega College, Talladega, Ala., is a four page sheet well printed,
edited by students appointed for the purpose.

TOUGALOO NEWS. A well-printed sheet, 8 pages, issued quarterly at
Tougaloo University, Tougaloo, Miss.

HEAD AND HAND. Issued monthly from the Normal Training Department of
Le Moyne Institute, Memphis, Tenn., a four page sheet, 25 cts. a year.
It is now in its 12th volume.

THE WORD CARRIER, published by the Normal Training School press at
Santee Agency, Neb., is a four page paper edited and published by Rev.
A. L. Riggs, D.D. This sheet, well printed and well edited, is now in
its 27th volume, and presents many important phases of the Indian life
and work. 50 cts. a year.

THE GLOUCESTER LETTER, devoted to education and industry, published
monthly at Cappahosic, Gloucester Co., Va., Prof. W. B. Weaver,
editor; a four page publication in its tenth year, price, 50 cts. a
year.

THE PARISH VISITOR, the official organ of the First Congregational
Church, Atlanta, Ga., a church paper edited by Rev. H. H. Proctor,
with several assistants. 25 cts. a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

The South.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAMPLES AND EXAMPLES.

BY SECRETARY A. F. BEARD.


It is my lot on the routes of less frequented travel to fall in with a
class of my fellowmen distinctively known as "Commercial men." It is
their business to be both inquisitive and communicative. While waiting
at some little tavern or railroad station often the right hand of
fellowship has been extended to me with the question "What is your
line?" or "I see you have no trunks, how do you carry your samples?"
They do not always quite understand "our line" when I tell them that
our samples have learned to carry themselves and even to carry others.
Then I am called to explain how they began their intelligent life with
us, how we took the raw material and in process of time sent out our
products from our schools and institutions with their thought of life
widened, with enlarged mental vision and the great majority of them
with hopeful religious characters and purposes. Sometimes these fellow
travelers hear, and sometimes I marvel because of their unbelief. If
our readers could see our samples as we see them in their varied
vocations and places they would not soon forget them.

Not long since in Alabama I came across certain ones which are types;
and as types I present them. The environment which conditions their
work and gives the color of it must needs be included. Situated among
the hills of Eastern Alabama is a thickly settled community of people
about two-thirds of whom are colored. It is in the County of Elmore,
and bears the Indian name of Kowaliga. Being near the corner of two
adjoining counties, it is a rural centre from which large numbers of
children can be reached who ought to be educated, and who are anxious
to "get an education" as their one chance in life, a chance which so
far has been beyond them.

Kowaliga settlement is remote from any railroad and consists wholly of
plantations. These plantations were formerly tilled by slaves, but
since freedom came to those who gave their unrequited labor, the rich
white planters have become poor and many of their sons now may be seen
themselves following their plows, tilling the fields and driving mules
instead of men. The country is fertile and repays intelligent tillage.

The American Missionary Association has been applied to repeatedly for
help in this settlement of Kowaliga. Under the lead of two young
college graduates, both of whom I had met while they were students at
Fisk University, the colored people with great sacrifice had
contributed building material and labor in the construction of a very
substantial two-story building with attic and basement, which,
however, is yet incomplete and unfurnished. The people with few
exceptions, are extremely poor and very ignorant, and have an
imperfect idea of what a school means with its proper appointments and
teachers.

[Illustration: KOWALIGA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.]

In answer to the most urgent appeals of the two young educators, I
arranged in my recent journeying in the South for a personal
investigation. One of the former student acquaintances came for me in
his "one horse shay" and with him as my courier and companion I rode
through this rural district. I found that the white farmers are
gradually leaving their plantations while the colored people are as
gradually becoming land owners. Abandoned farms, which through poor
culture have not paid the farmers for cultivation, can easily be
secured by industrious colored people who are willing to deny
themselves and work hard for an independent start in life.

The father of the young man whom I accompanied on my long ride through
the country is one of these who has already won his success. His
experience and achievement are typical in illustrating the trends and
the probabilities.

Mr. J. A. Benson--at this present time forty-six years of age--was
born a slave three miles from the great plantation which he now owns.
When his owner's estate was divided he was a part of the property
which fell to an heir in Talladega, Alabama. There as property he was
sent, and there he worked as a slave until emancipation came. At the
age of nineteen years, with a hundred dollars saved from his earnings
as a free man he returned to his birthplace and purchased on credit
160 acres of land. His first year of crops gave him a handsome profit
and soon he was able to pay for this land. Again he bought land, and
again more year by year. Now I found him with his new house of twelve
rooms nearly completed on the site of his old one, the construction of
which was under the direction of a Negro contractor whose leading
workman was a white man; a native of that same community. The mason
who did the masonry was also a Southern white man. While engaged on
this "job" both white men ate at the same table with the owner. In the
"Merchant of Venice" we read of one who said, "I will buy with you,
sell with you, talk with you, walk with you and so following, but I
will not eat with you." Nevertheless there are times when "Necessity
knows no law" and this was one of the times. It was the common
opinion, however, that the excellent mason was much more expeditious
than is common about his job, though he was working by the day. His
work was completed in about one-half the usual time allowed for it. He
stayed, not upon the order of his going. Doubtless a second experience
would come with less self conquest than the first.

Mr. Benson began his independent life with his unpaid farm of 160
acres. Now he owns 3,000 acres of land paid for and without
encumbrance, with the virtual ownership of a fine stream, at some
points 500 feet wide, which for five miles runs through his extensive
plantations. On this stream he has a brick yard, a saw mill, a grist
mill and a cotton gin and compressing mill combined in one and
operated by the water of this stream. The farm is worked on shares
chiefly, the owner furnishing the land and the stock, the laborers
dividing the products half and half.

[Illustration: KOWALIGA CREEK--THROUGH MR. BENSON'S PLANTATIONS.]

The leases are taken by a dozen responsible and experienced farmers,
who sub-contract with the laborers under their immediate supervision.
Of the 3,000 acres, one-half is devoted to corn, cotton, cane, etc.;
500 are used for pasturage and 1,000 furnish ample supply of pine, oak
and hickory timber for the greedy teeth of his saw mill and the
willing embrace of his planing mill. He has cows, cattle, mules,
horses, barns and farm implements to meet all necessities. His teams
go regularly to Montgomery markets and return with stores for the
forty families who live upon his lands and work them, and for the
community who purchase of him what things they have. Besides his
possessions in land, Mr. Benson has been able to loan to his white
neighbors some $6,000, which are secured by mortgages upon their
farms. They are running behind and he is running ahead. While I was
the guest of this man, opposite me at the table dined a white man who
was engaged on the carpentry of the new house. He was a native
Southerner but he showed no evidence of social injury, and if he did
his carpentry work as thoroughly as he did that of the table he
certainly earned his wages.

Mr. Benson has managed with his uncommon ability to pick up education
enough to achieve and handle successfully and shrewdly these large
interests; not only to know their details but also to realize their
significance and somewhat of the larger world beyond his own
dominions. The success of this self-made colored man may be somewhat
exceptional in degree, but it is not at all phenomenal. The story with
the variations of personality and place could be told a hundred times
over among the colored people who began thirty years ago without a
foot of land or a dollar of money.

Among the colored people in this rural community this man is one. For
the most part life has gone on for the others without much
advancement. They have not been left without a certain kind of school
for their children taught for three months out of twelve chiefly by
students who are themselves getting an education in institutions
sustained by Northern benevolence; but the teaching has been without
continuity and insufficient to make much impress on character. This
far-seeing colored man realized this, and his own influence in life
might have been greater if chances had come to him in his earlier
days. He has, therefore, given his son a liberal education at college
and has daughters now in the same path.

When the young man returned from his studies with Christian love in
his heart to assist his father in business he took in the situation
that there must be a school here commensurate with the needs, where
the colored boys and girls might receive the blessings of an education
large and thorough enough and of such a positive Christian quality as
should change the life of the community. In some aspects it sadly
needs radical change.

He called to his side one of his mates at Fisk University--a graduate
of the college department--under the conviction that for such work as
this there was a call for a thorough as well as a technical education;
that there must be breadth of mental knowledge and mental vision as
well as skill of hand. The young college man with his diploma in his
pocket heard the call, as scores of samples from our institutions in
our great system of schools are hearing theirs every year; and when
once there these two young men began what is to be the KOWALIGA
ACADEMIC AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL. They each had taken industrial
training enough with their studies to know what they were about. They
sought good counsel from others and thus the main school building was
begun. Mr. Benson, the father, furnished a sufficient allotment of
land for the site, the timber and the lumber which his mills sawed and
planed, and which his teams carted. The Samples supervised and the
young people and old wrought with their own hands. Generous friends
from the North lent their names to the undertaking and from and
through them contributions came in amounts sufficient to encourage but
not large enough to complete. From these were named an advisory board
of friends who with an equal number of colored people in the
neighborhood were called trustees.

These are the conditions in which I introduce our Samples. It was at
this stage of the proceedings when these children of the American
Missionary Association called to us for the second and third time,
"Come over and help us." We came, we saw, and they conquered. How
could we do other than honor their faith and patience with our "watch
and care," and with a little faith on our part that help enough would
come to us to make their own helpfulness successful. Here in the
darkness these light bearers will give light and save life and they
will do this better because light has been given to them and they
themselves have been saved.

[Illustration: PROF. T. S. INBORDEN.

Principal Joseph K. Brick Normal, Agricultural and Industrial School
at Enfield, N. C.--A. M. A.--born a slave. Struggled up through
poverty, educated himself by teaching vacations and working his way.
Was graduated from Fisk University. A Sample.]

I have given this story of Samples because it is our latest. Our
picture would be out of perspective, however, should it lead any to
the conclusion that this typical illustration of conditions and work
is other than a sample in itself. Let it be known that this is what is
going on in the work of the American Missionary Association constantly
year by year, every year, as it reduplicates itself in every State of
the South.

Above ten thousand of these Samples are examples. They have taken the
torches lighted at our fires and have borne the light of their
knowledge on to others in darkness. They are doing it this year. They
will do it next year. There are entire counties in the South in which
our schools have supplied nine-tenths of all the colored teachers.
These teachers, graduates of Normal Schools and higher institutions,
are good samples, making full proof of their enlarged powers in the
Christian upbuilding of their own race. The man who thinks leads.

Samples, also, in strong ministers of Christ, good and true, who are
in "our line," planting little churches and developing little churches
into larger ones, bringing dependent churches forward into
self-support, and leading the colored people out and away from
old-time superstition and evil ways into the pure life of intelligent
faith.

[Illustration: PROF. JAMES L. MURRAY.

Born a slave. Educated by his own endeavors. Taught his way through
College. Was graduated at Fisk University. Principal of the Albany
Normal School, A. M. A. A Sample.]

In the more conspicuous places of life we find our Samples. Some of
their "examples" are already on the shelves of science in our
libraries, and are hanging in honor in the galleries of art. Not a few
of our graduates fill Professors' chairs. Many are already teachers of
teachers. They believe that the Negro has intellect as well as hands.
They believe in the development of manhood and womanhood along all
lines, and do not believe that an elementary education for an
elementary people is enough to save a race. They have been taught in
our schools that our thought of education is that the knowledge which
is of most worth "is that which stands in closet relation to the
highest forms of the activity of the spirit created in the image of
Him who holds nature and man and life alike in the hollow of His
hand." Our idea of the educational process is that it is vital and not
merely technical; that it is indeed but another name for the unfolding
and growth of the human spirit. It has not, therefore, been along a
single line of material helpfulness, and its ends are not reached with
mere technical skill.

Our supreme purpose is "to give light and to save life," but we have
never tried to save disembodied spirits. We have written Christianity
large over and in all of our work in the school rooms, in the manual
training shops, in the farm instruction, because we are sure there is
no recuperative energy in the colored race, nor in any other,
sufficient to save itself. There is nothing so practical to uplift men
or races as Christianity. Said Archdeacon Tiffany the other day at
Yale, "A prevailing idea is, to create an environment is to develop
Christian life. Put people in the right places and they will be all
right, a statement, however, which experience has denied from the
Garden of Eden until now. Environment is a great factor but it does
not furnish the life impulse. Recognize the help of environment but do
not depend on it. How often environment does not make character but
may retard it." Our work strikes its roots far deeper than in
externals. Nevertheless, Christianity assumes intelligence and depends
upon it. With Christian character and intelligence we hear the call
for technical skill and provide for it in our industrial annexes side
by side with our work in mental development. Hence you will find the
Samples "in our line" as easily as a commercial traveler finds the
stores which handle his goods.

[Illustration: INDUSTRIAL ROOM, ORANGE PARK, FLA. A SAMPLE.]

We have industrial samples also in educated farmers, architects,
carpenters, masons, contractors, merchants and bankers, who in the
industrial competitions of life are proving the mettle of their
pasture in the fields where they were fed and trained. While we were
teaching them first of all to be larger and better in mind, stronger
in heart and will, teaching them to have a large and intelligent faith
in God, and an honest following of Christ, we have taught them at the
same time how to till the soil wisely, how to excel in the trades, how
to keep their accounts accurately and how to have accounts to keep. We
would like to have the great American Missionary Association
constituency see these samples as we have seen them and do see them,
not alone in pulpits, in schools and on farms and in trades, but also
in commercial life and in places of extended influence. We should like
to show our Samples in their Christian homes, homes which are not made
of brick and mortar and boards and shingles, but which are only
sheltered by these; homes where there is educated intelligence, where
there are books and thoughtful minds that can appreciate them; homes
where there is refinement, and where samples are examples of exalted
life which in itself stimulates and uplifts life all around--these are
centres of untold good. The light streams out from them day by day.
They are the leaven of a rising race. I go not anywhere in towns or in
rural places in any Southern state where I fail to find such samples
and examples which in their various ways are thus holding forth the
word of life and justifying the farsighted wisdom and benevolence
which planted the system of American Missionary schools upon "our
line" and which in sustaining them is building up the Kingdom of God
on the Master's line as it builds up thousands of men and women
towards the mind and heart of God.

[Illustration: COLLEGE GRADUATES. SAMPLES.]

[Illustration: SMALL SAMPLES, _En Route_ TO THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.]

The little people pictured above are "children's children." Parents
who came under our care thirty years ago, but one remove from all that
was wrapped up in hopeless slavery, can now give their children better
chances than they themselves could secure in the early days of
freedom. In our great system of schools one may look into thousands of
such earnest faces turned inquiringly toward the twentieth century.
What the coming days shall hold for them and through them for the
kingdom of Christ is in good part to be answered in positive Christian
schools, where character building is made the supreme foundation for
future homes and opportunities. These "children's children" began
their climbing on a higher round than did their parents, and there are
more of them to climb--

    "More and more, more and more,
    Still there's more to follow."

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, LA.

BY REV. G. W. HENDERSON, D.D.


Our school year, which closed May 25, has been crucial in many
respects. It has tested the attachment of the scholars to the school
on one hand, and their desire for an education and the willingness of
themselves and of their parents to make sacrifices to this end on the
other; for the fever and the rigid quarantine delayed the opening in
the fall, paralyzed business, and made it difficult for parents and
students to earn the means not only to meet school expenses, but even
to obtain the ordinary comforts of life. But, notwithstanding these
discouragements, our old scholars remained loyal and patiently awaited
the opening, and the attendance has been good--that in the higher
grades coming up to the average figure. How much solicitude, earnest
planning and brave self-sacrifice all this involved no one who has not
lived in the midst of the people can realize; no one but the
All-Knowing can understand.

The list of our various exercises is somewhat long, yet each
represents some special department of our work, or is a manifestation
of some special form of its manifold activities, and for this reason
cannot fail to be of interest to our readers.

Junior Exhibition, May 4, was the first exercise on the program; two
weeks later came the Recital by the Department of Instrumental Music.
The Address, Sunday morning, May 22d, to the Christian Associations by
Rev. J. M. Loring, D.D., of this city, and the Baccalaureate, Sunday
night, by President Atwood, were both greatly enjoyed by the large
audiences that came to hear.

A feature of growing power and usefulness is the Sumner and Alpha
Literary Societies, whose anniversary is always an occasion of great
interest. The able and eloquent address this year was given by Rev. L.
H. Reynolds, D.D., the successful pastor of the leading African
Methodist Church in this city. He made his auditors feel that, though
their lot had many hardships, it also had many compensating
advantages, and that to the educated and consecrated youth of the race
the field for usefulness and distinction was large and inviting.

The Class Day Exercise, Monday night, came up in point of interest and
attraction to the usual high standard. The Grammar Department had the
right of way Tuesday 1 P. M. Certificates admitting them to the Normal
and College Preparatory Departments were given to forty-two bright
boys and girls. And truly, the boys in their neat fitting suits and
the girls in their white gowns presented a beautiful sight. The
history of their efforts to reach this landmark in their educational
life is full of pathos and romance. Observe that girl sitting yonder
on the right. Her happy face glows with the interest of the occasion;
her dress is neat and cleanly. Yet that girl left the washroom or
laundry when she came to school this morning, and will return to it
when the school day closes. Back from the street and enclosed by
larger buildings and shut out from the blessed sunlight and pure air
is the house she calls her home. She is the oldest of five or six
children. The hard worked mother, who seldom leaves the wash-tub
except to retire to her weary couch, is only able to keep this girl in
school by the most rigid economy and self-denial, and when she has
finished her course, then by her help the others may have a chance.

This is one of many cases which the kind and faithful teacher has
discovered among her scholars. The lesson of it is that the race which
has such mothers, so patient, so self-sacrificing, is sure to rise,
and is worth taking some stock in by the friends of Christian
missions; nor need we be surprised to learn that out of a colored
voting population of 120,000 in Louisiana, nearly 39,000 have acquired
within thirty-five years the ability to read and write.

The Alumni Association held their annual meeting Tuesday night and
listened to a bright oration by Miss Annie Feyer, class '97.

And now let us look at the last scene in this drama of the closing
year at Central Church. It is the old story--old yet new and fresh in
its human element and its deep significance--of a packed house, and of
an attention so fixed and earnest that naught is heard during the
delivery of the pieces, though hundreds are standing, save the beating
of fifteen hundred fans against the warm air, and the clear
enunciation of the speakers, and the hearty, yet discriminating
applause.

The various subjects treated reveal, as usual, interesting traits in
the characters of the speakers, some breathing aspirations after a
larger liberty, and a more rational conception of it, some revealing a
deep consciousness of life's noble obligations and splendid
opportunities, some insisting on independence of mind as the basis of
true manhood. The graduate from the department of theology pleaded for
character in the ministry to the manifest satisfaction of the
audience. Here and there were heard echoes of the troubled past, some
sensitiveness to present hardships was manifested, but the prevailing
tone was a willingness to take hold of life bravely and seriously, to
redress the wrong and to glorify the right.

In beholding these ten graduates--six from the normal course, three
from the college preparatory and one from the theological--one could
not but compare the present with the not distant past, and rejoice in
the compensations of prudence. The proud father of one of the girls
who sat in the audience was once the body servant of Jefferson Davis.
The mother of one of the boys who acquitted himself with more than
usual ability came forward at the close of the exercises and looked
him in the face for several moments, too utterly happy to speak a
word.

The exhibits of the industrial department as well as the work of the
grades, notwithstanding the shortness of the year, showed no sacrifice
of quality.

Thus, in spite of many adverse circumstances, the year has been one of
signal blessing in all the departments; the religious life was never
sweeter or more earnest, the school was never more thoroughly
dominated by Christian motives and principles. President Atwood may
justly felicitate himself and his co-workers upon the good results
obtained.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.

BY PRESIDENT FRANK G. WOODWORTH, D.D.


The commencement exercises on May 19th closed one of the most
memorable years in the history of the institution. Quarantine delayed
the opening of the year until November 23d, and on the next night the
girls' dormitory was destroyed by fire. These two things greatly
reduced the attendance, and of course the fire entailed a great many
inconveniences. The school has gone bravely on, however, and the year
is now looked back upon as one of the most satisfactory in work and
general results that has been seen. Students and teachers have labored
with unusual diligence, crowding nearly the full work of the usual
school year into six months.

The year has been signalized by having a Freshman class, the first to
enter on college work. Four students have successfully completed the
year, and another class of the same size or larger is expected for
next year.

The president preached the Baccalaureate sermon from Gen. 5:24. All
the graduates are Christians; all but two of the Academy, and
three-fourths of the grammar pupils of the year have been Christians.

The annual concert always attracts much attention, and it has been a
problem what to do with the large crowds who attend. This year a
complimentary rehearsal was given on Monday evening to which friends
from Jackson were invited, a special train coming out on their behalf.
On Wednesday evening was the regular concert, and the room was again
crowded. A general program of fine selections was rendered, followed
by Rheinberger's "Clarice of Eberstein." Tougaloo's musical work is of
the highest order. At the graduating exercises on Thursday, nine young
people received diplomas of graduation from the Academy courses, five
of them young women. Four of the class expect to return for college
work, one to go on to college elsewhere, one to study medicine, one is
taking nurse training in a Chicago hospital, and the others expect to
teach. The spirit in which they go out is exemplified in the answer
made by one of them to the question, "What will you do if you fail to
get a school to teach this summer?" "Do what I can find. Dig, if need
be." A very similar answer was given by one of the most advanced young
women, except she said "Hoe corn or cotton" instead of "dig." The
higher education will hurt none who have that spirit.

The annual address was delivered by President Barrett of the Jackson
College, and was a most helpful and stimulating utterance on the
"Value of Purpose." Brief addresses were made by prominent visitors,
among them several pastors of the white churches in Jackson, the
principal of the city schools, and Col. Charles E. Hooker, for many
years congressman from this district. His address was specially
interesting in the strong feeling of sympathy which it exhibited for
the work of Tougaloo and similar schools, coming as it did from a
public man of such prominence, of a slave-holding family and himself a
former slave owner.

The industrial exhibit in one of the school rooms attracted very large
attention. It covered needle work, cookery, nurse-training, wood and
iron work, agriculture, and there was also a fine botanical exhibit.
While the manual training work has always made a fine appearance, it
was felt that this exhibit surpassed all that had preceded it. The
steel tools, made and tempered by students, were specially admired.

It was matter of special gratulation that the work of excavation for
the foundation of the new dormitory, delayed because the Association
builder was elsewhere occupied, was well advanced. It is hoped that
the building will be nearing completion when the term begins on
September 28th next.

It is sometimes said that colored students show little gratitude for
what aid is given to them. Many instances to the contrary are
continually occurring. One of the graduates of this year, a young
woman, left a note for the president to be read by him after she had
gone, which shows so much in several ways that a portion of it may
well be quoted here. "Since I have been coming to Tougaloo, I have had
quite a little help. Although it was a blessing from God, you are the
agent through whom it came. These few lines are to let you know that I
appreciate and thank you for your kindness. I haven't gained as much
as I would like to have done, yet I have this consolation, and it may
be encouraging to you, that I got as much as I could mentally,
physically and spiritually. Since my connection with this school, my
knowledge has been increased, false ideas have been corrected, truths
have been established, life broadened, desires multiplied, faith in
Christ increased, and I have been enabled to advance a few steps
toward my ideal. My greatest desire is to do as much for Christ as I
may among my fellow men." Who could show better results of education?
Does not aiding such a student pay?

       *       *       *       *       *

DORCHESTER ACADEMY, MCINTOSH, GA.

BY PROF. FREDERICK W. FOSTER.


The beginning of our Commencement Exercises occurred on Sunday
morning, May 15, when Rev. J. R. McLean, of Macon, preached an able
and instructive sermon to our graduating class. The speaker made very
apt and telling application of his subject, which, while especially
directed to the graduates, was good for all.

The examinations in the various grades took place on Wednesday, 18th,
lasting through the day. They gave evidence of good, thorough work on
the part of pupils and teachers, and that our school is moving upward
all along the line. Much interest was manifested in the recitations
and discussions by patrons and visiting friends. Although many of our
visitors were unlettered people, they showed that they could keenly
appreciate whatever they saw that was good.

A fine display of boys' and girls' clothing and quilts gave proof of
the diligence of teacher and pupils in the sewing and dressmaking
department, and of the progress made in that line both in the present
and past years. A display of household furniture, including tables,
stands, wash-stands, a side-board, hat racks and towel racks, showed
what our boys' manual teacher and his boys have been doing. To this
should be added a neat fence, built by the boys in the lower grades.
The neatness and thoroughness of the work on the furniture greatly
exceeds that of the same grade from a manufactory.

But our day of days came on Thursday, when a large audience from
various parts of Southeastern Georgia assembled at our church to
witness the exercises of graduation. Although this is only our third
exercise of this kind, it has already become one of the great annual
events of Liberty and neighboring counties. Notwithstanding the heat
of the day and the dust, the church was packed by an audience of at
least six hundred. In thought, force and plainness of expression and
delivery, the orations of the young men were well up toward
"high-water mark." The subjects chosen were eminently of a practical
nature, and were treated in a very practical and forceful way that
went right home to the understanding and appreciation of the hearers,
as was manifested by the close attention that was evident on every
hand. The music for the occasion was furnished by the Normal
department, assisted by the grammar grades, and consisted of
well-drilled choruses, a duet and a solo. The exercises closed with an
appropriate address by the pastor, Rev. A. L. DeMond, and the
presentation of the well-earned diplomas.

It should have been mentioned that, on Tuesday evening, a reception
was given by the teachers to the members of the graduating class and
the alumni, furnishing a very pleasant social occasion. On Thursday
afternoon, the alumni of the school organized and held its first
meeting, consisting of literary exercises; and in the evening gave a
reception to the teachers at a neighboring house, thus giving a
pleasant ending to the school year of 1897-8.

It has been a busy week and one filled with hard work, and moreover,
such work as could not have been possible a very few years ago. A
diploma received now by a graduate means the completion of a
four-years' Normal course, and the work satisfactorily done.

       *       *       *       *       *

COLORED TEACHERS IN THE SOUTH.

BY PROF. A. J. STEELE, MEMPHIS, TENN.


A full generation has passed since the emancipation of the slaves in
the United States and since the avenues of knowledge were thrown open
to the colored people through the doors of the school house. During
this time portions of three generations, parents, children and
grand-children, literally "Children's children to the third
generation," have, to a greater or less extent, availed themselves of
the tuition of the schools.

[Illustration: CHILDREN'S CHILDREN.]

During the first decade, and in regularly decreasing ratio since, the
most difficult problem has been how to provide competent teachers for
the instruction of a race crowding and hungry for knowledge.
Fortunately, perhaps, in the long view, the teaching of colored youth
has never, from the first, in the South, been considered a popular
calling, and so the work has in the main devolved upon the colored
people themselves, a work to which, for years, from almost entire lack
of opportunity for training, they could bring but the scantiest
preparation and even less experience.

No more interesting or suggestive study could be undertaken than that,
of tracing the progress of the colored teachers of a race so recently
emancipated, as they have advanced in literary, mental and moral
fitness for a work thrust upon them by the exigencies of the
situation.

Reference to the tables of statistics compiled by the Commissioner of
Education for 1895-6 shows how well the race is meeting the demand for
teachers in its schools, everywhere in the South kept separate from
the public schools for white children. For the year above mentioned
there were employed 26,499 colored teachers, who had under their care
1,429,713 pupils. For the same year there were in the various Normal
Schools for colored people 4,672 students, 966 of whom were graduated;
826 were graduated from high schools and 161 from college courses,
making in all 1,953 graduates from courses of study considered
sufficient in extent to fit more or less thoroughly for the work of
teaching; not to mention the even greater numbers who engage in
teaching before having completed any higher course of training. So
much as to mere numbers. Now, in general, as to the advancement being
made by schools of this class. Without exception, the reports of
school officers give credit for constantly increasing excellency and
proficiency of both schools and teachers, and certain it is, that the
public appreciation and esteem is shown by an increasing patronage and
a more substantial provision for the improvement and support of the
schools.

In particular, while it is not always safe to draw sweeping
conclusions from facts gathered within a limited area of observation,
it may yet be confidently asserted, that what is true of the schools
and teachers of any fairly representative city or community in the
South, is likely to be measurably true wherever similar conditions and
opportunities prevail. My own direct experience and observation have
had to do with the colored schools and teachers of a single city of
sixty to eighty thousand people, nearly one-half colored, and the
counties and towns adjacent. These I have followed very closely for
over twenty-five years. I can testify positively that there has been a
steady raising of the standards of qualifications and proficiency with
regard both to intellectual and moral attainments among the teachers
of colored schools, and in this I shall be borne out by the testimony
of superintendents and school officers, as well as by all observing
people of these communities. In many cases teachers and schools of
this class have attained an enviable reputation and are often
mentioned as models of excellence in many ways.

The process of growth here, as elsewhere, has been one of the
"survival of the fittest," the ill-trained, inefficient teachers
gradually giving place to the better qualified, more capable class.
The initial influence in this line of succession dates back but little
more than thirty years, to the founding of "mission" schools at
centres of influence throughout the South; "a handful of corn on the
top of the mountain" from which has come the wide-spreading harvests
of the present. It is a statement well within the facts that nine out
of ten of the colored schools of all grades in the South are taught by
those who had their training in these mission schools, or else by
teachers who owe their education to those of their own race who were
so trained. No more powerful or far-reaching influence was ever set in
operation than that which had its origin in the cabin where taught the
first humble missionary among the people freed by the war. The whole
power and potency of all that has followed was represented in that
first despised and humble effort.

From that day to this seems a long call. The passage has been made
almost unobserved, like the coming of the Kingdom of Heaven. It now
not unfrequently happens that a colored public school stands
accredited in a community with excellencies to distinguish it as an
example worthy of imitation. Such is the colored high school in the
city of my direct observation, in the two respects of self-control and
government of its pupils, and in its movement toward a collection of
miscellaneous books for a school library--excellencies not ascribed,
so far as I know, in anything like the same measure to any other
public school. It is perhaps needless to add that the principal of
this school, as well as the teachers of a large percentage of the
other best schools of the city and county, have had their training in
one of the "mission" normal schools above mentioned.

To remove or weaken these centres of power would be to strike the most
deadly blow at the education of the colored people. It would be the
removal of so many nerve centres out from which still flow the stimuli
needful to keep in active operation and growing power the entire
system.

John F. Slater and Daniel Hand and a hundred other individual
benefactors have seen this vital fact and have done what they could to
build up and strengthen such influences. The church will make a great
mistake if it ignores this fact or relaxes its efforts in the support
of the institutions so wisely planned and so greatly efficient for
good in the past.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES.


CLOSING EXERCISES AT LE MOYNE.--Le Moyne Normal Institute, Memphis,
Tennessee, closed on the 2nd of June. Not less than 2,500 people
crowded the auditorium at the closing exercises. The large attendance
betokens the influence of the school in the community and the esteem
in which it is held.

STUDENTS ENLISTING.--Many of the students of our colleges and Normal
Schools have enlisted in the service of their country. From Talladega
College, Alabama, we receive the following: "We send a score of our
choice young men off to the army to-morrow." From Lincoln School,
Meridian, Miss., the Principal writes: "One young man is away in the
interests of his company, of which he is Captain. He wrote, 'This is
the time to show of what clay we are made, and I trust each student
of Lincoln School will prove himself loyal to his country.' Four of
the officers of his company are graduates of Lincoln School."

       *       *       *       *       *

A SKETCH OF THE CAREER OF A STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY GRADUATE.

BY REV. GEORGE W. HENDERSON, D.D.


Among the young colored men who heard the call of God for the
uplifting of their race was Mr. H----, whose home was in Arkansas.
From the first, with him Christian faith meant Christian service, and
he at once became active in church and Sunday-school. Nature was
generous to him in the saving gift of common sense, and he was not
long in perceiving the incompetency of the ministers to whom the
people at that time looked for religious instruction and leadership.

A fortunate providence brought him into contact with a teacher from
Straight University. The information she gave him of this institution
opened the way to execute the purpose which he had been cherishing for
some time, to fit himself to become a missionary to his people in his
own home. The loss of a leg at this time, through the carelessness of
another, instead of discouraging, strengthened his resolution.
Penniless, like Booker Washington, he set out for this missionary seat
of learning, his only resource, prayer, his only support, hope and
faith.

One bright morning, this brave Arkansas lad presented himself at
Straight University. Hobbling up the walk to the main building, and
assuming an air of confidence quite in contrast to his internal
emotions, he hailed a passing student in the familiar vocabulary of
the plantation--"Say, Sonny, is the Boss in?" The "Boss" was in, and
on meeting this new candidate for academical honors, quite took away
his breath by addressing him as "Mr." Such courtesy was a surprise and
a revelation to him. That he was somebody in the eyes of heaven was
the gracious revelation of his Christian faith; it now for the first
time dawned upon him that the recognition of his manhood was possible
on earth.

Eight years of earnest study followed, years full of happiness,
because they were years of progress, of growing religious experience,
of expanding intellectual and spiritual vision. The dream of his
uncared for boyhood was in process of realization. He enjoyed the
confidence of teachers and scholars alike, for he was the soul of
honor, and his word was the word of truth. His vacations were spent in
teaching in the common schools of Louisiana. Success always crowned
his efforts; his schools were usually full to overflowing. He taught
in the Sunday-schools and made himself useful in every form of
Christian service. On one occasion the school house was destroyed by
fire, but nothing daunted, the enthusiastic teacher rallied the
neighbors, and with them and the scholars he went into the woods,
chopped down the trees, hewed the logs, and in a few days replaced the
old building with a better, and the school went on more successfully
than ever.

And so on till the end of his life, difficulties were faced bravely
and successfully. With the assistance of friends, a cork leg took the
place of the pole which he had lashed to the stump of his lost limb.
After completing the normal course, he took the usual course in
theology.

On Vermillion Bay, not far from the Gulf Coast, and at the terminus of
a branch of the Southern Pacific Railroad, about twenty miles from
Bayou Teche, the stream that keeps green and beautiful the year round
that section of Louisiana which was first settled by the exiled
Acadians and made famous in Longfellow's "Evangeline," is a thriving
village. In the patois of the country the people are called "Cajians,"
a corruption of Acadians. As a rule, they are non-progressive and
ignorant. But the spirit of modern progress, brought in on the
railroad, is putting new life into old customs.

In this village just waking into its new life, a humble man of faith,
in the year 1885, organized a Congregational church. The organizer of
this new church, having only a limited education, soon found himself
at the end of his resources. The people were still hungry and still
unfed. One plants, another waters. Unknown to the people, and in his
own good way and time, God was preparing to answer their prayer for a
shepherd who could lead them into the green pastures and by the side
of quiet waters.

The Arkansas lad, proud of the possession of his normal and
theological diplomas, and now ready for service, was sent by the A. M.
A. to this prosperous village in the beautiful Teche country. When Mr.
H. arrived in the fading twilight of a June evening, and looked over
the situation--a rude, unfinished edifice, a scattered congregation,
and a membership that had diminished almost to the vanishing
point--for the first time he began to have serious doubts whether
after all he had not mistaken his calling. After much searching, only
ten or twelve discouraged members could be found. Neither party was
unduly impressed with the other. His doubt that he could do anything
for the church was probably fully respected by the members as they
looked him over and took his measure. The thoughts that came to him
that night as he lay upon his restless and dreamless pillow, were
decidedly Jonah-like. Nor were the means lacking to follow the example
of that ancient prophet. Ships lay at anchor in Vermillion Bay ready
to carry him out into the gulf and the great sea beyond. The question
what he should eat and drink, and wherewithal he should be clothed,
seemed to justify his flight. He was now learning that missionary
service is a fine thing to talk about in prayer meetings and
missionary gatherings, but that the reality often possesses a stern
and forbidding countenance. Nor was much reflection needed to show him
that though the ships might take him away from the place of duty,
they could not take him away from duty itself; that it were better to
bear poverty and privation than to bear a guilty conscience.

It is always darkest before day. In a few weeks an ordaining council
has assembled, his old pastor and theological teacher being among the
number. The harvest was ripe, waiting for the reapers to put in the
sickle, and what began as ecclesiastical council ended in a gracious
revival. The Arkansas lad was now a minister; the dream of his boyhood
was rapidly fulfilling.

Three years and a half passed. The field which at first seemed so
barren of promises had proved to be rich in opportunities. The
Louisiana Congregational Association holds its annual meeting with
him. His old pastor sends three other teachers. One of them, the wife
of "the Boss," returns with the other members of the ordaining council
to see what progress has been made.

Yes, this must be the place; for the railroad stops here, and yonder
is Vermillion Bay, and the anchored ships. This, too, must be the
young pastor; his limp betrays his identity, but the face, whose pure
native hue three years ago was darkened by the cloud of doubt is now
wreathed in smiles. Here, too, is the church, the same, yet not the
same; its former disfigured and unwashed face now shines in a new coat
of paint; the unfinished and leaky bell-tower has been repaired and
beautified; and those old benches, apparently designed for those
condemned to do penance, have been replaced by comfortable modern
seats, so that the worshipper's attention is no longer diverted from
the sermon by the painful consciousness of his physical sufferings.

But these changes, excellent in themselves, are by no means the
highest test of these years of faithful and consecrated service. The
twelve members with whom the new pastor began, have been nearly
sextupled; the Sunday-school has been organized, enlarged and
developed; a flourishing Christian Endeavor Society started; and right
conceptions of practical righteousness enforced. The pastor's
conception of his ministry includes a practical interest in education,
and since his advent an increasing stream of young people has been
flowing to Straight University. Thrifty himself, his contagious
enthusiasm has not only affected his own flock, but the community
generally, filling them with ambition to save their humble earnings,
and become owners of their own homes, and send their children to
school.

The esteem in which Mr. H. is held by the best white people of the
town was well illustrated at the recent meeting of the State
Association. They not only crowded into the church, filling every
available space for standing, but stood outside at the windows for
hours in earnest attention, in the chilly night air. So great had
their interest become that the last night of the Association, one
white man offered the pastor any price for a reserved seat for himself
and lady friends, and the town representative wrote him a polite note
asking for a seat for himself and family, and the next day the white
people offered to procure the courthouse, that we might have a larger
place for our meeting.

Newspapers and magazines are teeming, nowadays, with articles claiming
that our people's supreme need is industrially trained men to indicate
the road to prosperity. We gladly concede that there is need enough
and room enough for such men, but we part company with these advocates
when they intimate that we have too many liberally educated men. The
value of such well educated men may be seen in the example of Mr. H.,
who is only one of many young men who have gone forth from Straight
University and other A. M. A. institutions.

       *       *       *       *       *

ITEMS.


PENALTY FOR LYNCHING.--The Legislature of Ohio has passed the
Anti-Lynching amendment which makes it possible for the heirs of a
person lynched to sue the county in which the crime is committed for
from $500 to $5,000. This is the right way to do. Every state in the
Union ought to be made to pay either one of these amounts. Why not let
us agitate on these lines. The government can never find the
offenders, but under this law they can find the county.--_The
Conservator of Chicago._


THE BLACK MILLIONAIRE ON HIS WAY.--Mr. T. Thomas Fortune, Editor of
the _New York Age_, one of the bright papers published by colored men,
stated at a recent meeting that the race problem, instead of being
solved in the South, is being intensified by the present condition of
things. He deplored the fact of the black man being excluded by the
labor unions from earning an honest living, and, while the poor white
people are employed in mills and factories of the cities, the black
man is left to till the soil. He is barred out from manual labor and
in many cases must either "starve or steal." This despised individual
who "befo' de war," performed all the labor, is now hardly able to
earn a living. Yet, for all that, Mr. Fortune is confident that in the
future a "monstrosity" is coming. "I may not live to see him, but the
black millionaire is on his way."


THE TRIUMPHANT DEATH OF A CHRISTIAN INDIAN.--"It was my privilege to
see her very frequently in these last days and to be with the family
circle when she died. Whenever I intimated that my presence seemed
like an intrusion, poor Uncle Elias always said, 'No, I like to have
you here; it strengthens me.' And when I was not there, he sent to
have me come. It was just the sympathy he felt. He was sure of that,
for I loved her, too. Through it all Elias had been lovely, a constant
wonder to me in the strength of his beautiful faith which never
faltered for a moment. Again and again in those last hours, his voice
led in prayer as we stood around her bedside, and it seemed the
spontaneous overflow of his soul. And in the accompanying hymn each
time, he also led. The last one which he gave out, only a few minutes
before the faint breathing ceased, was 'Praise God--', the doxology,
(as it is in the Dakota, of course). His faith triumphed over his
sorrow for he knew she was going home to God. Only in that last prayer
from his breaking heart, his voice trembled as he pleaded that God
would help him. Surely He has helped him wonderfully."


FAMILY AFFECTION AMONG INDIANS.--I am impressed with the great degree
of family affection in some cases. I know one young girl who would
profit much by going for several years to Santee. Her parents are past
middle life, and have buried many sons, and Millie is their only
daughter, so naturally they cling most tenderly to her, and it seems
to me most a necessity that the sacrifice should be made, and yet--I
wish it could be different.


SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, FROM MRS. A. E. R. JONES, MISSIONARY TO THE
CHINESE.--Since writing you last month I am happy to say that two of
our pupils have entered Salt Lake College as students. They have
joined the preparatory classes in arithmetic and grammar. It is a
great step for them. We help them in our evening school in the lessons
for the next day.

But this encouragement is little in comparison with the great blessing
that has come to us. By God's grace we trust three persons have been
led to Himself. These desire to be baptized next Sunday. It is no
hasty act, but has been postponed for some time rather than to make
haste. We believe that their conversions are of the Lord and are true
and genuine.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Indians.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW TYPE OF INDIAN UPRISING.

REV. GEORGE W. REED, FORT YATES, N. D.


The missionaries' correspondence begins to bring inquiries concerning
an Indian uprising. With the war news are mingled expressions of fear
that the Indians will be only too ready to seize upon the opportunity
to avenge fancied wrongs. Most of the soldiers have been withdrawn
from the frontier posts. In regard to the Sioux, those who know them
best have no fear. They recognize the progress made by them in the
last ten years. Too many of them have become followers of the Prince
of Peace. These ten years of splendid school training have given us a
new type of young men and women, who have more of home love and who
are beginning to think for themselves. The majority are no longer
roused to action by the harangue of a petty chief. The day of the
chief is rapidly passing away. The thinker and not the talker is
becoming the leader.

There must be convincing proof of a good cause and of beneficial
results before another Indian war is undertaken under the most
favorable circumstances. In territory there is nothing to be gained.
They cling tenaciously to what they have, but they are not grasping
for more, for they realize that their vast hunting grounds have been
lost to them forever. The young men and women in going half across the
continent to Carlisle and Hampton, being educated there and in summer
homes in the East, come back impressed with the largeness of the
country, the prosperity and vast numerical superiority of the people.
They care not to war against so strong a foe.

There is an uprising of the Indians, however, which is being too
slowly recognized. They are slowly but surely rising above
superstition and ignorance, yes, even above indolence. The old roving,
restless, tramp-like spirit has not wholly disappeared. Some are still
living only a stomach level life, with apparently no thought of head
or heart. The old Indian life is self-centered, hence selfish, ever
gathering to itself, never giving out, hence stagnant, non-progressive.

Religion has given the life a new center and indefinite breadth. The
Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man are truths which once
accepted must change the whole life, and he who teaches them to an
Indian becomes a friend and not an enemy, and becomes loved for what
he brings and not hated for what he has taken away. The Indian and the
white man have gone into partnership in building churches. The Indian
has been giving liberally to missions outside of his own little land.

The progress in educational work has been marked in the last decade.
Today every healthy boy and girl over six years of age is supposed to
be in school. More than half of these are for ten months of every year
in a boarding school, well cared for, well fed, well instructed. To me
one of the greatest evidences of progress is that so many of them
uncomplainingly--some eagerly--part with their young children during
these many months. The large majority of the parents have never
attended school a day in their lives, yet they make this large
sacrifice for the child's good. Ten years ago there was a dance house
in nearly every village, and the senseless gyrations were in progress
every week. The larger portion of the two weeks' rations was given to
the dancer's feast, and the half fed children were the sufferers.
Today there is not a dance house for the whole 90 miles along Grand
River.

Ten years ago the first Indian returning with his bi-weekly rations
would invite his neighbors as they came home to help him eat in one
day, often in one meal, all this food. For the remainder of the two
weeks the family would be driven to live upon other feasts, or to the
fields for the wild turnip, the few berries or the plum. If four or
more feasts were called daily, the feasts gave way to famine before
the coming ration day. Often a week of feasting, then a week of
famine, became the rule. This state of things is becoming more and
more a thing of the past. Hospitality is as marked, but is not
carried to starvation extremes. Recently passing some trees in which
twelve or more years ago seven bodies were placed, and contrasting
this with the last funeral I attended, impressed upon me progress in
another line.

Ten years ago last Jan. 12, a day made memorable by the great blizzard
which swept over our land with death and destruction, in the early
morning, long before daylight, I was aroused from slumber by a knock
at the door of our little log house on Oak Creek. One stops to think
twice before he jumps out of a warm bed when the temperature is out of
sight below zero in the room, the fire has gone out and a blizzard is
howling outside. The rapping at the door was continued till I opened
it. A rope was placed in my hand in which were two knots. They showed
the length and width of a coffin the man wished to make, and for which
he wanted lumber. I had only an old packing-case to give him. At
daylight, breakfastless, I went over to the tent and helped him make a
coffin from the case, a soap box and a small stable door. It was a
crude and weak affair. Ignorant of the language, I could only read
words of comfort from the Word of God and try to sing two Indian
hymns. Only a few of us stood about the grave, which the husband and
myself had dug.

In the coffin had been placed dry crusts of bread, waste pieces of
meat, a rusty knife, fork and spoon. In the grave were first placed
some thick comfortables and a filthy pillow, on which the coffin,
warmly wrapped, was placed. Then over the mouth of the grave was laid
the broken tent poles, the tent covering folded and laid over, then a
great mound of earth. At the grave everything the family had was given
away. And this was only ten years ago. But how great an improvement on
the custom of laying the body on the top of a high hill, or in the
branches of a tree, or even leaving the top of the coffin even with
the surface of the ground, which has been done away with only in the
last twelve years.

I have described one of the first funerals in the Indian country that
I remember. How different the funeral of one of our most faithful
women, Mrs. Mary Gilbert, who was buried from our crowded Grand River
Chapel April 17th. She had been a great sufferer for years, yet
patiently, uncomplainingly, bearing it all. Though in her last
sickness there was no hope of recovery, the most popular medicine man
was not sent for. The suffering woman was not put out in a tent to
die. Gratefully did she receive the tender nursing of the white lady
missionary and the skillful school physician. Tenderly was she cared
for to the last in a comfortable bed, in a clean, tidy house. The body
was not hurried with unseemly haste to the burial. Through the
darkness of night a messenger rode 30 miles to have the agency
carpenter make a coffin, neatly cover it with black cloth and white
metal trimmings. Through the darkness of another night was it carried
back. The one service of the Sabbath day was the funeral service.
Crowds gathered at the house at an early hour. The long procession of
wagons was nearly two hours in reaching the chapel. Beautiful and
simple was the service, and the closing words of the sorrowing husband
will long be remembered, as he spoke of his wife's noble work and
trusting faith in the Master. Through the parted lines of the 80
school children was borne the casket, followed by the parents of these
children and others to the number of over 200, most of whom in the
last eight years have found Christ as an ever-present Saviour, and
have learned to know Him as "the resurrection and the life." In this
belief they gathered about this grave, and from it they went to their
homes to live re-consecrated lives.

I have but hinted at progress in these illustrations from their life.
May the churches recognize this new type of Indian uprising, this
progress in many ways, by larger gifts for building much needed
churches, and in sending out new messengers of the Gospel of peace.
The Indians seem ready to do their share, are we ready to do ours?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.


I am requested to give a "general view of our work in about 1000
words:" and I attempt the task. The story is elastic; it bears
compression. Perhaps it can be brought within the allotted space. I
have often undertaken to tell it in five minutes, premising, however,
always that to do this adequately would require more than five hours.

I. FIGURES THAT WILL NOT LIE. The first half of the present fiscal
year ended March 3. The statistical reports for these six months are
the best we have had for more than ten years. The total number of
pupils enrolled in our 19 mission schools thus far is 970: about as
many as in the whole year '95 to '96. The average membership month by
month has been about 430, and the average attendance 234. Every month
has been fraught with saving light and love for some dark souls. I
cannot give an exact statement, but I think that nearly 50 conversions
have been reported, making a total, since our work began, of fully
1,600.

II. THE NEW MISSION HOUSE. It has cost us, finished and furnished (so
far as it is yet furnished), fully $19,500. It is a fine building in
an admirable location, the best that could be found, overlooking a
pretty square, yet standing just within the border line of San
Francisco's Chinatown. It is four stories high, with a dry basement
and a flat roof, and it is utilized on these six floors. The Noyes
Memorial Chapel on the first floor is an attractive place of worship
seating easily 250, and is used on week days for the Central School,
which is, doubtless, the largest Chinese week-day school in our
country. Rev. Jee Gam, with his large family, has several rooms as a
sort of parsonage. Other Christian families occupy apartments.
Homeless young men rent some of our best rooms, and use them for
social purposes and as a retreat from the wickedness of almost every
other gathering place in Chinatown. Most of these young men were
Christians when they came to occupy these rooms. One among those who
were not Christians has already turned to Christ, the first fruits in
this our new garden of the Lord. We owe $13,250 on this building, of
which $2,000 ought to be paid at once.

[Illustration: NEW MISSION HOUSE.]

III. OUR WORK FOR MOTHERS AND CHILDREN is to be distinguished from the
Rescue work among the female slaves bought and sold for the worst of
purposes, who constitute a large majority of all the Chinese women in
California. This latter work our Presbyterian and Methodist Missions
have been doing for many years at large expense and with good results.
They were prepared to take care of all who would come to them, and we
did not enter into that field, for we never have used missionary money
for the purpose of competition with other denominations, and we never
will. The mothers living in wedlock and their children constitute our
field, and wherever we have missions this is carried on with more or
less activity according to the number of families and the welcomes
extended. In Los Angeles, Marysville, San Francisco and Watsonville,
there are visitors giving to this undertaking so much of their time as
to make it necessary to assist in their support. I doubt if any human
beings anywhere on earth have more hindrances to overcome, more lions
to face, more superstitions to be laid aside in coming to Christ, than
have the Chinese women. The tyranny of heathen husbands, the scorn of
neighbors, the vague dread of untold calamities which the ghosts of
the dead will inflict upon them if not duly worshipped, the stories
told them of children kidnapped, eyes put out, hurtful spells thrown
upon people by foreign devils; all these and other obstacles must be
met and overcome. But Christian kindness will overcome everything if
persistently shown, and I believe the time is coming when the harvest
among these Chinese mothers will exceed, in proportion to the numbers
within reach of us, any reaped elsewhere. I would like to go into the
details of this comparatively new work but my limits forbid it.

IV. THE CHINESE POPULATION in America is, I believe, increasing. I
cannot prove this, and I state it only as an impression. The Exclusion
Law at its best is a leaky dike, and the tide washing up against it
leaps through and sometimes overflows. How this comes to pass I have
not space to tell, but while I do not believe that _all_ men have
their price, I suspect that some Custom House officials have not
always been proof against temptation, and are not now. And perjury in
the view of a non-christian Chinese is a venial offense except when so
clumsily committed as to lead to detection. But, no matter how these
new comers get here, once among us they are fish for our fishing, and
when one of them becomes a Christian and tells me he has been in the
country five or six or eight years, I do not feel bound to make him
confess the method of his entrance. He was a heathen then. There is no
probability whatever that the work of our mission will cease for lack
of material to work upon, till long after the present workers have
passed to their reward.

V. THE FINANCES. Under this head the tale is soon told. Appropriation
from the A. M. A. exhausted. The last check for this fiscal year from
the office in New York came to me on the 1st of March. The bills for
April are provided for, however. As to May, June, July and August,
bills, which if the work were done as it should be, could not even by
closest economy, be brought below $4,000, we wait for the payment of
upon God and upon those whom he has made to be the almoners of His
bounty. Our Chinese will probably give about $1,500. Who will give the
rest?

W. C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *

Obituary.


Rev. C. L. Woodworth, D.D., died in Amherst, Mass., May 23, 1898, on
the day after the 78th anniversary of his birth. He was born in
Somers, Conn., was graduated at Amherst College in 1845, at East
Windsor Theological Institute in 1848, and was ordained to the
ministry in the Second Church in Amherst and became its pastor Nov. 7,
1849. He remained there till September 2, 1863 when he resigned to
become chaplain to the Twenty-seventh Massachusetts Regiment. In this
service he remained nearly a year, and in 1865 was appointed general
agent of the American Missionary Association for Massachusetts, and in
1866 its District Secretary for New England, with office in Boston,
which position he occupied till 1888. In June, 1893, he returned to
his pastorate in Amherst where he labored with much earnestness till
his death.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for February                             $5,037.35
     Previously acknowledged                         29,295.00
                                                    ----------
                                                    $34,332.35
                                                    ==========


NOTE.--Where no name follows that of the town, the contribution is
from the church and society of that place. Where a name follows, it is
that of the contributing church or individual. S. means Sunday-school;
C. means Church; C. E., the Young People's Society of Christian
Endeavor; S. A. means Student Aid.


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $224.03.

Augusta, Joel Spalding, 5. Baldwin, 2.85, Bangor. Stearns Circle K.
D., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 4. Bath, Central, 33.34.
Castine, J. W. Dresser, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. East
Orington, 3.90. Farmington, S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 22.43. Hampden,
First, 5.22. Harpswell Center, Aprons, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Limington, C., 9.15; C. E., 2. Little Deer Isle. Silas Hardy, _for
Building, Tougaloo U._, 1. Machias, Clothing, Freight, 2, _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._ Pownal, "Friends," _for Marion, Ala._, 25, Scarborough,
S., 4.75. Skowhegan, L. S., Clothing, Freight 2.29. _for Blowing Rock,
N. C._ South Freeport, Miss Fannie E. Soule, _for S. A., A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 45. South Brewer, 3.60. Waterford, Miss H. C.
Douglas, _for Freight_, 2; "Memorial of a deceased Friend," 50 cts.
Waterville, C. E., _for S. A. Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. West
Brooksville, C., 2.50; S., 75 cts.; C. E., 75 cts. West Newfield, 3.
Windham, C., by Miss S. S. Varney, _for Mobile, Ala._, 18. Woodfords,
Clothing, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Woodfords, L. S., Clothing, _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas.,
$15.00:

Ashland, Agnes R. Mitchell Memorial, 5. Portland Second Parish, S.,
Miss Conley's Class, _for Mountain Work_, 10.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $527.15--of which from Estate, $70.00.

Alstead Center, Clothing, Freight 1.26, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Amherst, S., 4. Belmont, "Friends," _for furnishing Teachers' Tables,
Tougaloo U._, 37. Claremont, Y. L. M. S., Clothing, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ Concord, Clara Howe Circle, K. D., Clothing. Francestown, S.,
3.70; C. E., 1.30. Gilmanton, 86 cts. Hanover Center, First, 2.19.
Henniker, 10.69. Keene, Second, 22.70. Kingston, 4.75. Lebanon, Mr.
and Mrs. Wm. S. Carter, 15; Mr. and Mrs. Geo. M. Amsden, 6.
Manchester, First, to const. FRANK H. HARDY, L. M., 50.71; Franklin
St., 33.24. Nashua, First, Miss E. A. Boutwell, S. Class, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 7. North Hampton, C., to const. MRS. J. W. HOBBS, L. M., 41.
Penacook, C. E., 2.45. Peterboro, Union, "Ladies' C. of Industry,"
_for Share Jubilee Fund_, 50. Plymouth, C. E., 5. Salem, S., 3.
Sanbornton, 9.30. Stratham, 7. Webster, "Two Friends," _for Marion,
Ala._, 3. Wilton, Second, C. E., 2. Winchester, C. E., _for S. A.,
Tougaloo U._, 12.

----, "Friends," _for House Furnishing, Tougaloo U._, 17.

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. and H. M. UNION, by Miss Annie A.
McFarland, Treas., $105.00:

Concord, First, "A Friend," 100; South, Miss Helen Ayer's S. Class,
5.

ESTATE. Francestown, Estate of William Butterfield, by George
Kingsbury, executor, 70.


VERMONT, $1,702.43--of which from Estate $1,239.76.

Albany, C. E., 1.57. Barre, S. and C. E., 6.71; L. M. S., Clothing,
_for Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Barton, 23.60. Barton, W. H. M. S., _for
Freight to Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 2. Brattleboro, Central, S., 5.10.
Brattleboro, L. M. S., Clothing, _for Fisk U._ Burke, Miss Emma H.
Beaman, Scrap Books, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Chelsea, 14.39.
Chelsea, Ladies of C. _for Freight to Dorchester Acad._, 1.25. Dorset,
W. H. M. S., Clothing and Bedding, _for Marshallville, Ga._ Jamaica,
Ladies' Aux., Clothing, freight paid, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._
Newbury, First, 34. North Thetford, Mrs. John Pratt, 10. Pittsford,
Mary Manley, 5. Putney, L. S., Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Randolph, "A Friend." 10; First 8.25. Rutland, S., _for S. A.,
Straight U._, 10. Saint Albans, Miss Fonda, Papers and Magazines, _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._ Springfield, by Mrs. M. C. Hutchinson, 70 cts.
Strafford, C., 9; C. E., _for Mountain Work_, 6. Tunbridge, 1.45.
Vergennes. H. M. S., Clothing, _for Enfield, N. C._ Weston, Mrs. C. W.
Sprague, 2.

----, "A Friend," 100.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Rebecca P.
Fairbanks, Treas., $211.65:

Bethel, Jr. C. E., 3.64. Brattleboro, 30. Cambridge, 1.61. Castleton,
Jr. C. E., 3. Cornwall, Jr. C. E., 5. East Dummerston, Jr. S., 2.50.
Essex Junction, Jr. C. E., 1.25. Granby, "Friends," 10; Mrs. M. A.
Willson, 5. Jericho Center, S., 3.40. Montpelier, 20. Montpelier, Jr.
C. E., 10. Pittsford, S., 10. Rutland, 15. Saint Johnsbury, Mrs.
REBECCA P. FAIRBANKS, to const. herself L. M. 50; Saint Johnsbury,
North, 8.50; East, Jr. C. E., 3. Swanton, Jr. C. E., 3. Waterbury, 5.
Windsor, 10. Woodstock, 11.75.

ESTATE. Woodstock, Estate of Mrs. Emily W. Lewis, by Mason W. Ladd,
executor, 1,239.76.


MASSACHUSETTS, $3,966.76--of which from Estates, $1,020.00.

Abington, S., 4. Amherst, First, C. E., _for Indian M._, 3.64.
Andover, West, 20.68. Ashfield, Mrs. J. W. Hall, _for Freight_, 1.
"Ayer, A. G. B.," 5.

Ayers Village, Miss Fannie Kimball, _for S. A. Fisk U._, 6. Boston,
Leyden (1 of which _for Tougaloo U._), 119.94; Mrs. Ellen M. Wellman
to const. REV. and MRS. V. F. CLARK, L. M's., 100; H. Fisher, 50;
"Christian Endeavorer, Thank Offering," 25; Old South, S., _for
Tougaloo U._, 5.20; Mabel S. Conillard's S. S. Class, Freight, 61
cents, _for Blowing_

_Rock, N. C._; Old South, Sewing Circle, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._
Charlestown, J. E. T., 5. Dorchester, Second, 75; Second, "A Friend,"
15; Second, "A Friend," _for Oahe Indian M._, 3; Harvard, _for Freight
to Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 1.09. Braintree, First, Member, 5.
Brockton, Mrs. D. D. Tilden, Christmas Gifts, _for Mobile, Ala._
Brookline, Miss Annie T. Belcher, 10. Buckland, 12.51. Cambridge, C.,
Young Ladies, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25. Cambridgeport, "R. L.
S.," 50; Hope, 5.51. Charlton, 8.35. Chelsea, Central, 48.64.
Cohasset, Second, 14. Conway, W. Soc., _for Freight to Fort Berthold,
N. D._, 5. Dalton, Zenas Crane, _for Tougaloo U._, 150.00. Dennis,
Miss S. E. Hall, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. East
Longmeadow, First, 5.56. East Somerville, Franklin Street Ortho., S.,
3.29. East Wareham, "Two Friends" (10 of which _for Alaska M._), 30.
Fall River, A. Robertson, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 1.
Fall River, L. M. Soc. Clothing, _for Fisk U._ Fitchburg, F. W.
Osgood, _for Marion, Ala._, 50 cts. Framingham, "A Friend," 5 _for
Indian M._ and 5 _for Jubilee Fund_. Great Barrington, S., 8.45. Great
Barrington, C. E., Papers and Books, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._
Hadley, First, S., 19.15. Haverhill, North, 86.79; "A Friend," 50;
Center, Rev. C. M. Clark, 20. Holbrook, Winthrop, to const. MRS. ELLEN
M. SPEAR and MISS LYDIA B. MERRITT, L. M.'s, 72.23; S., 2.21.
Hubbardston, ad'l 5. Hyde Park, Dom. M. Soc., 5. Ipswich, Rev. T.
Frank Waters, _for S. A. Fisk U._, 50; First Parish, S. & C. E., 10.
Lawrence, South, 8. Lowell, Pawtucket, C. E., _for Lowell, N. C._,
12.50. Lowell, S. Robetsheek, 1. Lexington, Hancock, H. M. & S. U.,
Clothing, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ Manchester, C. E., _for
Thomasville, Ga._, 16. Merrimac, Magazines, etc., _for Fisk U._
Millbury, First, C. E., _for Mountain Work_, 9.52. Newbury, First,
21.82. Newton, Eliot, W. M. S., _for S. A. Fisk U._, 50. Newtonville,
Central, 135.84. North Attleboro, Oldtown and Bethany Chapel, 5.71.
North Amherst, L. M. Soc., Clothing, _for Fisk U._ Northampton, "A
Friend," 300. North Andover, S., _for S. A. Fisk U._, 8.52. North
Brookfield, First, 43. North Leominster, C., 16; C. E., 2. North
Woburn, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 5.
Orleans, 19.39. Pittsfield, First Ch. of Christ, S., 26.47; South, "A
Friend," 25. Reading, "A Friend," 25. Richmond, Kings Daughters,
Clothing, and 1.21 _for Freight to Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Rockland,
Mrs. Betsey A. Hicks, 5. Salem, Tabernacle, S., 50. Salem, Crombie St.
S., _for Indian M., Santee, Neb._, 10. Salem, Crombie St., Clothing,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Saxonville, Edwards, C. E., 2.59. Somerville,
Highland, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Wilmington, N. C._, 4. South
Framingham, Miss C. A. Kendall, _for Meridian, Miss._, 5. South
Hadley, C., to const. REV. ARTHUR B. PATTEN, L. M., 30. South
Weymouth, Mrs. William Dyer, _for Jos. K. Brick, A. I._ and _N. Sch.,
Enfield, N. C._, 25.25. Springfield, Park, C. E., 5. Springfield,
First, W. H. M. S., Clothing, _for Enfield, N. C._ Springfield, C. E.,
Clothing, Mags., etc., _freight paid for Dorchester Acad., Ga._
Stockbridge, Miss Alice Byington, _for Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._,
100. Thorndike, C. E., 5.70. Townsend, 7.46. Ware, Clothing, _for
Meridian, Miss._ Wareham, Joseph J. W. Burgess, 13. Wareham, 7.35.
Warren, C. E., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 2. Webster, A. P.
Webster, Clothing, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Wellesley Hills, Mr. and
Mrs. Frank L. Fuller, _for Share Jubilee Fund_, 55. West Boxford, "The
Gleaners," _for S. A., Lexington, Ky._, 8. West Brookfield, by Miss
Alice J. White, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 2. West Haverhill,
C. E., 6.20. West Medway, Mrs. E. J. Spencer, 1. West Newbury, C.,
_for S. A., Straight U._, 5. West Somerville, Highland, 10. West
Springfield, "Unknown," 50c. West Tisbury, First, 15.38. Worcester,
Plymouth, S. _for Tougaloo U._, 25; "Two Friends," _for Freight_, 10;
"A Friend," 10.

----, "A Friend," _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 20.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., $620.00.:

W. H. M. A., of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese
Work_, 20; _for S. A., Straight U._, 10; Boston Union, Mrs. Francis
Rolfe, 25. Roxbury, 50. South Boston, Miss C. A. Harlow and Miss
Florence Nickerson, 5. Stoneham, Stevens, H. M. S., to const. MISS
LUCY J. JOHNSON, L. M., 30.

ESTATES. Holliston, Estate of George Batchelder, J. M. Batchelder,
Executor, 500. Northampton, Estate of Numan Clark, part bequest, 20.
South Hadley, Estate of Mrs. Maria Burnham Gridley, In Memory of her
husband, the late Addison Gridley, of Granby, Mass., by Loomis T.
Tiffany, Executor, 500.


RHODE ISLAND, $161.27.

Little Compton, United, 24.57. Pawtucket, James Coates, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 100. Providence, Pilgrim, 25; North, C. E., 1.70.

Providence, R. E. Tenney, _for S. A. Lincoln Normal School, Marion,
Ala._, 10.


CONNECTICUT, $1,849.24--of which from Estates $525.00.

Bethel, First, C. E., _for Mountain Work_, 2.50. Bridgeport, First,
_for Tougaloo U._, 33.68; E. P. Bullard, Clothing, _for Mobile, Ala._
Bristol, "A Friend," _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 25. Canaan, Ladies' H.
M. S., Clothing, _for Thomasville, Ga._ Centre Brook, S., 6.49. Centre
Brook and Ivoryton, 16.25. Cheshire, C. E., 3.97. Chester, 17.50.
Columbia, 21.75. Dayville, C. E., 2.42. East Canaan, C. E., 6.16.
Eastford, 7.80. Ellsworth, 10. Glastonbury, J. B. Williams, _for
Building, Tougaloo U._, 50. Glastonbury, First, S., _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 5. Glastonbury, Christ's, Jr. C. E., _for Mobile, Ala._,
10; Goshen, S., 5.44. Hartford, First, 226.07; Park, 36.06; "S. M.
D.," 30; "A Friend," 15; H. Blanchard, 10; Asylum Hill, "Two Friends,"
6. Hartford, Asylum Hill, Prudential Com., _for Gloucester Sch.
Cappahosic, Va._, 25. Hartford, "A Friend," 5; J. C. Williams, 50,
_for Building, Tougaloo U._ Hartford, ----, _for Tougaloo U._, 75
cents. Ledyard, S., 2 75. Litchfield, Mrs. Ella Grannis, 6. Lyme, C.
E., 5. Manchester, Second C. E., 10.33; "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._,
5. Marlboro, 1.81. Meriden, "N. F., First Cong. Ch.," 10. Meriden,
First Jr. C. E., _for Building, Tougaloo U._, 4. Middleton, South, 10.
Mount Carmel, C. E., 1.50. New Britain, First Ch. of Christ, to const.
Mrs. SARAH A. STRONG, L. M., 30. New Britain, D. N. Camp, _for
Building, Tougaloo U._, 25; "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._, 10. New
Haven, United, 210. New Haven, United C., 100 yards Cloth, _for Sewing
Sch., Macon, Ga._ New Milford, "A Friend," _for Macon, Ga._, 1.50. New
Windsor, Miss Holmes' S. Class, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 12. Noank,
M. H. Giddings, 3. Northfield, S., 1. North Guilford, 15. Norwalk,
First, Jr. C. E., _for Tougaloo U._, 4.50. Norwich, Second, S., _for
Athens, Ala._, 13.84. Plainville, S., 7.67. Plymouth, Mrs. M. T.
Wardell, _for Tougaloo U._, 20. Plymouth, S., 4.52. Putnam, G. G.
Smith's S. Class, _for Savannah, Ga._, 5. Salisbury, C., 9.10; S.,
11.45. Saybrook, Thomas C. Acton, Jr., 12.85; C. E., 3. Somers, Mrs.
E. L. Hurlbert, Clothing, _for Fisk U._ Stamford, First, C. E., _for
Indian Sch., Oahe, S. D._, 31.18. Talcottville, C. E., _for S. A.,
Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 8. Terryville, S., 11.72. Thomaston,
First, 13.91. Thompson. S., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 10; First,
Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Trumbull, 6.21. Wallingford, B. B.
Brown, 20. Wauregan, 26. Woodstock, ----, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._,
17.45; Mrs. Childs' S. Class and Children's M. Band, Clothing, _for
All Healing, N. C._ Yantic, L. M. Soc., Clothing, _for Thomasville,
Ga._

----, C. B. P., 30.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $46.10.

Thompson, 21.10. Trumbull, 25.

ESTATES. Groton, Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt, 325. West Hartford,
Estate of Nancy S. Gaylord, 200.


NEW YORK, $497.61.

Brooklyn, Park, 12.52; Plymouth, 5. Brooklyn, Miss C. D. Jennings, 5;
Park, L. M. S., 4.50; Lee Av., L. M. Aux., Clothing, _for All Healing,
N. C._ Brooklyn, Mrs. F. W. Gallison, Clothing; Miss D. M. Halliday,
Clothing; Edith Beecher, Music Box, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Buckstone,
Ladies' Soc., Clothing, _for Mobile, Ala._ Canandaigua, First, 56.84.
Carthage, First, L. M. S., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 4.16. Dobbs
Ferry, Westminster Sch., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 51.10. East Evans, S.,
1. Elizabethtown, 4.80. Franklin, 13.20. Greene, Senior C. E., 2.
Hamilton, 22. Honeoye, C. (9 of which _for Fisk U._), 20.30.
Hopkinton, 26.32. Jamestown, First. S., 7.13. Lisle, S., 3. Middle
Island, Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, 10. Middletown, First, 8.85.
Morristown, 7.72. New Haven, S., 2.40. New York, Forest Av., C. E.,
_for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. New York, "Anonymous," _for Indian M._, 5.
New York, Mrs. W. F. Merrill, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 5. New
York, Miss F. Pilet, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1. New
York, Rev. S. Bourne, Clothing. Northfield, 12.78. Randolph, First, C.
E., 8. Richmond Hill, Union. S., 7.35. Saratoga, N. E., Clothing; Mrs.
A. L. Douglass, _for Freight_, 1.50; _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
Sinclairville, Freight, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 2.14. Syracuse,
South Av., C. E., 3. Ticonderoga, Miss Burt, _for All Healing, N. C._,
10. Troy, Mrs. Caroline H. Shields, _for Gloucester Sch., Va._, 25.
Walton, "Friends," Clothing, _for All Healing, N. C._ Westfield, Jr.,
C. E., _for S. A., Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._, 6. White Plains, Mrs.
A. W. Ferris, Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $118.00:

Antwerp, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 10. Aquebogue, 4. Binghamton, 25.
Candor, _for Sch'p., Saluda, N. C._, 10. Homer, S., 5. Lysander, _for
S. A., Talladega C._, 2. New York, Broadway Tab., 27.

New York, Manhattan Guild, _for Chinese M._, 25. Sherburne, "Little
Lights," 10.


NEW JERSEY, $226.00.

Colts Neck, Reformed, 4. Haddonfield. J. I. Glover, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 5. Montclair, First, S. W. S., Clothing, etc.,
_for Enfield, N. C._ Newark, Frank E. Haines, _for Mechanical Drawing,
Tillotson Inst._, 50. Ocean Grove, Mrs. G. W. Dayton, _for Mobile,
Ala._, 4. Plainfield, C., A Lady, 2. Plainfield, S., Clothing, _for
Marshallville, Ga._ Upper Montclair, W. Aid Soc., Clothing, 1,
_Freight for Wilmington, N. C._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. J. ASSN., by Mrs. H. Denison,
Treas., $160.00:

W. H. M. Union of N. J. 150. Montclair, First, _for S. A., Talladega
C._, 10.


PENNSYLVANIA, $23.75.

Carlisle, "A Friend," _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 5.
Kingston, Welsh, 6.50. Newtown Square, Chas. E. Stevens, 7. New
Wilmington, "A Friend." 1., Clothing, etc., _for Lexington, Ky._
Ogontz, Miss Barnard and Miss Gates, Clothing, Freight, 2, _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._ Philadelphia, Ladies' Bible Soc., Box New Bibles
and Testaments, _for Fisk U._ Sallsbury, Mrs. R. W. Fais, Clothing,
_for Mobile, Ala._ West Spring Creek, First, 1.25.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENN. by Mrs.

T. W. Jones, 1.00.

Spring Creek, 1.


OHIO, $866.41--of which from Estate, $500.00.

Akron, Arlington St., S. and C. E., 2.07. Bellevue, 6. Cleveland,
Pilgrim, 63.06; Pilgrim, C. E., _for Song Books, Dorchester Acad._,
30; Trin., 3. Cleveland, Pilgrim, Temple Circle K. D., Clothing, _for
Dorchester Acad., Ga._: Pilgrim, Clothing, _for Mobile, Ala._
Kingsville, Miss Eliza S. Comings, 5, _for Freedmen_: 5 _for Indian
M._ Madison Central, 4.37. Madison, C. E., Clothing, _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._ Mansfield, First, S., 25. Marietta, First, 10; M. E. Ch.,
Clothing, _for Mobile, Ala._ Marysville, L. Soc., Clothing, _for
Andersonville, Ga._ New Milford, E. C. Prindle, 1.50. Oberlin, First,
S., 11; Mrs. E. B. Clark, 10. Oberlin, Mrs. J. B. Thompson, _for
Chinese M._, 3. Oberlin, Second, Clothing, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Painesville, Miss N. Mosha, Clothing, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
Palmyra, C. & S., 3.77. Pittsfield, Miss A. F. Whitney and "Friends,"
_for Indian M., Standing Rock Agency, N. D._, 6. Pierpont, 5. Plain,
1.44. Saybrook, 8.20. Saybrook, Rev. and Mrs. C. W. Grupe, 2.50.
Springfield, First, 8.25; Senior Dept., S., 6; Primary Department, S.,
1, _for Mountain Work_. Strongsville, First, 10. Toledo, Miss F. M.
Williams, _for Thomasville, Ga._, 2.50. Whittlesey, L. M. Soc. (5 of
which _for Tougaloo U._), 10.

OHIO WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Mrs. George B. Brown, Treas.,
$122.75:

Alexis, "Willing Workers," 5. Aurora, C. E., 5. Bellevue, 3.50.
Berea, 5. Charlestown, 2.50. Cleveland, East Madison Av., Int., Jr. C.
E., 2.50. Columbus, Mayflower, 3. Edinburg, 10. Elyria, 10. Marietta,
Oak Grove, 6. Medina, Jr. C. E., 10. Painesville, First, 7.25.
Ravenna, Jr. C. E., 2. Springfield, C. E., 13; Prim. S., 2; W. H. M.
S., 3. Tallmadge, 15. Toledo, Washington St., 8. Willoughby, Miss Mary
P. Hastings, 10.

ESTATE. Oberlin, Estate of Mrs. Lucy C. Hardy, by Rev. Hinds Smith,
Executor, 500.


INDIANA, $3.61.

Fairmount, 2.61. Ridgeville, S., 1.


ILLINOIS, $403.06.

Alton, Miss I. D. Gilman, _for Mobile, Ala._, 6. Alto Pass, 2.07.
Austin, C. E., 5. Bloomington (7 of which _for Alaska M._), 17.
Carpentersville, 11.85. Carpentersville, S., 5.15. Chicago, South, W.
M. S., 25. Chicago, Millard Av., C. E., 15; Miss Barber, 50c. Chicago,
"A Friend," _for Marion, Ala._, 5. Cobden, 2.25. Dwight, 5.75. Elgin,
Miss Linda Jennie, _for Marion, Ala._, 5. Fall Creek, "Friends," to
const. MRS. FRED REICH, L. M., 30. Galesburg, Central, S., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 15. Greenville, 4. Gridley, S., _for Tougaloo U._, 5.
Harvey, C. E., 2. Henry, 3. Highland, 6.25. Joliet, E. C. Hargar, _for
Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 10. Lockport, Ladies' Soc., 5, and Papers
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Oak Park, Needlework Guild, 22 New Garments;
First, L. B. S., Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Odell, Clothing,
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Oneida, C. and S. 19.79. Paxton, 14.14.
Peoria, Mrs. M. P. Stevens and S. Class, 2; Rev. A. A. Stevens, 2,
_for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._ Princeton, Mrs. F. W. Stewart _for
Marian, Ala._, 6. Rio, 3.35. Rockford, Rockford College, _for S. A.,
Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 10. Rockton, 6. Saunemin, Mrs.
Mary E. Knowlton, 1. Somonauk, 9.95. Somonauk, C. E., 2.18. ----,
Eugene B. Read, Freight, 2, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
$139.23:

Alton, Ch. of R., 17. Chicago, New Eng., 15.50. Union Park, 35.
Jacksonville, 11.80. Oak Park, Mrs. Humphrey, 50. Oneida, 1.93.
Payson, 2. Rockford, First, 1. Rollo, 5.


MICHIGAN, $85.72.

Ann Arbor, First, L. M. Soc., Clothing, _for Macon, Ga._ Church, Mrs.
A. W. Douglass, Clothing, Freight, 1.91, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Grand Rapids, Plymouth, S., 2.86. Hudson, L. S., Clothing, _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._ Jackson, First. S., 12.11. Kalamazoo, First, _for
S. A., Joppa, Ala._, 7.90. Leland, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. M. Porter, _for
Marion, Ala._, 10. Port Huron, First. S., 10. Saline, Mrs. C. F. Hill,
_for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 5. Sherwood, "Lincoln Mem. Off.," 60
cents.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $35.34:

Ann Arbor, 10. Coloma, 25 cents. Dexter, 50 cents. Grass Lake, 3.50.
Middleville, 15 cents. New York,

Mrs. Abby K. Tillotson. 19.44. Olivet, S., _for S. A., Santee Indian
Sch._, 1. Ovid, Jr. C. E., 50 cents.


IOWA, $277.50.

Algona, King's Daughters, Bedding, _for Fisk U._ Anamosa, 8.05.
Blairsburg, 2.13. Boonsboro, S. W. Thayer, 2. Buffalo Center, 1. Cedar
Rapids, Willing Workers, _for Savannah, Ga._, 5. Decorah, First,
34.80. Decorah, Mrs. G. B. Millet, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._,
5. Des Moines, "A Friend," 8. "A Friend," Pkg. Christmas Cards, _for
Mobile, Ala._ Des Moines, Frank, Howard and Carroll Cowles, _for S.
A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 50 cents. Earlville, 7. Estherville,
Clothing, _for Meridian, Miss._ Fonda, Hattie Pinneo, 40 cents.
Fontanelle, Mrs. Sybil C. Gow, 8. Hampton, C. E., 2.25. Harlan, 4.17.
Humboldt, L. M. S., _for Savannah, Ga._, 5. Ottumwa, Second, 4. Polk
City, S., 1.53. Riceville, C., 11.50; L. M. Soc., 3; C. E., 2.60.
Waverly, First, 7.85. ----, Friends, _for Library, Joppa, Ala._, 7.50.

IOWA WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$146.25:

Anita, _for Sch'p. Fisk U._, 25. Des Moines, Plymouth, 6.40; North
Park, 2. Davenport, Edwards, 8. Eldora, 10; Eldora, C. E., 15.
Emmetsburg, 1. Farragut, 10. Grinnell, Plymouth, _for S. A., Talladega
C._, 9. Grinnell, 10.21. Hampton, J. C. E., 1.54. McGregor, 10.10.
Ottumwa, 5. Old Man's Creek, 3. Red Oak, Miss Martha Clark, 15.
Waterloo, C. E., 5. Winthrop, 10.


WISCONSIN, $229.91.

Columbus, Mrs. H. J. Ferris, Clothing, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Durand, L. M. S., 5. Eagle River, Mrs. B. F. Jones, _for Lincoln Sch.,
Marion, Ala._, 1. Green Bay, James Challenger, 2. Hartford, First, to
const. REV. CLEMENT C. CAMPBELL, L. M. 45. Milwaukee, Grand Av., 53;
Hanover St., 7.21. Milwaukee, Robert and Helen Willard, _for A. G.
Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Ripon, First, 40.50. Sheboygan, 38. Sun
Prairie, 9. Whitewater, First, C. E., 5. Windsor S., _for S. A.,
Meridian, Miss._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $18.20:

Beloit, First, 5.70. Fort Atkinson, 1.50. Ripon, S., 11.


MINNESOTA, $48.03--of which from Estate, $16.13.

Austin, W. M. Soc., _for Freight to Marion, Ala._, 2.65. Duluth, Mrs.
L. H. Roe, _for Marion, Ala._, 10. Lake Park, 3. La Verne, Jr. C. E.,
Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Litchfield, Mrs. M. Weeks, 2;
Clothing, _for Meridian, Miss._ Minneapolis, Como Av., C. E. 4.50;
Infant Class, S., 2; Class of Boys 50 cts, _for Macon, Ga._ Sauk
Center, 7.25.

ESTATE. Bloomington Ferry, Estate of H. D. Cunningham, by Sever
Ellingson, 16.13.


MISSOURI, $229.86.

Bonne Terre, C. E., 1. Riverdale, 5.21. Saint Louis, Pilgrim, 46.
Saint Louis, Pilgrim, Ladies' Clothing, _for Fisk U._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MISSOURI, by Mrs. K. L. Mills,
Treas., $186.99, less expenses $9.34. ---- $177.65:

Little Rock, Ark., 1.50. Old Orchard, Children's Band, 45c. Rogers,
Ark., 2. Saint Louis, First, to const., MRS. JOSEPH L. SWAN, L. M.,
35. Saint Louis, First, 1. Saint Louis, Pilgrim, 60.89; Compton Hill,
27.03; Central, 20; Memorial, 10; Plymouth, 9.50; Immanuel, 4.50; Hyde
Park, C. E., 5. Springfield, Pilgrim, 92c. Webster Grove, 9.20.


KANSAS, $46.84.

Eureka, First, Class of Little Girls, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._, 1. Garfield, 2. Garnet, S., 3. Maple Hill, Clothing, _for
Meridian, Miss._ Paola, 10.10. Westmoreland, 2.74. White Cloud, First,
2.

----, "Friend" (1 of which _for Chinese M._), 26.


NEBRASKA, $122.11.

Aurora, C. E., 1.61. Fairfield, W. E. Loomis, _for Lincoln Sch.,
Marion, Ala._, 5. Hastings, S., 3. Omaha, Saratoga, 2. Santee, Miss
Edith Leonard, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 50. Santee
Agency, Pilgrim, 30.50. Santee, from Unknown Source, _for Santee,
Neb._, 5.

----, "A Friend in Nebraska," 25.


NORTH DAKOTA, $117.89.

Cando, S., 1.49. Dwight, 6. Elbowoods, School Com., _for Tuition of
Pupils, Indian Sch._, 60. Elbowoods, Dr. J. L. Finney, _for Indian M.,
Fort Berthold, N. D._, 5. Elbowoods, Sew. Soc., _for Indian M.,
Independence Station, N. D._, 5. Elkhorn Butte, 2.75. Fargo, Miss
Fisher's Primary Class, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 2.50.
Fort Berthold, Thanksgiving Off., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold_,
20.15. Valley City, C. E. _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 5.
Webster, Pkg. Patchwork, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NORTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Mary M.
Fisher, Treas., 10.00

Wahpeton, C. E., 10.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $71.75.

Erwin, 3.51. Fort Pierre, 3. Sioux Falls, 7.74. Yankton, "A Friend,"
_for Santee, Neb._, 30. Yankton, Miss M. E. Bartow, _for Indian M.,
Independence Station, N. D._, 1.

----, "Friends," 15.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $11.50:

DeSmet, 2.50. Gettsburg, 1. Redfield, 5. Redfield, S., 3.


MONTANA, $6.50.

Castle, Mrs. Barnes, _for Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._, 6.50.


IDAHO, $20.00.

Genesee, Edwin London, 20.


WYOMING, $4.52.

Sheridan, 4.52.


COLORADO, $31.37.

Longmont, First, 15.50. Denver, Plymouth, S., 11.52. Denver, Olivet,
2. La Fayette, 2.35.


CALIFORNIA, $399.85.

Bakersfield, C. _for Mountain Work_, 3. Cloverdale, 7.10. Oakland,
Plymouth Av., 4. Ontario, Ad'l, 18. Poway, Rev. H. C. Abernethy, _for
Marion, Ala._, 50. San Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese
Mission (see items below), 317.75.


OREGON, $9.52.

Ashland, C. E., 2. Astoria, First, 1.90.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OREGON, by Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Treas.:

W. H. M. U. of Oregon, 5.62.


WASHINGTON, $15.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WASHINGTON, by Mrs. Edward B.
Burwell, Treas.:

W. H. M. U. of Washington, 15.


MARYLAND, $1.50.

Baltimore, Mrs. J. S. Dinwoodie, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._,
1.50.


VIRGINIA, $9.50.

Mathews Co., Mrs. A. Foster, 1; G. Taliafern, 1; _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ Troy, Mrs. L. M. Marvin, 6; Miss L. Hoag, 1.50;
_for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._

WEST VIRGINIA.

New Cumberland, N. Y. Fay, 25. Books, _for Macon, Ga._


KENTUCKY, $8.40.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 3. Williamsburg, Rev. W. G. Olinger, _for
S. A., Williamsburg Acad., Ky._, 5.40.


NORTH CAROLINA, $1.00.

Blowing Rock, Mrs. E. F. Leonard, 1.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $5.00.

Greenwood, Miss Clara S. Boyd, 5.


TENNESSEE, $37.17.

Chattanooga, J. W. White, 1. Deer Lodge, 10. Jellico, 60 cts.
Nashville, Union, 21.50. Pleasant Hill, C. E., 4.07.


GEORGIA, $44.90.

McIntosh, Midway, to const. REV. A. L. DEMOND, L. M., 30. McIntosh,
Mrs. Fred W. Foster, 3; Richard Clemens, 40 cts., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad._, Thomasville, Allen N. & I. Sch., _for Marion,
Ala._, 10; "A Friend," 50c. Woodville, Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 1.


ALABAMA, $112.55

Anniston, Abraham Lincoln Cent. Soc., 2.35; W. M. S., 2.40; K. D.
Soc. (little girls), 25c. Joppa, S., _for Joppa_, 1.10. Marion,
Colored People of Marion, _for Lincoln Normal Sch._, 60.65.
Pushmataha, Amy Harrison, _for Meridian, Miss._, 3.80. Selma, Rev. T.
J. Bell, 6; Rev. A. T. Burnell, 5; Prof. J. A. Merriman, 3.60; Mrs.
Mary A. Dillard, 2.40, _for S. A., Burrell Sch., Selma, Ala._;
Talladega, Abraham Lincoln Cent. Soc., bal. _for Share Jubilee Fund_,
25.


FLORIDA, $41.00.

Fernandina, Elisha F. Richardson, 15; Homeland, Chas. Porter, _for S.
A., Tougaloo U._, 20; Ormond, C. E., _for Indian M._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF FLA., by Mrs. W. D. Brown, Treas.,
1.00

Interlachen, Aux., 1.


LOUISIANA, $14.80.

Hammond, 5.80; New Iberia, Saint Paul, 7.50.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF LOUISIANA, by Mary L. Rogers, Treas.,
$1.50:

Roseland, _for Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 1.50.


----, $65.00.

----, Miss E. T. Bird, _for Tougaloo U._, 50.

----, "A Friend," _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 10.

----, A Friend, _for Lincoln Normal Sch., Marion, Ala._, 5.00.


INCOME, $203.00.

Atterbury Endowment Fund, 5. Wm. Belden Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega
C._, 30. H. Carter, Theo. Endowment Fund, 5. Rev. B. Foltz, Endowment
Fund, 15. General Endowment Fund, 20. Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard
U._, 60. Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 30. Straight U. Sch'p
Fund, 10. Tuthill King Endowment Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 20. Yale
Library Fund, _for Talladega C._, 8.


TUITION, $4,896.93.

Lexington, Ky., 116.75; Williamsburg, Ky., 223.48; Cappahosic, Va.,
42.25; All Healing, N. C., 43; Blowing Rock, N. C., 29.52; Beaufort,
N. C., 18.45; Chapel Hill, N.C., 33; Enfield, N. C., 35.37; Hillsboro,
N. C., 33; Troy, N. C., 1.43; Whittier, N. C., 21.90; Wilmington, N.
C., 22.15; Charleston, S. C., 321.82; Greenwood, S. C., 107.41;
Knoxville, Tenn., 46.30; Memphis, Tenn., 646.32; Nashville, Tenn.,
911.92; Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 111.95; Albany, Ga., 104; Atlanta, Ga.,
Storrs Sch., 237.43; Andersonville, Ga., 14.80; Macon, Ga., 286.93;
Marshallville, Ga., 1; New Orleans, La., 419.39; Savannah, Ga.,
309.79; Thomasville, Ga., 72.75; Joppa, Ala., 16.10; Florence, Ala.,
14.80; Marion, Ala., 95.67; Mobile, Ala., 91.60; Selma, Ala., 52.45;
Meridian, Miss., 104.50; Tougaloo, Miss., 123.75; Moorhead, Miss.,
20.35; Austin, Tex., 135.45; Orange Park, Fla., 55.65.


SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY 1898.

     Donations                                       $9,137.71
     Estates                                          3,370.89
                                                    ----------
                                                    $12,508.60
     Income                                             203.00
     Tuition                                          4,896.93
                                                    ----------
     Total for February                             $17,608.53


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for February                         $30.25
     Previously acknowledged                            137.97
                                                       -------
                                                       $168.22


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION William Johnstone,
Treas., from Dec. 21, 1897, to Jan'y 27, 1898, $317.75.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS $143.95.

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 4.50, Ann. M., 2.50, Joe Dun, 1; Los Angeles,
Chinese M's, 5.50, Ann. M., 2.50; Marysville, Chinese M., 7.80;
Oakland, Chinese M., 6; First Cong. Ch., 33; Oroville, Chinese M.,
2.25; Pasadena, Chinese M., 4; Petaluma, Chinese M., 2.50; Riverside,
Chinese M., 5.05; Sacramento, Chinese M., 5.60; San Bernardino,
Chinese M., 1.50; San Diego, Chinese M., 1.25; San Francisco, Central
Chinese M., 7.50, Ann. M's, 4, Miss Sarah Caughey, 1; San Francisco,
West, Chinese M., 1.45; San Francisco Branch Ass'n, one year, M. O.,
15; Santa Barbara, Chinese M., 6.45, Christmas Gift, 2.50; Santa Cruz,
Chinese M. O., 6.10; Santa Cruz, Japanese M.O., 7.25; Ventura, Chinese
M. O., 75c.; Watsonville, Chinese M. O., 5, Ann. M., 2; Oakland, Cal.

INDIVIDUAL DONATIONS $105.00.

Rev. F. B. Perkins, 5; New Haven, Conn., Mrs. Henry Farnum, 100.

FOR CHINESE WOMEN AND GIRLS $68.80.

Bangor, Me., First S., 10.60; South Britain, W. M. S., of Cong. Ch.,
5; Oakland, First, Y. L. Guild, 30; King's Daughters, 5; Miss S. A.
Gallie, 1; San Jose, First Cong. Ch., Kingdom Extension Soc., 17.20.


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Av. and Twenty-Second St.,
  New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for March                                  $515.33
     Previously acknowledged                         34,332.35
                                                    ----------
                                                    $34,847.68
                                                    ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $216.65.

Bangor, Central, Individuals and S., _for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._, 25. Bluehill, L. M. C., 2. Boothbay Harbor, 10.35. Boothbay
Harbor, Mrs. M. Alice Beal, 2. Bucksport, Miss Charlotte S. Barnard,
_for Indian M._, 5. Castine, Noah Brooks, _for S. A. McIntosh, Ga._,
2. Ellsworth Falls, Miss Whitaker's S. Class, _for S. A., McIntosh,
Ga._, 1.50. Gardiner, First, 24. Gray, 2.58. Harrison, 3. Hiram, C.,
1.50; C. E., 1. Lewiston, Pine St., Mrs. Sarah E. Dinsmore's S. Class,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8. Lewiston, L. M. S., Clothing, _for
Marion, Ala._ North Bridgton, 6. Orland, Miss Hannah Buck and
"Friends," Clothing and Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Portland, West, 16;
"A Friend," 5. Sebago, 1.60. South Berwick, Clothing, _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._ South Gardiner, 8. Waterville, First, 25; First, C. E.,
2. West Brooksville, _for Freight_, 2. West Ellsworth, Bapt. Miss'y A.
Soc., Clothing and Freight, 1.50, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Whiting, S.
Class, _for S. A., Lincoln Acad., N. C._, 5. Wilton, 8.62. Wilton,
Woman's Aid, 8. Yarmouth, L. A. Soc., Clothing, _for Big Creek Gap,
Tenn._ York, Second, 5.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas., $35.00:

Bethel, 23. Woodfords, 4.50. Woodfords, "A Friend," _for Mountain
Work_, 5. Limerick, _for Agnes R. Mitchell Memorial_, 2.50.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,551.57--of which from Estate, $1,000.79.

Alton, 1.40. Amherst, "L. F. B.," 150. Bennington, C., 3.25; C. E.,
2.25. Berlin Mills, C. E., 5. Bethlehem, C., 3.50; C. E., 1.50.
Croydon, 7. Exeter, First, 149.25; Phillips, 50. Exeter, Phillips, S.,
_for Indian Sch., Santee, Neb._, 10. Greenville, C. E., 5. Hampton,
5.70. Hancock, 5. Hancock, Miss L. H. Kimball, 2, _for Freight to
Blowing Rock, N. C._ Hudson, Miss E. A. Warner, _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._, 14. Littleton, First, 24.69. New Castle, "Christian League,"
2.53. Newfields, by Miss H. L. Fitts, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 52.
Newfields, _for Freight to Gregory Inst., N. C._, 2. North Barnstead,
80 cts. North Hampton, C. E., _for Normal Inst., Grand View, Tenn._,
25. Rochester, First, 17.91. Suncook, Mrs. J. Chickering and Sister,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 10. Swanzey, Miss Mary A. Downing, from
boys in her S. Class, _for Pleasant Hill Acad._, 1. Concord, Clothing,
_for Tougaloo U._

ESTATE. Candia, Estate of Nancy Parker, J. Lane Fitts, Executor,
1,000.79.


VERMONT, $401.87.

Barton, W. H. M. S., Clothing, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Benson, 4.90.
Berlin, 12.52. Brattleboro, First, Fessenden Girls, 10; Dea. Thompson,
10; First, 5.40; _for S. A., Fisk U._ Brownington and Barton Landing,
17.30. Burlington, Ladies' S., Clothing, etc., _for Greenwood, S. C._
Castleton, C., 3.10; C. E., 3. Dorset, W. H. M. S., 5 and Clothing,
_for Marshallville, Ga._ Fair Haven, First, 20.14. Manchester, Miss E.
J. Kellogg, 5. Morgan, Miss Lucy Little, 50 cts. North Bennington,
28.45. Northfield, 28.73. North Pomfret, 5. Peacham, 27. Post Mills,
3.10. Randolph Center, 7.85. Rutland, 80. Salisbury, Mrs. R. J.
Bartow, 1, _for Freight on Clothing to Burrell Sch., Selma, Ala._
Saxtons River, 20. Stockbridge, Rev. T. S. Hubbard, 5.39. Thetford,
Miss Mary L. Ward, 2. West Brattleboro, 18.63. West Brattleboro, _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 16. West Charleston, 13. West Glover, W. H. M. S.,
Clothing, _for McIntosh, Ga._ West Hartford, 2.09. Westminster, Jr. C.
E. S., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 4.50. Williston,
4.27. Windham, C., 23.11; S., 1.89; "A Friend," Townsend, Vt., 5; to
const. REV. GEORGE ROGER, L. M.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, Mrs. Rebecca P. Fairbanks,
Treas., $8.00:

Pittsford, 8.


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,782.57--of which from Estates, $3,242.00.

Andover, South, S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. Andover, South, Y. L.
Soc. of C. W., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 20. Arlington, S., 6; Prim.
Class, 5. Ashburnham, First, 17.06. Auburndale, C., "A Friend," 25.
Auburndale, Ladies' Benev. Soc., Clothing, _for Nat., Ala._ Ayers
Village, Fannie L. Kimball, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 3. Belchertown, C.
B. Southick, 50 cts. Berkley, First, 25.85. Boston, Old South, 279.57;
"A Friend," 60. Boston, Mrs. Susan C. Warren, _for Pleasant Hill
Acad., Tenn._, 100. Boston, Henry E. Warren, _for Indian Sch., Oahe,
S. D._, 1. Dorchester, Second, 25; Central, 20.86. Dorchester, Rev. H.
Houston, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Dorchester,
Dea. Thos. Knapp's Bible Class, 8.; Second, Extra Cent-a-Day Band, 8,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Roxbury, Mrs. P. M. Livermore, _for
Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 50. Roxbury, Immanuel C., _for Furnishing
Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. West Roxbury, Lucy M. Smith, _for Furnishing
Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Boxford, First, S., _for Macon, Ga._, 10.
Brookline, Leyden, 3.50. Cambridge, Wood Memorial, C. E., 7. Campello,
South, S., 9.30. Chelsea, Central, S., 9.47. Chester Center, 2.
Chicopee, First, 4.60. Chicopee Falls, Second, 33.25. Conway, Rev.
Eugene F. Hunt, 10. Dalton, First, to const. REUBEN BELLOWS, J. JACOB
BEISEIGEL, JESSE T. GAGE, ORSON J. MELLEN, GEO. B. SCUDDER and SIMON
B. SMALL, L. M's, 202.27. Dalton, C. E. S., _for Furnishing Room,
Tougaloo U._, 25. Danvers, First, 28. Dover, Miss E. C. Frost, 1 and
Clothing, _for Saluda, N. C._ East Bridgewater, Union, 4. East
Northfield, Miss Agnes M. Bigelow, 100. Foxboro, Bethany, 18.21;
Bethany, S., 6.37. Framingham, Plymouth (25 of which from E. H.
Bigelow), 62.96. Framingham, "A Friend," _for Indian Schp._, 17.50.
Greenfield, Mrs. Ellen M. Russell, 25. Greenwich Village, L. A.
Parker, "In memory of Daniel Parker," 5. Grafton, Evan., 40.63.
Granby, C. of Christ, "Friends," 3. Great Barrington, S., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 18.26. Great Barrington, First, C.
E., 8. Hanover, First, Willing Workers, 3.25; Second, 1.80. Hanson,
First, 6.50. Haverhill, North, Seeley C. E., 50; Fourth, S., 5; _for
S. A., Fisk U._ Haverhill Centre, 41.52. Holliston, First, 33.15.
Holyoke, Second, 54.15; First, 28.69. Holyoke, First, Int. Soc. of C.
E., _for Indian Work, Santee Neb._, 6.50. Hyde Park, First, 53.36.
Islington, 4.50. Lawrence, Trinity, S., _for Furnishing New Dormitory,
Tougaloo U._, 3.70. Lee, S., _for Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25.
Lee, C., Bedding, val. 50, _for Charleston, S. C._ Leominster, 28.06.
Lowell, First Trin., to const. REV. GEO. F. KENNGOTT, L. M. 38.07;
John St., 21.38. Lowell, Kirk St., L. A. Soc., _for S. A., Grand View,
Tenn._, 10. Malden, Miss Aiken, 5. Medfield, Second, 10.58; C. E., 5.
Medford, Union, 30.72. Melrose, 64.54. Middleboro, Central, 3.65;
Central, S., 8.94. Millbury, Second, 19.06. Mittineague, Southworth
Paper Co., Case Paper, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Newton, Eliot, 36.
Newton Centre, John Ward, 50; Maria Furber M. Soc., 25, _for
Furnishing Rooms, Tougaloo U._ Newton Highlands, Mrs. Hyde, _for
Freight to Tougaloo U._, 50 cts. New Bedford, North, 53.34. North
Adams, C. E., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 14. North
Amherst, Mrs. G. E. Fisher, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Northampton,
Edwards, "Friends," _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 10.
Northampton, Edwards, Ladies' Benevolent Soc., _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._, 8. Northampton, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._ North Beverly,
Second, C. E., 3. North Falmouth, C. E., 3.05. North Leominster, Miss
Kendall, 3.50; Chas. Johnson, 1; Miss Carrie L. Wood, 3.50, _for S.
A., Fisk U._ North Middleboro, 17.88. Pittsfield, Ladies' Benevolent
Soc., _for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8. Randolph, L. B. A., _for Tougaloo
U._, 25. Reading, 18. Rehoboth, C. E., 5. Richmond, King's Daughters,
_for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 5. Rockville, C. Chapel,
_for Mobile, Ala._, 5. Royalston, D. P. Foster, _for Mountain Work_,
5; First, 3.40. Rutland, First, 12.62. Salem, Tabernacle (1.25 of
which _for Indian M._), 64.62. Salem, Crombie St., Clothing, King's
Daughters, 6; Crombie St., Benevolent Soc., 2; _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._ Saxonville, Edwards, 14.17. Somerville, Broadway, 26.32. South
Easton, 20. South Framingham, Grace, S., 29.40. South Hadley Falls,
56.93. South Hadley Falls, L. A. Soc., Bedding, etc., _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._ South Weymouth, Union, Clothing, _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._ Sutton, 3.61. Springfield, Mrs. A. L. Brooks, _for Furnishing
Room, Tougaloo U._, 12.50; St. John's, S., 5.10; C. E., 5; Jr. C. E.,
1.36; _for Tougaloo U._ Springfield, "A Friend," 25 cts. Springfield,
Clothing, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Tewksbury, C. and S., Cards,
Clothing, etc., _for Fisk U._ Turners Falls, 37.42. Upton, First,
18.35. Warren, C. E., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 2.
Watertown, Phillips' Sew. C., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 10. Wellesley,
Wellesley College, by Miss Agnes Beecher Scoville, _for Indian Sch.,
Oahe, S. D._, 5.37. Westborough, Int. C. E., _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 10. West Boxford, 3. West Boylston, Dorcas Soc.,
Clothing, _for Nat, Ala._ Westfield, First, 74. West Medford, 10. West
Springfield, Park St., 27.05; First, 23.50. Whitman, First, 18; C. E.,
8.20. Wilmington, 12.05; C. E., 1.70. Winchester, Pilgrim, S., _for
Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Worcester, ----, 30, to const.
CHARLES F. WHITE, L. M. Worcester, Plymouth, S., 25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., $645.50:

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese
M._, 20. Boston, Old South Aux., _for Schp._, 75. Roxbury, Walnut Av.,
70.50.

ESTATES. Boston, Estate of Mrs. Sally A. Dwight, 1500 (less expenses,
200), 1300; Estate of Dr. Edmond K. Alden, by Edmond K. Alden,
Executor, 1000 (less tax 50), 950. Fitchburg, Estate of C. H. Wellman,
10. Pittsfield, Estate of Sarah Martin, by Mary C. Clapp and Francis
W. Rockwell, Executors, 1000 (less tax 50), 950, _for Burrell Sch.,
Selma, Ala._ Springfield, Estate of Samuel C. Ray, 32.


RHODE ISLAND, $151.22.

Central Falls, 37.93. Newport, United, 10.20. Providence, Beneficent,
77.34; North, C. E., 75 cts. Providence, H. C. Waters and wife, _for
Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Westerly, C., L. A. Soc., Clothing,
Rug, etc., _for Tillotson C._


CONNECTICUT, $1,682.15--of which from Estate, $65.00.

Bloomfield, C. E., 8.40. Bethel, "Friend," 5. Berlin, Mrs. B. G.
Savage, 10; Miss Julia Hovey, 10. Berlin, Golden Ridge M. C., _for
Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Branford, H. G. Harrison, 10. Bridgeport, First,
81.40; South, C. E., 13.80. Bridgeport, Miss Hawley, _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._, 25. Bridgeport, Mary Barnes Palmer M. C., _for Mountain
Work_, 25. Bridgeport, South, W. M. S., _for Winnsboro, N. C._, 10.
Bridgeport, E. P. Bullard, _for Mobile, Ala._, 5. Canaan, Pilgrim, 7.
Central Village, C. E., 4.50. Cheshire, "A Friend," 1. Chester,
Children, by Mrs. E. E. Post, 64 cts. Colchester, First, 2. Cornwall
Hollow, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 10. Cromwell, 64.83.
Durham, S. 5. East Hampton, 20.53. East Hartford, First, S., _for
Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. East Hartford, South, 10.28. Essex,
First, 24.62. South Canaan and Falls Village, 7.17. Farmington,
"Friend," _for Shop, Tougaloo U._, 50. Farmington, Dea. and Mrs.
Hawley, _for Building, Tougaloo U._, 17. Franklin, 3. Gilead, 19.25.
Glastonbury, J. B. Williams, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 50.
Glenbrook, Union Memorial, 5. Groton, "Friends," _for S. A., Tillotson
C._, 10. Hartford, Second, 100; Talcott St., S., 4.13; Mrs. Geo.
Langdon, 50 cts. Ledyard, W. M. S., Household Supplies, _for Tillotson
C._ Lyme, "A Friend," 5. Meriden, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._
Middletown, First, 19.44; North, C. E., 10. Naugatuck, 150. Naugatuck,
B. B. Tuttle, _for Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. New Britain, C.
E. Steele (1 of which _for Building_), _for Tougaloo U._, 6. New
Haven, Plymouth, S., 20. New Haven, Center, S., _for Indian Schp,.
Santee Sch., Neb._, 17.50. New Haven, Member Centre C., "M. B. S.,"
15. New Haven, Dwight St., M. Soc., 10; Mrs De Forest, 2; "A Friend."
1, _for Marion, Ala._ New Haven, United, L. A. Soc., Clothing; Dwight
St., M. Soc., Clothing; _for Marion, Ala._ Noank, M. H. Giddings, 3.
Norfolk, "A Friend," 5. North Haven, 31. Norwalk, First, 25.60.
Norwich, Second, C. E., 8; King's Daughters, Clothing, _for Athens,
Ala._ Norwich Town, "A Friend," 100. Old Saybrook, 15.08. Oxford,
10.41. Plainfield, C. E., _for Alaska M._, 6.06. Plainville, "Conn,"
1. Plattsville, Miss Harriet Hallock, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8.
Portland, Mrs. F. W. Goodrich, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Putnam,
"Friends," Clothing, _for Savannah, Ga._ Ridgebury, 7. Simsbury, Lorna
McLean, Mary McLean and Hilda Stowe, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 16.50.
Somersville, 7.65. South Coventry, Ladies' Soc., Clothing, _for
Gregory Inst., N. C._ South Glastonbury, C. and S., 7.26. South
Manchester, Jr. C. E., _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ (3.50 of
which _for S. A._), 6.50. South Norwalk, Mrs. W. H. Gleason, 1. South
Windsor, Second, 13.51; First, 19.14. Stratford, S., 10.
Staffordville, C. E., 2.07. Suffield, "Helping Ten," _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 5. Waterbury, Mrs. W. H. Camp, 100; First, 12.40;
First, "A Friend," 5. Watertown, Steadfast Workers, 1.50; "A Friend,"
1.50; _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._ Wethersfield, S., _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 18.31. Wethersfield, L. A. Soc. of C., _for
Freight on Supplies, to Austin, Tex._, 3. Windham, 34.88. Windsor,
First, to const., EDWIN S. SMITH, L. M., 76.20.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $122.59:

Danbury, West St., _for S. A., Williamsburg Acad., Ky._, 4. Hartford,
First, Jr. Aux., _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 45: _for Sch.,
Grand View, Tenn._, 45. Hartford, First, Prim. S., 5. Huntington, _for
S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 3. Kent, S., 10. South Canaan,
3. Newington, "A Friend," _for Alaska M._, 5. Torringford, 2.59.

ESTATES. Berlin, Estate of H. N. Wilcox, 25. Brooklyn, Estate of M.
E. Ensworth, 10. Groton, Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt, 30.


NEW YORK, $1,321.04.

Aquebogue, C., 5.25; C. E., 4.05. Batavia, Miss Frances P. Rice, _for
Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Brooklyn, The Church of the Pilgrims, 513.07.
Brooklyn, Mrs. Jos. K. Brick, _for Jos. K. Brick Ag'l, Ind'l and
Normal Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 180. Brooklyn, South, 55.83; South,
Mission Sch., 10. Brooklyn, Park, L., M. Circle, 4.50 and Clothing.
Brooklyn, Clinton Av. Y. L. Guild, Clothing, _for Marshallville, Ga._
Brooklyn, "Friends," Clothing, _for Savannah, Ga._ Danby, C., 4.22;
S., 78 cts. East Bloomfield, Mrs. Eliza S. Goodwin, 5. Flushing,
First, 30.96. Glen Spey, 3. Irvington, Mrs. John Terry, Cards, _for
Skyland Inst., N. C._ Keuka College, Mrs. Dora Worden, 5. Lebanon, C.
(of which from S. W. Seymour 1 and Alfred Seymour, 1), 6.35, bal. to
const. ARTHUR L. LINDSAY, L. M., New York, Manhattan, 41.11. New York,
"A Friend," _for Moorhead, Miss._, 25. New York, F. W. Moulton, _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic_, 10. New York, Ginn & Co. and G. & C.
Merriam, Books, _for Burrell School, Selma, Ala._ New York, Dr. E. W.
Gilman 100 copies Easter Booklet and postage. New Rochelle, "Friends,"
_for S. A., Fisk U._, 11. Olean, First, S., 1.22. Poughkeepsie, First,
53.85; S., 15. Port Leyden, 5.91. Philadelphia, C. E., 5. Sayville,
S., 11.46. Sherburne, S., 19.25. Troy, Miss S. H. Willard, _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 2. Vernon Center, Rev. G. C. Judson
and Mrs. Mary R. Judson, 5. Walton, First, 91.59. West Bloomfield, 32.
Wellsville, First, 28.94.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $129.70:

Barryville, 2. Bristol Center, M. S., 7.50; C., 7.50; C. E., 5; _for
S. A., Fisk U._ Brooklyn, Lewis Av., C. E., 15. Brooklyn, Park, _for
S. A., Lincoln Acad._, 4.50. Churchville, 4. Flushing, S., 19.20. New
York, Broadway Tab., 5. Riverhead, 25. Riverhead, Mrs. J. H. Tuthill,
25. Warsaw, C. E., 10.


NEW JERSEY, $464.57.

Chatham, Stanley, S., 6.65. Closter, S., 2.12. East Orange, First,
41.52; M. M. Dodd, 25. Elizabeth, 15. Glen Ridge, 103.05. Newark,
Belleville Av., 106. Orange Valley, 123.98. Perth Amboy, First Presb.,
C. E., 5. Plainfield, S., _for Marshallville, Ga._, 25. Vineland,
"Friends," Clothing, _for Savannah, Ga._ Westfield, C. E., _for S. A.,
Charleston, S. C._, 11.25. Westfield, C. E., Clothing, _for Greenwood,
S. C._


PENNSYLVANIA, $61.66.

Allegheny, "S. M. Y.," 5. Edwardsdale, Bethesda, 3. Johnstown, First,
C. E., 1. Mount Carmel, S., 5.86. Oxford, Mrs. Robert Watson, _for
Gregory Inst., N. C._, 8. Philadelphia, Elizabeth W. Stevenson, _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 5. Pittsburg, Mr. and Mrs. M. C.
Adams, _for Orange Park, Fla._, 20. Scranton, Providence Welsh C.,
1.80. White Haven, C. E., Papers and other Literature, _for Chandler
Sch., Lexington, Ky._ Wrightstown, Miss M. A. Wiggins, _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 2.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENN., by Mrs. T. W. Jones, Treas.,
$10.00:

Meadville, 10.


OHIO, $445.67--of which from Estate, $37.50.

Akron, Prim. Class, First, _for Kindergarten, Memphis, Tenn._, 5.
Ashland, J. O. Jennings, 10. Ashtabula, M. Soc. King's Daughters,
Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._ Aurora, 5. Bellevue, Jr. C. E., _for
Knoxville, Tenn._, 2. Claridon, "A Friend," _for Native Teacher, Fort
Yates, N. D._, 50. Cleveland, Union, 8. Cleveland, Mr. and Mrs. A. W.
Collins, (2 of which _for Cappahosic, Va._,) 4. Cleveland, Temple
Circle, King's Daughters, _for Freight to McIntosh, Ga._, 1.42.
Dayton, Mrs. F. M. Williams, _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 5.
Dayton, "Friends," _for Storrs Sch._, 2. Garrettsville, 18.65.
Grafton, 4. Jewell, T. B. Goddard, 100. Kent, Mrs. S. O. Hathaway,
_for Moorhead, Miss._, 2.50. Litchfield, C. E. 5; S., 66 cts.
Marietta, Miss Sada Strecker, _for Mobile, Ala._, 4. Monroeville, Miss
Helen Keeler, _for Marion, Ala._, 1. Mount Gilead, Ladies, Park St.
C., Clothing; L. W. C., Clothing, _for Saluda, N. C._ North
Bloomfield, C., 7; "Friends," 10. Oberlin, First, S., 10. Oberlin,
Mrs. and Miss Sadie Manning, _for Burrell School, Selma, Ala._, 10.
Oberlin, Aid. Soc., Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._ Oberlin, First, L. A.
Soc., Clothing, _for Nat, Ala._ Oxford, "K," 5. Painesville, First,
Clothing, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Pierpont, 1. Springfield, Miss L. A.
Waters, 1. Toledo, Central, 8.25. Unionville, First, 5.93. Wauseon,
18.36. West Richfield, Emma, David and Esther Alger, _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 5.22. York, 5.33.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. Geo. B. Brown, Treas.,
$92.85:

Akron, First, 20. Berea, 5. Cleveland, Lake View, 3. Cleveland, Mount
Zion, 3.50. Cuyahoga Falls, 4. Lorain, 5. Madison, 6. Mansfield,
First, 32. North Amherst, Jr. C. E., 1.69. Oberlin, First, 5. Wauseon,
S., 7.66.

ESTATE. Oberlin, Estate of Mrs. Lucy C. Hardy, ad'l, by Rev. Hinds
Smith, Executor, to const. REV. HINDS SMITH, MISS LAURA ESTHER RUDD
and MISS ANNIE L. WHITE, L. M's, 37.50.


INDIANA, $18.59.

Diamond, S. and C. E., 2. Hammond, First, 4.39. Porter, Mrs. R. M.
Cady, 20 cents.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF INDIANA, by Mrs. W. A. Bell, $12.00:

Indianapolis, Mayflower, 12.


ILLINOIS, $579.40

Alton, Mrs. I. D. Gilman, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 2. Amboy, S.,
Infant Class, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 1.20. Aurora, First, 36.95.
Brimfield, C., 7; C. E., 2. Chandlerville, 46.72. Chicago, T.
Templeton, 100; First, 42.77; Mizpah Chapel, 5.36; S., 1.64; C. E., 2;
Jr. C. E., 1.50; Sedgwick St., 10.75; South, W. H. M. U., 3, bal. to
const. MRS. H. J. PAGE and MRS. J. L. LEWIS, L. M's. Chicago, Mrs.
Harriet Blake, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._ 8. Elmwood, 9. Geneseo, W.
M. U. of C., Clothing and 1.18 _for Freight for Blowing Rock, N. C._
Glen Ellyn, "A Friend," 4.50. Glen Ellyn, 3.78. Gridley, 9.59.
Marseilles, Dr. R. N. Baughman, Deceased, 51. Oak Park, Second (Rev.
Sidney Strong), _for Burrell School, Selma, Ala._, 26. Pecatonica,
1.76. Peru, First, 6; C. E., 5. Providence, 25. Rockford, Jr. C. E. of
Presb. C., Papers, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Saint Charles, 11.
Shabbona, Miss A. E. Langford, _for Marion, Ala._, 1. Stark, C. E., 8.
Wheaton, Clothing, _for Athens, Ala._ Winnebago, L. M. Soc., _for
Marion, Ala._, 11.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
$134.70:

Champaign, 17.55. Chicago, Union Park, 30. Chicago, South, 22.90.
Chicago, New England, 13.50. Chicago, Lincoln Park, C. E., 1. Lincoln
Park, 1. Chicago, Covenant, Jr., C. E., 1; Dundee, 3.25. Joy Prairie,
10. Oak Park, First, 4. Princeton, 10. Rockford, Second C., 15.50.
Sycamore, 5.


MICHIGAN, $318.63--of which from Estate, $84.68.

Alamo, Cards, etc., _for Athens, Ala._ Ann Arbor, First, L. H. M. S.,
_for Macon, Ga._, 1.46. Bellaire, C. E., ad'l, 65 cts. Benzonia, Mrs.
Mary Barns, 3. Calumet, First, 56.12. Cooper, S. and C. E., 1.53.
Grand Haven, 8.63. Harrison, First, 4. Hudson, Ladies' M. Soc., _for
Freight to Blowing Rock, N. C._, 34 cts. Kalamazoo, Miss Dox, _for
Storrs Sch._, Ga., 2. Lansing, Pilgrim, 5.10; Plymouth, 29.25;
Plymouth S., 14.44. Northville, Bell & Daniels, Astral Lantern _for
Williamsburg, Ky._ Olivet, C., Clothing and Literature, _for Tillotson
C._ Somerset, 3.95. South Haven, C., 30; Miss D. Delamere, 5; S.,
6.70; _for Marion, Ala._ South Haven, Clark Pierce, 10. Whittaker,
Clothing, _for Macon, Ga._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $51.78:

Allendale, 5. Chelsea, 5. Galesburg, 1. Grand Rapids, 3. Hopkins
Station, 3. Jackson, First, 8. Lansing, 26.28. Ellsworth, Children of
S., _for S. A., Santee Indian Sch._, 50 cts.

ESTATE. Homer, Estate of Mrs. Clarinda C. Evarts, by Geo. H. French,
Executor, 84.68.


IOWA, $175.81.

Algona, King's Daughters, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 9. Blairsburg, Miss
Clara Smith, _for Savannah, Ga._, 5. Burlington, 60. Chester Center,
_for Marion, Ala._, 4.71. Decatur, Ella V. Patterson, _for Moorhead,
Miss._, 25 cts. Dunlap, "A Friend," _for Alaska M._, 2. Glenwood, C.
E., 7. Grand View, 12.52. Hawarden, 6.63. McIntire, 3.40. Ottumwa,
Second, C.E., _for Marion, Ala._, 2.05. Runnells, 2.35. Waucoma,
First, 6.07.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$54.83:

Algona, 6. Almoral, 5. Des Moines, Pilgrim, S., 5.08. Des Moines,
Plymouth, 3.63. Grinnell, 9.76. Manchester, C. E., 6.09. Maquoketa,
12.25. Oskaloosa, 5. Ottumwa, First, Jr. C. E., 2.


WISCONSIN, $115.18.

Appleton, Clothing, _for Athens, Ala._ Big Spring, 1.25. Brandon,
Mrs. R. C. Kelly, Clothing, _for Burrell Sch., Selma, Ala._
Cooksville, 2.25. Eagle River, Household Articles, _for Athens, Ala._
Eau Clair, ----, _for Marion, Ala._, 1. Leeds, 3.25. Menasha,
Clothing, _for Athens, Ala._ Milwaukee, Grand Av., Clothing; Pilgrim,
Clothing; _for Athens, Ala._ New Richmond, C., 14.25; S., 4.58.
Racine, First, 17.01; Miss A. A. Nichols, 50 cts. Racine, First, W. M.
S., _for Mountain Work_, 5. Rosendale, Clothing, _for Athens, Ala._
Seymour, 1.80. Sturgeon Bay, Hope, 20.15. Sun Prairie, Clothing, _for
Athens, Ala._ Viroqua, C. E., 2.50. Waukesha, Dr. Maybelle Park,
Clothing, _for Athens, Ala._ Windsor, 10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $31.64:

Fond du Lac, 10. Milwaukee, Pilgrim, 14. Token, 2.64. Wauwatosa, 5.


MINNESOTA, $175.69.

Elgin, Flora and Marjorie Sawyer, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 25 cents.
Fairmont, First, 5.80. Grand Meadow, 7.24. Minneapolis, Wm. H. Norris,
15. Minneapolis, Lyndale, 12.50. Minneapolis, T. H. Colwell, _for S.
A., Fisk U._, 5. Rochester, 22.88.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs M. W. Skinner,
Treas., $117.02 (less $10.00 expenses), $107.02:

Anoka, 1. Austin, 7.34. Benson, S., 85 cts. Elk River, 2. Excelsior,
2.91. Lake City, Jr. C. E., 5.55. Monticello, 1.75. Mantorville, 5.
Minneapolis, First, 2. Minneapolis, Lora Hollister, 5. New
Paynesville, Jr. C. E., 1.50. New Richland, 3. Northfield, _for S. A.,
Fisk. U._, 50; _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 10; Mrs. L. A.
Baldwin, _for Chinese Mission House_, 5. Rochester, Jr. C. E., 2.
Rochester, C. E., 1.40. Saint Paul Park, 8.72. Winthrop, 2.


MISSOURI, $13.85.

Amity, S., 61 cents. Carthage, First, 4.82. Green Ridge, 3.42.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MISSOURI, Mrs. K. L. Mills, Treas.,
$5.00:

Saint Louis, First, _for Fort Yates Hospital_, 5.


KANSAS, $40.00.

Blue Rapids, 7.40. Brookville, L. H. M. S., 2. Jr. C. E., 1; _for S.
A., Lincoln Sch., Meridian, Miss._ Brookville, 2.85. Clay Center,
Clarence Eastman Memorial, 5. Eureka, Hon. Edwin Tucker, _for Burrell
School, Selma, Ala._, 5. Hill City, Mrs. T. Garnett, _for Meridian,
Miss._, 2. Overbrook, 9.60. Ridgeway, 55 cts. Wabaunsee, First C. of
Christ, 5.50; Wabaunsee, Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._


NEBRASKA, $90.82.

Crawford, First, 3.91. Omaha, 38.20. Omaha, Pilgrim, 5.76. Omaha,
Hillside, 4. Santee, S. L. Voorhees, _for Santee_, 10. Wallace, 7.30.
Weeping Water, 21.65.


NORTH DAKOTA, $11.40.

Cando, 2.35. Fort Yates, Standing Rock Agency, 7. Fort Yates,
Standing Rock Agency, Cannon Ball Branch, 2.05.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $21.58.

Aberdeen, Plymouth, 1. Canova, C., 4; Canova, C. E., 1.65. Carthage,
Redstone, 4.50. Dover, 3. Oahe, Bad River, 69 cents; Cheyenne River,
2.50; Moreau River, 1.74; Oahe, 1.50. Wessington Springs, 1.


COLORADO, $25.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF COLORADO, by Mrs. Belle C.
Valentine, Treas., $25.00:

W. H. M. U., of Colo., 9.73. Colorado Springs, First, L. M. S., 5.
Highland Lake, 7.07. Pueblo, Pilgrim, 3.20.


CALIFORNIA, $330.80.

Belmont, Mrs. E. L. Reed, 10. Byron, Rev. D. Goodsell, _for Burrell
School, Selma, Ala._, 80 cts. Fresno, C. E., _for Marion, Ala._, 1.
Long Beach, Fanny and Freda Hand, Box Sea Shells, _for Chandler Sch.,
Lexington, Ky._ Los Angeles, "Friends," 10. Ontario, C., 4.75.
Pasadena, First, 5.05. Pasadena, Lake Av., _for Indian M._, 4. Santa
Barbara, First, 42. San Francis, Receipts of the California Chinese
Mission (see items below), 218.20.0

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CALIFORNIA, Mrs. Mary M. Smith,
Treas., $35.00:

Riverside, 10. Redlands, First, 25.


OREGON, $32.91.

Fairview, 2. Portland, First, 20.10. Salem, First, 9.31. Weston,
1.50.


WASHINGTON, $13.78.

Ashtunum, S., 68 cts.; C. E., 82 cts.; Rev. L. W. Britnall and wife,
2. Pullman, First, S., 1.60. Riverside, 4. Skokomish, 1. Snohomish,
First, 3.68.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $25.00.

Washington, First, C. E., _for Sch., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25.
Washington, First, Ladies Soc., Clothing, _for Pleasant Hill Acad.,
Tenn._


MARYLAND, $30.00.

Federalsburg, L. J. Deming, 30, to const. WILLIAM P. CURTISS, L. M.


VIRGINIA, $1.00.

Hampton, Miss Mary N. Mead, 1 _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._


WEST VIRGINIA, $2.00.

----, "A Friend," through Miss Merrick, _for Mobile, Ala._, 2.


KENTUCKY, $5.00.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 3. Corbin, Rev. C. W. Greene, 1.
Williamsburg, Jr. C. E., 1.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $12.00.

Charleston, Avery Inst., 5.50; Principal and three lady teachers,
6.30.


TENNESSEE, $17.00.

Chattanooga, Miss L. Parker, _for Marion, Ala._, 5. Knoxville,
Second, 2. Nashville, Jackson St., 10.


GEORGIA, $12.12.

McIntosh, Prof. Fred. W. Foster, 4; Mrs. Mary W. Foster, 2; Miss
Janetta Knowlton, 2; Richard Clemens, 80 cts., _for S. A., Dorchester
Acad., McIntosh, Ga._ Woodville, Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 61 cts.
Rutland, 2.71.


ALABAMA, $2.20.

Joppa, S., 1.20. Gadsden, 1.


FLORIDA, $25.97.

Daytona, 25.97.


LOUISIANA, $28.79.

New Orleans, University C., 27. New Orleans, C. E. Union, by E. H.
Phillips, 1.79.


MISSISSIPPI, $21.00.

Jackson, Ada Harvey, _for Building, Tougaloo U._, 6. Moorhead, Miss
Fannie Gardner, 10; Miss Eva Rogers, 5, _for Moorhead, Miss._


----, $12.50.

----, ----, Mrs. Yeatman, _for Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 12.50.


CANADA, $5.00.

Sherbrooke, Mrs. H. J. Morey, 5.


INCOME, $2,253.08.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 245.58; C. B. Erwin Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 2,000; Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 7.50.


TUITION, $3,015.70.

Cappahosic, Va., 23; Lexington, 120.65; Williamsburg, Ky., 106.15;
Beaufort, N. C., 24.80; Blowing Rock, N. C., 19.58; Chapel Hill, N.
C., 9.05; Enfield, N. C., 40.14; Hillsboro, N. C., 27.28; Kings
Mountain, N. C., 39.50; Saluda, N. C., 8.65; Troy, N. C., 2.09;
Whittier, N. C., 33.62; Wilmington, N. C., 281.98; Charleston, S. C.,
305.65; Greenwood, S. C., 179.34; Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 53.05;
Knoxville, Tenn., 39; Memphis, Tenn., 617.70; Nashville, Tenn.,
596.94; Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 73.25; Albany, Ga., 135; Andersonville,
Ga., 14.17; Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch. 233.58; Macon, Ga., 241.20;
McIntosh, Ga., 186.46; Savannah, Ga., 155.75; Thomasville, Ga., 67.55;
Athens, Ala., 53.19; Florence, Ala., 16; Joppa, Ala., Public Fund,
54.52. Joppa, Ala., 15.50; Marion, Ala., 72.35; Mobile, Ala., 93.15;
Nat, Ala., 234.15; Selma, Ala., 45.15; New Orleans, La., 413.52;
Meridian, Miss., 73.50; Moorhead, Miss., 35; Tougaloo, Miss., 106.84;
Orange Park, Fla., 47; Austin, Tex., 120.70.


SUMMARY FOR MARCH, 1898.

     Donations                                      $10,812.82
     Estates                                          4,429.97
                                                    ----------
                                                    $15,242.79
     Income                                           2,253.08
     Tuition                                          5,015.70
                                                    ----------
     Total for March                                $22,511.57


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for March                            $44.74
     Previously acknowledged                            168.22
                                                       -------
                                                       $212.96


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, William Johnston,
Treasurer, from Jan. 27th to Feb. 25th, 1898, $218.20.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $99.20:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 6.20; Wong Wing, 2. Los Angeles, Chinese M.,
5.20. Marysville, Chinese M., 7.25; Special Col., 5. Oakland, Chinese
M., 6. Oroville, Chinese M., 2.25. Petaluma, Chinese M., 2.50.
Riverside, Chinese M., 4.15. Sacramento, Chinese M., 5.50. San Diego,
Chinese M., 1.20. San Francisco, Central Chinese M., 9.65. Miss
Caughey, 1. San Francisco, West Chinese Mission, 2.65. Santa Barbara,
Chinese M., 5.40; Mrs. Caroline Sawyer, 1.50. Santa Cruz, Chinese M.,
5. Santa Cruz, Japanese M., 5. Ventura, Chinese M., 1.35; Ann.
Membership, 2.50. Vernondale, Chinese M., 2.25; Ann. Mem., 2; Special
Offering, 9.15. Watsonville, Chinese and Japanese Mon. Off's, 4.50.

FOR CHINESE WOMEN AND GIRLS, $119.00:

Bangor, Me., Prof. J. S. Sewall's S. Class, 6; Mrs. J. S. Sewall's S.
Class, 6. Marlboro', Mass., "A Friend," through Miss H. J. Alexander,
5. Albany, N. Y., "Friends" of Chinese, through Miss Janet McNaughton,
72. Binghampton, N. Y., Helpers' Soc. of First C., 5. Oakland, Cal.,
Mrs. L. E. Agard, 20. The Woman's Home Missionary Union of Southern
Cal., 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for April                                $2,350.00
     Previously acknowledged                         34,847.68
                                                    ----------
                                                    $37,197.68
                                                    ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $387.84.

Alfred, 7.25. Bar Harbor, 2.83. Bath, Henry E. Palmer, 25. Biddeford,
Second, 27.15. Brewer, First, 10.50. Bridgton, First, 20.04.
Cumberland Centre, "Busy Hands," _for S. A., Dorchester Acad.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 3. Denmark, 3.75. Farmington, First, 9.54. Gorham, 75.
Kennebunk,

Union, 32.82. Machias, Center St., 12.34. Monson, C. E. of C., 5.
Portland, Second, "A Friend," 5; St. Lawrence, Wm. L. Blake, 5.
Portland, S. Class, by Mrs. Albert B. Hall, _for Emerson Inst._, 5.
Windham, 2.40.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas., $136.20:

Brunswick, 45.15. Bridgton, Miss Walker, 10; Mrs. J. P. Hale, 1; Mrs.
D. Stone, 1. Calais, 25. Jonesboro, 2. Machias, 32.05. Woodfords, L.
M. S., 13.

Dennysville, C. E., 5; Woolwich, W. A., 2; _for Agnes R. Mitchell
Memorial_.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $3,985.76--of which from Estates, $3,778.70.

Atkinson, 11.32. Bennington, C. E., by Miss E. Rogers, 5. Colebrook,
C. E., 5. Concord, First, to const. WILLIAM H. DURANT, MRS. JOHN S.
BLANCHARD and MRS. PERRY KITTREDGE, L. M's, 90.39. Deerfield, 4.35.
Epping, 10. Exeter, Phillips, S., _for Mountain Work_, 5.98.
Francestown, 25. Francestown, Dea. M. B. Fisher, 5. Hindsdale, 9.92.
Lancaster, 22.10. North Weare, 5. Plymouth, C. E. of C., _for Mission
Sch., Andersonville, Ga._, 5. South Weare, 3.

ESTATES. Meredith, Estate of Mrs. Lovey A. Lang, by J. F. Beede,
Executor, 3,600. Milford, Estate of Mrs. Caroline B. Harris, 178.70.


VERMONT, $2,941.36--of which from Estate, $2,771.90.

Bethel, 2.03. Brattleboro, Fessenden Helping Hand Soc., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 40. Cornwall, 17. Danville, C., to const. J. E. TUCKER, L.
M., 30. Fairlee, "A Friend," 30. Milton, S., _for Mountain Work_,
1.18. Newport, W. H. M. S., _for Freight to Dorchester Acad.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 1. North Craftsbury, 4.50. Norwich, Mrs. B. B. Newton,
5. Pawlet, "A. Flower," 5. Pittsford, Ladies, H. M. S., Thank
Offering, 5. Saint Johnsbury, "A. W. A.," 5. Swanton, L. M. Soc.,
Clothing, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._ West Dover, 1.50. West Rutland,
12.25. Wilder, Extra Cent-a-Day Band, 10.

ESTATE. Royalton, Estate of Cyrus B. Drake, William Skinner,
Administrator, 3,079.84 (less expenses 307.94), 2,771.90.


MASSACHUSETTS, $7,292.50--of which from Estates, $2,968.54.

Abington, First, C. E., 6.77. Acton, Evan., S., 3. Adams, Jr. C. E.,
_for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 6.56. Amherst, C., _for Tougaloo
U._, 5. Andover, Miss Florence Abbott, _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._,
20. Ashburnham, Marshall Wetherbee, 2. Ashby, Orthodox, 18.91.
Ashfield, C., Clothing, _for Mission Sch., Andersonville, Ga._ Athol,
Ladies' Union of C., _for Furnishing, Tougaloo U._, 25. Athol, C. E.,
_for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Attleboro, C. E. of
Second, _for Cumberland Gap, Tenn._, 21. Ballardvale, Union, 53.75
Bedford, Senior Golden Rule Soc., 4. Beverly, Dane St., S., _for S.
A., Fisk U._, 50. Blackstone, C., 5.12; S., 1.50; C. E., 1; Jr. C. E.,
2.

Boston, Proceeds sale of gold and silver articles, gifts from various
sources, _for the Work of the A. M. A._, 52; Mrs. Mary A. Fullerton,
_for Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._, 30; Union, S., _for Room, Tougaloo
U._, 25; Mrs. Roger Wolcott, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._,
5; Interest account, 2.19; Mrs. L. H. Kendall, _for Marshallville,
Ga._, 2; Miss Margaret McKenzie, Clothing, _for Saluda, N. C._ ----,
Books, _for Troy, N. C._; ----, Clothing, _for Saluda, N. C._
Dorchester, Second, by Miss Elizabeth Tolman, _for S. A., Fisk U._,
50. Dorchester, Second, 74.31. Jamaica Plain, Boylston, 47.68.
Roxbury, Highland, S., 17.57; "A Friend," 7.50. Roxbury, Eliot, C. E.,
Clothing, 1.50 _for Freight for Skyland Inst., N. C._ West Roxbury,
Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._

Boxford, ----, Clothing, Table Linen, Sheeting, etc., _for Tougaloo
U._ Bradford, Rev. N. Moses, _for S. A., Straight U._, 5. Braintree,
First, 5.77; Brookline, Harvard, 84.56. Cambridge, First, 350; North
Av., 57.50. Cambridge, North Av., W. A. Mandell, 2. Cambridgeport,
Pilgrim, Annual, 101.68. Quarterly, 15.90. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim, Y.
L. M. S., 10; W. M. S., 5, _for S. A., Fisk U._ Chelsea, First, 28.27.
Coleraine, C. E. of C., 4. Dedham, First, S., 14.10. Dunstable, C., to
const. MISS ALICE L. BUTTERFIELD, L. M., 31. East Charlemont, 11.51.
Easthampton First, 33.07. East Hampton, L. M. S. of C., 25; Ladies and
Childrens M. Soc., Clothing, _for S. A., Lincoln Acad., Kings Mt., N.
C._ Fall River, Central, 29. Fitchburg, Rollstone, 8.56; Grace U.
Davis, 2. Florence, Florence, 12.73. Foxboro, S., Primary Dept., _for
A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Georgetown, Memorial, 13.04. Globe
Village, Evan. Free, 23.10. Granby, L. M. S., _for S. A., Grand View,
Tenn._, 15. Holyoke, First, Jr. C. E., _for Indian M., Santee, Neb._,
5. Holyoke, J. E. Griffith, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1.
Holyoke, Parsons Paper Co., Case Paper, _for Meridian, Miss._ Harvard,
S., _for Alaska M._, 10. Haverhill, R. H. King, _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._, 3. Haydenville, 8.68. Hyde Park, Miss O. J. Perry,
_for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 15. Ipswich, South, S., _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 25. Leicester, First, 22.74. Lowell, Mrs. E. M. Buss, deceased,
500. Lowell, G. H. Candee, 10; Mrs. Althea Peabody, 1, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._ Lowell, First, 10. Ludlow Center, First, 10. Marion, S.,
1.40. Marlboro, C., "A Friend," 15. Melrose Highlands, 64.14. Newton,
Eliot, 275; First, 92.65; North, 5.67. Newton Highlands, 91.37.
Northampton, Edwards, 74.21. Northboro, Rev. A. D. Smith, 1.
Northbridge, Rockdale, 2. North Brookfield, First, 25.50. Northfield,
Trinitarian, 75. North Woburn, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10.
Orange, C. E., 10. Palmer, Mrs. W. H. Hitchcock, 40 cents. Peabody,
First, by Geo. A. Hall, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 52; Miss Lizzie Cook
Kimball, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. Pepperell, Clothing, _for
Greenwood, S. C._ Pittsfield, First C. of Christ, 30. Reading, 18.
Salem, Tabernacle, "A Friend," 5. Scotland, 2.24. Somerville, Winter
Hill, 37.21. South Framingham, Grace, 50.65. South Hadley Falls, "In
His Name," 20. South Weymouth, Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for S. A., Allen Sch.
Thomasville, Ga._, 15. Spencer, Mrs. Murdock's S. Class, _for S. A.,
Skyland Inst., N. C._, 7. Springfield, South, 31.30; Hope, 26.57; Mrs.
J. S. Dean, 5; Emmanuel, 2. Springfield, "Workers" of Faith C.,
Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ Sterling, Evan., 20. Sunderland, C. E.,
15. Tewksbury, C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. Wakefield, 30.49.
Waltham, Trin., 12.04. Waltham, Miss E. A. Cutler, Clothing, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Warren, Ladies' Union of C., Sheeting, Freight paid,
_to Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._ Watertown, Phillips, 107.81.
Wellesley Hills. "P," 185. Wenham Depot, Mrs. Andrew Allen, 5.
Westboro, Ladies' Aux., _for Freight_, 3. Westboro, "A Friend," _for
S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 50 cents. West Boxford, C. and
Parish, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 6. Westport, 7. West Stockbridge,
Village, 17. Wheaton, Anna Perry, Clothing, _for Mission Sch.,
Andersonville, Ga._ Whitinsville, Mrs. M. F. W. Abbott, 7.78 and
Clothing, Freight prepaid, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._
Winchester, Mission Union, _for Tougaloo U._, 25. Worcester Union,
87.13; Piedmont, 30; Plymouth, 26.33. Wrentham, First, 12.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., $550.00.:

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese
M._, 20, _for Alaska_, 50.

ESTATES. Boston, Estate of Rev. E. K. Alden, D.D. 3,000 (less tax
150), 2,850 South Hadley, Estate of Mrs. Maria Burnham Gridley, by
Loomis T. Tiffany, Executor, ad'l. 18.54. Worcester, Estate of
Margaret A. Fletcher, by W. W. Fletcher, Executor, to const. SAMUEL J.
FLETCHER, MRS. E. W. WOOD and JAMES E. FLAGG, L. M's, 100.


RHODE ISLAND, $44.54.

Central Falls, 44.54. Providence, Mrs. S. R. McClaren, Clothing, _for
Moorhead, Miss._


CONNECTICUT, $5,026.69--of which from Estates, $4,030.00.

Branford, 30.56. Bridgewater, C., 6.90; C.E., 1.10. Bristol, First.
15. Chaplin, C. (of which 11.65 bal. to const. AGNES E. KIDDER, L.M.),
14. Chester, Mrs. Lydia J. Gaylord, 1. Cobalt, 4. Coventry, Second,
12.34. East Canaan, S., _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 7.
East Hartford, Clothing, _for Greenwood, S. C._ East Haven, 18.75.
Fairhaven, Mrs. A. T. Gager, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._,
1. Gilead, "A few Friends," 17. Glastonbury, S., _for Furnishing,
Tougaloo U._, 25. Glenbrook, Union, "A Friend." 5. Greenfield Hill,
23.15. Greenwich, Second, 137.84; Second, S., 14.57. Guilford, C. E.
of First, Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ Hadlyme, Richard E. Hungerford,
25. Hartford. First Ch. of Christ, 10.37. Higganum, 18. Ivoryton, L.
H. M. Soc., Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._, 1, _for Freight_. Meriden. "A
Friend," 10. Middlebury, 23.50. Moosup, Chas. F. Burgess and wife for
Foster Lewis Burgess, 10 and Rachel Elanor Burgess (in heaven), 10,
_for Indian M._ New Britain, Rev. J. W. Cooper, D.D., _for Orange
Park, Fla._, 20. New Hartford, North, 24.31. New Haven, Mrs. A. B.
Woodford, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. New Haven, United, "Members," _for
Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._, 17. New Haven, Dwight Place, Mrs.
Dickerman, 5. New Haven, Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ New Haven,
Humphrey St. Mission Circle, Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ New Milford
"A Friend." _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._, 1.50. North Stamford, 4.
Norwich, Miss Emily Gilman, _For Saluda Sem., N. C._, 2. Norwich, Park
St., Clothing, _for Skyland Inst., N. C._ Plainfield, C. E., _for
Alaska M._, 1.21. Plainville, L. M. S., Clothing and Bedding, _for
Grand View, Tenn._ Pomfret Centre. Ladies' Aux., Clothing, _for Grand
View, Tenn._ Sound Beach, C. E. of Pilgrim, Clothing, _for
Childersburg, Ala._ South Glastonbury, C. and S., 9.91. South
Manchester, 55.57. Southport, Mrs. Martica G. Waterman, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 25. Stamford, Jr. C. E. of C., _for Indian Sch., Oahe, S.
D._, 15.18. Stamford, W. L. Wilde, 1. Stratford, C., _for Tougaloo
U._, 4.60. Suffield, Mrs. A. P. Pierce, Clothing, _for Meridian,
Miss._ Terryville, "Three Friends," 20. Thomaston, First, S., _for
Lincoln Normal Sch., Marion, Ala._, 35. Thomaston, First, 9.45.
Thompson, 19.75. Torringford, 24.50. Watertown, S., 5.30. Wauregan,
Clothing, and 1.50 _for Freight, for Allen, Sch., Thomasville, Ga._
Westchester, 4.35. West Hartford, First Ch. of Christ, 14.66; "Two
Friends," 5. West Suffield, 21.95. West Winsted, L. M. S., Clothing,
etc, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Whitneyville, 10.50.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $171.37:

Danbury, West St., 20. Bridgeport, Park St. 25. Bristol, 35.
Naugatuck, 30. New Britain, South, 36. New Britain, ad'l to "Thank
Offering," 37 cents. Torrington, Third, 25.

ESTATES. Mansfield Center, Estate of Mrs. Martha G. Swift, 30. West
Hartford, Estate of Maria Whitman, M. A. Andrews, and J. W. Havens,
Administrators, 4,000.


NEW YORK, $1,391.69.

Auburn, "Friends," Clothing, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._ Binghamton,
Mrs. Edward Taylor, 10. Brooklyn, Boys' Missionary Soc. of Church of
the Pilgrims, _for Alaska M._, by Dana C. Wells, Treas., 300.
Brooklyn, Mrs. Cornelia F. Ham, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 18.
Brooklyn, New England, S., 7.27. Brooklyn, Park, Kings Daughters,
Clothing, _for Emerson Inst._ Cold Brook, Miss A. J. Burt, _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1. Cranesville, Miss Jennie
Mathias, _for Talladega C._, 2. East Rockaway, Bethany, 10. Elmira,
St. Lukes, 5.15. Fairport, C. "Workers" _Clothing for Troy, N. C._
Holland Patent, Welsh, 5.55. Maine 10.63. Mount Sinai, 5.25. New York,
Broadway Tabernacle, Adl. "A Friend." 25. New York, Charles L. Mead,
10. Orland Smith Beresford, 15, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
New York, Forest, 11.18 Northville, 14.80. Orient, 11.94. Salamanca,
First, 7.36. Saugerties, 31.22. Sherburn, First, 90.27. Troy, Mrs. L.
E. Gurley, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $795.07:

Albany, First L. H. M. S., 103.78; Mizpah, B., 5; Busy Bees, 5; C.
E., 5; Helpers, 5. Altmar, C. E., 2.50. Aquebogue, 9. Brooklyn, Church
of the Pilgrims, 100; Central Ch., L. B. S., 75; Plymouth, H. W.
Beecher M. C., 50; Clinton Av. Y. L. G., 25; Lewis Av., 22; New
England, L. S., 10. Brooklyn, Park, _for S. A. Lincoln Acad._, 4.50.
Buffalo, First, 43.62; First, W. G. Bancroft, M. B., 5; Peoples, 15;
Camden, C. E., 7; Churchville, Jr. C. E., 2. Cortland, Jr. C. E.,
3.84. Elbridge, Jr. C. E., 5. Ellington, Jr. C. E., 4.13. Fairport,
20. Gloversville, Jr. C. E., 5. Honeoye, Y. L. M. S., 8; C. G., 5.50;
Hudson River Ass'n, Annual Meeting, 3. Ithaca, 30.08. Ithaca, C. E.,
5. Maine, _for New Building, Tougaloo U._, 20. Morrisville, Jr. C. E.,
2. New York, Broadway Tab., Soc. for Woman's Work, _for Sch'p, Fisk
U._, 50. Ogdensburg, Jr. C. E., 5. Oswego, C. E., _for S. A. Blowing
Rock, N. C._, 10. Owego, 10. Rutland, S., 7.62. Saratoga Springs,
Goodrich Mem., 20. Schenectady, 25. Syracuse, Geddes Ch., Silver
Circle, _for S. A., Kings Mountain, N. C._, 20. Syracuse, Geddes, C.
E., 5. Syracuse, Danforth, Mrs. Manchester's S. Class, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 12. Syracuse, Danforth, _for S. A. Fisk U._, 12. Syracuse,
Danforth, Jr. C. E., _for S. A. Talladega C._, 5; Utica, Bethesda, 5.
Walton, M. B., 2.50.


NEW JERSEY, $423.45.

Haddonfield, Miss Rebecca Nicholson, _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._, 5. Montclair, First, 359.45. Newark, First, C. E.,
10; Newark, "Friends," Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ Newark, Miss Mabel
Brown, Literature, Freight prepaid, _for Talladega C._ Trenton, "A
Friend," _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._, 2.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. J. H. Denison,
Treas., $47.00:

Germantown, First, 12. Montclair, First, _for S. A., Talladega C._,
35.


PENNSYLVANIA, $123.52.

Hartford, C. E., 1.52. Newton Square, Chas. E. Stevens, 4.
Philadelphia, "T. B.," 100. Philadelphia, John H. Converse, 10; C. P.
Hoyt, 5; Col. John McKee, 1. _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._
Philadelphia, R. S. Dorsett, _for Skyland Inst., N. C._, 2.


OHIO, $1,277.04--of which from Estates, $763.08.

Ashland, 10. Atwater, 1.80. Austinburg, 6.55. Belden, First, 3.34.
Bellevue, Jr. C. E. of C., _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1. Cleveland,
Pilgrim, 72; Plymouth, 22.70; First S., 8.60; Lake View, 6. Columbus,
Rev. B. Talbot, 1. Fredericksburg, First, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill
Acad., Tenn._, 8. Geneva, Mrs. Harriet A. Wood, 2. Hudson, 5. Madison,
C. E., _for Freight, Skyland Inst., N. C._, 1.66. Oberlin, First,
56.14; Rev. A. D. Barber. 20; Mrs. E. B. Clark, 10. Painesville, W. M.
S. of First, Clothing, _for Moorhead, Miss._, Richfield, L. M. S. of
C., Rugs, etc., _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._ Rootstown, Lloyd
Hinman, 10. Shandon, Paddy's Run, 10. Thomastown, Rachel Davies, 2.
Toledo, Washington St., 20.09. West Richfield, Jeanett, Scott,
Christine and Beth Wheatley, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. Geo. B. Brown, Treas.,
$235.08:

Akron, West. 3. Bellevue, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 8.
Berea, 5. Ceredo, West Va., 2. Cleveland, Pilgrim, Bequest of Miss
Lydia Hadlow 25 and 5 from W. A., to const MRS. SARAH HORNSEY, L. M.,
Cleveland. Euclid Av., 20; First. 9.80. Cleveland. First. C. E., 5.
Columbus, Plymouth, 4.

Dover, Second, Jr. C. E., 1. Edinburg, "A Friend," 60. Hudson, 3.25.
Jefferson, 4. Lexington, 6. Lock, 2. Lorain, S., 9.03. Mansfield,
Mayflower Mem., 4. Mt. Vernon, 7. Paddy's Run, 1. Richfield, 2.50.
Richmond, 3. Ruggles, 3. Steubenville, 2.50. Tallmadge, Y. L. M. S.,
20. Tallmadge, 5. Toledo, Central Busy Bees, 1; Washington, St., 12;
Jr. C. E. 4.

ESTATES. Cleveland, Estate of Mrs. Fanny W. Low 75 (less Tax, 3.30),
71.70. Tallmadge, Estate of Daniel Hine, by George M. Wright, Trustee,
691.38.


INDIANA, $46.00.

Kokomo, H. W. Vrooman, 5. Terre Haute, First, 32. Worthington, J. J.
Ballard, _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 1.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF INDIANA, by Mrs. W. A. Bell, Treas.,
$8.00:

Terre Haute, W. M. S., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 8.


ILLINOIS, $961.06.

Alton, L. M. S., _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 2. Austin, L. S.
of C., _for S. A., Skyland Inst., N. C._, 3. Champaign, C., 44.63; C.
E., 3.70; Jr. C. E., 99 cts. Chicago, Tabernacle, S., 10; Miss H. A.
Farrend, 1; _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ Chicago, Fellowship, S.,
_for Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._, 2.58. Chicago, Central Park, C.
E., _for Freedmen and Indian M._, 2. Colona, F. W. Wheeler, 5. Dundee,
C., 9.85; S., 2. Earlville, 8.25. Farmington, 16.65. Galva, First, S.,
_for Burrell Sch., Selma, Ala._, 15. Greenville, C. E., 8.68
Griggsville, 11.55. Hinsdale, 8.57. Jacksonville, 20. Lyonsville, C.
C. E., _for Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._, 7.50. Marseilles, Mrs.
Harriet F. Baughman, 652. Northampton, R. W. Gillian, 10. Peoria, M.
H. Bradley, 5. Plainfield, 27. Plymouth, 4.54. Rock Falls, 5.09. Rock
Falls, S., 5.18. Roseville, Mrs. L. E. Axtell, Trees, Roots, etc.,
_for Moorhead, Miss._ Stark, 7.50. Summer Hill, C. and S., 4.
Sycamore, S., 6.29. West Chicago, 9.86. Wataga, First, 9.40

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
$32.25:

Elmwood, 5. Evanston, 15. Rockford, Second, 12.25.


MICHIGAN, $490.66.

Allegan, "A Friend," 100. Grand Rapids, Plymouth, 2.32. Greenville,
Mrs. R. L. Ellsworth, 10. Hudson, "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._, 250.
Jonesville, R. D. Nichols, 50 cts. Litchfield, First, 12.76. Saint
Joseph, S., 3.84.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $111.24:

Ann Arbor, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10. Benton Harbor, 5.
Calumet, 20. Detroit, First, 20. Grand Rapids, Park, _for S. A. Santee
Indian Sch., Neb._, 25. Lamont, 2.25. Ludington, 5. Morenci, 2.
Olivet, 10. Union City, _for S. A., Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 2.50.
Lansing, Plymouth, 5; Leslie, First, 15 cts; Muskegon, Primary S.,
Birthday Off., 4.34, _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._


IOWA, $294.69.

Avoca, German, _for Savannah, Ga._, 3. Belle Plaine, Mrs. James P.
Henry, 5; Mrs. Caroline M. Henry, 5. Belmond, 5.15. Castana, 6.20.
Cedar Falls, Y. M., and Y. W. C. A., _for S. A., Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 5. Cedar Falls, L. A. of C., Clothing, _for
Moorhead, Miss._ Cedar Rapids, Grace Potwin and Maud Chapman's S.
Classes, 4; Mission Band, 2; _for Savannah, Ga._ Clay, 10.35.
Danville, Lee W. Mix, _for Indian M._, 5. Dunlap, L. M. Soc., _for
Mountain Work_, 12.25. Dunlap, L. M. S., by Mrs. S. E. Wilmot, Sec.,
_for Debt_, 1. Eagle Grove, 5. Grinnell, S., 14.47. Hampton, First,
15.70. Humboldt, C., to const. CARLOS COMBS, L. M., 30.03. Iowa Falls,
First, 25. Long Creek, Welsh, 6.13. McGregor, 5. Newton, "A Friend,"
_for A. G., Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. New Hampton, First, C. E., 3.
Weaver, C., to const. LEMUEL W. MORSE, L. M., 35.20. Peterson, C. E.
of C., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION, OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $85.21:

Cedar Rapids, 6.95. Cedar Rapids, S., 1.69. Central City, 5. Clare,
Mrs. E. E. Jones, 1. Creston, 10. Cromwell, 5. Des Moines, Plymouth,
2.92. Dubuque, First, 3. Eldora, S., 1.85. Iowa City, Woman's Ass'n,
8. Iowa Falls, 5. Miles, 4.58. Ottumwa, First, Woman's Ass'n, 3.
Salem, 5. Traer, S., 8.32. Webster City, 5. Winthrop, 8.90.


WISCONSIN, $153.30.

Auroraville, S., 7.86. Burlington, Plymouth, 14.20. Delevan, 4.85.
Fond du Lac, 18.88. Hartland, Mrs. Leroy, 1.50; Miss Ordway, 50 cts.;
Mrs. Whitehead, 1, _for Tougaloo U._ Ironton, O. C. Blanchard, 5.
Kenosha, Rev. Thomas Gillispie (5 of which _for Marion, Ala._), 12.50.
Leeds, Ad'l, 10 cts. Peshtigo, 18.50. Pewaukee, 5. Poy Sippi, 3.
Rosendale, S., 3.25. Spring Green, 2. Wilson Creek, 80 cts. Wyoming,
4.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $50.36:

Beloit, First, 14.65. Milwaukee, Grand Av., 20. Rochester, 8. Sun
Prairie, 2.71. Windsor, 5.


MINNESOTA, $198.00.

Freeborn, 2.10. Mankato, W. M. Soc, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 1.
Minneapolis, Plymouth (7.66 of which _for Fisk U._), 53.65.
Minneapolis, Plymouth, S., by Robert S. Russell, 50, _for S. A., Fisk
U._ Minneapolis, Vine, 14.25; Lyndale, S., 4.25. Morris, 3.95. Morris,
L. M. Soc. of C., Clothing, _for Macon, Ga._ New Brighton, Mrs. Alice
Lewis' S. Class, _for S. A., Skyland Inst., N. C._, 5. Plainview,
4.40. Spring Valley, 14.05. Zumbrota, First, 8.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs. W. W. Skinner,
Treas., $36.85:

Mazeppa, S., 5. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 10; First, 5.50. Saint Paul,
Park, 4.15. Wadina, 3.20. Waseca, 4. Winona, S., 5.


KANSAS, $94.12.

Muscotah, 5.80. Neosha Falls, Rev. S. B. Dyckmann, 1. Saint Marys, L.
H. M. S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 3. Topeka, First, 15.81. Topeka, Mrs.
Gaw, _for Meridian, Miss._, 2. Valley Falls, Mrs. M. E. Rosebrough,
35.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF KANSAS, Mrs. F. A. Wilkinson,
Treas., $31.51:

W. H. M. U. of Kansas, 31.51.


MISSOURI, $240.16.

Lebanon, Mrs. W. I. Wallace, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Kansas City,
South West Tab., 1.50; Ivanhoe Park, S., 3.62.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MISSOURI, by Mrs. K. L. Mills,
Treas., $236.89, (less expenses $11.85), $225.04:

Aurora, S., 1. Bonne Terre, First, 10. Kansas City, First, 165.81.
Saint Louis, Pilgrim, 25. First, Mary and Martha S., 1.50. Saint
Louis, First, to const., MRS. A. E. COOK, L. M., 30. Sedalia, First,
1.08. Springfield, First, 2.50.


NEBRASKA, $27.11.

Exeter, 4.35. Fremont, 22.76.


NORTH DAKOTA, $16.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NORTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Mary M.
Fisher, Treas.:

Cummings, 6. Wahpeton, 10.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $11.00.

Armour, W. M. S., _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 5. Faulkton, 6.


MONTANA, $14.20.

Billings, 14.20.


COLORADO, $45.90.

Greeley, First, 26.65.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF COLORADO, by Mrs. Belle C.
Valentine, Treas.,:

Grand Junction, _for Alaska M._, 19.25.


CALIFORNIA, $1,234.20.

Oak Park, W. C. McNeely, 10 cts. Pasadena, Y. W. M. S., _for S. A.,
Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 8.80. San Diego, 2. San Francisco,
Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see items below),
1,207.39. Stockton, C. (5 of which from Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D.),
12.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, by Mrs. Mary M.
Smith, Treas., $3.66:

Vernon, S., 3.66.


OREGON, $51.25

Astoria, Mrs. Alice M. Bishop, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, and
to const. herself L. M., 50. Elliot Prairie, 1.25.


WASHINGTON, $11.20.

Pleasant Prairie, C. E., of C., 3. Ritzville, First German, 8.20.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

Washington, Ladies of C., Clothing, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._


MARYLAND, $25.00.

Baltimore, Reuben Foster, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 25.


VIRGINIA, $1.00

North, Miss Lucy Smith, 1, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._


KENTUCKY, $13.00.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 3. Williamsburg, 10.


NORTH CAROLINA, $4.65.

Whittier, 65 cts. Haywood, 1.50. Dudley, 2.50.


TENNESSEE, $3.00.

Deer Lodge, 3.


GEORGIA, $91.76.

Atlanta, "Friend," _for Storrs Sch._, 77. Atlanta, C. E. of First,
Clothing, _for Troy, N. C._ Augusta, "Friends," Clothing, _for Troy,
N. C._ Hagan, Eureka, 2. McIntosh, Mrs. Mary W. Foster, _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Thomasville, Bethany, 10.26;
Thomasville, "A Friend," _for S. A., Allen Sch._, 50 cents.


ALABAMA, $2.31.

Birmingham, Rev. A. Simmons, 1. Joppa, S., 1.31. Mobile, Mr. Waters,
Clothing, _for Enfield, N. C._


FLORIDA, $5.00

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF FLA., by Mrs. W. D. Brown, Treas.,
5.00

Interlachen, Aux., _for Alaska M._, 5.


MISSISSIPPI, $78.75.

Meridian, C. and S., 12.50. Moorhead, C. Rock,
10; Miss Eva Rogers, 4; _for A. G. Sch._ Tougaloo, Miss L. M. Sisson,
50. F. S. Hitchcock, 2.25, _for Tougaloo U._


LOUISIANA, $62.80.

Abbeville, St. Mary, 4. Hammond, 7.60. New Iberia, Mrs. C. Blanchet,
20 cents. New Orleans, Alumni Ass'n, 50; Miss Mary L. Rogers, 1, _for
S. A., Straight U._


----.

----, W. C. T. U. of Lincoln Memorial Ch., Clothing, for _Troy, N.
C._


GERMANY, $10.00

Gottingen, Mary F. Leach, 10.


INCOME, $875.00

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 418.82; Mrs. S. N. Brewer Endowment
Fund, 20.93; De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair, Talladega C._,
67.50; C. E. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._, 50; E. B. Eldredge
Endowment Fund, 225; Fisk University Theo. Fund, 4.50. General
Endowment Fund, 50; E. A. Hand Endowment Fund, 11.25; S. M. Strong
Endowment Fund, _for Saluda, N. C._, 27.


TUITION, $4,540.84

Cappahosic, Va., 34; Lexington, Ky., 101.93; Williamsburg, Ky.,
115.20; Beaufort, N. C., 21.50; Blowing Rock, N. C., 10.50; Chapel
Hill, N. C., 8.85; Enfield, N. C., 29.25; Hillsboro, N. C., 20.67;
Kings Mountain, N. C., 42; Saluda, N. C., 28.30; Troy, N. C., 17.75;
Whittier, N. C., 22.61; Charleston, S. C., 306.35; Greenwood, S. C.,
110.05; Grand View, Tenn., 11.25; Knoxville, Tenn., 37.55; Memphis,
Tenn., 575.60; Nashville, Tenn., 567.58; Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 121.18;
Albany, Ga., 115.25; Andersonville, Ga., 15.78; Atlanta, Ga., Storrs
Sch., 228.83; Mason, Ga., 235.85; McIntosh, Ga., 95.72; Savannah, Ga.,
148.13; Thomasville, Ga., 71.35; Athens, Ala., 119.23; Florence, Ala.,
19.30; Joppa, Ala., Public Fund, 170.15; Joppa, Ala., 25.90; Marion,
Ala., 68.85; Mobile, Ala., 89.85; Nat, Ala., 35.98; Selma, Ala.,
44.75; Talladega, Ala., 15.90; New Orleans, La., 434.90; Meridian,
Miss., 110; Moorhead, Miss., 12; Tougaloo, Miss., 82.25; Martin, Fla.,
30.95; Orange Park, Fla., 62; Austin, Texas, 118.80.


SUMMARY FOR APRIL, 1898.

     Donations                                      $12,768.29
     Estates                                        $14,312.22
                                                    ----------
                                                    $27,080.51
     Income                                             875.00
     Tuition                                          4,540.84
                                                    ----------
     Total for April                                $32,496.35


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for April                            $10.17
     Previously acknowledged                            212.96
                                                       -------
     Total                                             $223.13


SUMMARY.

     Donations                                      $93,013.81
     Estates                                         55,652.13
                                                   -----------
                                                   $148,665.94
     Income                                           7,446.34
     Tuition                                         25,993.18
                                                   -----------
     Total from Oct. 1, 1897, to April 30, 1898,   $182,105.46


RECEIPTS FROM THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, William Johnstone,
Treas., from Feb. 25 to April 1, 1898, $262.71

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $235.17:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 13.55; Ann O., 19.67. Los Angeles, Chinese M.,
3.60; Ann. Gifts, 27.74. Marysville, Chinese M., 7.25. Oakland Chinese
M. 12; First, S. Primary C., 15. Oroville, Chinese M., 2.40.
Pasadena, "A Friend," 5. Petaluma, Chinese M., 2.50. Riverside,
Chinese M., 4.75; Ann. Gifts, 8.80. Sacramento, Chinese M., 5.50. San
Diego, Chinese M., 4; Ann. Gifts, 34.60. San Francisco, Central
Chinese M., 12.25; New Years Gifts to Jesus, 6; Miss Sarah Caughey, 1.
Santa Barbara, Chinese M., 5.15; Ann. Gifts, 14.45. Santa Cruz,
Chinese M. 7.55. Ventura, Chinese M., 1.35; Ann. Gifts, 3.60.
Vernondale, Chinese M., 2.50; Ann. Gifts, 10.96. Watsonville, Chinese
M., 4.

PERSONAL GIFT, $1.00.

Miss Mary M. Bevans, 1.

EASTERN FRIENDS, $11.54.

Boston, Mass., Yong Kay, 1. Washington, Conn., Cong'l S., 10.54.

WORK FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $15.00.

Greenfield, Mass., Mrs. E. B. Loomis, 15.


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION From April 1 to April 15,
1898, $944.68.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $104.58.

Fresno. Monthly O., 4.60; Ann. Membs., 2; Los Angeles, Chinese M.,
11.75; Douglas Perkins, 3; Marysville, Chinese M., 7.20. Oakland,
First, 26; Oroville, Chinese M. O., 2.10. Petaluma, Chinese M., 2.50.
Riverside, Chinese M., 5.25; Ann. Pledges, 12.25. Sacramento, Chinese
M., 5. San Diego, Chinese M., 2.10; Ann. Pledges, 19.50. San
Francisco, Bethany Ch., Ann. Pledges (of which Rev. W. W. Madge, 40;
"W. C. P.," 15, to const. Rev. W. W. Madge, L. M. of A. M. A. and Mrs.
Margaret Madge, L. M., of Cal. Chinese M.), 58.50. Santa Barbara,
Chinese M., 3.70; Ann. O., 13.75. Santa Cruz, Chinese M., 6.45.
Ventura, Chinese M., 2.40; Ann. O., 2.50. Vernondale, Chinese M.,
1.50. Ann. O., 2.50. Watsonville, Chinese M., 2.38.

PERSONAL GIFT, $250.00.

Messrs. Balfour, Guthrie & Co., 250.

EASTERN FRIEND, $500.00.

Mass.; "S.," 500.


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Av. and Twenty-Second St.,
  New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUBILEE YEAR FUND, ADDITIONAL SHARE.

THE LADIES' CIRCLE OF INDUSTRY OF UNION CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
Peterboro, N. Y.

  Previously reported                     856
  Subscription reported above               1
                                         ----
  Total number of shares reported         857

       *       *       *       *       *

Bureau of Woman's Work.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, Secretary.


In the notice of the Annual Meeting given on the cover page, it will
be observed that one of the sessions is to be given as usual to the
Woman's Department. A cordial invitation is extended to all, and we
especially hope that all Women's State Unions will be represented both
by State officers and auxiliaries. On the programme there will be
speakers representing the Unions, missionaries from the field, and
speakers of note.

"How to interest the uninterested," is the missionary puzzle of the
times. Will it not help to solve it if every friend who comes to this
Annual Meeting at Concord, New Hampshire, October 25-27, will try to
bring one who is not interested in missions?

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

  WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.
  _State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords; Mrs. L. J.
  Thomas, 115 So. Main St., Auburn; Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

  FEMALE CENT. INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION
  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 16 Rumford St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W. J. Van Patten, 386 Pearl St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Rebecca P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

  [A] WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--


CONNECTICUT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 530 Farmington Ave., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 153 Decatur St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. Frank J. Goodwin, Glen Ridge.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. S. Upton, Ridgway.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. W. Carroll, 48 Brookfield St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 515 The Ellington, Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. F. Coe, Elkhart.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. H. Ball, Anderson.


ILLINOIS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Oak Park.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Whitcomb, 463 Irving Ave., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.


MISSOURI.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes St., Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Doane, 3319 E. 9th St., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. F. Berry, Ottumwa.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, West Grand Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Isaac Platt Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. N. Thorne, 212 S. Union St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. E. Smith, 140 Gorham St., Madison.


MINNESOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth St., St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. M. M. Lander, Wahpeton.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. B. H. Burtt, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. M. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs C. W. Brown, Rapid City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S. Cushman, Deadwood.


NEBRASKA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Q St., Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Charlotte C. Hall, C St., Lincoln.


KANSAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. H. Jaquith, 1157 Filmore Street, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read, Parsons.


COLORADO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette St., Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valentine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Brown, Wheatland.


MONTANA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Victor F. Clark. Livingston.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. J. Miller, Livingston.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. S. Bell, Helena.


IDAHO.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. E. Mason, Mountain Home.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. L. Cole, Mountain Home.


WASHINGTON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K St., Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth St., Seattle.


OREGON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. D. Clarke, 447 N. E. Twelfth St., Portland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Forest Grove.


CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, Saratoga.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. B. Perkins, 546 24th St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (including Southern Idaho).

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth St., E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. H. Ashmun, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. McCluskey, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, Greensboro.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, Oaks.


GEORGIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--
  Secretary--
  Treasurer--


FLORIDA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Spencer Snell, Talladega.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY and ARKANSAS.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Miss Mary L. Corpier, Florence, Ala.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. C. Napier, 514 Capitol Square, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  Secretary--Miss Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th St., Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

  President--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, 2436 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda W. Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary L. Rogers, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 52, NO. 02, JUNE, 1898 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.