Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

JANUARY, 1896

Vol. L

No. 1




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  THE NEW YEAR,                                                   1
  PAMPHLETS AND SPEECHES,                                         2
  JUBILEE BELL BANK,                                              3
  MEETING WOMAN'S BUREAU--CLIPPINGS,                              3


THE CHINESE.

  ENDEAVOR TESTIMONIES,                                           4


IN MEMORIAM.

  PROF. GEO. L. WHITE,                                            6
  MISS ADA M. SPRAGUE,                                            7
  MRS. N. D. MERRIMAN--MISS LILLIAN BEYER,                        8


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  ANNUAL MEETING--REPORT OF SECRETARY,                            9
  ADDRESS OF MRS. SYDNEY STRONG,                                 13
  ADDRESS OF MISS ANNETTE P. BRICKETT,                           15
  EXTRACTS FROM ADDRESS, MISS H. S. LOVELAND,                    18
  ADDRESS OF MRS. HARRIS,                                        20
  EXTRACTS FROM ADDRESS OF MRS. WOODBURY,                        21


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS                                      23


RECEIPTS,                                                        25


  NEW YORK:
  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
  Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


  Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.
  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class mail
    matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

   H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of
thirty dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L.     JANUARY, 1896.     No. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

1846.          THE NEW YEAR.          1896.

Eighteen Hundred and Ninety-six brings in the Jubilee Year of the
American Missionary Association. What marked changes have taken place
between 1846 and 1896, even in the range of events with which the
Association is connected! Then the great gold discoveries in
California had not been made; then little was done by the Church or
the Government for the Indian; then the Southern mountaineers were
hunting and fishing, innocent of schools and railroads; then slavery
dominated the land, oppressing the slave and aiming to crush free
thought and speech in the North.

Now how changed! As to slavery, for example. The war and emancipation
have written a new page on our national history. But emancipation only
battered down the prison doors and sent forth the millions of
ignorant, helpless and vicious people--a menace to the Republic and a
reproach to the Church, if left in their degraded condition, but
presenting a most hopeful field for humane and Christian effort. The
facts made an appeal for immediate and effective work and the American
Missionary Association sprang into the task. Hundreds of refined and
Christian women lent their aid and toiled in the uplifting of the
needy, amid the scorn and hatred of the white people, while the
churches and benevolent friends responded with the means. The
Association has followed up this Christlike beginning by the planting
of permanent institutions--schools and churches--and the good effects
are becoming apparent in the multitude of industrious, prosperous and
educated colored people, the hopeful and helpful leaders of their
race. But their advancement only reveals the yet unreached masses
behind them as hopeful if promptly met, and as helpless if neglected,
as those that preceded them.

This good work is at its crowning point--to push forward is victory,
to halt is disaster. But the Association feels the pressure of the
hard times. It owes a debt of nearly $100,000, and needs four times
as much to sustain the work now in hand. Nevertheless, there is no
cause for discouragement in all this. There is vast wealth in the
nation, and a large share of it is in the hands of those who are more
or less directly connected with the Christian Church, and who are
liberal in their gifts when worthy objects are fairly brought to their
attention. It is true that there are those whose resources are
restricted by the present stagnation in business. This, however, gives
the opportunity for Christian self-denial. The relief for imperiled
Christian work will come if those who are prospered will give of their
abundance, while those less favored will imitate the Macedonians of
whom Paul speaks, whose "deep poverty abounded unto the riches of
their liberality." Self-denial is not a lost virtue in the Church of
Christ.

We make our appeal for relief during this Jubilee year. Already large
correspondence has been had with pastors of churches and others, and
the responses are very cheering, giving promise of most efficient
helpfulness. We hope, therefore, that our next Annual Meeting--our
fiftieth anniversary, to be held in Boston--will have the enthusiasm
of a Jubilee deliverance from the bondage of hampering limitations,
and give a new impulse to our labors for the emancipation of those
still in the bondage of ignorance and vice.

       *       *       *       *       *

PAMPHLETS AND SPEECHES.

Our recent annual meeting has furnished a large number of papers and
addresses, covering, in a wide range, the various parts of the work of
this Association. Some of these have already appeared in the December
number of THE MISSIONARY, and a portion of them will be reprinted in
pamphlet or leaflet form, especially those from the field workers or
which relate directly to field operations. Besides these, some of the
valuable addresses not thus printed will be issued in pamphlet form,
and all of them are freely offered to our constituents on application!
We give below a somewhat complete list of these documents with the
name of the author and the title of the address:

  The Freedman Truly Free Only by Christian Education: Pres. MERRILL E.
    GATES.
  Ownership and Service: Secretary F. P. WOODBURY.
  The Indian Factor in the Indian Problem: Secretary C. J. RYDER.
  Last Decade of A. M. A. Work in the South: Dist. Secretary JOS. E.
    ROY.
  Christianization of the "Inferior Races:" President J. B. ANGELL.
  The Chinese in America an Element in Christianizing China: Rev.
    WILLARD SCOTT, D.D.
  Plea for Hope and Courage: Rev. W. E. C. WRIGHT, D.D.
  Educational Work in the South: President W. G. BALLANTINE.
  Mountain School Work: Prof. C. M. STEVENS.
  After Twenty-five years in Negro Education: Prof. A. K. SPENCE.
  The Financial Problem: Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D.
  Indian Work: Rev. G. W. REED.
  Story of a Young Indian: JONAS SPOTTED-BEAR.
  Reciprocal Interests and Responsibilities of the Indian and White
    Man: Rev. NEHEMIAH BOYNTON, D.D.
  Southern Church Missions: Rev. H. M. LADD, D.D.
  Progress and Needs of the Negro Race: Rev. GEORGE W. MOORE.
  New Mission Churches: Rev. GEORGE H. HAINES.
  Brothers and a Story: Rev. JOSIAH STRONG, D.D.
  A Plea for the Chinese Work of the A. M. A.: Rev. J. K. MCLEAN, D.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUBILEE BELL BANK.

The American Missionary Association has prepared a Bell Bank for the
use of Sunday-schools, Christian Endeavor Societies, etc., which it is
ready to distribute freely on application.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEETING OF THE WOMAN'S BUREAU.

As usual, the January number of the MISSIONARY is devoted to the
addresses and papers delivered at the meeting of the Bureau of Woman's
Work, at Detroit, Mich. We are sure our readers will be gratified with
the reports which we give of these very telling papers and speeches.
They set forth distinctly the work of this Bureau and the needs and
prospects of the various peoples to whom its labors are devoted. The
Bureau is commending itself more and more as a valuable assistant in
reaching the hearts and moving the sympathies of the Christian women
of our churches, thus securing enlarged contributions.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLIPPINGS FROM FIELD CORRESPONDENCE.


THE SOUTH.

From Allen Normal School, Thomasville, Ga.:

Every year of experience in the work strengthens my conviction of the
uncounted value of the work done in the American Missionary
Association schools in just the matter of fitting young men and women
to go to these country places, to carry to the multitudes of their own
race, whose lives are miserably darkened by ignorance and
superstition, the light which they have received.

From Lincoln School, Meridian, Miss.:

God is giving us great encouragement. No year has yet brought us as
great pleasure as this in seeing the fruits of our work. Eight of our
last year's graduates entered Tougaloo and Fisk. Better than this--for
we do not expect the greater part of our pupils will enter higher
institutions--more than forty of our students are now teaching. Nearly
every school in Kemper County is supplied with teachers from our
school. Several of our young men are seriously considering the going
as mission teachers into the darkest part of the great Black Belt.


THE MOUNTAIN FIELD.

From one of our mountain academies comes the following good message
that will interest all the loyal Endeavorers throughout the land:

"Last Sunday at our Young People's meeting a vigorous beginning was
made to the organization of a Christian Endeavor Society. Young men
active in religious meetings made the move and organized."

The following lines are used in one of the Sunday-schools in
Connecticut, which has recently given its birthday pennies to work
among the mountain children in the South. Their contribution goes to
help provide a building for the Christian instruction of a large
number of Highland lads and lassies in Tennessee. We thoroughly
appreciate gifts that come with the evident spirit of consecration
that accompanies these birthday pennies:

    Jesus sat beside the treasury,
    Saw the pennies as they came,
    Knew the hands that love to bring them
    For the sake of His dear name.
    Jesus, bless the ones _we_ bring Thee,
    Give them something sweet to do;
    May they help someone to love Thee;
    Jesus, may we love Thee, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese.


ENDEAVOR TESTIMONIES.

BY REV. W. C. POND, D.D.

It seems to me that nothing else should so much interest the friends
of our Chinese Mission, as to get glimpses of the inner life, the
Christian purposes, the ways of thinking which characterize those whom
we report as giving evidence of conversion, and, perhaps, not
otherwise can such glimpses be given than by jotting down some of the
testimonies borne by them in their Y. P. S. C. E. meetings.

I myself have heard very many such which I have wished I could
reproduce in the hearing of those whose gifts sustain our work, but
that I may not seem to have gleaned the remarkable ones from the
whole field, I will take only those recently reported to me from our
Los Angeles Mission by its faithful and efficient teacher, Mrs. Rice.
It must be noted that these were all made under the embarrassments
attendant upon speaking in English, to them a strange and but
half-learned tongue.

1. "I enjoy C. E. very much. When you in trouble, your friend let you
have money; when you get money you pay him back. So friends and
teachers help us. Now they want us to give few words. They like to
know how much I know Christ. Another thing: China never show us the
way to Heaven. This country help us. God gave his only Son. We ought
to thank Him and give him our words."

2. "If you in strange place and look for hotel, may-be get in bad one;
some friend show you good one, be very thankful. Christ show way to
Heaven. _We_ be very thankful."

3. "Ten days ago I read in paper--C. E. Society started in China. I
felt very glad. When I visited China few years ago, did not know about
it. I tell few friends words about great Creator of world. He made
everything. He made good and evil. Some people ask me why God make
evil. I tell him so people choose. I used to choose evil things,
worship idols, and such things. Then I come Mission school, learn to
sing; best of all, read Bible, and I read Jesus is the way, the truth
and the life, and I choose good. I am glad I know Jesus is the way."

4. An Exposition, Matt. 16:19. "I will give thee the keys," etc.
"Don't lose your key. If you lose your key you can't get home. Not
take care [_i. e._ carelessly] I lost my key for P. O. box. Had to ask
for another. Have great trouble for lose your key, but if you do, ask
your Father in heaven. He give you another."

5. "I will explain how to go to heaven. Remember how I found the way
to cook. First I make some cake. I not know how much eggs and how much
sugar. Sometimes good and sometimes bad. After while I ask friend all
about make cake. He good cook. He tell me how much eggs, how much
flour, and how long bake. Then I have no trouble. So ask Jesus how to
go to heaven. He tell me and I have no trouble."

6. "We, brethren, go out all day, working hard. When it come night, we
all come here to our home [_i. e._ the Mission House]. _It like fader
and moder to us._"

7. One of our brethren was greatly moved one night over a letter just
received from his father acknowledging the receipt of $20, which he
had sent in accordance with his custom of remitting regularly toward
the support of his parents. His father asked him to send more in
order that he might "buy him a new son who would worship ancestors."
He said: "I am his only child. My father rather I smoke opium, gamble
and drink, only so I give up Jesus and serve ancestors. I am not that
way. I never give up my religion so long as I live. I did explain to
them to be a Christian very much, but they not want to change. I wish
I never got that letter. I do pray much for them. I pray for them
every night."

Teachers in any of our missions who succeed in persuading their pupils
to speak at the Endeavor meetings in English will all recognize in the
above testimonies counterparts of such as they have often heard. I am
not surprised to have one of them, who has recently entered into this
service, write: "The longer I teach the better I like the work and
realize the grand possibilities in it. Oh! if only I can bring my
scholars to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ!" She is doing this,
and so are all the others in our noble band.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Memoriam.


PROFESSOR GEORGE L. WHITE.

Twenty-four years ago a choir of colored singers, young men and women,
went forth from Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn., and introduced a
peculiar variety of songs and music, which they and their successors
have carried with _éclat_ well-nigh round the world. They not only
awoke the enthusiasm of vast audiences in the large cities of America
and Europe, but they were invited to sing before the mightiest
monarchs and the most distinguished people on the other side of the
water. These singers were endowed richly with the sweet and mellow
voices that nature has given to their race, but they had also a
training under a most skillful and magnetic teacher, Professor George
L. White. He not only had genius as a teacher of music, but a profound
faith in God that prompted him to undertake a seemingly hopeless
enterprise, without adequate means and with little encouragement from
others.

He was born in Cadiz, N. Y., in 1833, and was a member of the 73d Ohio
regiment. He fought in the battles of Gettysburg and Chancellorsville,
and his life was always characterized by a spirit of loyal devotion to
his country. At the close of the war he held office in the Freedmen's
Bureau and was appointed to be the first treasurer of Fisk University.
After training his singers, he started with them on their journey,
stopping in Cincinnati and in Oberlin where they were welcomed by the
first National Congregational Council; thence eastward, scarcely
paying expenses, until they reached Brooklyn, where Henry Ward Beecher
gave them an audience completely packing his great church, thus
indorsing them for their future career. Their first trip through this
country netted $20,000, and a second "campaign" in Great Britain and
on the Continent was even more successful. As the result of all the
efforts of the Jubilee Singers at home and abroad under different
leaders, nearly $150,000 was realized, which was expended in grounds
and buildings for Fisk University--an eloquent though silent monument
to their remarkable undertaking. In 1881 Mr. White, while at
Chautauqua with a band of singers, fell from a platform and suffered
injuries from which he never wholly recovered. For several years he
has been at Sage College, Ithaca, N. Y., where he has performed a work
of great personal influence and endeared himself to all those with
whom he came in contact. Mr. White died suddenly November 9, being
stricken with paralysis. Services were held in the chapel of Sage
College, and also at Fisk University, where some of the original band
of singers rendered some of the old Jubilee hymns. He was buried at
Fredonia, N. Y., and the interment service was held in the
Presbyterian church. A useful career of a consecrated man has
terminated amid the sorrows of many friends who yet do not mourn
without hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS ADA M. SPRAGUE.

Another of our faithful workers has finished her work and gone to her
rest. On the 23d of November Miss Ada M. Sprague, assistant in the
normal department of the Ballard School at Macon, Ga., breathed her
last after a brief illness of two weeks. She leaves a widowed mother
and twin sister. She has gone in the prime of her young womanhood and
in the midst of her usefulness. But she has left behind the example of
a consecrated life which will endure.

Miss Sprague was born in Keene, Ohio, November 15, 1863. She was of
New England ancestry. Her first experience in teaching was in a
country school near her home, where she was very successful. She
afterward went to college in Wooster, Ohio, but before she completed
her course her father died and she was obliged to give up her studies
and find some employment. For the following three or four years she
worked in the Pension Office at Columbus, Ohio. Then, offering her
services to the American Missionary Association, she was appointed to
a position in Tillotson College at Austin, Texas, where she labored
faithfully for four years. In October of this year she went to Macon,
Ga., where she did her work thoroughly up to within two weeks of her
death. She will be sadly missed by the mother, whose main dependence
she was, and by the many friends she had made wherever she had lived
and labored.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. N. D. MERRIMAN.

On the 1st of October, 1895, on the anniversary of her entering upon
work as a teacher in Burrell School, at Selma, Ala., we buried Mrs.
Narcissa Dorsey Merriman, wife of Professor James A. Merriman, of the
class of '91, Talladega. Mrs. Merriman took the full college course at
Fisk University, graduating in 1891. Professor Spence was for four
years her instructor in Greek and leader of the Mozart Society, in
which she was soprano soloist. He writes: "Let us thank God it was
light with her at the evening of life." This was indeed true. A few
hours before the end, when seemingly at the very brink, strength was
given to sing in her remarkably clear, flute-like tones the verse,
"God moves in a mysterious way." We sang this at her funeral; also by
her request, "O mother, dear Jerusalem." These constituted a part of
the memorial service at Fisk also.

Miss Dorsey taught in '91-2 at Beaumont, Texas; '92-3-4 in Birmingham,
Ala., and '94-5 in Burrell. In all these places she will long be
remembered for her gift of song, scholarly attainment and genial
bearing--a lovely woman. Besides a sorrowing husband she left a
widowed mother, bereft of her only child, and a helpless infant three
weeks old, thus seeming to lay down her work at the very dawn of great
usefulness in home and society.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS LILLIAN BEYER.

Miss Lillian Beyer, who taught in the Warner Institute at Knoxville,
Tenn., last year, under this Association, died on November 29, and was
laid to rest December 2. A week before her death she had every
appearance of good health. She had secured a position as city
missionary in the neighborhood in which she used to live in New York,
and was expecting to begin her life work there on the very day on
which she was buried. But a few days before she was attacked with a
violent fit of coughing and grew rapidly worse, falling asleep two
days later, on her twenty-fifth birthday.

Her pastor writes: "The funeral was held in the chapel on Sunday
evening. A great company gathered, and I trust that impressions were
received which will bear fruit in the coming years. It is our prayer
that those who did not yield to her life and her teaching may bow
before this mysterious Providence. While preparing for her life work,
Miss Beyer had done considerable missionary labor, and a bright
prospect was before her--shall I not rather say _is_ before her."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bureau of Woman's Work.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


ANNUAL MEETING.

One of the interesting sessions of the American Missionary Association
at Detroit was the Woman's Meeting, which was held from two to four
o'clock on Thursday afternoon before the same large audience that had
already listened for two days to the varied accounts of work on the
mission field.

The devotional exercises were led by Miss Mallory, a deaconess of the
First Church. Six of the Women's State Organizations were reported,
viz. Maine, by Mrs. Woodbury, president; Massachusetts and Rhode
Island, by Miss Bridgman, treasurer; Ohio, by Mrs. Brown, treasurer;
Illinois, by Mrs. Claflin, president; Minnesota, by Miss Brickett,
delegate; Michigan, by Mrs. Davis, delegate. We were privileged in
having with us other officers of some of these Unions, Michigan
especially being represented by president, secretary and treasurer.
All brought words of hope, and some of the crisp sentences from the
lips of these devoted home workers for missions will not soon be
forgotten by those who heard them.

Following the reports from State Unions, Mrs. Sydney Strong, of
Cincinnati, president of the Ohio Union, gave a very interesting and
helpful address on woman's work throughout the country. Then came the
annual report of the Bureau of Women's Work, and missionary addresses
from the field. The sweet Jubilee singing by the young women from
Nashville, Tenn., added to the enjoyment of the occasion.

We regret that the limit of the magazine pages will not allow the
addresses in full, but we hope to furnish some of them in pamphlet
form. The paper by Miss Mitchell, of Blowing Rock, N. C., will be
printed thus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Following the woman's meeting, a children's meeting was conducted,
which held the close attention of the little ones for an hour with
vivid descriptions of the children of Alaska and China, the Indian
boys and girls, and of the mountain and negro children of the South.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPORT OF SECRETARY.

We come to this Annual Meeting with hearts full of gratitude to the
many friends who have stood by this work in its emergency, and with
praise to Him who daily beareth our burdens, and who we believe is
unto us a God of deliverances. True, every passing month of the year
just closed has sounded the ominous word "Debt," and the burdens
consequent have been many and heavy; it has been hard to see the
missionary work so repressed and cramped when opportunities for
development offered on every side. But it has been glorious to watch
its wonderful power and accomplishment even in its too restricted
limitation. Surely a blessing followed the offerings of those who
remembered this A. M. A. field with their gifts especially of "money
consecrated to the Lord's work." Some, we have reason to believe, in
giving "their slender mite for love of Him," gave much.

Thirty-one of the forty-two State Unions have made cash contributions
to the Association's work during the year, but this does not represent
in full the aid given. Four hundred and eighty-six barrels have been
sent to the various fields, and while all have contained useful
articles, some have been packed with valuable supplies of house linen
for the boarding-halls and goods for the industrial classes.

The Secretary has presented the work frequently at missionary
meetings, and series of meetings were planned for her and for
missionaries from the field, in several of the States. In this the
officers of the State organizations cooperated cordially, and were
most helpful in arranging appointments among the auxiliaries. There is
evident need of the work being made known by personal presentation.
Missionary literature has been freely distributed, and letters from
the field have been sent out in response to contributions wherever
desired. The system of missionary letter-writing entails not a little
of care and burden upon both missionaries and secretary, but it brings
the missionaries and home workers into closer sympathy, and provides
interesting information for missionary meetings. We acknowledge
thankfully the consideration shown when letters have been unavoidably
delayed, and the many expressions of appreciation of the missionary
news.

Through the circulation of the letters and printed leaflets you have
had many glimpses of the schools, churches, prayer-meetings,
Sunday-schools, Endeavor meetings and the homes of the people in the
South, on the Indian reservations, the Pacific Coast and Alaska. We
trust it has been a joy to you to make the work so much your very own
by the share you have had in sustaining it and watching its
development.

There is a very precious part of this missionary work, however, that
lies beyond the boundaries of our one hundred and seventeen schools. A
hint of it may be seen in the following to her teacher from a former
colored student, now the wife of a Congregational minister in the A.
M. A. church service. It represents hundreds of cases equally
gratifying of those who, through the beneficent work of the American
Missionary Association, to-day fill positions of influence and
usefulness in the various walks of life. The writer says: "The work
here I enjoy very much, nevertheless there are many discouraging
things in connection with it. But then I know we cannot always have
smooth sailing. If everything was all smooth there would be no need
of much work. I am only too glad to do something for the Master,
though I know I am one that is fitted only to quietly fill in a little
chink in the great work that is to be done. When I remember that we
are not all given the same number of talents, I am somewhat encouraged
to go on with the work, content to do little unnoticed acts in the
name of the Master. I remember, too, that what I am, you are the one
who was instrumental in making me. The Lord has a great reward for you
for your patience and kind dealing with me."

"Little, unnoticed acts in the name of the Master." Think of it--that
these colored boys, girls and mountain youth, Indians and Chinese, to
the number of thirteen thousand annually, are through this American
Missionary Association brought under such Christian training that a
large proportion go forth to use their talents, be they great or
small, in the name of the Master. What better could we do for either
of these races than to support liberally a work that, preparing the
youth for the practical duties of life, sends them forth to exert
their influence among their people for the love of Christ and In His
Name.

It has been a year of advance in contributions from the organizations
of Woman's Work, and while this has been a welcome and valuable aid to
the A. M. A. treasury, it is also a cheering indication of what these
organizations may be able to do the next year and the next with
increasing knowledge of the mission field, increasing interest and
ability. The cash receipts, through the State organizations, have been
$21,213.95, and directly from local societies and mission bands,
$4,124.66, a total of $25,338.61. We give a tabulated statement from
which it will be seen that nine of the State organizations now measure
their dollars for the A. M. A. by the thousand, and some of those in
the list immediately following we hope will soon join the
thousand-dollar rank.

  Massachusetts and Rhode Island      $4,853.89
  New York                             2,530.06
  Ohio                                 1,893.29
  Maine                                1,708.02
  Connecticut                          1,517.05
  Iowa                                 1,231.54
  Illinois                             1,184.17
  Vermont                              1,134.00
  Missouri                             1,019.96
  Minnesota                              851.61
  New Jersey                             589.35
  Michigan                               528.28
  New Hampshire                          527.57
  Wisconsin                              466.63
  Nebraska                               274.39
  Southern California                    207.85
  Kansas                                 199.32
  California                             102.10
  South Dakota                            85.92
  Colorado                                82.05
  Louisiana                               45.52
  Pennsylvania                            35.00
  Alabama                                 30.00
  North Carolina                          29.90
  Arkansas, Tennessee and Kentucky        20.25
  Washington                              20.00
  Indiana                                 15.00
  North Dakota                            11.50
  Black Hills, S. D.                       6.28
  Wyoming                                  5.75
  New Mexico                               1.60

In assigning these contributions to some definite portion of the work,
as has been desired, the choice has naturally been the support of
women as missionary teachers, forty-five having been thus assigned.
The total number of missionaries in the A. M. A. churches and schools
is six hundred and forty-nine. The churches number two hundred and
twelve. The schools number one hundred and seventeen, and the five
hundred and thirty teachers engaged in them, many of whom preach as
well as teach, are indeed too few for the broad lines of instruction,
the varied industrial training, the intellectual and spiritual, or, to
use a favorite expression, the training of "head, hand and heart." But
it is often noticeable how cheerfully these missionaries meet the
increasing demands upon their strength, forgetful of self, in their
intense desire for the good of their pupils, that, intelligent,
industrious, virtuous, all may go out to their life-work, whatever and
wherever it may be, in the name of the Master.

But what of those who are not gathered into these Christian schools?
Longing, praying and pleading to enter, what if the doors are closed
against them because they have no money, no influence, and in their
time of need, no friends? Our hearts ache that such should have been
the bitter experience of any the past year. But it is too true. With
no means of their own and no friend to aid them, hundreds have been
turned back to darkness when they wanted light; turned back because
there was none to help.

The opportunities of the year just closed we may not reclaim, but we
are beginning a new year with its new opportunities. The colored
people, eager for improvement, struggling with poverty, appeal for
schools and churches, but it costs $400 for each teacher or minister.
The Indians want their children to come into the mission schools where
they may learn "the Jesus way," but it costs $150 for each pupil. The
mountain people of the South, unlettered, simple-hearted, credulous,
are the prey of Mormon missionaries, who are working zealously for
converts, and, as one reports, with "good success." The antidote is
Christian teachers and preachers, but here again is an average cost of
$400. The Chinese field, besides the work for men in mission schools,
presents an opportunity for women's work among twenty-five hundred
Chinese women in San Francisco, who are accessible in their homes, and
who respond gratefully to Christian sympathy and instruction. Was
there ever such gracious opportunity to the Christian church to gather
into the fold the "other sheep" of the Great Shepherd? He has said,
"them also I must bring." Would He bring them in through us? Let us
arouse ourselves that we may not so lose these opportunities God has
given to win this land for Christ. We have done something, but it is
so far short of the need. Our offerings--have they been so much a part
of ourselves, have they cost us so much that they have been _worthy_
tokens of love to our Lord?

The American Missionary Association has come to its fiftieth year of
work and appeal for these to whom the gospel is to be preached,
through church planting and Christian schools. It comes burdened with
obligations for the work already done, and for that of the year just
begun. Can we not, each one of us, _double our gifts_ to this work in
this A. M. A. Jubilee year? This, with one true self-denial offering
from every woman in the Congregational church, and friend of the work,
and not only shall the Association come next year to its fiftieth
anniversary with rejoicing, but hundreds of _new voices_ from the
millions of people to whom we are sent, will join also in the song of
Jubilee.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDRESS OF MRS. SYDNEY STRONG.

A speaker at our Toledo meeting two years ago, when she had told of
her life work in China, closed her remarks by saying: "American
sisters, the women of China look to you for their examples of
Christian womanhood. Do not disappoint them: for if you do, it will be
the greatest blow foreign missions can have." During the past year, in
our work in Ohio, when I have known so much of the needs over this
broad land of ours, I have wondered continually what some of the
Christian converts of China would think could they visit our shores
and go into the mountains in our Southern land and see the women
there, how perfectly ignorant they are, some of them not even knowing
their alphabet, and, what is sadder still, not even knowing that they
are hundreds of years behind the women living but a few miles from
their mountain home. If these Chinese converts could go down from the
mountains into the plains and see our negro sister there in her cabin
home, and realize how she is oppressed and how so few there care for
her soul; if they could go into the West and visit the Indians, and
realize how America has treated the Indian, how she has given him land
until she wanted it herself and then has taken it, and pushed him
farther West until now she has him in a place where the land is so
poor it is not likely she will ever want it; if they could go and see
their Chinese sisters--their own flesh and blood--and realize that
America had the opportunity right at her own door of teaching and
raising up Christian Chinese women to go back and teach their own
kindred the "old, old story," what do you suppose they would think of
Christian America? My sisters, what do you think of it? Are these
conditions due to lack of money? We can all give when we are
interested. Poverty is a thing of comparison. We are all poor compared
with our neighbor on the avenue, and we are all rich compared with our
neighbor who lived on crusts of bread last week and knows not where
her crusts are coming from this week. No, my friends, we can give when
we are interested.

In this connection I have been thinking a little of a dear friend, who
when asked if she could not increase her contribution to five dollars
for the work this coming year, said: "Possibly I can another year, but
this year I cannot, for I am going abroad and I have to economize."
"Economy!" Is not that just the place it always begins? Can we look
back over the last two years, those of us who have been affected by
the hard times, and truthfully say that we did not begin at the giving
end to economize? It seems to me that this is just where we all make
our mistakes. Is not this just the reason why our church work is so
cold and lifeless? We are trying to do Christ's work in man's way and
we can no more do it than the Indian we are told about, who tried to
run the machine controlled by electricity in his own way rather than
in the way the inventor intended it to be run. God has given us a plan
for doing this work and saving souls, and we are trying man's way
rather than God's way. What is man's way? It is to do church work, go
to missionary societies, and give--when we have time and money. What
is God's way? "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, and prove
me now herewith, saith your God, and see if I will not open the
windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing." Have we done it? Have
we brought the tithes all in?

We use much more wisdom in material things often than we do in
spiritual things. Can we not learn a lesson from the farmer? What does
God say to the farmer! "Sow, and ye shall also reap." But the farmer
says, "I cannot; I haven't enough. If I had plenty I would sow, but I
haven't. My family could not live as well as my neighbor; we could not
set a good enough table; we might even have to go hungry." But the
command comes again: "Sow, and ye shall also reap," and I venture to
say that there is not a farmer in this country of ours but who would
go hungry, yea, he and his children would go bare-footed, but he would
take some portion of the grain that he had and throw it broadcast over
his field, knowing that it would lie there and decay, but trusting in
the Lord that it would come back to him after many days. Why cannot we
use the same wisdom in spiritual matters?

But there is something that is of more value even than money. It seems
to me that the one thing we need is more consecrated women in our
churches, women that have more love for their Master and for his
cause, women that do not do this work from a sense of duty, but
because they love their Lord and Saviour. It seems to me we ought to
put love in the same place where Christ put it, on the same pinnacle
where Paul put it: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels and have not love, it profiteth me nothing; though I understand
all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith so that I
could remove mountains, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing;
and though I give my body to be burned, and though I bestow all my
goods to feed the poor, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing."

My dear friends, if we only had this love, this consecration, we would
be interested in everything that interests our Master. And hearing of
our sister in the mountains who knows nothing of him, we would hasten
to go ourselves or make it easy for others to go and tell her of His
love. And thinking of our colored sister in the South who is oppressed
and down-trodden, if we loved Him we would hasten to go with joy and
tell her of the yoke that is easy and the burden that is light. And
remembering our Indian sister who is so in the dark and is so
destitute of knowledge we would find a way to tell her of Him who is
the light of the world. And knowing of our Chinese sister here on our
shores, who looks forward to a heavenly home for her husband, though
she has no such hope for herself, we would go and tell her--or see
that some one else told her--of Him who said: "Whosoever cometh unto
me shall have eternal life." Our work then would not be done from a
sense of duty but as the expression of our love and joy, and all we
would ask in return would be the words: "Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto one of the least of these, ye have done it unto me."

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDRESS BY MISS ANNETTE P. BRICKETT.

In the few minutes which are assigned me in which to bring before you
the work of our Indian mission and boarding school at Fort Berthold,
among the Rees, Mandans and Gros Ventres, there is no time for me to
discuss the "Indian Problem," about which I am not at all wise, nor to
talk of the Indian character, nor to defend it against the numberless
unjust opinions and popular newspaper and magazine prejudice with
which you are all so familiar.

I think you want to know all that I shall have time to tell you of our
past year's work, our encouragements, our difficulties and successes.

There has been an increasing spirit of loving, gentle, helpfulness
among our school girls, both in the home and school life. We have all
gladly noticed that our boys have become more courteous and
thoughtful. Many of them have learned for the first time, under their
wise and consecrated matron, the value of strict adherence to God's
great law of obedience in the forming of manly characters and in the
making of happy homes.

Our older Ree girls came back to school this fall more neatly and
cleanly clad than ever before. Some of them made tasteful calico
dresses for themselves with which to return to us. Several of these
older girls, under the leadership of one of our ladies, organized
themselves into a "Cleaning Club" at the close of school in July and
have kept faithfully at work all through the vacation, each week
meeting at a certain house and giving the poor little log home, with
its mud-plugged walls and dirt floor a most vigorous and thorough
"scrub." After the beds had been made up cleanly with sheets and
pillow cases, which were in each case the property of the school girl
at whose house they met, and putting up cheap scrim curtains at the
two little windows, then these students of scrubology, on a stove,
shining with a perhaps unprecedented coat of blacking, prepared before
their somewhat dazed parents a neat and wholesome meal of such simple
material as they had, set it out on a white covered table just as
nicely as they are taught to do at school, and invited their parents
to eat with them. This improvement has not been merely spontaneous. It
was a principle of the society that each girl who had been thus
assisted should do all in her power to keep the home clean and neat,
and our girls have greatly delighted us by the brave way in which they
have kept this pledge.

This past year several of our older boys and girls have, without
urging or even suggestion from the teachers, told us of their earnest
desire to go out into the world and attend a higher school. They were
quite prepared to enter the school at Santee and though reminded of
the opposition they would undoubtedly encounter in getting permission
from their ignorant and in some cases heathen parents, as well as that
of the Government Agent, they have still been quite determined.
"Maimie," one of the girls, first asked consent of her uncle and aunt
with whom she has her home. They both refused, being unwilling to have
her go so far away and also to lose the small help which the little
money Maimie earned by doing extra work at school brought to them.
Both the uncle and aunt are members of our church and our prayers that
Christian principle might triumph in this case and make these two an
example to the rest were answered, for soon "Hand" and his wife
"Alice" cheerfully went to the Agent and told him of their previous
unwillingness but also of their present decision that they were glad
to have Maimie go away and learn more of God's ways so that she might
better teach and lead her people.

John, one of the boys, has met with much bitter opposition from his
people who are under the influence of the Catholic priest at the
Agency. They have forced him into the Government school, which is of a
grade entirely below his present attainments, and he is much
discouraged, but we still trust that God's plan for our boys and
girls, into whose souls he has put these aspirations, will be worked
out in His own time and way.

Our church members who are as yet but "babes in Christ" have had
numerous testings this year, which, while they have been times of
severe trial to us as well as to them, have been but passing clouds,
which have only for a time hid from them the "Guiding Hand," and which
has made them all the more strong and distinct as members of Christ's
body.

There have been disappointments in the past year; a few of those from
whom we hoped much have become careless and indifferent. But more have
grown in spiritual strength and are manifesting the new spirit of
godliness in their lives in many practical ways; in neater personal
appearance, in better houses and cleaner homes, and in much more
industrious attention to their farm work. The Christian women nearly
all ride on the seat of their wagons beside their husbands and not
squatted down behind in the old way which indicated their inferiority
and degradation.

Our church and women's missionary organization have cheerfully
contributed from exceedingly scanty means to all the branches of our
Congregational work. While our school on account of the reduced
appropriations has been reduced to forty-two pupils, our further
outstation among the Mandan people, which for two years has been
closed, has this fall been reopened, and one of the lady missionaries
is already living among them in her little log house. Shall I speak of
the needs of our school boys and girls? You patient mothers know so
well what are the needs of forty-two play-loving active children, who
wrestle, play football, tag, jump rope and barbed wire fences; and the
needs of Indian boys and girls are nearly identical with those of the
same number of white children.

I think I have never yet heard an Indian Christian man or woman offer
a prayer in which I have not heard this petition, "Oh Father in
Heaven bless all the white people who love us and send us these
teachers to tell us of God's ways." Shall we not return their grateful
thought, by loving prayers, generous and sympathetic interest and
every practical aid?

       *       *       *       *       *

EXTRACTS FROM ADDRESS BY MISS HELEN S. LOVELAND.

I have come to tell you something of Orange Park, the town, the school
established there, and the trouble connected with it. The village is
situated on the west bank of the St. John's River, which at that point
is a beautiful expanse of water three miles wide. Nature has been very
prodigal in that section. The trees and plants are of a luxurious
growth. Flowers are numerous. Every kind of fruit is plentiful.
Because of these natural advantages, general climate and apparent
fitness for orange growing, a Northern settlement was made. The people
were from various Northern States. The principal industry was orange
growing.

Five years ago when the Association was looking for a favorable place
in Florida in which to locate a school, attention was drawn to this
town. The place was selected because of its healthful situation and
beautiful surroundings. The people in the town were anxious such a
school should be established. To secure this the town voted the
Association a considerable tract of land on which to build, and in
addition a large wooded park. This was done with the understanding
that all children in the town should be allowed to attend school.

The buildings belonging to the institution are a church, in which both
white and colored people worship together; the Girls' Hall, in which
the girls, teachers and matron live; in the rear of this, connected by
a passage way, is the dining-room and kitchen; next, to the west, is
the school building, containing the chapel, study room and recitation
rooms; yet farther to the west of this is the Boys' Hall, in which the
principal and his wife live, in charge of the boys. Back of the two
last mentioned buildings is the shop where the boys do the industrial
work.

The school has entered upon its fifth year. It has grown steadily and
surely. The work done has been thorough and of a high grade. Up to the
present time there have been in all 252 pupils connected with the
school. There have been five teachers aside from the music, sewing and
manual training teachers, principal and matron.

The students are instructed in the common school branches. The work in
the normal grades is designed to prepare them for teaching. The girls
have classes in sewing, are taught to care for their rooms, and each
one does her own laundry work. A certain amount of time, whether in
the dining-room, halls, kitchen or laundry, is required. In this plan
there are two objects; to aid the pupils in paying their school
expenses and to teach them the arts of housekeeping. Each boy is
required to give especial care to his room. A certain amount of work
is also required of them. It consists of yard work, carrying mail,
sweeping school buildings, attending to the lamps, etc.

When there have been white boarding pupils they have had separate
rooms and a separate table in the common dining-room.

Bible lessons are given twice a week by the pastor. A school prayer
meeting is held every Thursday afternoon in the school chapel. In this
meeting the majority of the pupils take part, and much interest is
shown. The Christian Endeavor, however, is the most enthusiastic
meeting in which the students engage. It is held in the chapel of the
church, and attended by both town people and the school. The colored
students have shown themselves efficient committee workers and
leaders. There have been several conversions in the society, and there
is great reason to be encouraged. It is in this field that personal
work is needed and is effective. So the school is educating the pupil
in different lines, industrial, intellectual, and religious.

Last May the Governor of Florida signed a bill, now well known, framed
by Superintendent Sheats, of the State Educational Department, which
was aimed directly at the Orange Park school. What Mr Sheats' real
intentions are in regard to the colored race is but too plain. One can
but perceive, if his policy is followed, that their education in
Florida practically ceases. During the last session of the Florida
Legislature he requested it to enact a law prohibiting any others than
negroes from teaching schools for negroes, except in normal
instruction in institutes and summer schools. This did not become a
law, but it was not the superintendent's fault.

Last May in Lake County only nine candidates obtained certificates.
There were sixty-seven schools to be supplied with teachers. This
closed the schools. During last year one hundred and sixteen schools
in the State, mostly colored, for the want of teachers were not held
at all. A county official remarked that this examination law would
probably "result in retiring nearly or quite all the colored teachers
in a few years." Such a law "is a barbarous souvenir to make the
country remember its bloody dealings with its black brother." "Though
slavery is dead, its spirit yet lives; 'the serpent's head is crushed,
but his tail still writhes, and sometimes it lashes out spitefully.'"
We who are engaged in teaching in Orange Park are glad that the
American Missionary Association is to test, and is already testing,
the validity of this law. In contesting this law aimed at the Orange
Park school, the Association takes up a question which has arisen
before, but has never been settled. Theoretically, in the United
States all men, whether white or black, enjoy equal civil liberties;
practically, in the South, they do not. If the law is found to be
unconstitutional, that will go a long way in establishing equal
liberties for all.

Meanwhile the school continues as before. The school and the
Association need your assistance. The great work before the
Association requires both the money and the prayers of the Christian
people.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDRESS OF MRS. HARRIS,

GRADUATE OF FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.

Miss Emerson has invited me to say a few words to this meeting in
behalf of the women of my own race. As I have sat here and listened to
the helpful and sympathetic words which have been spoken, I have felt
that I bore upon my heart the burden of gratitude of all the negro
women in the South, certainly of all the women and girls who have been
under the influence of such schools and such teachers as the American
Missionary Association has supplied. I do wish that I could show you
enough of the need and tell you enough about the results to encourage
you in the magnificent work you are doing for womanhood, wifehood and
motherhood among us. My own father, years ago, studied for a time in
Fisk University before it was really Fisk University; my mother's
people, her brothers and sisters, also studied in Fisk University, so
they were very anxious that their children should be in the same
institution. For that reason, as it meant a good deal out of the
family purse to board three or four children in such an institution as
that, eight or nine years ago the family moved from a little town in
the northern part of Kentucky to Nashville. We were reared in a quiet
Christian home and early placed in Fisk University.

I did not have an opportunity to come into personal contact with the
class of colored people who make up the great mass in the South until
after I had left school and gone to a little town in western Tennessee
to teach. There I was placed in charge of the young women in the
boarding department, and I sought to come most intimately in contact
with their lives. Many of these young women came straight from the
cotton plantations, and, although they could not sing and play as well
as we who had been at Fisk, many of them boasted that they could
handle a plow as well as a man. We undertook mission work in
connection with the circle of King's Daughters which I organized among
the girls, and the condition of the people as we found it in the two
years I was there among the poor negroes of the city was very painful
to me. Very often I came in from my visits in the poorer districts and
closed the door of my room, feeling that I must leave it all to the
Saviour, it seemed so discouraging and so much more than we could do.
We found, among other things, that we needed to teach the women the
most common and necessary habits of life, how to put the children to
bed, how to feed and clothe them. Yet I would say that it is through
the students of such schools as Fisk University that the Northern
teachers whom you send to us can hope to reach the masses of our
colored people. We get the life from our Northern teachers and then
the great mass of the colored people look to us for it, for we can get
into the home and into the life of the people as they cannot. And we
begin to feel the responsibility; we begin to realize how much the
race depends upon the mother and the sister and the wife. We begin to
realize that we as negro women must be especially alive to the
quickening influence of all that is noble and grand and true. We
realize that we are indeed

    "Living in a grand and awful time,
      In an age on ages telling,
    To be living is sublime."

       *       *       *       *       *

EXTRACT FROM ADDRESS OF MRS. WOODBURY.

Our eyes and our ears have been greeted during the last few days by
those initial letters, "A. M. A.," and we have perhaps got a new
meaning which was hinted at yesterday morning, "A Master Artist,"
because the American Missionary Association takes the black clay and
transforms it into the immortal soul. But I like best of all the
meaning given to the letters by a little boy who had just begun to
study Latin. With that air of ownership which we are so apt to see in
the boys and girls who have just begun the study of a new language, he
came to his mother and said, "Here it is: A. M. A.--_AMA._, Love thou
them." I like better than all the meaning given inadvertently by that
little boy, because it seems to me that the American Missionary
Association, working as it does among the poor and oppressed classes,
striving to weld into one common brotherhood the black, the white, the
red and the yellow, is the best exponent we have here in our own
country of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, and of
that self-sacrificing love which brought Christ into the world to die
for the rich and the poor, the high and the low, the black and the
white alike. So it is entitled to write on all its literature and
emblazon on its shield those cabalistic letters, "A M A"--"Love thou
them."

I will not try to add to facts or multiply incidents. Here we have
before us this great problem: ten millions of our people, one-sixth of
our whole body politic, sunk in the depths of superstition, ignorance
and sin. We may shut our eyes to this problem; we may ignore it; we
may say it has been exaggerated; we may even say it does not exist.
You and I in our quiet homes may not hear the mutterings or the
moanings of these ten million souls in bondage; but their cry goes up
to Him who in mankind's first morning uttered those two burning
questions which have ever since determined the standard of the Christ
spirit in humanity: "Where art thou?" "Where is thy brother?"

We are to make of these ten million people God-fearing, intelligent
citizens. We are to leaven this mass of humanity with the leaven of
the school and of the church, and, so doing, make of these two million
whites, these stanch, stalwart Anglo-Saxon men, and of these eight
million loyal, affectionate, docile negroes, all American-born
citizens--we are to make of them a bulwark which shall resist the
oncoming tide of socialism, anarchism and of atheism, which is trying
to overwhelm our American institutions, rob us of our public-school
system, profane our Sabbath and snatch the scepter from our fathers'
God.

And how is this to be done? How is this problem to be solved? By just
such work as this of the American Missionary Association, which has
abundant facilities, plenty of energy, wisdom and experience, and even
the consecration necessary for the great work before it--everything
but the money. And where is the money coming from? The money is coming
from the churches. How do we know? Because the American Missionary
Association was born in the churches, is the child of the churches,
was sent forth from the churches with the benediction and prayers and
blessings of the churches to carry out the policy adopted by the
churches. The Church will not forsake its own.

And this is our work. It is not the abolition of races, but the
recognition of brotherhood. This is the work which Christ has given us
to do; and if we would solve this negro problem, and all the thousand
and one problems which are ever vexing the life of our free Republic,
we must solve them by the principles of the Golden Rule and the
democracy of the Lord's Prayer. It is not sufficient for us to stand
with Thomas and say in rapt admiration, "My Lord and my God." Side by
side with our black brother and with our white brother, with our
yellow brother and with our red brother, we are to kneel and say, not
"My Lord and my God," but "Our Father," and the spirit of common
prayer to a common Father whom we have not seen will bind our hearts
in closer brotherhood to those whom we have seen, and we will rise
from our knees to carry out the principles of the Golden Rule.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.

  _State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury,
  Woodfords; Mrs. A. T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
  Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT. INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. John T. Perry, Exeter.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.

MASS AND R. I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Massachusetts Ave., Boston, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. R. J. Hegeman, 32 Forest Street, Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. W. Thomas, Lansford.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. H. Ball, Dewhurst.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. C. Denison, 132 N. College Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman, Whitewater.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, 17 Florence Court, S. E., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. P. Cleveland, Caledonia.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Gilchrist, Hot Springs.
  Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Second Street, Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. James W. Dawes, Crete.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read, Parsons.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valantine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. A. Paddock, Weiser.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D. L. Travis, Pocatello.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 323 Blanchard Street, Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K Street, Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth Street, Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 546 Third Street, Portland.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 911 Grove Street, Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison Street, Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Bullock, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, McLeansville.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, Oaks.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H. B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. S. Jackson, Montgomery.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. J. Lewis, 15 Echols Street, Memphis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland, 216 N. McNairy Street, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Mrs. Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Bella W. Hume, corner Gasquet and Liberty Streets,
    New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Crawford, Hammond.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1895.


_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

_For the Education of Colored People._

  Income for November                                         $15,000.00
  Previously acknowledged                                       1,460.00
                                                              ----------
                                                              $16,460.00


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $1,140.12.

  Bangor. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for C. E. Hall,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                  9.25
  Bar Harbor. Class in Cong. Sab. Sch., 8; King's Daughters,
    3.14, _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._       11.14
  Brewer. Jun. C. E. S., _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad.,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                  3.00
  Castine. Mary F. and Margaret Cushman, 5; and "The Dear
    Mother," 2.50                                                   7.50
  Castine. Cong. Ch., 6; G. L. Weeks, 5; Mrs. D. W. Webster,
    4; Kate S. Russell, 3; Mrs. M. B. Woodbury, 2; Mrs. S. W.
    Webster, 1; Merritt Hewett, 50c., _for Student Aid,
    Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._                               21.50
  Castine. Y. P. S. C. E., 5.25; "Friends," Box and Bbl. C.,
    _for C. E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._                                 5.25
  Cumberland Center. Cong. Ch., _for C. E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._    23.00
  Hallowell. "Friends, In His Name," _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   5.00
  Isleboro. J. P. Bragg, _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad.,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                  5.00
  Kennebunkport. Mrs. H. Smith                                       .50
  Lewiston. Pine St. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
  Machias. Center St. Cong. Ch.                                     4.08
  Norridgwock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  30.00
  Phippsburg. Rev. and Mrs. Noble, _for Student Aid, Dorchester
    Acad._                                                          1.50
  Portland. St. Lawrence St. Ch.                                   15.00
  Portland. ----, _for Student Aid, King's Mountain, N. C._         7.00
  Pownal. "A Few Friends" (10 of which _for Indian M._)            53.00
  South Bridgton. Cong. Ch.                                         1.50
  Union. Cong. Ch.                                                 20.25
  Westbrook. "Friends" in Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Dorchester Acad._                                               8.00
                                                               ---------
                                                                 $236.47

  ESTATES.

  Bangor. Estate of Elizabeth G. Smith, George W. Sawyer,
    Executor                                                      858.05
  Eliot. Estate of Phebe J. (Moody) Shapleigh, by J. P. Moody,
    Administrator                                                  45.60
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,140.12


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,270.61.

  Alstead Center. Mrs. Whitney Breed, by W. H. Spalter, Co.
    Treas.                                                          1.00
  Bennington. Cong. Ch.                                            10.00
  Colebrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                    10.00
  East Alstead. Cong. Ch., by W. H. Spalter, Co. Treas.             3.00
  Epping. Mrs. G. S. Thompson and S. S. Class, _for Student
    Aid, Wilmington, N. C._                                        18.00
  Gilmanton Iron Works. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          3.50
  Hanover. Mrs. S. J. Kellogg                                      20.00
  Henniker. "A Few Friends," by Mrs. L. W. Peabody                  5.00
  Hooksett. Union Ch.                                              13.22
  Littleton. First Cong. Ch.                                         .50
  Lyme. Mrs. Amos Bailey                                            1.00
  Lyndeboro. Cong. Ch.                                              5.15
  Manchester. First. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            65.56
  Meredith. Cong. Ch.                                              14.50
  North Hampton. Cong. Ch., to const. MISS GERTRUDE E.
    ROBINSON L. M.                                                 30.00
  Peterboro. Union Cong. Ch.                                       17.50
  Piermont. Ladies' Homeland Circle, by Miss L. C. Hosford, Sec.    5.00
  Webster. First Cong. Ch.                                         23.18
  West Concord. West Cong. Ch.                                     24.50
                                                               ---------
                                                                 $270.61

  ESTATE.

  Manchester. Estate of Chester B. Southworth, in part, by
    Mrs. Hattie I. Southworth, Executrix                        1,000.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,270.61


VERMONT, $383.38.

  Barre. Cong. Ch.                                                 21.90
  Barton. "A Friend"                                               10.00
  Bennington. Jun. End. Soc., _for music, Fort Berthold, N. D._     5.00
  Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., 8.10; Second Cong. Ch., 15.40       23.50
  Burlington. Member First Cong. Ch.                               25.00
  Burlington. Mrs. J. H. Worcester, Box of Mags. and Books,
    _for New Orleans, La._
  Burlington. Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. Books _for McIntosh, Ga._
  Ferrisburg. Cong. Ch.                                             7.87
  Hardwick. C. E. Ch.                                               2.43
  Hartford. Mr. and Mrs. Eph. Morris, _for Knoxville, Tenn._       20.00
  McIndoe's Falls. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
  Middlebury. Rev. J. C. Houghton                                  10.00
  Montpelier. Bethany Cong. Ch.                                    35.00
  Newport. Cong. Ch.                                               16.19
  Orwell. Cong. Ch.                                                48.46
  Pittsfield. Mrs. Arunah Allen                                     4.00
  Saint Johnsbury. Ladies' Aid Soc., Box of C. and Table Linen
    _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Stowe. Cong. Ch.                                                 37.20
  Thetford. First. Cong. Ch.                                        7.03
  West Charleston. Cong. Ch., special                               7.00
  West Randolph. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch. (Class 13), _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._                                      25.00
  West Randolph. Cong. Ch.                                         18.95

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vermont, Mrs. Rebecca
    P. Fairbanks, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Burlington. First Ch. W. H. M. S.              20.00
      Castleton. W. H. M. S.                          3.60
      East Hardwick. Junior C. E., _for Indian
        Schp._                                        3.25
      W. H. M. U. of Vt.                             20.00
                                                    ------         46.85


MASSACHUSETTS, $9,260.02.

  Acton. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Meridian, Miss._              6.75
  Amesbury. Main St. Cong. Ch.                                      9.18
  Andover. Free Christian Ch.                                      50.00
  Andover. By Miss L. G. Merrill, Bbl. C. _for King's Mountain,
    N. C._
  Amherst. South Cong. Ch.                                          7.18
  Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch.                                      36.80
  Belchertown. "Two Friends" to const. REV. V. C. HARRINGTON
    L. M.                                                          30.00
  Billerica. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              5.95
  Boston. Park St. Cong. Ch.                        397.35
    "A Lady"                                        200.00
    Miss E. S. Ficke, _for Marshallville, Ga._       50.00
    "A Friend"                                        7.78
    East Boston. Maverick Cong. Ch.                  27.04
    Allston. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                      7.66
    Dorchester. Mrs. C. P. Potter, _for Student
      Aid, Wilmington, N. C._                         8.00
    Mrs. Mary Houston, _for Student Aid,
      Dorchester Acad._                               5.00
    M. F. T. Drowne, Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._
    Roxbury. "A Friend," _for Central Ch., New
      Orleans, La._                                   5.00
                                                  --------        707.83
  Boxford. First Cong. Ch.                                         36.82
  Bradford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Gloucester Ag.
    and Indl. Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                               20.14
  Braintree. First Cong. Ch.                                        6.97
  Brockton. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for S. S. Work,
    Mill Creek, Tenn._                                             10.00
  Buckland. East District, by E. F. Smith, Treas.                   2.25
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. (5.75 of which _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._)                                             50.95
  Canton. Cong. Ch.                                               134.63
  Charlemont. "A Friend"                                            2.00
  Concord Junction. Union Ch.                                       1.00
  Conway. Cong. Ch.                                                23.00
  Dalton. Mrs. Zenas Crane, 30; Miss Clara L. Crane, 30, _for
    Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                                 60.00
  Dalton. Mrs. James B. Crane, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     50.00
  Danvers. Maple St. Cong. Ch. (10 of which _for Macon, Ga._),
    ad'l to const. GEORGE B. SEARS, CHARLES H. PERRY, LUTHER
    A. GUPPY, FRANK EVERETT, AURELIA W. PERRY, ESTHER W. KEMP,
    ELIZABETH E. DODGE and MABEL G. ROSS L. M'S, 128.33; Sab.
    Sch. Maple St. Cong. Ch., 5                                   133.33
  Danvers. Sab. Sch. Maple St. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                              30.00
  Dunstable. Mrs. Fletcher, 50 cents; ----, Bbl. Mdse., _for
    Meridian, Miss._                                                 .50
  East Somerville. Sab. Sch. Franklin St. Cong. Ch.                10.00
  Essex. Cong. Ch.                                                 23.00
  Everett. First Cong. Ch., 26.56; Sab. Sch. Mystic Side Cong.
    Ch., 5; Miss Mary Kent, 1                                      32.56
  Framingham. Elizabeth Stone, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg
    Acad., Ky._                                                     4.00
  Fitchburg. Rev. and Mrs. John Wood                                5.00
  Goshen. Cong. Soc.                                               12.16
  Great Barrington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for C. E. Hall, McIntosh,
    Ga._                                                           17.70
  Hamilton. Mrs. E. M. Knowlton                                     3.00
  Hanover. Pilgrim Conf.                                            1.08
  Harvard. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
  Hatfield. Cong. Ch.                                              51.94
  Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols (50 of which _for Talladega C._) 150.00
  Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   7.14
  Holyoke. Circle of K. D. First Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                              10.00
  Hubbardston. Cong. Ch.                                           14.87
  Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                20.00
  Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. Ch.                                     15.52
  Lakeville. W. H. M. Soc., by Mrs. A. C. Southworth, Sec.,
    _for Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch._                          15.00
  Lawrence. Samuel White                                           30.00
  Leominster. Miss Shedd's S. S. Class, _for Grand View, Tenn._    10.50
  Lynn. Mary P. Stewart                                            12.00
  Malden. First Ch.                                               109.72
  Malden. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M., Fort Yates,
    N. D._                                                         15.00
  Mansfield. Cong. Ch.                                             17.70
  Marion. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                           2.70
  Mattapoisett. Cong. Ch.                                          11.00
  Middleboro. First. Cong. Ch.                                     24.00
  Middleboro. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch.                           7.26
  Middleton. Cong. Ch.                                              3.50
  Middleton. Mrs. W. P. Landers, Bbl. Papers and C. _for Nat,
    Ala._
  Milford. Y. P. S. C. E., by H. L. Hunt, Treas., _for Student
    Aid, Grand View Inst., Tenn._                                  25.00
  Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., Miss M. A. Goodell                    5.00
  Mittineague. Southworth Paper Co., Box of Paper _for Marion,
    Ala._, and Box of Paper _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Medfield. "A Friend"                                             20.00
  Medway. Village Cong. Ch., in part                               20.00
  Monson. E. F. Morris, 100; Cong. Ch., 19.23                     119.23
  Newburyport. Prospect St. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. MYRON
    O. PATTON L. M.                                                56.06
  Newburyport. North Cong. Ch., 27.44; Master Tom Carter, 25c      27.69
  Newton Highlands. "Friends" _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._                                                         50.00
  Newtonville. Central Cong. Ch.                                   82.26
  North Amherst. Friends, _for Student Aid, King's Mountain,
    N. C._                                                          1.00
  Northampton. "A Friend"                                         300.00
  Oldtown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.90
  Pepperell. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                       10.29
  Pittsfield. ----, _for Freight to King's Mountain, N. C._         7.00
  Pittsfield. Y. P. S. C. E. South Cong. Ch.                        5.00
  Reading. W. M. S. Cong. Ch., Bbl of C. _for Williamsburg, Ky._
  Rutland. Woman's Missionary Soc.                                  6.25
  Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc.                                   14.20
  Salem. Crombie St. Ch., _for Student Aid, Wilmington, N. C._     12.00
  Salem. "J. H. W.," _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._            2.00
  South Braintree. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Southbridge. Mrs. Geo. Bradford                                  10.00
  South Hadley. First Cong. Ch.                                    18.50
  Southampton. Miss Ida Sutherland, Bbl. of C. _for Moorhead,
    Miss._
  Springfield. Park. Cong. Ch.                                     11.11
  Taunton. Winslow Cong. Ch.                                       55.35
  Templeton. Cong. Sab. Sch., 7.45; Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    C., _for McIntosh, Ga._                                         7.45
  Uxbridge. Cong. Ch.                                              19.57
  Ware. Miss S. R. Sage, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._            70.00
  Ware. Mrs. S. R. Sage, _for Student Aid, Wilmington, N. C._      10.00
  Wareham. C. E. Soc., _for Tougaloo U._                            5.00
  Watertown. Ladies' Soc., Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. _for
    Williamsburg, Ky._
  Webster. Two Bbls. of C. _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Westboro. C. E. Soc., Box Papers, friend prepaid, _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._
  Westfield. Second Cong. Ch. Primary S. S. Thanksgiving Off.,
    _for Student Aid, Fort Berthold, N. D._                        12.00
  Westford. Y. P. S. C. E., by H. A. Bunce, Treasurer               5.50
  West Medford. Cong. Ch.                                           7.00
  West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch.                             27.44
  Whitman. "A Friend"                                               3.00
  Winchester. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Harrow Sch.,
    Cumberland Gap, Tenn._                                         50.00
  Winchester. ----, 3 Bbls. Mdse.; Ella C. Abbott, Pkg. Table
    and Bed Linen, _for Meridian, Miss._
  Worcester. Mary A. and Joanna F. Smith (60 of which to const.
    FRED. J. FARRAR and MRS. SUSIE G. FARRAR L. M's)               75.00
  Worcester. "A Friend," _for Library, Tougaloo U._                20.00
  Wrentham. First Cong. Ch.                                         8.70
  ----. "A Friend," _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                     12.00
  ----. "A Friend of the Cause"                                     2.00
  Hampden Benevolent Association, by Geo. R. Bond, Treas.:
    Chicopee. First Ch.                               2.67
    Ludlow. First Ch.                                13.56
    Holyoke. First Ch.                               28.13
    Feeding Hills. Ch.                                9.00
    Palmer. Second Ch. (of which 7.32 _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._)                            27.20
    Springfield. Hope Ch.                            26.49
    West Springfield. First Ch. Ladies, 10 _for
      Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._ and 10 _for
      Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                 20.00
                                                   -------        127.05

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and
    R. I., Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas., _for Woman's
    Work_:
      W. H. M. A., _for Salaries of Teachers_       680.00
      Boston. Central Ch. Ladies Aux., _for Three
        Schps., Nat, Ala._                           90.00
      Dedham                                          5.00
      Gloucester, Ladies' Aux.                        5.00
                                                   -------        780.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $9,260.02

   ESTATE.

   Boston. Estate of Elizabeth C. Parkhurst, by Elmore
     F. Brackett, Executor                                      5,000.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $9,260.02

  CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

  South Berwick. M. Ladies of Cong. Soc., Bbl. C. _for Blowing
    Rock, N. C._
  Boston. Mrs. Kendall, Pulpit Bible _for Enfield, N. C._
  Lanesville, Mass. W. L. Saunders, Box Men's C. _for Charlotte,
    N. C._
  Medford, Mass. Miss Fanny Washburn, Pkg. C. _for Charlotte, N. C._
  Wellfleet, Mass. Mrs. Geo. S. Holbrook, Bedding _for Enfield, N. C._
  Cranston, R. I. Rev. D. C. Torrey, Picture Rolls, Papers, etc.


RHODE ISLAND, $92.47.

  Bristol. First Cong. Ch.                                         41.68
  Kingston. Cong. Ch.                                              46.60
  Providence. Y. P. S. C. E. of North Cong. Ch.                     4.19


CONNECTICUT, $1,155.62.

  Abington. "Friends in Cong. Ch."                                  3.00
  Barkhamstead. First. Cong. Ch.                                    1.71
  Berlin. Infant Class Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Moorhead, Miss._       5.00
  Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch., 10.25; Second Con. Ch., Chas.
    A. Miller, 1                                                   11.25
  Buckingham. Cong. Ch., ad'l                                       1.00
  Burlington. Cong. Sab. Sch. and Friends, _for Children's Aid_     3.00
  Chester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                           40.00
  Chester. Cong. Ch.                                               23.75
  Clinton. Birthday offerings of a class of little children, by
   Mrs. E. E. Post, _for Grand View, Tenn._                         1.67
  Colchester. First Cong. Ch.                                      16.25
  Cromwell. E. S. Coe, 15; R. S. Griswold, 1, _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                              16.00
  East Haddam. "A Friend"                                           5.00
  East Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                          30.97
  East Hartford. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Bedding, etc., _for
    Athens, Ala._
  Easton. Cong. Ch.                                                23.66
  East Woodstock. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Indl. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._                                              13.00
  Ekonk. Rev. John Elderkin, for self and wife, 6; for son and
    a deceased daughter, 4                                         10.00
  Ellington, Cong. Ch., by H. L. James, Treas. Tolland Co. Conf.   92.80
  Fairfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_              25.00
  Farmington. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., ad'l., _for Schp., Tougaloo U._ 41.26
  Greenwich. Cong. Ch., _for Selma, Ala._                          24.00
  Groton. Cong. Ch. Jr. Soc. of C. E.                               5.00
  Hadlyme. Richard E. Hungerford                                   20.00
  Hartford. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._            50.00
  Hartford. Warburton Chapel Sab. Sch.                             17.62
  Hartford. Windsor Av. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  10.00
  Lisbon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Indl. Sch., Thomasville
    Ga._, 6; "A Friend," 1, bal. to const. NELLIE S. CARPENTER
    L. M.                                                           7.00
  Lyme. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._                      5.00
  Meriden. Miss Annie M. Wilcox, _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            3.00
  Middlefield. "Mizpah" Circle of K. D., _for Mountain Work_        3.00
  Middletown. Individual, by E. P. Augur, Treas.                    6.00
  Milton. Cong. Ch.                                                 8.13
  New Britain. Mrs. J. B. Smith, 1 Box Patch Work Pieces _for
    Tougaloo U._
  New Canaan. W. H. M. S. of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Indl. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._                                              26.00
  New Canaan. Cong. Ch.                                            40.52
  New Haven. Howard Ave. Ch.                                       35.89
  New Haven. Mrs. J. Y. Leonard, 5; United Ch., Mrs. R. I.
    Miner, 5; Mrs. Samuel McQueen, 5; _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  15.00
  New Haven. United Ch., Mrs. D. M. Corthelle, _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                          1.00
  New Haven. Mrs. J. H. Burton, Box Books _for McIntosh, Ga._
  North Guilford. Miss Rossiter, _for Athens, Ala._                 4.50
  Norwich. Mrs. M. F. Norton, _for Student Aid, Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                         10.00
  Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Books, etc., _for Athens,
    Ala._
  Norwich. "Friends," 2 Bbls. C. _for McIntosh, Ga._
  Plainville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
  Rockville. Union Cong. Ch.                                       18.87
  Sound Beach. First Cong. Ch.                                     24.00
  Southport. Miss Eliza A. Bulkley, 40; Miss Georgie A.
    Bulkley, 40                                                    80.00
  Stafford Springs. Cong. Ch.                                      14.70
  Stamford. First Cong. Ch.                                        24.85
  Suffield. ----, Bbl. C. and Material _for Sewing Class,
    King's Mountain, N. C._
  Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                                        8.19
  Torrington. M. W. A. Miller, 20 Bibles, 20 Testaments, _for
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Vernon Center Cong. Ch.                                          17.30
  Voluntown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     2.00
  Watertown. Alert Boys of Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._         6.00
  Windham. So. Windham Branch of First Ch.                          1.38
  Westbrook. Cong. Ch.                                             23.96
  Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                         81.75
  Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                                        25.39

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn., Mrs. W. W.
    Jacobs, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Bridgeport. Park. St. Ch. Aux.                 25.00
      Danbury. Y. L. M. Soc.                          2.25
      East Haven. Aux.                               17.50
      Hartford. First Ch.                            10.00
      New Britain. So. Ch. S. S. Class No. 55         3.50
      Orange. L. H. M. S.                            13.00
      Putnam, L. H. M. S.                            50.00
                                                   -------        121.25
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,125.62

  ESTATE.

  Groton. Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt                            30.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,155.62


NEW YORK, $6,399.36.

  Albany. First Cong. Ch.                                          22.64
  Angola. Miss A. H. Ames                                           5.00
  Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
  Brooklyn. Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for Joseph K. Brick,
    Agricultural, Industrial and Normal Sch., Enfield, N. C._   1,000.00
  Brooklyn. Tompkins Ave. Cong. Ch.               1,000.00
    Clinton Ave. Cong. Ch.                          500.00
    "A Friend"                                      150.00
    South Cong. Ch.                                 102.15
                                                 ---------      1,752.15
  Brooklyn. Clinton Av. C. E., _for Hillsboro, N. C._              10.00
  Brooklyn. Y. P. S. C. E. of South Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                                   10.00
  Brooklyn. Miss Elsie M. Hodge, _for Student Aid, Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                          8.00
  Brooklyn. "Friend" in South Ch., 5; "A Thank Offering," 2,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                             7.00
  Buffalo. First Cong. Ch., 50; Niagara Sq. People's Ch., 12.64;
    T. D. Desmond, 5                                               67.64
  Canandaigua. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian Sch._ 33.40
  Cortland. Cong. Ch.                                              30.50
  Crown Point. Y. P. S. C. E., by May M. Washburne                  5.00
  East Bloomfield. Frederic Munson, to const. ABBY KINGSBURY L. M. 30.00
  East Bloomfield. Mrs. Eliza S. Goodwin, _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   5.00
  East Otto. Cong. Ch.                                              3.50
  Gainesville. Cong. Ch.                                            5.63
  Holland Patent. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   3.73
  Jamestown. First Cong. Ch.                                      182.17
  Lisbon. Cong. Ch. (of which Frank Benedict, 1; Silas W.
    Seymour, 1; Alfred Seymour, 1)                                  7.40
  Massena. Cong. Ch.                                                5.00
  McGrawville. H. D. Corey                                          1.00
  Napoli. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.53
  Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                         13.54
  New York. Broadway Tabernacle Ch., in part (20 of which
    _for Moorhead, Miss._)                                      1,845.86
  New York. Broadway Tab., 23; Broadway Tab., "A Friend," 10,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            33.00
  New York. "Cash"                                                100.00
  New York. Misses E. and M. Collins, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                               50.00
  Perry Center. Cong. Ch.                                          13.77
  Poughkeepsie. Cong. Ch., D.C. Mathews, _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               5.00
  Port Richmond. Capt. S. Squire                                    5.00
  Riverhead. Boys' S. S. Class, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg
    Acad., Ky._                                                     1.25
  Riverside-on-Hudson. Mrs. William E. Dodge, 2 Boxes Books and
    Magazines, _for Library, Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._
  Rochester. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch., 14.60; Plym. Ch., Jos.
    W. Robbins, 5, _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._             19.60
  Rochester. South Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C. and Books _for Macon,
    Ga._
  Saratoga Springs. Cong. Ch.                                      30.00
  Sing Sing. Miss E. L. Parsons, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         4.50
  Spencerport. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. (10.08 of which
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._, bal. to const. MRS.
    ADA NICHOLS L. M.)                                             22.84
  Spencerport. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   8.00
  Syracuse. Mrs. E. B. Cobb, Bbl. of C. _for Hillsboro, N. C._
  Troy. Mrs. John Neher, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._    20.00
  Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan                                   13.61
  Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge                                        5.00
  Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                                                 9.48
  West Brooklyn. Miss Myra Manley                                   1.00
  Westmoreland. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                 2.00
  West Newark. D. J. Borthwick, _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            3.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of New York, by Mrs. Minnie H.
    Pearsall, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Brooklyn. Class C, Tompkins Av. S. S., _for
        Student Aid, King's Mountain_                 1.00
      Canandaigua. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
        King's Mt._                                  12.62
      East Albany. S. S.                              5.00
      Evans. W. M. S., _for Student Aid, Fort
        Berthold, N. D._                             10.00
      Fairport. W. H. M. U.                           5.00
      Homer. Mrs. B. W. Payne                         5.00
      Ithaca. Jr. C. E., _for Student Aid,
        King's Mt._                                   5.00
      Northville. W. H. M. U.                         5.00
      Oswego. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
        Williamsburg Acad._                           5.00
      Paris. Judd Mission Band                        9.00
      Phoenix. W. M. S., _for Student Aid,
        Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                         50.00
      West Winfield. C. E. Soc., _for Central Ch.,
        New Orleans, La._                             15.00
      Woodhaven. Girls' Jun. C. E. S., _for Student
        Aid, Moorhead, Miss._                         10.00
                                                    -------       137.62
                                                              ----------
                                                               $5,554.36

  ESTATES.

  Homer. Estate of Sarah E. K. Hobart                             345.00
  Lake Grove, Long Island. Estate of Rev. Otis Holmes,
    by Rev. Henry M. Holmes, Executor                             500.00
                                                              ----------
                                                               $6,399.36


NEW JERSEY, $397.63.

  East Orange. Trinity Ch. (5 of which _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._) to const. MRS. EMMA A. HOWELL, JOHN
    TURNER and WILL SIBLING L. M's                                187.00
  East Orange. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                        20.00
  Jersey City. Tabernacle Ch. (7.90 of which _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._)                                             23.70
  Jersey City. First Cong. Ch., Dea. W. J. Hunt                    20.00
  Morristown. "Friend," 2.50, and 2 Bbls. Literature and C.,
    _for Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._                                2.50
  Morristown. Mission Band, Monroe Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._                                8.00
  Newark. Belleville Av. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  10.25
  Newfield. "A Friend"                                              2.00
  Plainfield. Jr. C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               4.18
  Stanley. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
  Upper Montclair. Christian Union Cong. Ch. (51 of which
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._)                          100.00
  Woodbridge. Cong. Ch., Wm. E. Fink, 5, _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               5.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $85.46.

  Chester. Mrs. E. W. Lieper, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                            5.00
  East Smithfield. W. H. M. S., by Miss Maria Perkins, Sec.,
    _for Freedmen_                                                  3.80
  Germantown. M. C. Cope, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._   50.00
  Germantown, First Cong. Ch.                                      11.66
  Philadelphia. Mrs. Josiah Morris and Sister, _for Student Aid,
    Wilmington, N. C._                                             12.00
  Shire Oaks. Jane Wilson                                           3.00


OHIO, $688.42.

  Canaan. Union Ch., _for C. E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._                5.00
  Cincinnati. Walnut Hills Cong. Ch. (60 of which to const.
    GEORGE MONTEITH and E. W. HYDE L. M's)                         80.99
  Claridon. L. T. Wilmot, bal. to const. FRED. WILMOT L. M.        10.00
  Cleveland. Pilgrim C. E. Soc., 20; Mrs. Gibbons, 5; Mrs.
    McAdams, 5; Mrs. A. W. Knowlton, 3; Miss Smith, 1, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                 34.00
  Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Cumberland Gap, Tenn._                                          9.00
  Cleveland. C. E. S. Hough Ave. Ch., Box Books and Mags. _for
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Columbus. First Cong. Ch.                                       173.07
  Conneaut. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                  20.00
  Creston. Rev. W. A. Knowlton, 2; Pres. W. H. M. S., 2; Claude
    McElvaine, 2, _for McIntosh, Ga._                               6.00
  Hudson. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            5.00
  Lenox. Cong. Ch., 6; W. M. Soc., 10., by Rev. F. W. Link         16.00
  Madison. Central. Cong. Ch.                                      14.96
  Madison. Central Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. and Box of C. _for
    Andersonville, Ga._
  Marysville. Cong. Ch.                                             3.50
  Medina. First Cong. Ch., A. I. Root, 25; Y. P. S. C. E., 25;
    Jun. End. S., 5; J. S. Warner, 5; Ch. Members, 9, _for Mountain
    Work_, and bal. to const. PROF. E. C. STICKEL, ROBERT EDWARDS,
    H. HEADY, D. EDDY and MISS GRACE ADAMS L. M's                  69.00
  New Milford. Mrs. E. G. Prindle                                   2.00
  Oberlin. Mrs. A. T. Reed, Bbl. C. _for McIntosh, Ga._
  Olmsted. Second Cong. Ch.                                        10.70
  Parkman. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                                  6.00
  Painesville. First Cong. Ch.                                     32.14
  Ravenna. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            3.22
  Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.                                        43.54
  Senecaville. Rev. Evans Thompson                                  1.00
  Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 5; C. E. Soc., 5; Ladies' Soc.,
    2; Primary Sab. Sch., 2, _for Campton, Ky._                    14.00
  Temple. Cong. Ch., _for Macon, Ga._                               8.25
  ----. ----, _for Freight to Memphis, Tenn._                       1.60

 Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. G. B. Brown,
   Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
     Ashtabula. W. M. S.                              9.00
     Chatham. Mission Band                            3.00
     Cleveland. Mt. Zion W. M. S.                     3.60
     Hudson. W. H. M. S.                              5.00
     Marietta. First Y. L. M. S.                     15.00
     Mount Vernon. W. M. S., to const. MISS ABBIE
       ATWOOD L. M.                                  30.00
     Painesville. Y. P. S. C. E.                      2.00
                                                    ------         67.60
                                                                --------
                                                                 $636.57

  ESTATE.

  Oberlin. Estate of Amanda Porter, by Judge J. E. Ingersoll       51.85
                                                                --------
                                                                 $688.42


INDIANA, $205.00.

  Angola. "A Friend," Elgin Watch _for a Teacher, King's
    Mountain, N. C._
  East Chicago. First Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
  ----. "Dorothy"                                                 200.00


ILLINOIS, $690.73.

  Chicago. New England Ch. "A Friend," 20; Rev. Willard Scott,
    D.D., 10                                                       30.00
  Creston. Cong Ch.                                                10.41
  Dover. Cong Ch.                                                  14.80
  Evansville. Cong. Ch.                                            15.80
  Granville. Cong. Ch.                                             30.11
  Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                              67.30
  Huntley. Cong. Ch.                                                6.15
  Illini. Cong. Ch.                                                 6.25
  Joliet. First Presb. Ch., Box of Books, etc., Freight 1.38,
    _for Macon, Ga._                                                1.38
  Lee Center. Cong. Ch.                                            21.25
  Lombard. First Ch.                                               20.00
  Lowell. V. G. Lutz                                                1.00
  Morgan Park. Mrs. M. Thomson                                      5.00
  Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                               100.00
  Payson. J. K. Scarborough                                       100.00
  Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens                                        5.00
  Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch.                                          14.00
  Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                             51.89
  Ridgeland. Cong. Ch.                                             13.28
  Rockefeller. Cong. Ch.                                            3.33
  Roseville. Mrs. S. C. Autell, Bbl. of Hats _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Shabbona. Miss B. M. Langford, C. E., _for Student Aid,
    Moorhead Sch., Miss._                                           5.00
  Sterling. First Cong. Ch.                                        30.13
  Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                       14.94
  Toulon. Miss A. M. Smith's Sab. Sch. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   1.25

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
    _for Woman's Work_:
      Ashkum. Y. P. S. C. E.                          2.00
      Chicago. New Eng. W. M. S.                     54.50
      Chicago. Lincoln Park W. M. S.                  6.00
      Chicago. Cal. Ave. W. M. S.                     3.00
      Elmhurst. Mission Band                          1.00
      Emington. W. M. S.                              1.00
      Illini. W. M. S.                                6.86
      La Salle. W. M. S.                              4.10
      Rockford. Second Ch. W. M. S.                  18.00
      Sandwich. W. M. S.                             10.00
      Waukegan. W. M. S.                             16.00
                                                    ------        122.46


MICHIGAN, $161.72.

  Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                       18.49
  Baldwin. Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.                                 3.10
  Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                                    10.00
  Hart. First Cong. Ch.                                             7.25
  Hillsdale. Mrs. Mary I. Mead                                      1.00
  Imlay City. First Cong. Ch., 5; C. E. Soc., 2, by Ellen
    Walker, Ch. Treas.                                              7.00
  Kalamazoo. Mr. J. A. Kent                                         5.00
  Manistee. Cong. Ch., by H. N. Dustin, Treas.                      8.00
  Morenci. Bbl. of C. _for Athens, Ala._
  Olivet. Mrs. Wm. Hickok, _for Dodge Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._   5.00
  Olivet. Miss May Ely, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._             5.00
  Portland. Cong. Ch., 15.78; Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., 1.85           17.63
  Three Oaks. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV. FRANK FOX L. M.      49.00
  Watervliet. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                      19.75
  Whittaker. Cong. Ch.                                              2.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E. F. Graybill,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Hopkins Station. W. H. M. U.                    1.50
      Pontiac. W. H. M. S., _for Schp., Pleasant
        Hill, Tenn._                                  2.00
                                                     -----          3.50


IOWA, $598.99.

  Almoral. Cong. Ch.                                                7.64
  Belknap.                                                          2.31
  Cass. Cong. Ch.                                                  16.50
  Castleville. Cong. Ch., _for Chinese M._                          5.00
  Cedar Rapids. Band Willing Workers, by Mrs. L. R. Munger, _for
    Student Aid, Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._                        1.00
  Cedar Rapids. Mission Band of Willing Workers of First Cong.
    Ch., Box C. and Bedding _for Tougaloo U._
  Cincinnati. Cong. Ch.                                             3.00
  Clarion. Cong. Ch.                                                4.41
  Council Bluff. Mrs. Helen Montgomery, _for Dodge Hall, Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                                    1.00
  Cromwell. Young People's Miss. Society, Box Bedding, by Mrs.
    C. M. Bacon, _for Beach Institute, Savannah, Ga._
  Danville. Cong. Ch.                                              14.50
  Des Moines. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                      78.92
  Grinnell. Mrs. J. D. Brainard, Bbl. C. _for King's Mountain,
    N. C._
  Humboldt. L. M. S. of Cong. Ch., _for Macon, Ga._                 5.00
  Lake View. Mrs. V. R. Anson, Pkg. Sewing Material and Literature
    _for Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._
  Lewis. Bear Grove Y. P. S. C. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Beach Institute, Savannah, Ga._                                 3.00
  Manchester. Cong. Ch.                                            27.31
  Monticello. Cong. Ch., ad'l                                       1.00
  Monticello. Mrs. R. C. Stirton, 450 vols. Books _for Library,
    Tougaloo U._
  Muscatine. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV. L. G. KENT L. M.      45.00
  Nashua. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00
  Oskaloosa. Cong. Ch.                                             20.78
  Red Oaks. Ladies' Miss. Society, Bbl. Literature, by Mrs. Paul
    Clark, _for Beach Institute, Savannah, Ga._
  Riceville. Cong. Ch.                                              5.83
  Rowen. Cong. Ch.                                                  7.00
  Tabor. Cong. Ch.                                                 25.33
  Waterloo. Cong. Ch. (10 of which from Rev. M. K. Cross)          67.00
  Williams. L. A. S. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. Literature _for Beach
    Institute, Savannah, Ga._

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Afton. Jr. C. E.                                1.00
      Algona. W. M. S.                               20.00
      Anita. W. M. S.                                 6.20
      Bear Grove. W. M. S.                            6.02
      Burlington. W. M. S.                           20.00
      Cedar Falls. Y. P. S. C. E.                     5.00
      Cedar Rapids. First W. M. S.                    4.20
      Council Bluffs. W. M. S.                       10.00
      Des Moines. "Plym. Rock Miss. Soc."             5.00
      Des Moines. Plym. W. M. S.                     11.83
      Emmetsburg. Cong. Ch., 6.15; Sab. Sch.
        Cong. Ch., 3.85; W. M. S., 4                 14.00
      Fairfield. W. M. S.                             6.00
      Glenwood. W. M. S.                             12.00
      Grinnell. W. M. S., 39.80; Boys' and Girls'
        Army, 5; Y. W. F. M. S., 4.50                49.30
      Hampton W. M. S.                                5.00
      Harlan. Council B. Assn.                       15.70
      Lewis. W. M. S.                                10.00
      Lyons. W. M. S.                                 1.00
      McGregor. Two Primary S. S. Classes             1.37
      McGregor. A. P. D.                              1.63
      Marshalltown. W. M. S.                          6.25
      Mason City. W. M. S.                            2.03
      Ogden. Y. M. S.                                 2.00
      Rockford. W. M. S.                              2.85
      Tabor. W. M. S.                                18.56
      Stuart. L. H. and F. M. S.                     10.50
      Webster City. Mrs. J. D. McMurray               5.00
                                                  --------       $252.44


WISCONSIN, $69.71.

  Baraboo. Cong. Ch.                                                9.25
  Bristol and Paris. Cong. Ch.                                     18.32
  Clintonville. First Cong. Ch.                                     6.97
  Delevan. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      6.00
  Le Grange. Miss Nellie Bishop, _for Memphis, Tenn._               6.25
  Menasha. Correction. E. D. Smith, 500. Incorrectly ack.
    in November number from Menasha, Iowa.
  Milwaukee. L. M. S., Prot. Home for Aged, _for Mountain Work_     1.50
  Nekoosa. Cong. Ch., 7.12; Mr. A. L. McClelland, 2.25, _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._                                       9.37
  Oak Center. Mrs. S. B. Howard, _for Indian M._                    2.00
  Rosendale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                 2.05
  Wauwatosa. L. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                                5.00
  Whitewater. Miss Mary Warne, _for Memphis, Tenn._                 3.00


MINNESOTA, $173.64.

  Benson. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                         1.30
  Etna. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._                      5.00
  Glenwood. Cong. Ch.                                              10.00
  Lake Park. Ladies' Aid Soc., by Ella Higley, Treas.               7.50
  Litchfield. Mrs. De Caster, _for Student Aid, Meridian, Miss._    7.50
  Mapleton. Miss Nellie Bishop, _for Memphis, Tenn._               15.25
  Mazeppa. Bbl. of C. _for Marion, Ala._
  Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                        26.29
  Princeton. First Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
  St. Paul. Atlantic Cong. Ch.                                      2.50
  Spring Valley. Negro, Indian and Chinese Soc., by Sarah E.
    Flower, Treas., _for N., I. and C. Work_, 5 each               15.00

  Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Alexandria.                                    10.00
      Lamberton.                                      2.00
      Minneapolis. Plymouth, 15.10; Park Ave.,
        13.71; Lyndale Jr. C. E. Soc., 5;
        Silver Lake, 4; First, 1.88                  39.69
      St. Paul. Park, 3.75; Miss. Union, 5.36         9.11
      St. Cloud. Jr. C. E. S.                         1.50
      Winona. Mrs. C. N. McLaughlin, Special         15.00
                                                  --------        $77.30


KANSAS, $86.42.

  Council Grove. Cong. Ch.                                         12.68
  Humboldt. "Two Sisters," 6 _for Freedmen_, 1 _for Mountain
    Work_, 1 _for Thunderhawk M._                                   8.00
  Manhattan. First Cong. Ch.                                       22.85
  Partridge. Cong. Ch.                                              3.00
  Seabrook. Cong. Ch., 3.14; Cong. Sab. Sch., 1.34                  4.48
  Stockton. Cong. Ch.                                               1.00
  White City. Rev. E. Richards                                      2.24

  Kansas Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. E. C. Read,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Axtell.                                         1.00
      Dover.                                          3.00
      Eureka.                                         3.00
      Eureka. C. E.                                   5.00
      Herndon.                                        2.00
      Kansas City. First Ch.                         10.00
      Kansas City. Pilgrim, "Little Pat"              1.02
      McDonald.                                        .15
      Ridgeway. Mission Soc.                          2.50
      Stafford.                                       1.00
      Udall.                                          2.50
      Wellsville.                                     1.00
                                                    ------         32.17


MISSOURI, $217.41.

  Bonne Terre. Cong. Ch.                                           11.65
  Cole Camp. Cong. Ch.                                             11.45
  Green Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                            1.00
  Old Orchard. Cong. Ch.                                           22.51
  Saint Louis. Cong. Ch., Pilgrim, 11.76; Cong. Ch., Compton
    Hill, 5.60; Cong. Ch., Olive Branch, 3.50; Cong. Ch., Hope,
    3.07; Cong. Ch., Redeemer, 2.10                                26.03
  Sedalia. Second Cong. Ch.                                         1.57

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Missouri, Mrs. K. L. Mills,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Meadville. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.                6.00
      Kansas City. First Ch. Ladies' Union.          27.00
      Kansas City. Clyde Ch. Ladies' Union.          12.20
      St. Louis Pilgrim Ch. L. H. M. S.              95.00
      St. Louis. First Ch. L. H. M. S.                3.00
                                                    ------        143.20


NEBRASKA, $44.27.

  Curtis. Cong. Ch.                                                 2.67
  Grafton. Willie Stuckey                                           1.60

 Woman's Home Missionary Union, of Nebraska, by Mrs. James W.
   Dawes, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
     W. H. M. U. of Neb.                                           40.00


NORTH DAKOTA, $110.00.

  Fort Berthold. Cong. Ch. S. S. and Cong., _for music, Fort
    Berthold, N. D._                                              100.00
  Fort Berthold. Miss. A. R. Creighton.                             5.00
  Mayville, C. E. Soc., by J. P. Haber                              5.00


SOUTH DAKOTA, $18.43.

  Beresford. Cong. Ch.                                              4.00
  Columbia. Cong. Ch.                                               3.96
  Huron. Woman's Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             1.50
  Mission Hill. Rev. D. B. Nichols                                  2.62
  Pioneer. Cong. Ch.                                                1.60
  Rapid City. Cong. Ch.                                             4.75


COLORADO, $29.45.

  Colorado Springs. Second Cong. Ch.                               19.45
  Highland Lake. Church of Christ                                   5.00
  Manitou. Carrie Bradley                                           5.00


CALIFORNIA, $457.47.

  Belmont. Mrs. E. L. Reed                                         10.00
  Ontario. Cong. Ch., 36.65, to const. RICHARD C. WILLIAMS L. M.;
    Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., 5.                                41.65
  Pasadena. Cong. Ch.                                              18.65
  Redlands. First Cong. Ch.                                        36.72
  San Francisco. The California Chinese Mission, Wm. Johnstone,
    Treas. (see items below)                                      332.45
  Tulare. "A Friend," _for Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._            10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Southern Cal., by Mary M.
    Smith, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Highlands. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                  5.00
      Ontario. W. M. Soc.                             3.00
                                                   -------          8.00


OREGON, $18.04.

  Forest Grove. First Cong. Ch.                                    16.04
  Salem. Wm. Staiger                                                2.00


WASHINGTON, $1.00.

  Anacortes. Geo. M. Hagadorn                                       1.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $20.00.

  Washington. Rev. B. N. Seymour                                   20.00


VIRGINIA, $1.75.

  Gloucester, R. H. Hogg, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._     .50
  ----. G. H. Harris, 25 c.; Miss L. A. V. Harris, 50 c.; _for
    Gloucester, Sch., Cappahosic Va._                                .75
  ----. M. O. Lockley, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._        .50


KENTUCKY, $6.75.

  Campton. "Friends," by Sarah G. Street                            3.25
  Carpenter. Ch., by Rev. S. Sutton                                 1.50
  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00
  Williamsburg. Ky. Lumber Co., 1 Old Iron Chimney, _for
    Williamsburg, Ky._


TENNESSEE, $132.94.

  Knoxville. Miss. I. F. Hubbard, _for Knoxville, Tenn._           12.28
  Memphis. Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Menken, _for Kindergarten,
    Memphis, Tenn._                                               100.00
  Memphis. Woman's Miss. Union, by Rev. G. V. Clark, _for
    Santee Indian M._                                              10.00
  Nashville. Rev. F. A. Chase, 5; Rev. A. K. Spence, 3.66           8.66
  Nashville. Rev. H. H. Wright, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._     2.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $5.44.

  Beaufort. First Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
  High Point. Cong. Ch.                                             1.25
  Melville. Cong. Ch.                                               2.19


GEORGIA, $2.92.

  McIntosh. Carrie A. Whitaker, _for C. E. Hall_                     .68
  Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 1.47; Rev. J. Loyd, 63c.; Rev. J. H. H.
    Sengstacke, 14c.                                                2.24


FLORIDA, $12.50.

  Orange Park. Rev. Truman S. Perry                                10.00

  Florida Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. W. D. Brown,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Interlachen. Philips Ch. Aux.                                 2.50


ALABAMA, $20.51.

  Marion. Cong. Ch.                                                 6.37
  Marion. Trinity Sch., _for Athens, Ala._                          8.14
  Ironaton. Rev. P. O. Wailes                                       4.00
  Shelby. Abraham Lincoln Cent Soc. of First Cong. Ch., 1.34;
    Rev. A. Simmons, 66c.                                           2.00


MISSISSIPPI, $24.00.

  Tougaloo. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                        20.00
  Tougaloo. Frank H. Ball, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._           4.00


ARKANSAS, $1.25.

  Helena. Normal Sch.                                               1.25


TEXAS, $5.00.

  Helena. Y. P. S. C. E., by Rev. F. H. Allen, _for Orange
    Park, Fla._                                                     5.00


CANADA, $5.00.

  Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                         5.00


ENGLAND, $500.00.

  London. Mrs. M. A. Allen, _for Memphis, Tenn._                  500.00


TURKEY, $6.60.

  Marsovan. Girls in the Boarding Sch., by Martha A. King,
    _for Alaska M._                                                 6.60


ASIA, $10.00.

  North China. "Two American Ladies," by John M. Gould,
    Portland, Me.                                                  10.00
                                                              ----------

Donations                                                     $16,679.53

Estates                                                         7,830.50
                                                              ----------

                                                              $24,510.03


INCOME, $775.00.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                        525.00
  Haley Schp. Fund, _for Fisk U._                    25.00
  Hastings Schp. Fund, _for Atlanta U._              18.75
  Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                 43.75
  Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                75.00
  Plumb Schp. Fund, _for Fisk U._                    50.00
  Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                  37.50
                                                  --------        775.00


TUITION, $4,010.88.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                            24.64
  Evarts, Ky. Tuition                                24.00
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                          29.62
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                            9.30
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                           34.10
  Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                            568.75
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                          867.72
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                       58.55
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                            18.45
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                         4.86
  Chapel Hill, N. C. Tuition                          6.75
  Enfield, N. C. Tuition                              4.00
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                           23.25
  King's Mountain, N. C. Tuition                     25.00
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                              15.75
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                         194.75
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                             9.27
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                         327.75
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                           44.86
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                               150.00
  Andersonville, Ga. Tuition                          4.40
  Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch. Tuition                  157.20
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                                269.79
  Marietta, Ga. Tuition                               8.75
  McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                              28.11
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                             178.27
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                              1.90
  Athens, Ala. Tuition                               43.80
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                               36.17
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                                  68.47
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                               102.80
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                             6.70
  Martin, Fla. Public Fund                           20.00
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuition                          45.75
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                            63.00
  Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                             6.30
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                          487.80
  Helena, Ark. Tuition                               40.30
                                                 ---------      4,010.88
                                                              ----------
  Total for November                                          $29,295.91
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                                   $28,232.59
  Estates                                                      19,569.54
                                                              ----------
                                                              $47,802.13

  Income                                                          775.00
  Tuition                                                       4,661.11
                                                              ----------
  Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30                                $53,238.24
                                                              ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for November                                      $28.90
  Previously acknowledged                                          24.15
                                                                 -------
  Total                                                           $53.05


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from October 17 to
  November 15, 1895. William Johnstone, Treas.

  FROM LOCAL MISSIONS:

    Applicable to expenses of the current fiscal year.

    Fresno. Chinese Mon. Offs.                        3.75
    Los Angeles. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   4.40
    Marysville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    7.40
    Oroville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                      2.05
    Petaluma. Chinese Mon. Offs.                      3.00
    Riverside. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     3.90
    Sacramento. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   10.50
    San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.                3.70
    San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     3.75
    San Francisco. Central Chinese Mon. Offs.        11.45
    San Francisco, West. Chinese Mon. Offs.           1.85
    Santa Barbara. Chinese Mon. Offs.                 3.15
    Santa Cruz. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    6.40
    Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs.                       2.00
    Vernondale. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    3.90
    Watsonville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                   1.75
                                                    ------         72.95

    Applicable to unpaid bills of year ending August 31, 1895.

    Oroville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                      1.50
    Riverside. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     2.00
    Sacramento. Chinese Mon. Offs.                    5.00
    San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.                2.50
    San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     5.00
    Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs.                       2.50
                                                   -------         18.50


  FROM INDIVIDUALS:

    Geo. I. Hawley                                   20.00
    Rev. Geo. Mooar, D.D.                            10.00
    "Mrs. C. S. R."                                   1.00
    "W. C. P."                                      150.00
                                                   -------        181.00


  FROM EASTERN FRIENDS:

    Greenfield, Mass. Mrs. E. B. Loomis              10.00
    Norwich, Conn. Mrs. S. A. Huntington             25.00
                                                   -------         35.00

  FOR CHINESE WOMEN:

    Hatfield, Mass. "The Real Folks"                               25.00
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $332.45
                                                                 =======


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N. Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 01, JANUARY, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.