Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









THANKSGIVING MENUS AND RECIPES

AMERICAN COOKERY

FORMERLY

THE BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL MAGAZINE

OF·CULINARY·SCIENCE AND DOMESTIC·ECONOMICS

        NOVEMBER, 1921
        VOL. XXVI    No. 4

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _Painted by Edw. V. Brewer for Cream of Wheat Co._
  _Copyright by Cream of Wheat Co._

HIS BODYGUARD]




        Do You Realize That
        Success in Baking
        Depends Upon The Leavener?

In reality, if the baking powder is not PURE and PERFECT in its
leavening qualities, food will be spoiled in spite of skill and care.

        RUMFORD
        THE WHOLESOME BAKING POWDER

leavens just right. RUMFORD makes the dough of a fine, even texture. It
brings out in the biscuits, muffins, cakes or dumplings the natural,
delicious flavor of the ingredients.

RUMFORD contains the phosphate necessary to the building of the bodily
tissues, so essential to children.

[Illustration]

        Many helpful
        suggestions
        are contained
        in Janet McKenzie
        Hill's
        famous book
        "The Rumford
        Way of
        Cookery and
        Household
        Economy"--
        sent free.

        RUMFORD
        COMPANY
        Dept. 19
        Providence, R. I.

[Illustration]

Buy Advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes




AMERICAN COOKERY

        =Vol. XXVI=     =NOVEMBER, 1921=      =No. 4=


        =CONTENTS FOR NOVEMBER=                               PAGE

        WINDOWS AND THEIR FITMENTS. Ill.
                  Mary Ann Wheelwright                         251

        THE TINY HOUSE. Ill.                      Ruth Merton  255

        YOU'RE NOT SUPPOSED TO, JIMMIE         Eva J. DeMarsh  258

        SOMEBODY'S CAT                           Ida R. Fargo  260

        HOMING-IT IN AN APARTMENT          Ernest L. Thurston  263

        TO EXPRESS PERSONALITY                  Dana Girrioer  265

        EDITORIALS                                             270

        SEASONABLE-AND-TESTED RECIPES (Illustrated with
          halftone engravings of prepared dishes)
                           Janet M. Hill and Mary D. Chambers  273

        MENUS FOR WEEK IN NOVEMBER                             282

        MENUS FOR THANKSGIVING DINNERS                         283

        CONCERNING BREAKFASTS               Alice E. Whitaker  284

        SOME RECIPES FOR PREPARING POULTRY         Kurt Heppe  286

        POLLY'S THANKSGIVING PARTY        Ella Shannon Bowles  290

        HOME IDEAS AND ECONOMIES:--Vegetable Tarts and
            Pies--New Ways of Using Milk--Old New England
            Sweetmeats                                         292

        QUERIES AND ANSWERS                                    295

        THE SILVER LINING                                      310

        =$1.50 A YEAR=  =Published Ten Times a Year=  =15c A Copy=
        Foreign postage 40c additional
        Entered at Boston post-office as second-class matter
        Copyright 1921, by
        =THE BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO.=
        =Pope Bldg., 221 Columbus Ave., Boston 17, Mass.=

Please Renew on Receipt of Colored Blank Enclosed for that Purpose

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _"When it rains--it pours"_]

_Discover it for yourself_

To read about the virtues of Morton Salt isn't half so pleasant as
finding them out for yourself.

It certainly gives you a sense of security and content to find that
Morton's won't stick or cake in the package when you want it; that it
pours in any weather--always ready; always convenient.

You'll like its distinct bracing flavor too. Better keep a couple of
packages always handy.

MORTON SALT COMPANY, CHICAGO

_"The Salt of the Earth"_

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Buy advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes




=INDEX FOR NOVEMBER=

                                                              PAGE
        Concerning Breakfasts                                  284
        Editorials                                             270
        Home Ideas and Economies                               292
        Homing-It in an Apartment                              263
        Menus                                             282, 283
        Polly's Thanksgiving Party                             290
        Silver Lining, The                                     310
        Some Recipes for Preparing Poultry                     286
        Somebody's Cat                                         260
        Tiny House, The                                        255
        To Express Personality                                 265
        Windows and Their Fitments                             251
        You're not Supposed to, Jimmie                         258


=SEASONABLE-AND-TESTED RECIPES=

        Beef, Rib Roast of, with Yorkshire Pudding. Ill.       277
        Boudin Blanc                                           281
        Bread, Stirred Brown                                   280
        Brother Jonathan                                       275
        Cake, Pyramid Birthday                                 280
        Cake, Thanksgiving Corn. Ill.                          277
        Chicken, Guinea. Ill.                                  276
        Cookies, Pilgrim. Ill.                                 279
        Cucumbers and Tomatoes, Sautéed                        281
        Cutlets, Marinated                                     276
        Fanchonettes, Pumpkin. Ill.                            279
        Frappé, Sweet Cider. Ill.                              278
        Fruit, Suprême                                         299
        Garnish for Roast Turkey                               274
        Jelly, Apple Mint, for Roast Lamb                      276
        Pancakes, Swedish, with Aigre-Doux Sauce               280
        Parsnips, Dry Deviled                                  278
        Pie, Fig-and-Cranberry                                 278
        Potage Parmentier                                      273
        Pudding, King's, with Apple Sauce                      278
        Pudding, Thanksgiving                                  277
        Pudding, Yorkshire                                     277
        Punch, Coffee Fruit                                    278
        Purée, Oyster-and-Onion                                274
        Salad, New England. Ill.                               275
        Salmon à la Creole                                     275
        Sauce, Aigre-Doux                                      280
        Sausages, Potato-and-Peanut                            273
        Steak, Skirt, with Raisin Sauce                        281
        Stuffing for Roast Turkey                              274
        Succotash, Plymouth. Ill.                              275
        Tart, Cranberry, with Cranberry Filling. Ill.          279
        Turkey, Roast. Ill.                                    274


=QUERIES AND ANSWERS=

        Cake Baking, Temperature for                           298
        Chicken, To Roast                                      295
        Corn and Potatoes, To boil                             295
        Fish, To broil                                         298
        Gingerbread, Soft                                      298
        Ice Cream, Classes of                                  300
        Icing, Caramel                                         295
        Pie, Deep-Dish Apple                                   298
        Pies, Lemon, Why Watery                                296
        Pimientoes, Canned                                     300
        Pineapple, Spiced                                      295
        Potatoes, Crisp Fried                                  296
        Sauce, Cream                                           298
        Sauce, Tartare                                         296
        Table Service, Instructions on                         296

       *       *       *       *       *

We want representatives everywhere to take subscriptions for AMERICAN
COOKERY. We have an attractive proposition to make those who will
canvass their town; also to those who will secure a few names among
their friends and acquaintances. Write us today.

AMERICAN COOKERY - BOSTON, MASS.

Buy advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes



Are You Using this Latest Edition of America's Leading Cook Book?

[Illustration]

=THE BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL COOK BOOK=

=By FANNIE MERRITT FARMER=

In addition to its fund of general information, this latest edition
contains 2,117 recipes, all of which have been tested at Miss Farmer's
Boston Cooking School, together with additional chapters on the
Cold-Pack Method of Canning, on the Drying of Fruits and Vegetables, and
on Food Values.

This volume also contains the correct proportions of food, tables of
measurements and weights, time-tables for cooking, menus, hints to young
housekeepers.

=_"Good Housekeeping" Magazine says:_=

"'The Boston Cooking-School Cook Book' is one of the volumes to which
good housewives pin their faith on account of its accuracy, its economy,
its clear, concise teachings, and its vast number of new recipes."

        =656 Pages=     =122 Illustrations=     =$2.50 net=

       *       *       *       *       *

        =TABLE SERVICE=               =_By Lucy G. Allen_=

A clear, concise and yet comprehensive exposition of the waitress'
duties. Detailed directions on the duties of the waitress, including
care of dining room, and of the dishes, silver and brass, the removal of
stains, directions for laying the table, etc. =Fully illustrated. $1.75
net=


        =COOKING FOR TWO=           =_By Janet McKenzie Hill_=

"'Cooking for Two' is exactly what it purports to be--a handbook for
young housekeepers. The bride who reads this book need have no fear of
making mistakes, either in ordering or cooking food supplies."--_Woman's
Home Companion._

        =With 150 illustrations. $2.25 net=


=JUST PUBLISHED=

        =FISH COOKERY=      =_By Evelene Spencer and John N. Cobb_=

This new volume offers six hundred recipes for the preparation of fish,
shellfish, and other aquatic animals, and there are recipes for fish
broiled, baked, fried and boiled; for fish stews and chowders, purées
and broths and soup stocks; for fish pickled and spiced, preserved and
potted, made into fricassées, curries, chiopinos, fritters and
croquettes; served in pies, in salads, scalloped, and in made-over
dishes. In fact, every thinkable way of serving fish is herein
described. =$2.00 net=

        =For Sale at all Booksellers or of the Publishers=
        =LITTLE, BROWN & COMPANY, 34 BEACON ST., BOSTON=


=Books on Household Economics=

THE BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL MAGAZINE COMPANY presents the following as a
list of representative works on household economies. Any of the books
will be sent postpaid upon receipt of price.

Special rates made to schools, clubs and persons wishing a number of
books. Write for quotation on the list of books you wish. We carry a
very large stock of these books. One order to us saves effort and
express charges. Prices subject to change without notice.

        =A Guide to Laundry Work.= Chambers.                 $1.00

        =Allen, The, Treatment of Diabetes.= Hill and Eckman  1.75

        =American Cook Book.= Mrs. J. M. Hill                 1.50

        =American Meat Cutting Charts.= Beef, veal, pork,
          lamb--4 charts, mounted on cloth and rollers       10.00

        =American Salad Book.= M. DeLoup                      1.50

        =Around the World Cook Book.= Barroll                 2.50

        =Art and Economy in Home Decorations.= Priestman      1.50

        =Art of Home Candy-Making (with thermometer, dipping
        wire, etc.)=                                          3.75

        =Art of Right Living.= Richards                        .50

        =Bacteria, Yeasts and Molds in the Home.= H. W. Conn  1.48

        =Bee Brand Manual of Cookery=                          .75

        =Better Meals for Less Money.= Greene                 1.35

        =Blue Grass Cook Book.= Fox                           2.00

        =Book of Entrées.= Mrs Janet M. Hill                  2.00

        =Boston Cook Book.= Mary J. Lincoln                   2.25

        =Boston Cooking-School Cook Book.= Fannie M. Farmer   2.50

        =Bread and Bread-Making.= Mrs. Rorer                   .75

        =Breakfasts, Luncheons and Dinners.= Chambers         1.25

        =Bright Ideas for Entertaining.= Linscott              .90

        =Business, The, of the Household.= Taber              2.50

        =Cakes, Icings and Fillings.= Mrs. Rorer              1.00

        =Cakes, Pastry and Dessert Dishes.= Janet M. Hill     2.00

        =Candies and Bonbons.= Neil                           1.50

        =Candy Cook Book.= Alice Bradley                      1.75

        =Canning and Preserving.= Mrs. Rorer                  1.00

        =Canning, Preserving and Jelly Making.= Hill          1.75

        =Canning, Preserving and Pickling.= Marion H. Neil    1.50

        =Care and Feeding of Children.= L. E. Holt, M.D.      1.25

        =Catering for Special Occasions.= Farmer              1.50

        =Century Cook Book.= Mary Ronald                      3.00

        =Chafing-Dish Possibilities.= Farmer                  1.50

        =Chemistry in Daily Life.= Lassar-Cohn                2.25

        =Chemistry of Cookery.= W. Mattieu Williams           2.25

        =Chemistry of Cooking and Cleaning.= Richards and
          Elliot                                              1.00

        =Chemistry of Familiar Things.= Sadtler               2.00

        =Chemistry of Food and Nutrition.= Sherman            2.10

        =Cleaning and Renovating.= E. G. Osman                1.20

        =Clothing for Women.= L. I. Baldt                     2.50

        =Cook Book for Nurses.= Sarah C. Hill                  .90

        =Cooking for Two.= Mrs. Janet M. Hill                 2.25

        =Cost of Cleanness.= Richards                         1.00

        =Cost of Food.= Richards                              1.00

        =Cost of Living.= Richards                            1.00

        =Cost of Shelter.= Richards                           1.00

        =Course in Household Arts.= Duff                      1.30

        =Dainties.= Mrs. Rorer                                1.00

        =Diet for the Sick.= Mrs. Rorer                       2.00

        =Diet in Relation to Age and Activity.= Thompson      1.00

        =Dishes and Beverages of the Old South.=
          McCulloch-Williams                                  1.50

        =Domestic Art in Women's Education.= Cooley           1.50

        =Domestic Science in Elementary Schools.= Wilson      1.20

        =Domestic Service.= Lucy M. Salmon                    2.25

        =Dust and Its Dangers.= Pruden                        1.25

        =Easy Entertaining.= Benton                           1.50

        =Economical Cookery.= Marion Harris Neil              2.00

        =Elementary Home Economics.= Matthews                 1.40

        =Elements of the Theory and Practice of Cookery.=
          Williams and Fisher                                 1.40

        =Encyclopaedia of Foods and Beverages.=              10.00

        =Equipment for Teaching Domestic Science.= Kinne       .80

        =Etiquette of New York Today.= Learned                1.60

        =Etiquette of Today.= Ordway                          1.25

        =European and American Cuisine.= Lemcke               4.00

        =Every Day Menu Book.= Mrs. Rorer                     1.50

        =Every Woman's Canning Book.= Hughes                   .90

        =Expert Waitress.= A. F. Springsteed                  1.35

        =Feeding the Family.= Rose                            2.40

        =Fireless Cook Book.=                                 1.75

        =First Principles of Nursing.= Anne R. Manning        1.25

        =Fish Cookery.= Spencer and Cobb                      2.00

        =Food and Cookery for the Sick and Convalescent.=
          Fannie M. Farmer                                    2.50

        =Food and Feeding.= Sir Henry Thompson                2.00

        =Food and Flavor.= Finck                              3.00

        =Foods and Household Management.= Kinne and Cooley    1.40

        =Food and Nutrition.= Bevier and Ushir                1.00

        =Food Products.= Sherman                              2.40

        =Food and Sanitation.= Forester and Wigley            1.40

        =Food and the Principles of Dietetics.= Hutchinson    4.25

        =Food for the Worker.= Stern and Spitz.               1.00

        =Food for the Invalid and the Convalescent.= Gibbs     .75

        =Food Materials and Their Adulterations.= Richards    1.00

        =Food Study.= Wellman                                 1.10

        =Food Values.= Locke                                  2.00

        =Foods and Their Adulterations.= Wiley                6.00

        =Franco-American Cookery Book.= Déliée                5.00

        =French Home Cooking.= Low                            1.50

        =Fuels of the Household.= Marian White                 .75

        =Furnishing a Modest Home.= Daniels                   1.25

        =Furnishing the Home of Good Taste.= Throop           4.50

        =Garments for Girls.= Schmit                          1.50

        =Golden Rule Cook Book (600 Recipes for Meatless
          Dishes).= Sharpe                                    2.50

        =Handbook of Home Economics.= Flagg                   0.90

        =Handbook of Hospitality for Town and Country.=
          Florence H. Hall                                    1.75

        =Handbook of Invalid Cooking.= Mary A. Boland         2.50

        =Handbook on Sanitation.= G. M. Price, M.D.           1.50

        =Healthful Farm House, The.= Dodd                      .60

        =Home and Community Hygiene.= Broadhurst              2.50

        =Home Candy Making.= Mrs. Rorer                        .75

        =Home Economics.= Maria Parloa                        2.00

        =Home Economics Movement.=                             .75

        =Home Furnishing.= Hunter                             2.50

        =Home Nursing.= Harrison                              1.50

        =Home Problems from a New Standpoint=                 1.00

        =Home Science Cook Book.= Anna Barrows and Mary J.
          Lincoln                                             1.25

        =Hot Weather Dishes.= Mrs. Rorer                       .75

        =House Furnishing and Decoration.= McClure and
          Eberlein                                            2.50

        =House Sanitation.= Talbot                             .80

        =Housewifery.= Balderston                             2.50

        =Household Bacteriology.= Buchanan                    2.75

        =Household Economics.= Helen Campbell                 1.75

        =Household Engineering.= Christine Frederick          2.00

        =Household Physics.= Alfred M. Butler                 1.50

        =Household Textiles.= Gibbs                           1.40

        =Housekeeper's Handy Book.= Baxter                    2.00

        =How to Cook in Casserole Dishes.= Neil               1.50

        =How to Cook for the Sick and Convalescent.=
          H. V. S. Sachse                                     2.00

        =How to Feed Children.= Hogan                         1.25

        =How to Use a Chafing Dish.= Mrs. Rorer                .75

        =Human Foods.= Snyder                                 2.00

        =Ice Cream, Water Ices, etc.= Rorer                   1.00

        =I Go a Marketing.= Sowle                             1.75

        =Institution Recipes.= Emma Smedley                   3.00

        =Interior Decorations.= Parsons                       5.00

        =International Cook Book.= Filippini                  2.50

        =Key to Simple Cookery.= Mrs. Rorer                   1.25

        =King's, Caroline, Cook Book=                         2.00

        =Kitchen Companion.= Parloa                           2.50

        =Kitchenette Cookery.= Anna M. East                   1.25

        =Laboratory Handbook of Dietetics.= Rose              1.50

        =Lessons in Cooking Through Preparation of Meals.=    2.00

        =Lessons in Elementary Cooking.= Mary C. Jones        1.25

        =Like Mother Used to Make.= Herrick                   1.35

        =Luncheons.= Mary Ronald                              2.00
          A cook's picture book; 200 illustrations

        =Made-over Dishes.= Mrs. Rorer                         .75

        =Many Ways for Cooking Eggs.= Mrs. Rorer               .75

        =Marketing and Housework Manual.= S. Agnes Donham     2.00

        =Mrs. Allen's Cook Book.= Ida C. Bailey Allen         2.00

        =More Recipes for Fifty.= Smith                       2.00

        =My Best 250 Recipes.= Mrs. Rorer                     1.00

        =New Book of Cookery=. A. Farmer                      2.50

        =New Hostess of Today.= Larned                        1.75

        =New Salads.= Mrs. Rorer                              1.00

        =Nursing, Its Principles and Practice.= Isabels and
          Robb                                                2.00

        =Nutrition of a Household.= Brewster                  2.00

        =Nutrition of Man.= Chittenden                        4.50

        =Philadelphia Cook Book.= Mrs. Rorer                  1.50

        =Planning and Furnishing the House.= Quinn            1.35

        =Practical Cooking and Dinner Giving.= Mrs. Mary F.
          Henderson                                           1.75

        =Practical Cooking and Serving.= Mrs. Janet M. Hill   3.00

        =Practical Dietetics.= Gilman Thompson                8.00

        =Practical Dietetics with Reference to Diet in
          Disease.= Patte                                     2.25

        =Practical Food Economy.= Alice Gitchell Kirk         1.35

        =Practical Homemaking.= Kittredge                     1.00

        =Practical Points in Nursing.= Emily A. M. Stoney     2.00

        =Principles of Chemistry Applied to the Household.=
          Rowley and Farrell                                  1.50

        =Principles of Food Preparation.= Mary D. Chambers    1.25

        =Principles of Human Nutrition.= Jordan               2.00

        =Recipes and Menus for Fifty.= Frances Lowe Smith     2.00

        =Rorer's (Mrs.) New Cook Book.=                       2.50

        =Salads, Sandwiches, and Chafing Dish Dainties.=
          Mrs. Janet M. Hill                                  2.00

        =Sandwiches.= Mrs. Rorer                               .75

        =Sanitation in Daily Life.= Richards                   .60

        =School Feeding.= Bryant                              1.75

        =Selection and Preparation of Food.= Brevier and
          Meter                                                .75

        =Shelter and Clothing.= Kinne and Cooley              1.40

        =Source, Chemistry and Use of Food Products.= Bailey  2.00

        =Spending the Family Income.= Donham                  1.75

        =Story of Germ Life.= H. W. Conn                      1.00

        =Successful Canning.= Powell                          2.50

        =Sunday Night Suppers.= Herrick                       1.35

        =Table Service.= Allen                                1.75

        =Textiles.= Woolman and McGowan                       2.60

        =The Chinese Cook Book.= Shin Wong Chan               1.50

        =The House in Good Taste.= Elsie de Wolfe             4.00

        =The Housekeeper's Apple Book.= L. G. Mackay          1.25

        =The New Housekeeping.= Christine Frederick           1.90

        =The Party Book.= Fales and Northend                  3.00

        =The St. Francis Cook Book.=                          5.00

        =The Story of Textiles=                               5.00

        =The Up-to-Date Waitress.= Mrs. Janet M. Hill         1.75

        =The Woman Who Spends.= Bertha J. Richardson          1.00

        =Till the Doctor Comes and How to Help Him.=          1.00

        =True Food Values.= Birge                             1.25

        =Vegetable Cookery and Meat Substitutes.= Mrs. Rorer  1.50

        =Women and Economics.= Charlotte Perkins Stetson      1.50

                      Address All Orders:
       =THE BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO., Boston, Mass.=


[Illustration: In Kitchen and Bathroom

Old Dutch makes linoleum; tile; tubs and utensils bright like new. For
general cleaning, it lightens your work; is efficient and economical]




[Illustration: FRUIT SUPRÊME]

=Fruit Suprême=


Select choice, fresh fruit of all varieties obtainable. Slice, using
care to remove all skins, stones, seeds, membranes, etc.; for example,
each section of orange must be freed from the thin membranous skin in
which it grows. Chill the prepared fruit, arrange in fruit cocktail
glasses with maraschino syrup. A maraschino cherry is placed on the very
top of each service.

[Illustration: WOODEN SHUTTERS, ORNAMENTED, ARE SUITABLE FOR REMODELLED
HOUSES]




American Cookery

        VOL. XXVI      NOVEMBER      NO. 4




Windows and Their Fitments

By Mary Ann Wheelwright


Through the glamour of the Colonial we are forced to acknowledge the
classic charm shown in late seventeenth and early eighteenth century
window designs. Developed, as they were, by American carpenters who were
stimulated by remembrance of their early impressions of English
architecture received in the mother land, there is no precise or
spiritless copy of English details; rather there is expressed a vitality
that has been brought out by earnest effort to reproduce the spirit
desired. Undoubtedly the lasting success of early American craftsmanship
has been due to the perfect treatment of proportions, as related one to
the other. That these are not imitations is proved by an occasional
clumsiness which would be impossible, if they were exact copies of their
more highly refined English prototypes.

The grasp of the builder's mind is vividly revealed in the construction
of these windows, for while blunders are often made, yet successes are
much more frequent. They are evolved from remembered motives that have
been unified and balanced, that they might accord with the exterior and
be knitted successfully into the interior trim. Some of these windows
still grace seventeenth century houses, and are found not only on old
southern plantations, but all through New England, more especially along
the sea coast. True products are they of Colonial craftsmanship, brought
into existence by skilled artisans, who have performed their work so
perfectly that today they are found unimpaired, striking a dominant note
in accord with the architectural feeling of the period.

There is no question but that windows such as these lend character to
any house, provided, of course, that they coincide with the period.
Doubtless the designing of modified Colonial houses is responsible, in
part, for the present-day revival of interest, not solely in windows of
the Colonial period, but also in that which immediately preceded and
followed it.

[Illustration: GROUP WINDOWS ON STAIRWAY]

The first ornamental windows were of the casement type, copied from
English cottage homes. Like those, they opened outward, and were
designed with small panes, either diamond or square shaped. As they were
in use long before glass was manufactured in this country, the Colonists
were forced to import them direct from England. Many were sent ready to
be inserted, with panes already leaded in place. Proof of this is
afforded by examples still in existence. These often show strange
patches or cutting. The arrangement of casements varies from single
windows to groups of two or three, and they were occasionally
supplemented by fixed transoms. Surely no phase of window architecture
stands out more conspicuously in the evolution of our early designs than
the casement with its tiny panes, ornamented with handwrought iron
strap-hinges which either flared into arrow heads, rounded into knobs,
or lengthened into points. That they were very popular is shown from the
fact that they withstood the changes of fashion for over a century, not
being abolished until about the year 1700.

Little drapery is needed in casement windows where they are divided by
mullions. The English draw curtain is admirable for this purpose. It can
be made of casement cloth with narrow side curtains and valance of
bright material. A charming combination was worked out in a summer
cottage. The glass curtains were of black and white voile with tiny
figures introduced. This was trimmed with a narrow black and white
fringe, while the overdrapery had a black background patterned with old
rose.

[Illustration: GROUPED WINDOWS WITH SQUARE PANES, LACE GLASS CURTAINS
AND CRETONNE OVER CURTAINS]

In the field of architectural progress, more especially during the last
few years, there have arisen vast possibilities for the development of
odd windows. These, if properly placed, showing correct grouping, are
artistic, not only from the outside, but from the inside as well. The
artistic woman, realizing the value of color, will fill a bright china
bowl with glowing blossoms and place it in the center of a wide window
sill, where the sun, playing across them, will carry their cheerful
color throughout the room. She also trains vines to meander over the
window pane, working out a delicate tracery that is most effective,
suspending baskets of ferns from the upper casement, that she may break
the length of her Colonial window. Thus through many artifices she
causes her simple room to bloom and blossom like a rose.

[Illustration: FOR FRENCH DOORS, USE MUSLIN WITH SILK-LINED OVERHANG]

The progress made in window architecture is more apparent as we study
the early types. Then small attention was paid to details, the windows
placed with little thought of artistic grouping. Their only object to
light the room, often they stood like soldiers on parade, in a straight
row, lining the front of the house.

Out of the past has come a vast array of period windows, each one of
which is of interest. They display an unmistakable relationship to one
another, for while we acknowledge that they differ in detail and
ornamentation, yet do they invariably show in their conception some
underlying unity. There is no more fascinating study than to take each
one separately and carefully analyze its every detail, for thus only can
we recognize and appreciate the links which connect them with the early
American types.

We happen upon them not only in the modified Colonial structures, but in
houses in every period of architecture. It may be only a fragment,
possibly a choice bit of carving; or it may be a window composed in the
old-fashioned manner of from nine to thirty panes, introduced in
Colonial days for the sake of avoiding the glass tax levied upon them if
over a certain size. A charming example of a reproduction of one of
these thirty-paned windows may be seen in a rough plaster house built in
Salem, after the great fire. The suggestion was taken from an old
historic house in a fine state of preservation in Boxford, Mass.

The first American homes derived their plans and their finish from
medieval English tradition. They were forced to utilize such materials
as they were able to obtain, and step by step they bettered the
construction and ornamentation of their homes. As increasing means and
added material allowed, they planned and executed more elaborately, not
only in size and finish, but in the adding of window casings, caps, and
shutters.

The acme of Colonial architecture was reached with the development of
the large square houses with exquisitely designed entrances and
porticos. These often showed recessed and arched windows, also those of
the Palladian type. At the Lindens, Danvers, Mass., a memory-haunted
mansion, may be seen one of the finest examples of these recessed
windows. This famous dwelling, the work of an English architect, who
built it in about 1770, is linked with American history through its use
by General Gage as his headquarters during the Revolution.

The recessed windows that are found here reveal delicate mouldings in
the classic bead and filet design, and are surmounted by an elaborate
moulded cornice, which lends great dignity to the room. This is
supported by delicate pilasters and balanced by the swelling base shown
below the window seats. Such a window as this is no mere incident, or
cut in the wall; on the contrary, it is structural treatment of
woodwork. Another feature of pronounced interest may be noted on the
stair landing, where a charming Palladian window overlooks the
old-fashioned box-bordered garden that has been laid out at the rear.

We have dwelt, perhaps, too much on the old Colonial types, neglecting
those of the present day, but it has been through a feeling that with an
intimate knowledge of their designs we shall be better able to
appreciate the products of our own age, whose creators drew their
inspiration from the past. A modern treatment of windows appears in our
illustration.

[Illustration: 75 BEACON STREET, BOSTON]




[Illustration: THATCHED-STYLE COTTAGE FOR AMERICAN SUBURBS]

The Tiny House

By Ruth Merton

(_Concluded from October_)


If, some fine day, all housewives awoke to the fact that most of the
trouble in the world originates in the kitchen, there would shortly be a
little more interest in kitchen problems and not so much distaste for
and neglect of this important part of the house.

Of course, women will cry out that we have never in our lives been so
intent on just that one subject, kitchens, as we are today.

I admit that there is a good deal of talk going on which might lead one
to believe that vacuum cleaners and electric-washing machines, etc., are
to bring about the millennium for housekeepers; and there is also a good
work going forward to make of housework a real profession.

But, until in the average home there comes the feeling that the
kitchen--the room itself--is just as much an expression of the family
life and aims and ideals as the living room or any other room, we shall
be only beating about the bush in our endeavor to find a remedy for some
of our perplexing troubles.

Nowadays, women who are doing much work out in the big world--the
so-called "enfranchised" women--are many of them proving that they find
housework no detriment to their careers and some even admit that they
enjoy it.

But so far most of them have standardized their work and systematized
it, with the mere idea of doing what they have to do "efficiently" and
well, with the least expenditure of time and energy. And they have more
than succeeded in proving the "drudgery" plea unfounded.

Now, however, we need something more. We need to make housework
attractive; in other words, to put charm in the kitchen.

There is one very simple way of doing this, that is to make kitchens
good to look at, and inviting as a place to stay and work.

For the professional, scientifically inclined houseworker, the most
beautiful kitchen may be the white porcelain one, with cold, snowy
cleanliness suggesting sterilized utensils and carefully measured food
calories.

But to the woman whose cooking and dishwashing are just more or less
pleasant incidents in a pleasant round of home and social duties, the
kitchen must suggest another kind of beauty--not necessarily a beauty
which harbors germs, nor makes the work less conveniently done, but a
beauty of kindly associations with furniture and arrangements.

Who could grow fond of a white-tiled floor or a porcelain sink as they
exist in so many modern kitchens! And as for the bulgy and top-heavy
cook stoves, badly proportioned refrigerators, and kitchen
cabinets--well, we should have to like cooking _very_ well indeed before
we could feel any pleasure in the mere presence of these necessary but
unnecessarily ugly accompaniments to our work.

We have come to think of cleanliness as not only next to godliness, but
as something which takes the place of beauty--_is_ beauty.

This attitude is laziness on our part, for we need sacrifice nothing to
utility and convenience, yet may still contrive our kitchen furniture so
that it, also, pleases the senses. With a little conscientious
reflection on the subject we may make kitchens which have all the charm
of the old, combined with all the convenience of the new; and woman will
have found a place to reconcile her old and new selves, the housewife
and the suffragist, the mother-by-the-fireside and the participator in
public affairs. The family will have found a new-old place of
reunion--the kitchen!

Granted then that our tiny house has a kitchen-with-charm, and an "other
room," the rest of the available space may be divided into the requisite
number of bed and living rooms, according to the needs of the family.

[Illustration: KITCHEN FOR THATCHED-STYLE COTTAGE]

There is only one other very important thing to look out for; that is
the matter of closets. There is no rule for the number of closets which
will make the tiny house livable, but I should say, the more the
merrier. If there is ever question of sacrificing a small room and
gaining a large closet, by all means do it, for absolute neatness is the
saving grace of small quarters, and storage places are essential, if one
does not wish to live in a vortex of yesterday's and tomorrow's affairs
with no room to concentrate on the present.

[Illustration: FIRST-FLOOR PLAN OF THATCHED COTTAGE]

Inside and outside the tiny house must conform to one law--elimination
of non-essentials; and the person who has a clear idea of his individual
needs and has also the strength of will to limit his needs to his
circumstances, will find in his tiny house a satisfaction more than
compensating for any sacrifices he may have made.

No one doubts that it _is_ a sacrifice to give up a lesser pleasure even
to gain the "summum bonum" and that it _does_ take will power to keep
oneself from weakly saying in the face of temptation, "Oh, well! what
does it matter! My little house would perhaps be better without that,
but I have grown accustomed to it, let it stay!"

        Such weakness is fatal in a tiny house.
        But how much more fatal in a tiny garden!

Oh! the waste lands which lie beneath the sun trying to call themselves
gardens! Oh! the pitiful little plots, unfenced, unused, entirely
misunderstood by people who stick houses in the middle of them and call
them "gardens"!

No amount of good grass seed, or expensive planting, or well-cared-for
flowers and lawns will ever make the average suburban lot anything but a
"lot," and most of them might as well, or _better_, be rough,
uncultivated fields for all the relation they bear to the houses upon
them or the use they were intended for.

It is to be supposed that when a man gives up the comforts of town
apartments and hies him to the country, it is the garden, the outdoors,
which lures him.

Why is it, then, that he seems to take particular pains to arrange his
garden so that it is about as much his own as Central Park is?

It might give the average man a great deal of pleasure to be able to say
to all the passersby on the Mall, "This little bit of the Park belongs
to me! I cut that grass, I weed those flower beds in the evening when I
come home from the office; and every Saturday afternoon I take the hose
and thoroughly soak that bit of lawn there, you may see me at it any
week in the summer."

But then, we are not dealing with the fictitious average man, and we
firmly believe that many "commuters" wonder deep down in their hearts
why it is they get from their gardens so little of the pleasure they
anticipated when they came to live out of the city.

Any one who has traveled abroad, has admired and perhaps coveted the
gardens of England, France, and Italy. Their charm is undeniable, and
thought to be too elusive for reproduction on American soil without the
aid of landscape gardeners and a fair-sized fortune.

Just why we, as a nation, are beset by the idea of reproducing instead
of originating beautiful gardens is a question apart from this
discussion. But as soon as we try to develop, to their fullest extent,
the advantages of our climate, and soil, in combination with our daily
life as a people, we shall produce gardens which will equal, without
necessarily resembling, those of other countries.

In every case we must, however, follow the same procedure which every
successful garden is built upon, whether it be in Mesopotamia or in Long
Island City. That is, we must study the place, the people, and the
circumstances.

The most general fault in American gardens is their lack of privacy.

No one claims that the high walls of Italy and France or the
impenetrable hedges of England would invariably suit the climate here.
But there are many ways to obtain seclusion without in any way depriving
us of much-needed air in summer and sun in winter. One way is by placing
the house rationally upon its lot. Our custom has been to invariably
build so that we had a "front yard," "back yard," and two side yards,
all equally important, equally uninteresting, unbeautiful and useless.

Of course, we have the porch which in a way takes the place of the
outdoor living room, always so attractive in foreign gardens. And
recently some laudable efforts are being made to incorporate the porch
into the house, where it belongs, as a real American institution,
instead of leaving it disconsolately clinging to the outside and bearing
no resemblance to the house either in shape or detail.

But after all, a porch is a porch, and a garden is a garden, and one
does not take the place of the other.

Especially is this true of the tiny property.

If you have only ten feet of ground to spare outside your tiny house,
plan it so that every foot contributes to your joy at being in the
country. Arrange it so that on a warm summer evening when the porch
seems a bit close and dark, you wander out into your garden and sit
beneath the stars in quiet as profound as on the Desert of Sahara. And
in the winter, let your garden provide a warm corner out of the wind,
where on a bright Sunday morning you may sit and blink in the sun.

Once you have got the desire for a room outdoors, a real garden, which
is neither flower beds, nor lawns, nor hedges, nor trees, but a place
for your comfort, with all these things contributing to its beauty, you
will know as by divine inspiration where to put each flower and bush and
path. Your planting will be no longer a problem for landscape
architects, but a pleasant occupation for yourself and family.

So then will your successful tiny house stand forth in its real garden,
an object of pride to the community and a tribute to one man who has
refused to be the impossible average, and has dared to build and plant
for his own needs.

May he live forever and ever happy in his tiny house!

[Illustration: FIRST-FLOOR PAN OF THATCHED COTTAGE]




"You're Not Supposed To, Jimmie"

By Eva J. DeMarsh


"Huh!" exclaimed Jennie, "there comes Aunt Rachel! Wonder what she wants
now? Last time it was--no, it wasn't--that was the time when Jimmie
Upson and his wife were here. How scandalized Aunt Rachel looked! Said
I'd ruin my husband, and a lot of such tommyrot. As though Jimmie and I
couldn't afford a spread now and then! I didn't, and I won't, tell Aunt
Rachel that it was a special party and a special occasion. Of course, I
know Jimmie isn't a millionaire, but--it's none of Aunt Rachel's
business, so there!" she finished defiantly.

Aunt Rachel plodded blissfully up the walk. "Jennie'll be glad to see
me, I know," she mused. "She's high-headed, but she knows a good thing
when she sees it, and I help her a lot."

Jennie received her aunt with cordiality, but not effusiveness. To be
discourteous was something she could not be. Besides, she liked Aunt
Rachel and pitied her idiosyncrasies. "Why can't she be as nice when she
goes to people's houses as she is when she is at home?" she mused. "I
love to go there, and everything is just perfect, but the minute she
steps outside the door--well, we all know Aunt Rachel! And she doesn't
go home early either. Jimmie'll be furious. She always calls him 'James'
and asks after his health and--and everything. I do so want him to like
her, but I'm afraid he never will. I do wish I could get her interested
in something. I have it!" she exclaimed triumphantly. "The very thing!"

Aunt Rachel looked up in surprise. "What's the matter, Jennie?" she
inquired.

"Oh, nothing much, Auntie! I was just thinking aloud."

"Don't!" said Aunt Rachel. "It's a bad habit, Jennie--though I do do it
myself, sometimes."

"Sometimes!" Jennie turned away to hide her smile. Why, Aunt Rachel made
a business of talking aloud!

As luck would have it, the dinner went off to Aunt Rachel's
satisfaction. It was good, but conservative.

"Jennie is learning," thought the old lady to herself. "After I've been
here a few times more, she'll get along all right."

Aunt Rachel hadn't noticed that every idea Jennie has used was,
strictly, either Jennie's own or her mother's.

"How long does your aunt expect to stay?" asked Jimmie, casually, while
Jennie was clearing the table. Aunt Rachel was in the kitchen. She
prided herself on never being "a burden on any one." Doubtless, some of
her friends would have preferred that she be. Most of us have a skeleton
we do not wish to keep on exhibition.

"Oh, I don't know, maybe a week or two," said Jennie, mischievously.
"She hasn't told me yet."

"Oh!" replied Jimmie, in a disappointed voice. "Business down town"?
"Dinner at the Club"? No, he couldn't keep that up indefinitely.
Besides, what did a man want of a home, if he wasn't going to live in
it? Covertly, Jennie watched him. She knew every expression of his face.
It amused her, but she was sorry, too. "Jimmie wants awfully to
flunk--and dassent," was her mental comment.

"Anything on for this evening, Jimmie?" inquired Jennie, sweetly, too
sweetly, Jimmie thought. He had heard those dulcet tones before.

"Yes--no!" stammered Jimmie. How he wished he had! However, as Jennie
said no more, he dismissed the subject from his mind. She probably
didn't really mean anything, anyway.

When James Atherton reached home that evening, he found the house
lighted from top to bottom. Beautifully dressed women were everywhere,
and in their midst--Aunt Rachel, at her best!

"Ladies," she exclaimed, and Jimmie paused to listen, "I am
honored--more so than you can guess--at the distinction conferred upon
me. This afternoon you have seen fit to make me one of your leaders in a
most important movement for civic betterment--an honor never before
accorded a woman in this city--and I need not assure you that you shall
not regret your choice. As a member of the Civic Betterment Committee of
Loudon, I shall do my duty." ("I bet she will!" commented Jimmie, _sotto
voce_.) "Again I thank you!" went on Aunt Rachel. "There's a work for
you and for me now to do, and--" she paused impressively, "we will do
it." ("I'll bet on you every time, Auntie," commented Jimmie to
himself.)

"Jimmie Atherton, what in the world are you doing?" whispered an
exasperated voice. "Hurry, Jimmie, hurry--do!" urged Jennie. "Dinner is
almost ready to serve, and you haven't even made the first move to
dress. Hurry, Jimmie, please!" And Jimmie did. He fairly sprinted into
his clothes, appearing presently fully clad and good to look upon.

"Bet you a nickel Jennie couldn't have done that," he reflected,
complacently. "Women never can get a move on them, where clothes are
concerned."

That was the best evening Aunt Rachel had ever spent. She was the center
of attraction; she had found a mission--not a desultory one, but one
far-reaching in scope, so it seemed to her; and like a war-horse, she
was after the charge.

Jennie's plans went through without a hitch. Aunt Rachel became, not
only a member of the Committee on Civic Betterment, but, as well, its
head and, in due season, mayor of the little city itself. Under her
active management, Loudon became noted as a model city of its size, one
good to look upon and good to live in. Crime fled, or scurried to cover,
and Aunt Rachel blossomed like a rose. One day when Jimmie came home
something seemed to please him greatly.

"What do you think, Jennie," he said, "Aunt Rachel is going to be
married! Yes, she is! I've got it on the best of authority--the groom
himself."

"Who?" gasped Jennie. "Why, Jimmie, she just HATES men! She's always
said they were only a necessary evil."

"Yes, I know," smiled Jimmie, "that's what she used to say, but she'd
never met Jacob Crowder then."

"Jacob Crowder!" exclaimed Jennie. "Why, Jimmie, he's as rich as
Croesus, and he's always hated women as much as Aunt Rachel has hated
men!"

"Yes," said Jimmie, "but that was before he met Aunt Rachel. He has been
her righthand man for some time now, and they've seemed to hit it off
pretty well. Guess they'll get along all right in double harness."

"When the girls and I steered Aunt Rachel into politics," said Jennie,
"little we thought where it would all end. I'm glad, glad, though! Aunt
Rachel is really splendid, but I've always thought she was suffering
from something. Now I know what--it's ingrowing ambition. She will have
all she can do now to take care of her own home and we won't see her so
often."

"Oh, ho! So that's it?" smiled Jimmie. "Well, you girls, as has happened
to many another would-be plotter before now, have found things have
gotten rather out of your hands, haven't you?"

Jennie shrugged her shoulders.

"We can have the wedding here, can't we, Jimmie?" she asked, somewhat
wistfully.

Jimmie wondered if she had heard him. Perhaps--and then again, perhaps
not.

"I don't see where we come in on it," he remarked. "It's a church
affair, you know."

"Oh!" said Jennie. "But there'll be a reception, of course, and if
she'll let us have it here, I'll have every one of us girls she has
helped so much in the past."

Jimmie stared. "Consistency--" he muttered.

"What's that you said, Jimmie? Are you ill?" inquired Jennie, anxiously.

"No!" replied Jimmie, "it's you women! I can't understand you at all!"

"You're not supposed to, Jimmie, dear," answered Jennie sweetly.




Somebody's Cat

By Ida R. Fargo


I never thought I should come to like cats. But I have. Perhaps it is
because, as my Aunt Amanda used to say, we change every seven years,
sort of start over again, as it were; and find we have new thoughts,
different ideas, unexpected tastes, strange attractions, and shifting
doubts. Or, it may be, we merely come to a new milestone from which,
looking back, we are able to regard our own personality from a hitherto
unknown angle. We discover ourselves anew, and delight in the
experiment.

Or, it may all be, as my husband stolidly affirms, just the logical
result of meeting Sir Christopher Columbus, a carnivorous quadruped of
the family _Felidæ_, much domesticated, in this case, white with
markings as black and shiny as a crow's wing, so named because he
voyaged about our village, not in search of a new world, but in search
of a new home. He came to us. It is flattering to be chosen. He stayed.
But who could resist Sir Christopher?

My husband and my Aunt Amanda may both be right. I strongly suspect they
are. I also strongly suspect that Sir Christopher himself has much to do
with my change of mental attitude: He is well-mannered, good to look
upon, quite adorable, independent and patient. (Indeed, if people were
half as patient as my cat this would be a different world to live in.)
More: He has taught me many things, he talks without making too much
noise; in fact, I have read whole sermons in his soft purrings. And I
verily believe that many people might learn much from the family cat,
except for the fact that we humans are such poor translators. We know
only our own language. More's the pity.

Had I known Sir Christopher as a kitten, doubtless he might have added
still more to my education. But I did not. He was quite full grown when
I first laid my eyes upon him. He was sitting in the sun, on top of a
rail fence, blinking at me consideringly. The fence skirted a little
trail that led from my back yard down to Calapooia Creek. It seemed
trying to push back a fringe of scrubby underbrush which ran down a
hillside; a fringe which was, in truth, but a feeler from the great
forest of Douglas fir which one saw marching, file upon file, row upon
row, back and back to the snows of the high Cascades.

And the white of Sir Christopher's vest and snowy gauntlets was just as
gleamingly clean as the icy frosting over the hills. Sir Christopher,
even a cat, believed firmly in sartorial pulchritude. I admired him for
that, even from the first glance; and, afterward, I put me up three new
mirrors: I did not mean to be outdone by my cat, I intended to look tidy
every minute, and there is nothing like mirrors to tell the truth.
Credit for the initial impulse, however, belongs to Christopher C.

But that first morning, I merely glanced at him, sitting so comfortably
on the top rail of the fence, blinking in the sun.

"Somebody's cat," said I, and went on down to the creek to see if
Curlylocks had tumbled in.

Coming back, the cat was still there. Doubtless he had taken a nap
between times. But he might have been carved of stone, so still he lay,
till my youngest, tugging at my hand, coaxed:

"Kitty--kitty--kitty. Muvver, see my 'ittle kitty?"

And I declare, if Sir Christopher (my husband and ten-year-old Ted named
him that very evening) didn't look at me and wink. Then he jumped down
and followed, very dignified, very discreet.

I attempted to shoo him back. But he wouldn't shoo. He merely stopped
and seemed to consider matters. Or serenely remained far enough off to
"play safe."

Meanwhile, my youngest continued to reiterate: "Kitty--kitty--kitty!
_My_ 'ittle kitty!"

"No, Curlylocks," said I, "it isn't your little kitty. It is somebody's
cat."

Which merely shows that I knew not whereof I spoke. Sir Christopher
proceeded to teach me.

Of course, at first I thought his stay with us was merely a temporary
matter; like some folk, he had decided to go on a visit and stay over
night. But when Sir Christopher continued to tarry, I enquired, I looked
about, I advertised--and I assured the children that some one,
somewhere, must surely be mourning the loss of a precious pet; some one,
sometime, would come to claim him.

But no one came.

Days slid away, weeks slipped into months, winter walked our way, and
spring, and summer again. Sir Christopher C. had deliberately adopted
us, for he made no move toward finding another abiding place. He was no
longer Somebody's cat, he was our cat; for, indeed, is not possession
nine points of the law?

Then one day when heat shimmered over the valley, when the dandelions
had seeded and the thistles had bloomed, when the corn stood heavy and
the cricket tuned his evening fiddle, when spots in the lawn turned
brown, where the sprinkler missed, when the baby waked and fretted, and
swearing, sweating men turned to the west and wondered what had held up
the sea breeze--Sir Christopher missed his supper. He vanished as
completely as if he had been kidnapped by the Air Patrol. Three weeks
went by and we gave him up for lost, although the children still prowled
about looking over strange premises, peeping through back gates,
trailing down unaccustomed lanes and along Calapooia Creek, for "We
_might_ find him," they insisted. Truly, "Hope springs eternal."

"Perhaps, he has gone back where he came from," said Daddy. "Perhaps, he
has grown tired of us."

But My Man's voice was a little too matter-of-factly gruff--indeed, he
had grown very fond of Sir Christopher--and as for the children, they
would accept no such explanation.

It was Curlylocks who found Sir Christopher--or did Sir Chris find
Curlylocks? Anyway, they came walking through the gate, my youngest
declaiming, "Kitty--kitty--kitty! _My_ 'ittle kitty!"

And since that time, every summer, Sir Christopher takes a vacation. He
comes back so sleek and proud and happy that he can hardly contain
himself. He rubs against each of us in turn, purring the most satisfied
purr--if we could but fully understand the dialect he speaks!--as if he
would impart to us something truly important.

"I declare," said Daddy, one day, "I believe that cat goes up in the
hills and hunts."

"Camps out and has a good time," added daughter.

"And fishes," suggested Ted. "Cats _do_ catch fish. Sometimes. I've read
about it."

Daddy nodded. "Seems to agree with him, whatever he does."

"Vacations agree with anybody," asserted my oldest. And then, "I don't
see why we can't go along with Sir Chris. At least we might go the same
_time_ he does."

"Mother, couldn't we?"--it was a question that gathered weight and
momentum like a snowball rolling down hill, for I had always insisted
that, with a big family like mine, I could never bother to go camping. I
wanted to be where things were handy: running water from a faucet,
bathtubs and gas and linoleum, a smoothly cut lawn and a morning
postman. Go camping with a family like mine? Never.

But the thought once set going would not down. Perhaps, after all, Sir
Christopher was right and I was wrong. For people did go camping, most
people, even groups to the number of nine (the right count for our
family), and they seemed to enjoy it. They fought with mosquitoes, and
fell into creeks; they were blotched with poison oak, black from
exposure, lame from undue exercise, and looked worse than vagrant
gipsies--but they came home happy. Even those who spent days in bed to
rest up from their rest (I have known such) seemed happy. And every one
sighs and says, "We had such a good time! We're planning to go back
again next summer."

So at last I gave up--or gave in. We went to the mountains, following up
the trail along Calapooia Creek; we camped and hunted and fished to the
hearts' content. We learned to cook hotcakes out-of-doors, and how to
make sourdough biscuit, and to frizzle bacon before a bonfire, and to
bake ham in a bread pan, such as our mothers fitted five loaves of bread
in; we learned to love hash, and like potatoes boiled in their jackets,
and coffee with the cream left out. We went three miles to borrow a
match; we divided salt with the stranger who had forgotten his; we
learned that fish is good on other days than Friday and that trout
crisps beautifully in bacon grease; we found eleventeen uses for empty
lard pails and discovered the difference between an owl and a tree
toad. We gained a speaking acquaintance with the Great Dipper, and
learned where to look for the north star, why fires must be put out and
what chipmunks do for a living. We learned--

Last night we came home.

"Now, mother, aren't you really glad you went?" quizzed Daddy.

"Yes-s," said I, slowly, "I'm glad I went. It has been a new experience.
I feel like I'd gained a degree at the State University."

My understanding mate merely chuckled--and went on unpacking the
tinware. But Ted spoke up:

"Gee! Bet I make good in English III this year. Got all sorts of ideas
for themes. This trip's been bully."

"We'll go again, won't we, Mother?" asked my oldest.

"I think we'll always go again," answered I--some sober thinking I was
doing, as I folded away the blankets.

"Let me get supper"--it was Laura, my middle girl, speaking--"surely I
can cook on gas, if I can over a campfire." And Laura had never wanted
to cook! Strange tendencies develop when one lives out in the open a
space of time.

But Curlylocks was undisturbed. "Kitty--kitty--kitty! _My_ 'ittle
kitty!" he reiterated. And truly, so my neighbor told me, Sir
Christopher had beat us home by a scant twenty-four hours. He rubbed
about us in turns, happily purring.

"He's telling us all what a good time he had," said I, understanding at
last, "but he is adding, I think, that the best part of going away is
getting home again."

"But if we didn't go we couldn't get home again," said Somebody.

And somebody's cat purred his approval. Perhaps, after all, he finds us
a teachable family. Or perhaps he knows that once caught by the lure of
the hills, once having tasted the tang of mountainous ozone, we will
always go back--he has rare intuitions, has Sir Christopher. For,
already, I find myself figuring to fashion a detachable long handle for
the frying pan: Yes, next time, we shall plan to conserve both fingers
and face. Next time! That is the beauty of vacation days: We think of
them when the frost comes, when the snow drifts deep, when the arbutus
blooms again--and we plan, plan, plan! And are very happy--because of
memory, and anticipation. We have opened barred windows, and widened our
life's horizon. Does Sir Christopher guess? Wise old Sir Chris!




Homing-It in an Apartment

By Ernest L. Thurston


There were four of them--all girls employed in great offices. Alone, far
away from their home towns and families, they were all suffering from
attacks of too-much-boarding-house. Each was longing for a real, home-y
place to live in. And out of that longing was born, in time, an idea,
which developed, after much planning, figuring and price-getting, into a
concrete plan and a course of action. They were good friends, of
congenial tastes, and so they decided to "home-it" together.

Now this is nothing new, in itself. It was the thorough way they went
about it that was not so common. They applied the rules of their
business life, and studied their proposed path before they set foot in
it. They looked over the field, weighed the problems, decided what they
could do, and then arranged to put themselves on a sound financial basis
from the start.

All had occupied separate rooms in sundry boarding houses. Each had
experience in "meals in" and "meals out." Each could analyze fairly
accurately her expenses for the preceding six months. After study, they
decided that, without increasing their combined expense, they could have
comfortable quarters of their own and more than meet all their needs.
"Freedom, food, furniture, fixing and _friends_," said Margaret,
"without the boarding house flavor."

They longed for a little house and garden of their own. But they were
busy people, and this would mean extra hours of care and labor, more
demands on their strength, and a longer travel distance--a load they
felt they could not carry. So they sought an apartment.

The search was long but they found it. It was in a small structure, on a
quiet street, and several flights up, without elevator. But, as Peggy
said, "Elevators have not been in style in our boarding houses, and
flights of stairs have--so what matters it?" The suite, when you arrived
up there, was airy and comfortable. It provided two bedrooms, a cheery
living room, a dining room and a kitchenette. Clarice remarked, "The
'ette' is so small we can save steps by being within hand's reach of
everything, no matter where we stand."

The rent was less than the combined rental of their four old rooms. Heat
and janitor service were provided without charge, but they were obliged
to meet the expense of gas for the range and of electric lights.

They might have lived along happily in their new nest without a budget,
and without specific agreements as to expense. But they were business
girls. So they sat right down and decided every point, modifying each,
under trial, to a workable proposition. Then they stuck to it and _made_
it work.

There was the matter of furnishing. Each partner, while retaining
personal title to her property, contributed to general use such articles
of furniture she possessed as met apartment needs. From one, for
example, came a comfortable bed, from another, chairs and a reading
lamp, from a third a lounge chair, and from the fourth her piano and
couch. Of small rugs, sofa pillows, pictures and miscellaneous small
furnishings there were sufficient to make possible a real selection.

Then the four determined on further absolute essentials to make the rooms
homelike. There were needed comfortable single beds for each, dressing
tables, bed linen, dining-room equipment, kitchen ware, a chair or two,
and draperies. Their decisions were made in committee-of-the-whole,
and nothing was done that could not meet with the willing consent of all.

To meet the first cost they each contributed fifty dollars from their
small savings, and assessed themselves a dollar and a quarter per week
thereafter. They then bought their equipment, paying part cash and
arranging for the balance on time. And be sure it was fun getting it!

Then there was the question of meals. It was determined to prepare their
breakfasts and dinners and to put up lunches. To allow a certain
freedom, it was agreed that each should pack her own lunch, and that
regular meals should be cooked and served, turn and turn about, each
partner acting for a week. A second member washed the dishes and took
general care of the apartment. Thus a girl's general program reduced to,

        First week        Cooking
        Second week       Free
        Third week        Dishes, etc.
        Fourth week       Free
        Fifth week        Cooking
        Etc.

During an experimental period, the cost of provisions and ice was summed
up weekly and paid by equal assessment. Later a fixed assessment of
seven dollars, each, was agreed to, and proved sufficient. There were
even slight surpluses to go into the mannikin jar on the living room
mantel, which Clarice called the "Do Drop Inn", because it provided from
its contents refreshment for those who dropped in of an evening.

Naturally there was a friendly rivalry, not only in making the most of
the allotment, but in providing attractive meals and dainty special
dishes. Clarice's stuffed tomatoes won deserved fame, and Margaret made
a reputation on cheese soufflé. Peggy, too, was a wizard with the
chafing dish.

Consideration was given the matter of special guests, either for meals,
or for over-night. The couch in the living room provided emergency
sleeping quarters. As for meals, separate fixed rates were set for
breakfasts and for dinners. This was paid into the regular weekly
provision fund by the girl who brought the guest, or by all four
equally, if she were a "general" guest. The girl who brought a guest
also "pitched in" and helped with the work.

Whenever the group went out for a meal, as they did now and then for a
change, or for amusement, or recreation, each girl paid her own share at
once.

Finally, there was the factor of laundry. After a little experimenting,
household linen was worked out on an "average" basis, so that a regular
amount could be assessed each week. Of course each girl met the expense
of her own private laundry.

As a result of this planning, each member of the household found herself
obligated to meet a weekly assessment containing the following items:
Rent, furniture tax, household laundry, extras ($1.00) and personal
laundry. Of these, the only item not positively fixed, as to amount, was
the last. Each girl, naturally, paid all her strictly private expense,
including clothes, and medical and dental service.

One of the number was chosen treasurer for a three-months' term, and was
then, in turn, succeeded by another, so that each of the four served
once a year. The treasurer received all assessments, gave the weekly
allotment to the housewife, and paid other bills. Minor deficiencies
were met from "surplus." Moreover, she kept accurate accounts.

Once settled comfortably in their quarters, with boarding-house memories
receding into the background, it took but little time for a happy,
home-y atmosphere to develop. Of course, with closer intimacy, there
were temperamental adjustments, as always, but they came easily. The
household machinery ran smoothly, almost from the first, because there
_was_ a machine, properly set up, operated and adjusted--rather than an
uncertain makeshift.




To Express Personality

By Dana Girrioer


"'Keep house?' I should say not!" answered Anne, who had journeyed out
into the suburbs to "tell" her engagement to Burt Winchester to the home
folks before she "announced" it. "I'm going to retire to the Kensington,
or some nice apartment hotel, at the ripe old age of twenty-four. What'd
you think, we're back in the dark ages, B. F.?"

"'B. F.'?" repeated Aunt Milly.

"Before Ford," said Anne, laughing. "Oh, it was the thing for you,
Auntie, you couldn't have brought up your own big family in a city
apartment, to say nothing of stretching your wings to cover Little
Orphant Annie, besides, everybody kept house when you were married!"

"And now nobody does, except a few Ancient Mariners?" inquired Cousin
Dan.

Anne blushed. "Of course it suits some people, now," she amended,
hastily. "Perhaps it's all right to keep house, if you have a big
family, or lots of money and can hire all the fussing done."

"You don't need to hire fussing, if you've a big family," said Aunt
Milly, her eyes twinkling behind the gold-bowed spectacles. "You'll keep
on with the drawing--illustrating?"

"Surely," answered Anne. "Burt will keep right on being a lawyer."

"I see," said George. "Well, Queen Anne, I suppose when we want to visit
you we can hire a room in the same block, I mean, hotel. I thought,
perhaps, having so far conformed to the habits of us Philistines as to
take a husband, you might go the whole figure and take a house!"

"Please!" begged Anne. In that tone, it was a catchword dating back to
nursery days which the elf-like Anne had shared with a whole brood of
sturdy cousins, and meant, "Please stop fooling; I want to be taken
seriously."

"I love to draw--but my people don't look alive, somehow," said little
Milly, wistfully.

Cried Anne: "Keep trying, Milly; there is nothing so lovely as to have
even a taste for some sort of creative work, and to develop it; to
express your own personality in something tangible, and to be encouraged
to do so. Do understand me, Auntie and the rest; it isn't that I want to
shirk, but I do want to specialize on what I do best! I'll wash dishes
if it's ever necessary, but why must I wish a whole pantry on myself
when either Burt or I could pay our proportionate share of a hotel
dish-washer, or butler, or whatever is needed?"

At the studio it was much easier.

"Some time in the early fall," Anne told her callers, who arrived by
two's, three's and four's, as the news began to circulate among her
friends.

"No, I won't keep this," with a jerk of her thumb towards the big, bare
room which had been hers since she left Aunt Milly and the little home
town. "There's a room at the top of the Kensington I can have, with a
light as good as this, and that settles the last problem. I'd hate to
have to go outdoors for meals, when I'm working."

"Nan Gilbert!" exclaimed her dearest friend. "You have the best luck!
You can do good work, and get good pay for it, and be happy all by
yourself; and now you're going to be happier, with a husband who'll let
you live your own life; you'll be absolutely free, not even a percolator
to bother with, nothing to take your mind from your own creative work,
free to express your own personality!"

"Mercy," said Anne, closing the door upon this last caller. "If I don't
set the North River, at least, on fire, pretty soon, they'll all call me
a slacker."

She hung her card, "Engaged," upon the door leading into the hall (some
one had scrawled "Best Wishes" underneath the printed word), and
proceeded to get her dinner in a thoughtful frame of mind. The tiny
kitchenette boasted ice-box, fireless, and a modest collection of
electric cooking appliances; in a half-hour Anne had evolved a cream
soup, a bit of steak, nearly cubical in proportions, slice of graham
bread, a salad of lettuce and tomato with skilfully tossed dressing, a
muffin split ready to toast, with the jam and spreader for it, and
coffee was dripping into the very latest model of coffee-pots. Anne had
never neglected her country appetite, and was a living refutation of the
idea that neatness and art may not dwell together. She moved quietly and
with a speed which had nothing of haste; her mind was busy with a
magazine cover for December, she believed she'd begin studying camels.

After dinner came Burt Winchester, a steady-voiced, olive-skinned young
man, in pleasant contrast to Anne's vivacious fairness, and together
they journeyed uptown and then west to the Kensington, for a final
decision upon the one vacant apartment. The rooms were of fair size,
they were all light, and the agent had at least half a yard of
applicants upon a printed slip in his pocket.

Burt studied the apartment not at all, but his fiancée with quiet
amusement. He was much in love with Anne, but he understood her better
than she had yet discovered.

"I don't think we'll ever find anything better," she was saying to him.
"Perhaps he'd have it redecorated for us, with a long lease--"

The agent coughed discreetly. "The leases are for one year, with
privilege of renewal," he said to Burt. "It has just been redecorated;
is there anything needed?"

"It would all be lovely, if one liked blue," murmured Anne. "Just the
thing for some girl, but not for me, all that pale blue and silver, it
doesn't look a bit like either of us, Burt. I had worked out the most
stunning scheme, cream and black, with a touch of Kelly green--"

Another cough, somewhat louder, and accompanied by an undisguised look
of sympathy for Burt. "The owner prefers to decide the decorations,
Madame," said the agent. "Tastes differ so, you understand."

"Please hold the suite for me until tomorrow night," said Burt,
decisively. "I suppose we'll take it; if not, I'll make it right with
you."

"I should say, 'tastes differ,'" laughed Anne, tucking her arm into
Burt's, as they began the long walk down-town. "Do you know, Aunt Milly
and the girls thought, of course, we'd keep house, and Dan and George
are going to pick out girls that will keep house, I saw it in their
eyes. You--you're going to be satisfied, Burt?"

"I think so," answered Burt, judiciously, and then with a change of
tone, "Nan, you precious goose, you've always told me you were not
domestic."

"And you've always said you were no more domestic than I was," finished
Anne, happily. She entirely missed the quizzical expression of the brown
eyes above her. "Nuff said.--Are we going to Branton tomorrow, Burt,
with the crowd? Can you take the day?"

Anne's "crowd," the half-dozen good friends among the many
acquaintances she had formed in the city, were invited for a day in the
country. She and Burt now talked it over, agreeing to meet in time to
take the nine-thirty train, with the others.

But at nine, next morning, Burt had not appeared at the studio; instead,
Miss Gilbert had a telephone message that Mr. Winchester was delayed,
but would call as soon as possible. It was unlike Burt, but Anne,
sensibly, supposed that business had intervened, and, removing her hat,
was glad to remember that she had not definitely accepted the invitation
when it was given. The "crowd" were sure enough of each other and of
themselves to appear casual: Burt and she could take a later train, and
have just as warm a welcome.

At nine-thirty Burt appeared, explaining briefly, "Best I could do.
There's a train in twenty minutes, we'll catch it if we hurry."

Anne hurried, which proved to be unnecessary, as the train seemed late
in starting; during the trip there was little conversation, as Anne was
tactful, and Burt preoccupied.

"Branton!" called the conductor, at least it sounded like Branton, Burt
came out of his revery with a start, and Anne followed him down the
aisle. They stood a moment upon the platform of the quiet little station
and watched the train pull out; as they turned back into what seemed the
principal street, Anne craned her neck to look around an inconvenient
truck piled with baggage, and made out the sign, Byrnton.

"Oh, Burt, what were we thinking of?" she exclaimed. "This isn't the
right place at all! We were to take the road up past a brick church--and
there isn't any here--this is Byrnton, and we wanted Branton. What shall
we do--why don't you say something?"

"Fudge!" said Burt, soberly, but in his eyes the dancing light he
reserved for Anne. "I'll ask the ticket-agent."

He came out of the station, smiling. "This isn't the Branton line at
all, but a short branch west of it," he informed her. "We took the wrong
train, but he says lots of people make the same mistake, and they are
going to change one name or the other, eventually. I am to blame, Nan,
for I know this place, Byrnton; I have, or used to have, an Aunt Susan
here, somewhere--shall we look her up? We have nearly three hours to
kill. It will be afternoon before we can get to Branton--and Aunt Susan
will give us nourishment, at least, if she's home."

"Very well," Anne assented. If Burt's business absorbed him like this,
she must learn to take it philosophically.

"What a pretty place, Burt! Do see those wonderful elms!"

Byrnton proved to be an old-fashioned village, which had had the good
fortune to be remodelled without being modernized. Along the main street
many of the houses were square, prim little boxes, with front yards
bright with sweet williams, marigolds, and candytuft; these had an iron
fence around the garden, and, invariably, shutters at the front door. An
occasional house stood flush with the brick or flagged sidewalk; in that
case there were snowy curtains at the window, and a glimpse of
hollyhocks at the back. The newer houses could be distinguished by the
wide, open spaces around them; the late comers had not planned their
homes to command the village street, and neighbors, as an older
generation had done, but these twentieth century models did not begin
until one had left the little railway station well behind.

"What a homely, homey place," said Anne, noting everything with the eye
of an artist. "I don't see how you could forget it, if you have an aunt
living here."

"That's the question," answered Burt. "Have I an aunt living here? She
may be in California; however, in that case, the key will be under the
mat."

Anne continued to look about her, with sparkling eyes. "If Aunt Milly
had lived in a place like this, I'd be there yet," she told him. "The
factories spoiled the place for me, but they made business good for
Uncle Andy and the boys, and Aunt Milly likes the bustle, she'd think
this was too quiet.--Isn't it queer how people manage to get what they
want--in time?"

"It is, indeed," smiled Burt. "There, Nan, that low white cottage at the
very end, the last before you come to open fields. That's Aunt Susan's."

They quickened their pace; Anne was conscious of an intense wish that
Aunt Susan might be home. She wanted to see the inside of the white
house, bungalow, it might almost be called, if one did not associate
bungalows with stucco or stained shingles. This cottage was of white
wood, with the regulation green blinds. There was an outside chimney of
red bricks; a pathway of red bricks in the old herringbone pattern led
up to the front door, with its shining brass knocker. A row of white
foxgloves stood sentinel before the front of the house, on each side the
entrance, their pointed spires coming well above the window-sills;
before them the dark foliage of perennial lupins, tossing up a white
spray of flowers, and then it seemed as if every old-fashioned flower of
white, or with a white variety, ran riot down to a border of sweet
alyssum. Above all the fragrance came the unmistakable sweetness of
mignonette.

"Oh, Burt!" called Anne, "I do hope she's home. What a woman she must
be, I can guess some things about her, just from the outside of her
house. I hope she'll show me the inside of it."

Burt shook his head. "She'd have seen us before this and been out here,"
he suggested. "Come 'round to the back."

The back of the premises proved no less fascinating; there was the
neatest of clothes-yards, a vegetable garden, and a small garage, after
which Anne regarded the silent cottage with wistful eyes.

"Those beautiful, old-fashioned flowers, no petunias but the white
frilled kind,--she's an artist--and has the wash done at home," she
enumerated, "and runs her automobile herself, I am sure, for she's a
practical person as well; if she were just a sentimental flower-lover,
she'd have had something or other climbing up the house, and it spoils
the woodwork."

"It's safe to say Aunt Susan's in California," said Burt, disregarding
this. "No joke, Nan, she has a married daughter who has been trying to
get her out there for years, and Aunt Susan's always threatening to go.
Never thought she would, but we can soon find out; I know who'll have
the key."

He left Anne and walked back to the house just passed, and presently
reappeared with the key. "Here you are. Aunt Susan left it with Mrs.
Brown, who is to look after the place, and to use her judgment about
letting people in. Aunt Susan has only been gone two days, she went
hurriedly at the last, and Mrs. Brown is to close the house for her, but
she hasn't got 'round to it yet. Lucky for us, there'll be everything we
need for lunch; I brought eggs--see?"

Laughing like a boy. Burt unlocked the back door, and then produced four
eggs, from as many pockets. He laid them carefully down upon the kitchen
table.

"Now, Nan, we can use anything in the kitchen or pantry, and Mrs. Brown
has a blueberry pie in the oven which she'll give us, she'll bring it
over when it's done.--Want to go over the house?--Give you my word it's
all right, in fact Aunt Susan told Mrs. Brown she wished she could rent
it, as is, if she only knew somebody who would love it--that was her
word. You can love it until the afternoon train, can't you?"

If Anne heard, she made no reply, she was exploring.

Downstairs, a wide hall occupied a central third of the house; it was
well lighted by the windows each side the front door, and by double
doors of glass, which opened on to the back porch. On one side the hall
were kitchen and pantry, nearly equal in size, and glistening with white
paint, aluminum, and blue and white porcelain. With a hasty glance over
these treasures, to which she was coming back, Anne stepped out into the
hall again, and around to the front of the winding staircase, and
entered what she knew at once for the "owner's bedroom." There were
windows on two sides, as this was a front room, and each broad sill bore
its own pot of ferns. The furniture here was all old-fashioned, of some
dark wood that had been rubbed to a satin finish, the floor was of plain
surface, with braided mats, and a blue and white counterpane provided
the only bit of drapery in the room. Anne's bright head nodded with
satisfaction. Here was character; to win Aunt Susan's respect would be
no light task, her personal and intimate belongings showed an austere
sense of values and an almost surgical cleanliness. Yet Aunt Susan could
not be a martinet; her hall, furnished for other people, showed due
regard for their comfort; the living room, which took the entire western
side of the cottage, bore unmistakable signs of much occupancy, with
wide and varied interests. A set of dark shelves, at the lower end, held
china, and suggested that one might also eat at the refectory table,
which was furnished as a desk and held a few books, many writing
materials, and a foreign-looking lamp. There was also a piano, well
littered with music, a sewing bag thrown down upon a cretonned window
seat, and the generous fireplace was flanked by two huge baskets, one
heaped with magazines, the other a perfectly round mound of yellow fur,
which suddenly took form and life as a yellow tabby cat fastened hopeful
topaz eyes upon them, blinked away a brief disappointment, and then
yawned with ennui.

"His missie left him all alone," said Anne, bending to stroke the smooth
head. "What's upstairs, Burt?"

"Go and look, I'll take your place with the Admiral until you come
back," offered Burt, and at sound of his name the yellow cat jumped out
and began rubbing against a convenient table leg. Anne found them in the
same relative positions when she returned from her inspection of the
upper floor.

"Your Aunt Susan must use it for sewing," she told Burt, dreamily. "With
that big skylight--it could be a studio, couldn't it?"

"It is," Burt informed her. "Aunt Susan is an artist--with her needle.
She gives, or gave, dressmaking lessons, in her idle moments. She gave
up dressmaking, when she bought this house and settled here, but now she
teaches the daughters of her old customers, they come out in automobiles
every Wednesday, in winter. Saturday afternoons she has some of the
young girls in the village, here,--without price--and without taste,
too, some of them! And Nan, I hate to mention it, but--Aunt Susan is a
pretty good cook, too!"

"Feed the brute!" quoted Nan, with a gay laugh. "Will the Admiral drink
condensed milk?"

Mrs. Brown came over with her blueberry pie as Burt was summoned to
luncheon. She surveyed the table, which Nan had laid in the kitchen, and
then the Admiral, who was making his toilette in a thorough manner that
suggested several courses, with outspoken approval.

"My, I wish Susan Winchester could pop in this minute. You found the
prepared flour, and all--baked 'em on the griddle! Wa'n't that cute! I
never did see an omelet like that except from Susan Winchester's own
hands, and she learned from a Frenchwoman she used to sew with. Some
folks can pick up every useful trick they see."

Turning to Burt, she continued:

"With all the new fangle-dangles of these days, women voting and all,
you're a lucky boy to have found an old-fashioned girl!"

"I know it," said Burt, brazenly, but he did not meet Anne's astonished
eyes. "My girl has learned the best of the new accomplishments, without
losing what was worth keeping of the old."

Anne's judgment told her it was a good luncheon--no better than she
served herself at home, though. She stared at her own slim, capable
fingers. Was she domestic, after all?

"We've been looking at apartments in the city," Burt went
on--"apartments in a hotel, you know.--Try the omelet, Mrs. Brown--Nan's
don't fall flat as soon as other omelets do.--But we haven't found what
really appeals to us."

"I should think not," declared Mrs. Brown, vigorously. "I always say a
person hasn't a spark of originality that will go and live in a coop
just like hundreds of others, all cut to the same pattern. Look at your
Aunt Susan, now. This house belonged to old Joe Potter, he built it
less'n ten years ago an Mis' Potter she had it the way she wanted it,
and that was like the house she lived in when she was a girl, little,
tucked-up rooms, air-tight stoves, a tidy on every chair, and she made
portières out of paper beads that tickled 'em both silly--yes, and
tickled everybody in the ear that went through 'em, though that wan't
what I meant to say. When she died, Joe wouldn't live here, said he
wouldn't be so homesick for Julia in another house, this one was full of
her. So, your Aunt Susan bought it, and what did she do?

"She knocked out partitions, took down fire-boards, threw out a good
parlor set and lugged in tables and chairs from all over, put big panes
of glass where there was little ones--in some places, she did, and only
the good angels and Susan Winchester knows why she didn't change 'em
all, they're terrible mean to wash--made the front hall into a setting
room and the parlor into a bedroom, got two bathrooms and no dining
room--well, to make a long story short, this house is now Susan
Winchester. Anybody that knows Susan would know it was her house if they
see it in China.

"Did you learn to keep house with your mother?"

The transition was so abrupt that Anne started. "I--my aunt brought me
up--and nine cousins," she answered. "My aunt is as unlike Burt's as you
can imagine, but just as dear and good. She had a big family, and there
was never time enough to have her home as she wanted it--so she
thought--and I thought so, too--but yet--Aunt Milly's home was always
full of happy children, and, perhaps, that's what she really wanted,
more than dainty furnishings or a spotless kitchen."

"Folks, mostly, get what they want, even if they don't know it,"
confirmed Mrs. Brown. "Look at the Admiral, here. He don't want to come
over and live with me, same as Susan meant he should. He wants to stay
right in his own home, and have his meals and petting same as usual, and
here you come along today and give them to him. Trouble is, folks don't
always know what it is they want."

When Mrs. Brown went back to her own dinner, she left Anne with
something to think about. Washing the dishes in Aunt Susan's white sink,
which was fitted to that very purpose, drying them upon a rack which
held every dish apart from its neighbors, and, finally, polishing the
quaintly shaped pieces upon Aunt Susan's checked towel, which remained
dry and spotless; opening every drawer and cupboard to see that all was
left in the dainty order she had found there, Anne had a clear vision of
the blue and silver furnishings at the Kensington. What had she told
Burt: "It doesn't look like either of us"?--while Aunt Susan's home--

"Burt," she called, "come and answer this question. Did you come to
Byrnton instead of Branton on purpose?"

"What's this?" said Burt. "Cross-examination?"

"It's an examination, surely, but I won't be cross," replied Anne, with
a rare dimple. "You must answer my question truly."

"Yes, Your Honor," said Burt. "I did, Your Honor."

"Did you know your Aunt Susan wouldn't be home?"

"Our Aunt Susan," corrected Burt.--"No, Your Honor--that is, I
thought--"

"You knew she was going to California?"

"Yes, Your Honor."

"This summer?"

"I didn't know exactly when--honestly, Nan, I did want you to meet her."

"Why?"'

"I knew you'd like the way she keeps house. I didn't realize that the
house could speak for itself, without her.--You do like it, Nan?"

"I don't have to answer questions, because I'm the Judge," Nan told him.
"I'll ask you one more. Do you want me to ask you to take this cottage,
for us, in the fall, and stay in it until Aunt Susan comes back?"

"Not unless Your Honor pleases."

"Case dismissed, for lack of evidence," said Nan.--"Burt, could we live
here?"

"We could. I'll admit it's what I'd like, if you do. The difference in
rents would buy gasoline. Could you work here, and keep house, too?"

"I can if I'm smart," answered Nan, soberly. "I wonder if I'm smart."

"Dear," said Burt. "What have you done since you came to New York but
work and keep house, too, in less convenient quarters than this, and
with no one to help you--no good husband like me--?"

"That's so!" she turned a radiant face upon him.

"If we like, we can begin another home, of our very own, when Aunt Susan
wants hers back," Burt smiled quizzically. "No one else's house would
suit you for always, Nan. Ask me why."

"Why?"

"Because," said Burt in triumph, "personality, like the measles, will
out!"




AMERICAN COOKERY

FORMERLY THE

BOSTON COOKING-SCHOOL MAGAZINE

OF

Culinary Science and Domestic Economics

        SUBSCRIPTION $1.50 PER YEAR, SINGLE COPIES 15C
        POSTAGE TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES, 40C PER YEAR

TO SUBSCRIBERS

The date stamped on the wrapper is the date on which your subscription
expires; it is, also, an acknowledgment that a subscription, or a
renewal of the same, has been received.

Please renew on receipt of the colored blank enclosed for this purpose.

In sending notice to renew a subscription or change of address, please
give the _old_ address as well as the _new_.

In referring to an original entry, we must know the name as it was
formerly given, together with the Post-office, County, State,
Post-office Box, or Street Number.

ENTERED AT BOSTON POST-OFFICE AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER




LOVE'S DAY


  When the morning on the hill crest snuffs the candles of the night,
  And the wide world blooms in beauty with the coming of the light,
  With the morn awakens, ever sweet and ever new,
  The happiness of knowing I share the dawn with you.

  When the morning shadows shorten on the sunny slopes of noon,
  And the roads of earth are humming with toil's deep, insistent tune,
  Fragrant as a sea wind, blowing from an island blue,
  Through moiling hours of toiling comes my memory of you.

  When the shadows of the twilight like long lashes dim and gray
  Close in slumber softly o'er the weary eyes of day,
  Calling through the twilight like harbor lights from sea,
  Your love becomes a beacon that shines with cheer for me!

                                      _Arthur Wallace Peach._




LIMITATION OF ARMAMENTS


"On Armistice Day, November 11, at the hour when the twenty-four men
representing the six participating nations first face each other across
the council table, a nation-wide demonstration will be under way in the
United States. Organized labor announces that in every town and city the
workers will join with other citizens in mass-meetings and parades and
that the keynote of Armistice Day should be, 'It is time to disarm.' It
will help in impressing upon our own government and upon other
governments that the people are weary of war-made tax burdens; that they
are deeply in earnest in their demands that these burdens be removed. It
will strengthen the purpose of the four men who are to represent America
to know that they have the support of the workers and the voters. The
action of organized labor will help in liberating and directing these
'moral forces'; but Labor cannot do it alone. There are others of these
'forces' that cannot be tapped or directed by Labor, and these must come
into action. The time is drawing nigh for their mobilization."

                                       _Philadelphia Public Ledger._


"Without the crowding, persistent, fighting force of the masses the
crusade cannot be won. This is the people's salvation and it is,
therefore, the people's fight. It is now up to the people of this
country to make their wishes known and their opinions felt. It should be
constantly in mind that, without the mobilized moral force of those upon
whom these crushing burdens are now falling, there is little hope that
the load will ever be lifted. If it is not lifted, no one can prophesy
what lies beyond. There can be no relief from taxes, no relief from
expenditures and no relief from war, except through disarmament."

                                                          W. E. BORAH.


"One more war, fully prepared for, prepared for with all the diabolical
perversions of science, will reduce Europe and America to what Russia is
today."

                                                         _Churchman._


Certainly we believe in the closest limitation of armament. In this
matter we would go to the extreme limit. We are tired of militarism and
tired of war and the rumors of war. While we need and desire a merchant
marine, we have no use for fighting ships or submarines. Years ago we
began to dream that America would never engage in another war, but we
have witnessed the most horrid conflict that ever devastated the earth.
How can any one ever want war again? The nation that makes an aggressive
attack on another should be regarded as an outlaw and treated as such by
the rest of the world. Dissensions are sure to arise, but these can be
settled by conference and agreement or by arbitration.

Prosperity is dependent on peace. No other world-wide saving can equal
that which can be gained through limitation of armament. The wealth of
the world consists of just what the world produces. The one master word
of the day is Production. People are not producing enough to satisfy all
their wants; there is not stuff enough to go round. As a nation we need
less of politics and more of production. Our main contention should be a
moral appeal for unity in the industrial world. "The field for
constructive, imaginative, and creative minds is the field of commerce."




A PIONEER IN HOME ECONOMICS


From a recent report by Mr. Eugene Davenport, vice-president of the
University of Illinois, we draw the following:

Miss Isabel Bevier retired this year from her work in Home Economics at
the University of Illinois. She entered the service of the University in
1900. During the twenty-one years of its existence, Professor Bevier has
given herself unsparingly to the development and conduct, day by day, of
the department of Home Economics. The field was almost entirely new, as
a university subject. The courses have been outlined and conducted with
a double purpose in mind. First, the presenting of home economics as a
part of a liberal education; and second, the development of courses
leading to a profession in teaching, dietetics, and cafeteria
management.

The first graduating class in 1903 numbered three. The number rapidly
increased, reaching ninety-four in 1918. The total number of students
coming under the instruction of the staff of teachers for the last
twenty-one years is approximately 5,000.

If efforts are to be judged by their results, whether in respect to
alumnæ or the present registration of undergraduate students, it is not
too much to say that the purposes of this department have been in the
main accomplished, by which is meant that the department has trained
hundreds of competent executives and teachers without such exclusive
attention to the professional as to break the contact with that great
mass of university women who are to become, not teachers or
professionals of any kind, but the heads of American homes. To achieve
this double purpose has been the great ambition of the department, in
which it has eminently succeeded.

It is not too much to say that at present, no department of the
university enjoys more of the confidence and respect of the institution
than does the department of Home Economics.

At the Recognition Service in honor of Professor Bevier, in May, 1921,
the alumnæ presented the University with an excellent portrait of Miss
Bevier.




"FEEDING-THE-FAMILY" CLUB


Women are waking up to the fact that upon their shoulders rests the
responsibility of having a healthier nation. Too many people are dying
of avoidable diseases. Rich foods have taken more toll of life than war
and pestilence, dietitians tell us. More and more stress is being placed
upon diet--not for the sick only, but for those in good health, that
they may preserve it. By diet we mean the proper combinations of foods
and the scientific uses of vitamines, starches, proteins and acids.
What we need is more than a reading acquaintance with those subjects.

A certain group of women in Long Beach, Calif., have decided that the
acquisition of knowledge concerning food properties is the only way to
better living for their families. They have grouped together under the
name of the "Feeding-the-Family" Club, and, under the leadership of the
head of the department of domestic science of the public schools, they
meet on Wednesday evening each week for two hours to learn how to
prepare healthful, nourishing meals for the average family. There are
sixteen women in the group, representing fifty-six persons, most of whom
are children in school. Think what it means to those children to have
mothers who are vitally interested in seeing them grow up to be strong,
virile men and women. "Knowledge makes Power," aye, the knowledge of the
mothers of today makes for the powerful citizens of tomorrow.

                                                             R. C. C.




DO YOUR OWN WORK AND SAVE MONEY


If you are one of the people who are "sick unto death" of these thrift
articles and are utterly weary of reading how to clean your porcelain
gas-stove and keep your electric washer in repair.

The magazines are so full of helpful hints to the $5,000 and upwards
class, that it seems as though a mere person like myself might inquire,
"How about poor us? Won't somebody write something for us? How can we,
who make up most of the world, live within our incomes?"

As nobody has responded as yet, I am going to tell how we manage and,
possibly, some one else may be helped thereby.

Six years ago, when my husband and I awoke from our honeymoon trance, we
found ourselves in California, strangers in a lone land, penniless and
jobless. My husband was blessed with neither college education nor
profession, but we were both young and undaunted--therefore we pulled
through. We rented an apartment, furnished, at $15 per month and
buckled in. I might say that the rent didn't have to be paid in advance
or we wouldn't have moved in. My soul mate--otherwise husband--worked as
a truckman, a taxi driver, a cement lamp-post worker, a chauffeur, a
night watchman, a salesman, a cook and a dish-washer. In five years we
moved twenty different times, an average of once every three months (not
because we wished to skip our rent, but because my husband found jobs in
so many different parts of the city).

The end of the sixth year has found us located, at last. We get $150 per
month and live on that alone. We are buying our own home, a flivver
stands in the garage, our house is nicely furnished (a good deal of the
furniture we have made ourselves) and we dress and live respectably. I
do all my own cooking, washing, ironing, sewing, cleaning, baking and
gardening, with a little writing thrown in as a spare-time occupation.
No electric machine, $300 gas stove, $700 bedroom set, nor blue-goose
stenciled kitchen yet graces our home. No little tea-wagon runs our food
to the table. We don't lay by 35 cents in one envelope, $1.25 for
electricity in another, nor 63 cents per week for meat in another. We
merely save a small portion each month. First, toward our home and the
rest we spend or save as we see fit. Our twenty chickens help out a
little in meat and eggs, but one whole year passed by before we bought
linoleum for kitchen or bath-room. At present we are working on a $7
second-hand writing desk with varnish remover and putty knife and in the
end we shall have a very modern, pretty, little, fumed-oak desk for
one-seventh the cost of a new one.

So, Ladies, get in and do your own work. Forget the servant problem and
the money question. Make things yourselves and see how much fun there is
in Life. Don't be afraid to soil your hands--cold cream will fix them.
Get as much fun out of each day as possible.

                                                           H. W. P.




[Illustration: SOME HOMELY THANKSGIVING VEGETABLES]

Seasonable-and-Tested Recipes

By Janet M. Hill and Mary D. Chambers


In all recipes where flour is used, unless otherwise stated, the flour
is measured after sifting once. Where flour is measured by cups, the cup
is filled with a spoon, and a level cupful is meant. A tablespoonful or
a teaspoonful of any designated material is a LEVEL spoonful. In flour
mixtures where yeast is called for, use bread flour; in all other flour
mixtures, use cake or pastry flour.


Potage Parmentier

Cook the well-washed, white stalks of two or three leeks, sliced
lengthwise, in two tablespoonfuls of fat in a saucepan, and allow to
remain over the fire for five or six minutes, or until slightly colored.
Add four large potatoes, pared and sliced, one quart of cold water, and
two teaspoonfuls of salt, cover, and cook for twenty minutes after the
water boils. Strain out the potatoes and leeks and press through a
colander. Thicken the water by adding one-fourth a cup of flour, blended
with two tablespoonfuls of butter or a substitute; stir until it has
boiled for one minute; add one-half a teaspoonful of white pepper, stir
into it the potato purée, and let the whole come to a boil. Pour into
the tureen, and add one-half a cup of rich cream, a cup of well-browned
croûtons, and a few chervil leaves, or the green leaves of cress or any
preferred herb. The addition of the half-cup of rich cream is essential
to the soup "parmentier."


Potato-and-Peanut Sausages

Mix one cup of roasted and fine-ground peanuts with one cup and one-half
of highly seasoned mashed potatoes. Add one beaten egg, and form the
mixture into small sausage-shaped rolls, rolling each one in flour. Roll
on a hot pan, greased with bacon fat, or bake in a very hot oven, until
the outside of the sausages is lightly browned. Pile in the center of a
dish, and garnish with curls of toasted bacon, placed on a border of
shredded lettuce.


Roast Turkey

Clean, stuff and truss a twelve-pound turkey, that, when cooked, may
rest on the wings level on the platter, the drumsticks close to the
body. Rub all over with salt and dredge with flour. Cover the breast
with thin slices of salt pork. Set on a rack in a baking-pan (a "double
roaster" gives best results). Turn often, at first, to sear over and
brown evenly. For the first half hour the oven should be hot, then lower
the heat and finish the cooking in an oven in which the fat in the pan
will not burn. Cook until the joints are easily separated. It will
require three hours and a half. Add no water or broth to the pan during
cooking. For basting use the fat that comes from the turkey during
cooking.


Turkey Stuffing

Add one teaspoonful of salt, one-fourth a teaspoonful of pepper and one
tablespoonful and one-half of poultry seasoning to three cups of cracker
crumbs; mix thoroughly and add three-fourths a cup of melted butter.

[Illustration: ROAST TURKEY]


Garnish the Roast Turkey with Stuffed Onions

Parboil eight choice onions about one hour. Remove from the water and
cut out a circular piece from the top of each to form cups. Chop, fine,
the pieces of onion; add an equal measure of cold, cooked ham, salt and
pepper to season, one-fourth a cup, each, of fine, soft crumbs and
melted butter and mix thoroughly. Season the inside of the cups with
salt, then stuff with the prepared mixture. Bake slowly about half an
hour, basting with melted butter. Serve decorated with celery tips.


Oyster-and-Onion Purée

Steam one pound of white onions, and when tender sift through a
colander. Cook one quart of oysters in their liquor until the gills
separate; strain, and chop the oysters in a chopping bowl. Return the
liquor to the saucepan, and cook with three tablespoonfuls of flour and
three tablespoonfuls of softened butter, rubbed together, stirring
constantly until well thickened and smooth. Season with one teaspoonful
and one-half of salt and one-half a teaspoonful of pepper. Sift into the
onion-pulp one-fourth a cup of flour, and stir until blended; add
one-fourth a teaspoonful of celery seed and one bayleaf, and mix with
the thickened oyster liquor. Stir until the whole comes to a boil and
the purée is thick as porridge. Add the chopped oysters and one pint of
thin cream, let heat through, and serve with oysterettes, saltines or
other plain crackers.


Salmon à la Creole

Clean and scale a small salmon, stuff with one-half a loaf of stale
bread moistened with hot water, seasoned with one-fourth a cup of
butter, salt and pepper to taste, and one-half a cup of capers. Mix all
well, and bind with one beaten egg. Place the salmon on the rack of a
baking-pan in a very hot oven, cover with thin slices of bacon, and let
cook until done. Serve on a bed of chopped fresh mushrooms, cooked in a
little bouillon, and garnish the dish with small fresh tomatoes.


Brother Jonathan

Make a mush of yellow cornmeal, and mould in cylindrical moulds, such as
baking powder boxes or brown bread moulds. Let stand until next day, and
cut into slices. Arrange the slices on a large porcelain pie-plate in
pyramidal form, sprinkling each layer with some sharp, hard cheese,
grated, and seasoned with a very little red pepper. Sift buttered crumbs
freely over the whole; brown in a hot oven, and serve as a vegetable
with fish, with sour grape jelly melted and poured over it.


Plymouth Succotash

Boil, separately, one chicken and four pounds of corned beef. The next
day remove meat and fat from both kettles of liquid, combine liquids,
season with salt (if needed) and pepper; when boiling add five quarts of
hulled corn; remove to slow fire and let simmer three hours. Have ready
three pints of New York pea beans that have been soaked twelve hours,
boiled until soft and strained through a sieve; add to soup (for
thickening). Boil one yellow turnip (or two white turnips), and six
potatoes; when done add to succotash. This recipe makes eight quarts.

[Illustration: PLYMOUTH SUCCOTASH]

[Illustration: NEW ENGLAND SALAD]


New England Salad

Dress flowerets of cold, cooked cauliflower with oil, salt, pepper and
vinegar. From cold, cooked beets remove the top and center portions to
make beet cups. Arrange the prepared cauliflower to fill cups, pour over
boiled salad dressing and arrange a heart of celery in each filled
beet-cup.


Guinea Chickens

Clean and truss two guinea chickens; place on a bed of sliced, uncooked
carrots, potatoes and celery, arranged in the bottom of a casserole--(a
large bean-pot serves as well). Sprinkle the chicks with salt and pour
over them melted butter; set the cover in place. Bake in a moderate oven
one hour and one-quarter, basting every fifteen minutes with melted
butter. Add no water to the casserole.

[Illustration: GUINEA CHICKENS]


Rib Roast of Beef with Yorkshire Pudding

Place a rib roast of beef on a rack in a dripping pan; dredge with flour
and sear over the outside in a hot oven, then add salt and pepper and
drippings and let cook at a low temperature until done, basting every
ten minutes. Remove to a platter and serve with Yorkshire pudding.


Yorkshire Pudding

Sift together one cup and a half of flour, and one-third a teaspoonful
of salt; gradually add one cup and one-half of milk, so as to form a
smooth batter; then add three eggs, which have been beaten until thick
and light; turn into a small, hot dripping pan, the inside of which has
been brushed over with roast beef drippings; when well risen in the pan,
baste with the hot roast beef drippings. Bake about twenty minutes. Cut
into squares and serve around the roast.


Apple Mint Jelly for Roast Lamb

Cut the apples in quarters, removing imperfections. Barely cover with
boiling water, put on a cover and let cook, undisturbed, until soft
throughout. Turn into a bag to drain. For a quart of this apple juice
set one and one-half pounds of sugar on shallow dishes in the oven to
heat. Set the juice over the fire with the leaves from a bunch of mint;
let cook twenty minutes, then strain into a clean saucepan. Heat to the
boiling point, add the hot sugar and let boil till the syrup, when
tested, jellies slightly on a cold dish. Tint with green color-paste
very delicately. Have ready three to five custard cups on a cloth in a
pan of boiling water. Let the glasses be filled with the water; pour out
the water and turn in the jelly. When cooled a little remove to table.
(English recipe.)


Marinaded Cutlets

Cut a pound of the best end of neck of mutton into cutlets, allowing two
cutlets for each bone, beat them with a cutlet bat and trim them
neatly. Let them soak for an hour in a marinade made by mixing six
tablespoonfuls of red wine vinegar, one tablespoonful of olive oil, half
a teaspoonful of salt, six bruised peppercorns, a minced onion, a sprig
of thyme, and a bayleaf. At the end of the hour drain the cutlets, and
dredge them with flour to dry them. Brush over each one with beaten egg,
and roll it in bread-crumbs; repeat the egging and breadcrumbing a
second time, and, if possible, leave them for an hour for the crumbs to
dry on. Half fill a deep pan with frying-fat, and when it is heated, so
as to give off a pale blue vapor, place the cutlets carefully in the
pan, and when they float on top of the fat and are of a rich brown
color, they are sufficiently cooked, and must be taken from the fat and
drained on kitchen paper before being served _en couronne_, or on a
mound of mashed potatoes, green peas, French beans, or Brussels sprouts.

[Illustration: RIB ROAST WITH YORKSHIRE PUDDING]

Veal cutlets, fillets of beef, fillets of white fish, or cutlets of cod
or hake, are excellent when prepared by the same method. (English
recipe.)


Thanksgiving Corn Cake

Sift together two cups of corn meal, two cups of white flour, four
_heaping_ teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one LEVEL teaspoonful of soda,
one teaspoonful of salt, and one-half a cup of sugar. Add one cup of
sour milk (gradually), three-fourths cup of sour cream, four eggs and
one-third a cup of melted butter.

[Illustration: THANKSGIVING CORN CAKE]


Thanksgiving Pudding

Beat the yolks of four eggs; add one pint of soft bread crumbs, one cup
of sugar, the grated rind of a lemon, one teaspoonful of salt, and one
cup of large table raisins from which the seeds have been removed; mix
all together thoroughly, then add one quart of rich milk. Bake in a very
moderate oven until firm in the center. When the pudding has cooled
somewhat, beat the whites of four eggs dry; beat in half a cup of sugar
and spread or pipe the meringue over the pudding; dredge with granulated
sugar and let cook in a very moderate oven about fifteen minutes; the
oven should be of such heat that the meringue does not color until the
last few minutes of cooking.


Coffee Fruit Punch

Add one-half a cup of fine-ground coffee to one cup of cold water, bring
very slowly to a boil, and let simmer for ten minutes. Strain, allow
grounds to settle, decant, and add one cup of sugar. Mix one-half a cup
of sifted strawberry preserve with the juice of two lemons, the juice of
three oranges and the grated rind of one, and half a cup of pineapple
juice. Let the whole stand together for half an hour; then strain, add
the coffee, a quart or more of Vichy, or any preferred sparkling water,
and serve in tall glasses filled one-third full with shaved ice; garnish
each with a thin strip of candied angelica.

[Illustration: SWEET CIDER FRAPPÉ]


Sweet Cider Frappé

Make a syrup by boiling one cup of sugar and two cups of water fifteen
minutes; add one quart of sweet cider and one-half a cup of lemon juice;
when cool freeze--using equal parts of ice and salt. Serve with roast
turkey or roast pork.


Fig-and-Cranberry Pie

Chop one-half a pound of figs and cook until tender in a pint of water.
Add a pint of cranberries, and cook until they pop. Mix one cup of sugar
with four tablespoonfuls of flour and stir into the fig-and-cranberry
mixture; let boil, remove from fire, and stir in two tablespoonfuls of
butter and the juice of one-half a lemon. Put into a pastry shell,
arrange strips of paste in a basket pattern over the top, and bake until
these are browned.


Dry Deviled Parsnips

Wash and scrape--not pare--three large parsnips; cut in halves,
lengthwise, and place, cut side uppermost, on the grate of a rather hot
oven to bake for thirty to forty minutes, or until soft and lightly
browned. Soften one-half a cup of butter, without melting it, and rub
into it the following mixture: Two teaspoonfuls of salt, four
tablespoonfuls of dry mustard, one-half a teaspoonful of cayenne, one
teaspoonful of white pepper, and flour enough to stiffen the paste. When
the parsnips are cooked make four slanting cuts in each of the halves,
and fill each with as much of the paste as it will hold. Spread over the
flat side with the remainder of the paste, arrange on the serving dish,
sift fine buttered crumbs over them, and place under the gas flame, or
on the upper rack of an oven until crumbs are brown.


King's Pudding With Apple-Jelly Sauce

Soak, over-night, one-half a cup of well-washed rice, and cook in one
pint of milk in double boiler until very tender. Mix this with three
cups of apple sauce, well-sweetened and flavored with cinnamon. Add the
beaten yolks of two eggs, one ounce, each, of candied citron and orange
peel, very fine-chopped, and one-half a cup of raisins. Add, the last
thing, the whites of the eggs, beaten to the stiffest possible froth.
Line a deep dish with a good, plain paste, pour in the pudding, bake
until both paste and pudding top are brown, invert on serving dish and
pour the sauce over it.


Apple-Jelly Sauce

Beat one-half a cup of apple jelly until it is like a smooth batter;
gradually add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, the juice of one
lemon and one-half the grated rind, and a few gratings of nutmeg. Set
into a saucepan of boiling water until ready to use, then beat well and
pour over the pudding.

[Illustration: CRANBERRY TART]


Cranberry Tart

Spread a round of paste over an inverted pie plate, prick the paste with
a fork eight times. Bake to a delicate brown. Remove the paste from the
plate, wash the plate and set the pastry inside. When cold fill with a
cold, cooked cranberry filling and cover the filling with a top pastry
crust, made by cutting paste to a paper pattern and baking in a pan.
Arrange tart just before serving.


Cooked Cranberry Filling

Mix together three level tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, three-fourths a
teaspoonful of salt and one cup and one-half of sugar; pour on one cup
and one-half of boiling water and stir until boiling, then add one-third
a cup of molasses, two teaspoonfuls of butter and three cups of
cranberries, chopped fine. Let simmer fifteen minutes.


Pumpkin Fanchonettes

Mix together one cup and a half of dry, sifted pumpkin, half a cup of
sugar, two eggs, two tablespoonfuls of molasses, one tablespoonful of
ginger, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, one teaspoonful of
cinnamon, one-fourth a teaspoonful of salt, and one cup of rich milk.
Pour into small tins lined with pastry, and bake about twenty-five
minutes. Serve cold; just before serving decorate with whipped cream.

[Illustration: PUMPKIN FANCHONETTES]


Pilgrim Cookies

Let soak overnight one cup of seedless raisins, then drain and dry on a
cloth. Cream one-third a cup of butter; beat in one cup of brown sugar,
one tablespoonful of milk, and two eggs, beaten light. Add the raisins,
and one cup of flour, sifted with one-half a teaspoonful, each, of
nutmeg and cinnamon and two teaspoonfuls and one-half of baking powder.
When thoroughly mixed, add one-half a cup of graham flour, unsifted, and
one-half a cup of bran, unsifted.

[Illustration: PILGRIM COOKIES]


Pyramid Birthday Cake

Bake any good layer cake or other simple cake mixture in one or two thin
sheets, in a large pan. When done cut into as many graduated circles as
the child is years old. Ice each circle, top and sides, with any good
cake icing, either white or tinted, and lay one above the other with
layers of jelly or preserves between slices. Around each layer arrange a
decoration of fresh or candied fruits of bright colors, glacéed nuts,
candied rose petals or violets, bits of angelica, or any other effective
decoration. Let the cake stand on a handsomely decorated dish, and small
flags be inserted in the topmost layer.

[Illustration: FRUIT AND MELONS]


Stirred Brown Bread

Measure three cups of graham flour into a large mixing-bowl; add one cup
of bran, and sift on to these one cup and one-half of white flour, to
which one and one-fourth a teaspoonful of salt has been added. Stir
together until mixed. Dissolve one teaspoonful of baking soda in a
tablespoonful of hot water, and add to two cups of buttermilk. Melt two
tablespoonfuls of butter and one of any preferred substitute, mix with
one-half a cup of molasses, stir into the buttermilk, and add all to the
dry ingredients, stirring vigorously. Lastly, add one-half a compressed
yeast cake to the batter, and stir again until the yeast is thoroughly
incorporated with the batter, which should be very stiff. Place in a
greased bread pan, cover, set in a warm place until batter has risen to
top of pan or doubled in bulk. Bake one hour in an oven with gradually
increasing heat. This bread keeps fresh for a long time, and is
particularly good sliced thin for sandwiches.


Swedish Pancakes With Aigre-Doux Sauce

Beat, until light, the yolks of six eggs; add one-half a teaspoonful of
salt, one teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in one tablespoonful of
vinegar, then two cups of sifted flour, alternately, with the beaten
whites of the eggs, and if necessary add enough milk to make a thin
batter. Pour a small ladleful at a time on the griddle; spread each
cake, when cooked, with raspberry jam, roll up like a jelly roll, pile
on a hot platter, dust over with powdered sugar, and serve with each one
a spoonful of Aigre-Doux Sauce.


Aigre-Doux Sauce

Add to two cups of sour cream the juice and fine-grated rind of one
large lemon. Stir in enough sugar just to develop a sweet taste,
one-half a cup or more, and beat hard and long with a Dover beater until
the sauce is quite light.


Sautéed Cucumbers and Tomatoes

Pare four large cucumbers and cut in quarter-inch slices; season by
sprinkling with salt and pepper, then dip in beaten egg, and afterwards
in fine, sifted crumbs. Proceed in the same manner with two firm
tomatoes, removing the skin by dipping first into boiling water, then
into cold, and rubbing the skin off. The tomatoes should be cut in
half-inch slices. Heat a large spider until very hot; add two or more
tablespoonfuls of dripping or other fat, and sauté in this, first the
cucumbers, then the tomatoes, turning the slices when browned on one
side, and cooking until crisped. Serve in a hot vegetable dish.


Skirt Steak, with Raisin Sauce

Make a rich stuffing by chopping together three-fourths a pound of
veal, one-half a pound of ham, and an ounce of beef suet or other fat.
Add the grated rind of a small lemon, and a teaspoonful of dried, mixed
herbs, or of kitchen bouquet, two beaten eggs, a grate of nutmeg, and
one cup of cream. Cook all together over hot water until mixture is the
consistency of custard; thicken further with fine bread crumbs, and let
cool. Divide a two-pound skirt steak into halves, crosswise, spread the
stuffing over both parts, roll up each one and tie. Let steam for half
an hour, then put into a hot oven to finish cooking and brown. Serve
with Raisin Sauce.


Raisin Sauce for Skirt Steak

Add one-half a cup of seeded raisins to one pint of cold water, set over
fire, bring slowly to a boil and let simmer, gently, for fifteen
minutes. Blend two tablespoonfuls of flour with one-half a teaspoonful
of salt and one-fourth a teaspoonful of white pepper, and stir this into
two scant tablespoonfuls of melted butter or butter substitute; add to
the raisins and water, and let boil, keeping stirred, for three minutes.
Remove from fire and add the juice of one-half a lemon or two
tablespoonfuls of vinegar.


Boudin Blanc

Cook a dozen small onions, sliced, in a saucepan with one cup of sweet
leaf-lard. While cooking put through the meat chopper one-half a pound,
each, of fresh pork and the dark and white meat of a fowl or chicken.
Add to saucepan containing onions and lard, and stir in enough fine
bread crumbs to make the whole the consistency of a soft dough. Add
seasoning of salt and pepper with a spoonful of mixed dried herbs.
Lastly, add one cup of sweet cream and three well-beaten eggs, and stir
the whole until the eggs are set. Stuff this into pig entrails, making
links six inches long. Keep stored in a cool place, and cook like
sausage. Or the boudin may be packed into jars, and sliced or cut into
dice and sautéed when cold.




Seasonable Menus for Week in November


        SUNDAY

        Breakfast

        Oranges
        Corn Flakes with Hot Milk
        Codfish Balls
        Buttered Toast
        Marmalade
        Coffee

        Dinner

        Roast Leg of Lamb
        Mashed Potatoes
        Spinach with Egg
        Creamed Turnips
        Celery Salad
        Date Soufflé
        Coffee

        Supper

        Oyster Stew
        Crackers
        Lettuce-and-Peanut Butter Sandwiches
        Soft Gingerbread
        Cocoa


        MONDAY

        Breakfast

        Malt Breakfast Food, Top Milk
        Scrambled Eggs with Tomato
        Graham Muffins
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Potage Parmentier
        Savory Hash, Meat and Potatoes
        Tea Tarts
        Russian Tea

        Dinner

        Planked Steak, Parkerhouse Style
        Head Lettuce
        King's Pudding, with Apple Jelly Sauce
        Black Coffee


        TUESDAY

        Breakfast

        Dates
        Gluten Grits, Cream
        Baked Potatoes
        Bacon
        Graham Toast, Butter
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Salmon à la Creole
        Pulled Bread
        Sweet Potato Croquettes
        Pears in Syrup
        Milk or Tea

        Dinner

        Stuffed Leg of Pork
        Mashed Potatoes
        Apple Sauce
        Fig-and-Cranberry Pie
        Coffee


        WEDNESDAY

        Breakfast

        Winter Pears
        Wheatena, Milk
        Pork-and-Potato Hash
        Raised Pancakes, Syrup
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Oyster-and-Onion Purée
        Crusty Rolls
        Apple-and-Nut Salad
        Cocoa

        Dinner

        Skirt Steak with Raisin Sauce
        Dry Deviled Parsnips
        Baked Sweet Potatoes
        Cherry Pie
        Coffee


        THURSDAY

        Breakfast

        Cream of Wheat, Cream
        Tomato Omelet
        Stirred Brown Bread
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Potato-and-Peanut Sausages
        Cabbage-and-Celery Salad, with Cheese
        Strawberry Gelatine Jelly
        Tea

        Dinner

        Boiled Tongue
        Steamed Potatoes
        Creamed Carrots
        Brussels Sprouts
        Apple Pie à la Mode
        Coffee


        FRIDAY

        Breakfast

        Grapefruit
        Cracked Wheat, Milk
        Creamed Finnan Haddie
        Hashed Brown Potatoes
        Popovers
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Frumenty with Cream
        Escaloped Chipped Beef and Potatoes
        Chocolate Layer Cake
        Café au Lait

        Dinner

        Halibut Steaks
        Brother Jonathan
        Creamed Cabbage
        Chow-Chow
        Apricot Puffs with Custard Sauce
        Coffee


        SATURDAY

        Breakfast

        Gravenstein Apples
        Quaker Oats, Milk
        Scrambled Eggs with Bacon
        Steamed Brown Bread
        Coffee

        Luncheon

        Purée of Baked Beans
        Castilian Salad (Pineapple, Nuts, Apples, Grapes, Celery)
        Swedish Pancakes with Aigre-Doux Sauce
        Chocolate

        Dinner

        Veal Stew
        Browned Sweet Potatoes
        Lima Beans in Tomato Sauce
        Leaf Lettuce with Fr. Dressing
        Brown Betty with Foamy Sauce
        Coffee




Menus for Thanksgiving Dinners


        I

        _Three-Course Dinner for Small Family in Servantless House_

        Roast Chicken, stuffed with Chopped Celery and Oysters
        Baked Sweet Potatoes
        Boiled Onions

        Salad
        (Fine chopped apples and nuts in red apple cups)
        Cream Dressing

        Mince or Squash Pie à la mode
        Sweet Cider
        Coffee


        II

        _A Simple Company Dinner of Six Courses_

        Celery
        Clam Bouillon, Saltines
        Ripe Olives

        Roast, Chestnut-Stuffed Turkey, Giblet Sauce
        Buttered Asparagus
        Glazed Sweet Potatoes
        Moulded Cranberry Jelly

        Chicken Salad in Salad Rolls

        Thanksgiving Pudding
        Hard Sauce

        Chocolate Ice Cream
        Strawberry Sauce

        Assorted Fruit
        Coffee


        III

        _A Formal Company Dinner. Eight Courses_

        Curled Celery
        Oyster Soup, Bread Sticks
        Radish Rosettes

        Turbans of Flounder
        Hollandaise Sauce
        Potato Straws
        Olives
        Crusty Rolls
        Salted Nuts

        Capon à la Creme
        (Stuffing of Potatoes, Mushrooms, Chestnuts, etc.)
        Mashed Potatoes
        Green Pea Timbales
        Cranberry Sauce

        Sweet Cider Frappé

        Venison Steaks
        Currant Jelly Sauce
        Baked Parsnips

        Apple-and-Grape Salad

        Macaroon Pudding
        Frozen Mince Pie
        Hot Chocolate Sauce

        Glacéed Walnuts
        Fruit
        Black Coffee


        IV

        _Elaborate Formal Dinner. Ten Courses_

        Fruit Cocktail
        Oysters on Half-shell
        Brown Bread-and-Butter Sandwiches
        Quartered Lemons

        Clear Bouillon, Oysterettes
        Radishes
        Celery

        Boiled Halibut
        Potato Balls in Parsley Sauce
        Sweet Pickles

        Cauliflower au Gratin

        Braised Turkey or Capon
        Bread Stuffing
        Giblet Gravy
        Duchesse Potatoes
        Spinach

        Crystallized Ginger
        Salted Pecans
        Pineapple Fritters, Lemon Sauce

        Granite of Cider and Apples

        Cutlets of Duck, with Chopped Celery

        Orange Salad

        Pumpkin Pie
        Raisin and Cranberry Tarts
        Chocolate Parfait
        Almond Cakes

        Nuts
        Raisins
        Bonbons
        Candied Orange Peel
        Black Coffee




Concerning Breakfasts

By Alice E. Whitaker


A certain Englishman who breakfasted with the Washington family in 1794
wrote of the occasion: "Mrs. Washington, herself, made tea and coffee
for us. On the table were two small plates of sliced tongue and dry
toast, bread and butter, but no broiled fish, as is the general custom."
However sparing the mistress of Mt. Vernon might have been, it was the
usual custom in old times to eat a hearty breakfast of meat or fish and
potato, hot biscuits, doughnuts, griddle cakes and sometimes even pie
was added. A section of hot mince pie was always considered a fitting
ending to the winter morning meal in New England, at least.

When Charles Dickens was in the United States, in 1842, he stopped at
the old Tremont house in Boston. In his "American Notes," which followed
his visit to this country, he wrote critically of the American
breakfast, as follows: "And breakfast would have been no breakfast
unless the principal dish were a deformed beefsteak with a great flat
bone in the center, swimming in hot butter and sprinkled with the very
blackest of pepper."

For a time my household included a colored cook, who, according to local
custom, went to her own home every night. Invariably before leaving she
came to me with the short and abrupt question, "What's for?" This
experience taught me the difficulty of planning breakfasts off hand.
More than one beginner in housekeeping wonders whether a light breakfast
of little but a roll and coffee is more healthful than one of several
courses. It is an old American idea that luncheon or supper may be
light, dinner varied and heavier, but breakfast must be wholesome and
nourishing. This is based on the belief that it is natural for man and
beast to wake up in the morning with a desire for food and unnatural to
try to do the hardest work of the day with but a pretence at eating.

About twenty years ago there was much talk of the alleged healthfulness
of going without breakfast entirely. For a time this plan was the object
of much discussion and experiment by medical and scientific men and
workers in general. The late Edward Everett Hale was a strong opponent
to abstinence from breakfast by brain workers, while those who labored
with hand and muscle looked with little favor on the morning fast.
Finally the no-breakfast idea went the way of most fads in food.

As a compromise between the extremes of going without any breakfast, and
the old-time, over-hearty meal of several courses, there came into
fashion the simple meal of fruit, cereal and eggs. This is to be
commended, if the egg, or its substitute in food value, is not omitted.
Too often a sloppy cereal is washed down rapidly with a cup of coffee
and called sufficient. Sometimes the ready-to-eat cereal and the milk
bottle left at the kitchen door include the entire preparation for the
morning meal.

The adaptability of this quick breakfast, and its ease of preparation,
keep it in favor, but filling the stomach with a cereal, from which
some of its best elements have been taken, means, for women folks at
home, placing the coffee pot on the range to warm up the cup that will
stop that "gone" feeling so common after a near-breakfast. The man at
work might once have found solace in a glass of beer; now, perhaps, he
smokes an extra cigarette. It is well understood that children grow
listless and dull before noon, when an insufficient breakfast is eaten.
One who has breakfast leisurely at nine o'clock may be satisfied with a
roll and a cup of hot drink, but a commuter with a trip ahead to office
or shop, and the farmer who must make an early start in the day, cannot
rely on light, quickly digested food in the morning. Their energy and
working capacity will slow down long before noon.

Objection is sometimes made to a good, sustaining breakfast because of a
distaste for food in the morning. In such a case, look to the quality or
quantity of the night meal; it may be too heavy or indigestible.

Between a breakfast with warmed-over meats, and one without meat,
especially if eggs are substituted, the choice should be given to the
latter. Twice-cooked meats, however pleasing they may be to the palate,
are not easy to digest. They serve merely as a way to use left-overs,
which good management will keep to the minimum.

When selecting fruits for breakfast, the fact must not be overlooked
that the starch of cereals and acid fruits, like a sour orange, often
disagree. When apples are plentiful nothing is better than this fruit
when baked, but in cities the banana frequently costs less and it stands
at the head of all fruits in food value. When perfectly ripe it has
about 12 per cent of sugar, but as it is picked green, the fruit sold in
the markets is often but partially ripe and is more easily assimilated,
if baked like the apple; it then becomes a valuable breakfast food.

It is a common mistake in a meatless breakfast to use too large a
proportion of cereal. While the standard cereal foods, when dry, are
from two-thirds to three-quarters starch, with the balance made up of a
little protein, fat, water, fibre and a trace of mineral matter, it
should not be forgotten that while cooking they absorb several times
their bulk of water, which reduces the food value of the product.
Oatmeal and corn meal are best adapted for winter use because they
contain a little more fat than wheat or rice, which are suitable for
summer diet.

Eggs are the most available substitute for meat at breakfast and it is
doubtful economy to omit them, except in times of extreme high prices.
They are not essential in all desserts and saving in their use should
begin at that point. Eggs may be cooked in many ways so that they need
never become a monotonous fare. All kinds of fish are an excellent
substitute for meat, and, as prepared for the table, nearly equal beef
and mutton, in the amount of protein, which is the element missed in a
non-meat diet, unless it be carefully planned.


Breakfasts without Meat

The following are adapted to different seasons and the beverage may be
selected to suit the taste.

1. Strawberries, eggs baked in ramekins, oatmeal muffins.

2. Fruit, cheese omelet, rice griddle cakes.

3. Oranges, codfish balls, wheat muffins.

4. Oatmeal, baked bananas, scrambled eggs, rice muffins.

5. Cereal, hashed browned potatoes, date gems.

6. Oranges, soft boiled eggs, lyonnaise potatoes, dry toast.

7. Cereal with dates, whole wheat muffins, orange marmalade.

8. Stewed prunes, French omelet, creamed potatoes, dry toast.

9. Grapefruit, broiled salt codfish, baked potatoes, corn muffins.

10. Fresh pineapple, broiled fresh mackerel, creamed potatoes, French
bread.

11. Sliced bananas, omelet with peas, rusked bread.


Breakfasts with Meat

1. Fresh apple sauce, pork chops, stewed potatoes, graham muffins.

2. Dried peaches, stewed, broiled honeycomb tripe, escalloped potatoes,
reheated rolls.

3. Fruits, minced mutton, potato puffs, rice griddle cakes, lemon syrup.

4. Baked apples, baked sausages, hashed potatoes, corn cakes.

5. Baked rhubarb and raisins, ham omelet, bread-crumb griddle cakes,
caramel syrup.

6. Melon or berries, broiled ham, shirred eggs, creamed potatoes.

7. Oranges, broiled beef cakes, French fried potatoes, toast.

8. Steamed rice, sliced tomatoes, bacon and eggs, rye muffins.

9. Berries, broiled chicken with cream sauce, fried potato cakes,
muffins.

10. Cereal with syrup, scalded tomatoes with melted butter, baked hash,
dry toast.

11. Melon, veal cutlet, cream sauce, baked potatoes, corn bread.




Some Recipes for Preparing Poultry

By Kurt Heppe


Fowls should be divided into four classes, according to their uses. The
uses are controlled by the age of the fowl.

What is suitable for one dish is not suitable for others. In fowls the
age of the bird controls the use to which it can be put. This is
something the caterer and the housewife must remember.

A young bird can be distinguished from an old one by the pliability of
the tip of the breastbone. When this tip bends under pressure, then the
bird is young. If it is hard and unyielding, then it is old.

Very old birds are used for soup and for fricassée.

Medium-aged birds are used for roasts.

Spring chickens are used for broilers and for sautéed dishes.

Very young chicks are used for frying in deep fat; for this purpose they
are dipped in a thin batter, or else in flour, and in eggs mixed with
milk and afterward in breadcrumbs. These chicks, and also spring
chickens, are used for casserole dishes and for cocottes (covered
earthen ware containers, in which the fowls are roasted in the oven).

The liver of fowls is used in different ways; it makes an excellent
dish. It is best when sautéed with black butter. Some of the fine French
ragouts consist mostly of chicken livers.

With omelettes they make an incomparable garnish.

In very high-class establishments the wings and breast are often
separated from the carcass of the fowl and served in manifold ways.
Sometimes the entire fowl is freed of bones, without destroying the
appearance of the bird. These latter dishes are best adapted for
casserole service and for cold jellied offerings.

Capons are castrated male fowls. They fatten readily and their flesh
remains juicy and tender, owing to the indolence of the birds. The meat
of animals is tenderest when the animal is kept inactive. For this
reason stall-feeding is often resorted to. When the animal has no
opportunity to exercise its muscles the latter degenerate, and
nourishment, instead of being converted into energy, is turned into fat.
Range birds and animals are naturally tough; this is especially true of
the muscles.

Large supply houses now regularly basket their fowls for about two weeks
before putting them on the market. During this time they are fed on
grain soaked in milk. This produces a white, juicy flesh.

When a bird is to be roasted it should be trussed. This is done by
forcing the legs back against the body (after placing the bird on its
back); a string is then tied across the bird's body, holding the legs
down. The wings are best set firmly against the breast by sticking a
wooden skewer through the joint and into the bony part of the carcass,
where the skewer will hold against the bones.

In preparing birds for the oven their breasts should be protected by
slices of bacon. Otherwise they will shrivel and dry before the birds
are cooked.

For broiling, the birds are cut through in the back, in such a manner
that they quasi-hinge in the breast; they are then flattened so they
will lie evenly in a double broiling iron; for this purpose the heavy
backbone is removed.


Stuffed Poularde

After trussing the bird rub it with lemon so it will keep of good color;
now cover the breast with thin slices of bacon (these can be tied on).
The poularde is put into a deep, thick saucepan and cooked with butter
and aromatics in the oven. When it is nearly done it is moistened with
poultry stock. If this stock reduces too fast, then it must be renewed.
It is finally added to the sauce.

These fowls may be stuffed with a pilaff of rice. This is prepared as
follows: Half an onion is chopped and fried in two ounces of butter.
Before it acquires color half a pound of Carolina rice is added. This is
stirred over the fire until the rice has partly taken up the butter;
then it is moistened with consommé (one quart); and covered and cooked
in a moderate oven for fifteen minutes. It is now combined with a little
cream, a quarter a pound of dice of goose liver and some dice of
truffles.

The rice should not be entirely cooked by the time it is stuffed into
the bird; the cooking is completed inside the bird. The cream is added
to provide moisture for the rice to take up.

Instead of cream one may use consommé, and the truffles and fat liver
may be left out, if too expensive.

The bird is served with a suitable sauce.

The best sauce for this purpose is Sauce Suprême, and is prepared as
follows: Put two pints of clear poultry stock and some mushroom-liquor
into a sauté-pan. Reduce two-thirds.

While this is going on prepare some poultry velouté by bringing some
butter in a pan to bubble, and adding some flour. This is brought to a
boil while stirring constantly. The flour must not be allowed to color.
Now, gradually, add some poultry-stock, stirring all the while with a
whisk. Salt, pepper and nutmeg are added. This is simmered on the side
of the fire, and then strained.

Now add one pint of this velouté to the suprême sauce; reduce the whole
on an open fire, while constantly stirring. Gradually add half a pint of
good cream and finish with a little butter.


Sautéed Chicken

Young chickens should be used for this purpose. Feel the breast bone; if
it bends beneath pressure the bird is right.

Empty, singe and clean, and disjoint the bird. This is done by cutting
the skin at the joints and loosening the bones with a knife.

The wings are cut off in such manner that each holds half of the breast;
the pinions are entirely cut off; the different pieces are seasoned with
salt and pepper; now heat some clarified butter in a sauté-pan; when it
is very hot insert the pieces of chicken and let them color quickly;
turn them over, from time to time, so as to get a uniform color; cover
the utensil and put it in a fairly hot oven. The legs are cooked for
about ten minutes more than the breast and wings. The latter are kept
hot separately.

When all pieces are done, they are dished on a platter and kept hot in
the oven; the pan is now moistened with mushroom-liquor, or chicken
stock, and again put on the fire; only a very little moistening is put
in the pan. As soon as it boils swing it around the pan and then add to
it, gradually, the sauce that is to be served. This swinging in the pan
dissolves the flavor, which solidifies in the bottom of the pan; it
greatly improves the sauce.

A simple sauce for sautéed chicken is nut butter, that is, butter
browned in the pan. This may be varied by flavoring it with a crushed
garlic-clove. An addition of fine herbs will further improve it. A dark
tomato sauce may also be served.

A good garnish for sautéed chicken is large dice of boletus mushrooms,
sautéed in garlic butter; also dice of raw potatoes sautéed in clarified
butter, and again fresh tomatoes cut up and sautéed in butter.
Egg-plants are also excellent for a garnish.

Sautéed chicken may be baked and served in the cocotte.


Poulet en Casserole Bourgeoise

The chicken is trussed; the breast is covered with strips of bacon and
put into a deep, thick saucepan. It is colored in the oven, and when
nearly done is transferred to a casserole. It is now moistened with some
chicken-stock and a little white wine. This moistening is used in the
basting, and after being freed of fat, added to the sauce.

A few minutes before the fowl is done bouquets of fresh vegetables are
added to the chicken, in individual heaps, and the chicken is then
served, either with a sauce, or else with an addition of butter. It
should be carved in sight of the guests.


Chicken Pie

A fowl is cooked (boiled) with flavoring vegetables until done, and is
then cut up as for fricassée; the pieces are seasoned with salt and
pepper and sprinkled with chopped onions, a few mushroom-buttons and
some chopped parsley. The pieces are now put into a pie-dish, legs
undermost, some thinly-sliced bacon is added and some potatoes
Parisienne (spooned with the special potato spoon). The pie-dish is now
filled two-thirds with chicken velouté (chicken-stock thickened with
flour and egg-yolks), and a pie crust is laid over all, pressed to the
edges of the dish and trimmed off. The crust is slit open (so the steam
can escape), it should be painted with egg-yolk, and be baked for one
and a half hours in a moderate oven.


Suprême de Volaille Jeanette

Of a poached cold fowl the suprêmes (boneless wing and breast in one
piece) are loosened and trimmed to oval shape. They are covered with
white chaudfroid sauce, by putting the pieces on a wire tray and pouring
the sauce over while still liquid. They are decorated with tarragon
leaves.

In a square, flat pan a half-inch layer of aspic is laid. On this slices
of goose liver are superimposed (after having been trimmed to the shape
of the suprêmes); the suprêmes are now put on top of the fat liver, and
then covered with half-melted chicken jelly.

When thoroughly cooled and ready to serve, a square piece is cut out of
the now solid jelly around the suprêmes. The suprême is thus served
incrusted in a square block of thick jelly; the dish is decorated with
greens.




Polly's Thanksgiving Party

By Ella Shannon Bowles


The idea for the party came to Polly one night as she was washing the
dinner dishes, and that very evening she waved away the boys' objection
that Thanksgiving was a family affair pure and simple.

"I'm not planning to have any one in for dinner," she said, "though
there's nothing that would suit me better, if the apartment boasted a
larger dining room. But there are three girls in my Sunday School class
that can't possibly go home this year, and I've no doubt you boys could
find somebody that won't be invited anywhere. Thanksgiving is such a
cheerless place in a boarding house! If we ask a few young people in for
a party in the evening, it will liven things up a bit for them, and I
think it will be pretty good fun for us, don't you?"

In the end Polly had her way, and just a week before Thanksgiving, she
sent invitations to three girls and to two boys whom Rupert and Harry
suggested.

Polly searched the shops for a card of two-eyed white buttons of the
size of ten cent pieces. She carefully sewed a button on the upper part
of a correspondence card, added eyebrows, nose and mouth with India ink,
copied a body and cap from Palmer Cox's "Brownie Book," painted the
drawing brown, and behold, a saucy brownie grinned at her from the
invitation. Underneath the picture, she carefully printed a jingle.

        "This Thanksgiving Brownie brings a message so gay,
        To visit our house on Thanksgiving Day,
        To help celebrate with all kinds of good cheer
        The 'feast of the harvest' at the end of the year."

The boys took a walk into the country on Thanksgiving morning and came
laden with sprays of high-bush cranberries. These, with the bunches of
chrysanthemums which they bought, and Polly's fern and palm, gave the
small living room a festive appearance.

Assisted by her brothers, Polly served the dinner early. After clearing
the dining room table, she placed a pumpkin jack-o-lantern in the
center, and arranged around it piles of apples, grapes, and oranges.

After the guests had been introduced to each other, Polly passed each
one a paper plate containing a picture, cut and jumbled into small
pieces, and a tiny paper of paste and a toothpick. Each girl and boy was
asked to put the "pi" together and paste it on the inside of the plate.
When arranged, the pictures were found to be of Thanksgiving flavor.
"Priscilla at the Wheel," "The Pilgrims Going to Church," "The First
Thanksgiving," and others of the same type. To the person making his
"pi" first a small and delicious mince pie was awarded.

Pencils and paper were then passed. On one slip was written, "What I
have to be thankful for," on the other, "Why I am thankful for it." The
slips were collected, mixed up, and distributed again. Each guest was
asked to read the first slip handed him with the answer. The result
caused much laughter.

This was followed by a modification of the famous "donkey game." Polly
had painted a huge picture of a bronze turkey, but minus the tail, and
this was pinned to the wall. Real turkey feathers with pins carefully
thrust through the quills were handed about, and each guest was
blindfolded and turned about in turn. To the one who successfully pinned
a feather in the tail was given a turkey-shaped box of candy, and the
consolation prize was a copy of "Chicken-licken."

A pumpkin-hunt came next. Tiny yellow and green cardboard pumpkins were
concealed about the apartment. The yellow pumpkins counted five and the
green two points. At the end of the search a small pumpkin scooped out,
and filled with small maple sugar hearts, was presented to the guest
having the highest score, and a toy book of, "Peter, Peter, Pumpkin
Eater" was awarded to the unfortunate holding the lowest score.

Polly had determined to keep the refreshments very simple. The day
before Thanksgiving she made an easy salad dressing by beating two eggs,
adding one-half a cup of cider vinegar, two tablespoonfuls of sugar,
one teaspoonful of mustard and one-half a teaspoonful of salt, and a
tablespoonful of melted butter. She placed the ingredients in a bowl,
set in a dish of water on the front of the stove, and when they
thickened she removed it from the fire and thinned with cream. To make
sandwiches, she mixed the dressing with minced turkey, added half a
fine-chopped pepper, and spread the mixture between dainty slices of
bread.

The sugared doughnuts she made by beating two eggs, adding one cup of
sugar, one cup of sour milk, three tablespoonfuls of melted butter and
flour, sifted with one-half a teaspoonful of soda and two teaspoonfuls
of baking powder, to make the mixture thick enough to roll without
sticking to the moulding board. They were cut with a small cutter, fried
in deep, hot fat, and sugared plentifully.

Rupert contributed "Corn Popped in a Kettle." A large spoonful of lard
and a teaspoonful of salt were placed in the bottom of a large kettle
over a hot fire. A cup of shelled popcorn was added and stirred briskly
with a mixing spoon. When the kernels began to pop, the kettle was
covered and shaken rapidly, back and forth, until filled with fluffy,
white popcorn.

With the fruit and "grape-juice lemonade," the sandwiches, doughnuts and
popcorn made a pleasing "spread," Polly felt. She served everything on
paper plates and used paper napkins, decorated with Thanksgiving
designs.




To Make a Tiny House


        Oh, Little House, if thou a home would'st be
        Teach me thy lore, be all in all to me.
        Show me the way to find the charm
        That lies in every humble rite and daily task within thy walls.
        Then not alone for thee, but for the universe itself,
        Shall I have lived and glorified my home.

                                                  _Ruth Merton._




Home Ideas and Economies


Contributions to this department will be gladly received. Accepted items
will be paid for at reasonable rates.




Vegetable Tarts and Pies


Elizabeth Goose of Boston bestowed a great blessing upon American
posterity when she induced her good man, Thomas Fleet, to publish, in
1719, "The Mother Goose Melodies," many of which rhymes dated back to a
similar publication printed in London two hundred years before. Is it
strange that, with this ancestral nursery training, the cry against the
use of pastry goes unheeded, when as children, we, too, have sung to us,
over and over, the songs of tarts and pies?

The word tart comes from the Latin word _tortus_, because tarts were
originally in twisted shapes, and every country seems to have adopted
them into their national menus. That they were toothsome in those early
days is shown in these same nursery rhymes, and, that tarts seemed to
have been relished by royalty and considered worthy of theft is evinced
in the rhymes,

        "The Queen of Hearts she made some tarts."

                         and,

        "Little King Boggen he built a fine hall,
         Pie-crust and pastry-crust that was the wall."

Again this ancient lore speaks of "Five and twenty blackbirds baked in a
pie," and, too, there was that child wonder, "Little Jack Horner" who,
with the same unerring instinct of a water wizard with a willow twig,
could, by the sole means of his thumb, locate and extricate, upon the
tip of the same, a plum from the Christmas pie.

American tarts and pies are in a class of their own. Pies were very
closely allied to pioneer, and the Colonial housewife of early days was
forced to concoct fillings out of sweetened vegetables, such as squash,
sweet potatoes, and even some were made of vinegar. Yet the children
still doted on these tempting tarts, pies and turnovers, for were they
not trotted in babyhood on a

        "Cock horse to Banbury Cross,
          To see what Tommy can buy:
        A penny white loaf, a penny white cake,
          And a two-penny apple pie."

The next time you have a few varieties of vegetables left over, or wish
a dainty luncheon side dish, try making a tray of vegetable tarts with
various fillings, and they will prove as fascinating to choose from as a
tray of French pastries.

While I have worked out these modern recipes in tempting ways of serving
left-overs using common vegetables, I will lay all pastry honors to our
fore-mothers, who passed on to us the art of pie-making. Proof as to the
harmlessness of pies in diet is shown in the fine constitution of our
American doughboy, who is certainly a great credit to the heritage of
pastry handed down by the Daughters of the American Revolution.

The moral of this discourse is that, "The child is father of the man,"
and men dote on pies.


Potato Tarts à la Gratin

Line round muffin pans with pastry circles as for other preserve tarts,
and fill with the following:

Dice cold-boiled potatoes, season with salt and pepper, moisten with
white sauce, made of two tablespoonfuls of flour, two tablespoonfuls of
lard, one cup of milk, one-half a teaspoonful salt. Mix with this
grated cheese. Fill the shells and sprinkle grated cheese on top. Bake a
light brown.


Baked Onion Dumplings

Parboil medium-sized onions in salted water. Cut half way down in
quarters, add salt, butter, and pepper. Place each on a square of
biscuit dough or pastry, rolled thin. Bring together opposite corners,
twist, and place in a moderate oven to bake the onion tender. Serve with
white sauce.


Fresh Tomato Tart Salad

With a round cooky cutter make rounds of pastry. Cut an equal number
with the doughnut cutter. Prick, sprinkle lightly with grated cheese and
bake a light brown. Place a plain shell on a crisp lettuce leaf, add a
slice of tomato, not larger, on top. Then pour on a little mayonnaise
and place on top the tart shell with a hole in the center. Serve at
once.


Green Tomato Mince Pie

One peck of green tomatoes, put through a food chopper. Boil, drain and
add as much water as juice drained out. Scald and drain again. Add water
as before, scald and redrain. This time add half as much water, then the
following:--

        3 pounds brown sugar
        2 pounds raisins
        2 tablespoonfuls nutmeg
        2 tablespoonfuls cinnamon
        2 tablespoonfuls cloves
        2 tablespoonfuls allspice
        2 tablespoonfuls salt

Boil all together, and add one cup of vinegar. Cook till thick as
desired. Put in jars and seal.

To one pint of this mixture add one cup of chopped apple and the juice
and rind, grated or ground. Sweeten to taste, fill crust and bake as the
usual mince pie.

Evaporated apples may be used, but grind before soaking and do not cook.

These pies will not harm children, and are very inexpensive, as compared
to those made of mincemeat.


Plum Tomato Preserves Turnovers

Make a circle as big as a saucer, or a square equal in area. Fill the
center with plum tomato preserve and fold over matching edges, either as
a half circle, or a triangle. Prick and bake.

Turnovers are especially ideal as pies for fitting into lunch boxes, and
may be made of any sweetened vegetable preserve for school lunches.


King Cabbage Tarts

Use cabbage, which has been boiled in salted water and seasoned with
salt and pepper to taste. Make a white sauce and pour over, mixing well
with the cabbage. Fill round muffin pans lined with pastry circles,
sprinkle with cheese over the top and bake. Carrots may be used the same
way, omitting the cheese and using latticed strips of pastry over the
top. These will be hardly recognizable as such common vegetables.

                                                         M. K. S.




New Ways of Using Milk


While probably the best way of using milk is to drink it in its raw or
pasteurized state, many children and adults will not use it in that
form. In that case, the problem is to disguise or flavor the milk in
some way so that the food value will not be changed or destroyed, and
yet be more palatable than the natural product.

It has been found that children will drink flavored, sweetened milk when
they will simply not touch pure milk. In order to demonstrate how
universal the craving for sweetened, cold drinks has become, and how
easy it is for the milkmen to cater to this demand, Prof. J. L. Sammis
of the Wisconsin College of Agriculture conducted a booth at the 1921
Wisconsin state fair and dispensed milk in twenty-five new, pleasing,
and attractive ways over a soda fountain.

Thousands of these milk drinks were consumed, and a report from a
Tennessee county fair also revealed that 10,000 similar drinks were sold
there by an enterprising dairyman. There is nothing elaborate about the
proposition. If these drinks are to be prepared in the home, and the
whole question is largely one of increasing the home consumption of
milk, Professor Sammis declares:

"Take any flavor that happens to be on the pantry shelf, put a little in
a glass, add sugar to taste, fill the glass with milk, and put in some
ice. That is all there is to it. Be sure that the milk is drank very
cold, when it is most palatable. Vanilla is a very good flavor."

It is not even necessary that whole milk be used, as condensed milk will
do very well. Simply dilute the condensed milk with an equal volume of
water, and use as whole milk. Condensed milk, however, has a cooked
flavor found objectionable by many, and, in that case, a suitable
substitute is powdered milk, which has no such cooked flavor.

To prepare a powdered milk drink, put the flavor into the receptacle
first, then the sugar, and then the powdered milk with a little water.
Beat the powdered milk with an egg beater until it is wet through, and
then add the rest of the water, finishing with the ice.

By adding fruit colors these various milk drinks can be given a changed
external appearance, and wise is the mother who will prepare them often
when her children show an inclination not to drink enough milk. Served
at the table, they attract every member of the family. These milk drinks
are no more expensive than many of the more watery and less useful
compounds, so often substituted.

Soda fountains might well consider these various forms of sweetened and
flavored milk to attract new trade. At the fountains the various
flavoring syrups would naturally be used, and no sugar is necessary. And
instead of clear water, carbonated water is used. The variety of these
drinks is limited only by the ingenuity of the dispenser.

                                                        W. A. F.




Old New England Sweetmeats


Crab-Apple Dainty

Wash seven pounds of fruit and let boil with a little water until soft
enough to press through a colander. Add three pounds of sugar, three
pints of vinegar, and cloves and cinnamon to taste, and let the mixture
boil, slowly, until it is thick and jelly-like.


Pumpkin Preserve

Pare a medium-sized pumpkin and cut into inch cubes. Let steam until
tender, but not broken. Or cut the pumpkin into large pieces and let
steam a short time and then cut the cubes.

Prepare a syrup of sugar and water, about three pounds of sugar and a
pint-and-a-half of water, in which simmer the juice and rind (cut into
strips) of two lemons. Drop the pumpkin cubes into the syrup and let
simmer, carefully, until the pumpkin is translucent. Dip out the pumpkin
and pack in ordinary preserve jars; pour over the syrup and lemon and
close the jars.

                                                            S. A. R.

       *       *       *       *       *


Apple-Orange Marmalade


Take seven pounds of apples, all green, if possible; wash and remove any
imperfections, also the blossom and stem. Cut, but do not core nor peel.
Cut in very small pieces. Three oranges; wash and remove peel, which put
through finest knife of food-chopper, after discarding the inner white
peeling, also seeds. Put the apple on to boil, adding water till it
shows among the fruit, and boil to quite soft; mash fine and put in
jelly bag to drain over night. Boil the juice with the orange pulp, cut
in very small pieces; add the orange peel and cook for twenty minutes,
or till the orange is cooked. Add five (5) pounds of granulated sugar
and let boil until a little in a cold saucer will jell.

This recipe has never been in print to my knowledge and will prove very
satisfactory to the majority of people.

                                                        B. F. B.




QUERIES AND ANSWERS


This department is for the benefit and free use of our subscribers.
Questions relating to recipes and those pertaining to culinary science
and domestic economics in general, will be cheerfully answered by the
editor. Communications for this department must reach us before the
first of the month preceding that in which the answers are expected to
appear. In letters requesting answers by mail, please enclose address
and stamped envelope. Address queries to Janet M. Hill, Editor. AMERICAN
COOKERY, 221 Columbus Ave., Boston, Mass.



QUERY NO. 4241.--"I wish you would let me have a good recipe for Caramel
Icing, the kind that does not call for the whites of eggs."


Caramel Icing

Add two cups and one-half of dark brown sugar to three-fourths a cup of
milk, and let boil thirteen minutes. When nearly done add three
tablespoonfuls of butter and one teaspoonful of vanilla. Beat until
nearly cold, then spread on top of cake. It may also be used between the
layers. If a sugar thermometer be used, the syrup should be boiled to
the soft-ball stage, or between 235 deg. Fah. to 240 deg. Fah.



QUERY NO. 4242.--"Please let me have a recipe for Spiced Pineapple."


Spiced Pineapple

Weigh six pounds of pineapple, after paring, coring, and cutting in
rather small pieces. Cook in a porcelain kettle with three cups of the
best white vinegar, until the pineapple is softened, keeping the kettle
closely covered, and turning the fruit once in a while so that the
pieces may be equally exposed to the action of the vinegar. Tie in
cheesecloth or netting one ounce, each, of whole cloves, previously
bruised, and stick cinnamon, broken into small pieces; add these to the
kettle with five pounds of granulated sugar, and let cook until the
mixture is of the consistency of marmalade, being careful to avoid
burning. The spices may be removed as soon as they have given the flavor
desired.



QUERY NO. 4243.--"Will you kindly answer the following in your
Department of Queries and Answers? Should Boiled Potatoes be started in
cold or boiling water? Should Corn on the cob be put on in cold water
and allowed to simmer for several minutes after it comes to a boil, or
be put on in boiling water and boiled five minutes? Should Chicken,
Turkey, or other Fowl be covered during roasting? Can you give a clear
and up-to-date article on correct Table Service?"


To Boil Potatoes

Very young, new potatoes--the kind hardly bigger than walnuts, should be
put on in cold water and brought quickly to a boil, for potatoes so
young as to be immature contain more or less of a bitter principle,
which is desirable to get rid of in the cooking. Potatoes in their
prime, as from September to March, are best put on in boiling, salted
water. Later in the spring, when the potatoes begin to sprout and
shrivel they ought to be put on in cold water and brought, as slowly as
possible, to a boil, or allowed to stand in cold water for some hours
before cooking.


To Boil Corn

It is usually preferred to put on the corn in cold water, bring to a
boil, and let simmer until done. But to steam the ears will give, in our
opinion, the best results.


Should Chicken Be Covered While Roasting?

Decidedly not; it spoils the flavor not only of chicken and turkey, but
of any prime joint of meat to bake it in a covered pan. The covered pan
is properly used for braising only, for the tough cuts which have to be
braised call for the combination of baking and steaming which results
from the covered pan. All kinds of poultry, and all prime joints of meat
should be placed on a rack in an uncovered roasting pan, put into a very
hot oven for the first ten or fifteen minutes, and then have one or two
cups of water poured over them, mixed with fat if the meat is lean, this
water to be used for basting every ten or fifteen minutes. The rack in
the pan serves both to allow a circulation of air around the meat, and
to keep it from touching the water. It is this circulation of air that
gives the fine flavor of the properly roasted meat, and the frequent
opening of the oven door for the basting serves to supply the fresh air
needed for the best results.


Instructions on Table Service

The Up-to-Date Waitress, by Janet M. Hill, or Breakfasts, Luncheons, and
Dinners, by Mary D. Chambers, both contain clear and up-to-date
directions for table service. We can supply these books if you wish to
have either of them.



QUERY NO. 4244.--"Will you tell me in your paper why my Lemon Pies
become watery when I return them to the oven to brown the meringue? Also
give me some suggestions for Desserts for Summertime, other than frozen
dishes."


Why Lemon Pies Become Watery

A lemon pie may become watery when put in the oven to brown the
meringue, if it be left in the oven too long; or it may water because
the filling was not sufficiently cooked before putting into the pastry
shell; or it may be from an insufficiency of flour being used in making
the filling. If you had told us just how your pies are made, we would be
better able to solve your problem.

In future we hope to answer queries as soon as they reach us, and by
direct reply to each individual questioner; but up to the present we
have answered most of them in this department of the magazine, and
since it takes two or three months to get the manuscript into print many
of the questions are answered too late. So it happens with your inquiry
regarding desserts for Summertime. Any of the cold desserts, such as
gelatines, custards, blancmanges, or fresh fruits with cream, are
suitable for summer and are easily prepared.



QUERY NO. 4245.--"Will you oblige me by an answer to the following in
the pages of AMERICAN COOKERY? How shall I make Tartare Sauce? What
should be the temperature of the fat for French Fried Potatoes or for
Potato Chips? Mine are never crisp, can you tell me why? Also tell me
how to Broil Fish, how to make a good Cream Dressing for fish, meat, or
croquettes, and how to make Soft Gingerbread with a sauce to put over
it."


Tartare Sauce

A Tartare Sauce or Sauce Tartare is merely a mayonnaise dressing with
pickles chopped into it, a tablespoonful, each, or more, of chopped
cucumber, cauliflower, and olives, with a tablespoonful of capers and
two teaspoonfuls of red pepper to a pint of the mayonnaise. There is,
however, a hot Tartare Sauce which is made by adding to one cup of thick
white sauce the following ingredients: One tablespoonful, each, of
chives, parsley, pickled gherkins, olives, and capers, all put through
the food chopper. Stir into the white sauce; heat while stirring
constantly, but do not allow the mixture to boil, and add one
tablespoonful of vinegar just before serving.


Crisp Fried Potatoes

We think your trouble is not so much the temperature of the fat, which
should be about 350 deg. to 375 deg. Fah., as it is that potatoes, to be
crisped by deep frying, should first be soaked in cold water for twenty
to thirty minutes, then dried perfectly before immersing in the fat.
Also, they should be removed from the fat the moment they are done, and
drained dry.


To Broil Fish

Wipe the fish dry, and brush it lightly with oil or melted butter.
Place it in a double wire broiler, and cook over a clear fire, turning
every other minute until both sides are a light, even brown. Remove
carefully from the broiler, using a sharp boning knife to free it from
adhesions. If the fish is thoroughly oiled, it should not adhere to the
broiler.


Cream Sauce

Blend together butter and flour, and add to hot milk; keep stirring
until the whole has boiled for at least one minute. Add seasonings to
taste, at the beginning of cooking. The proportions for a thin, a
medium, and a thick sauce are, respectively: One, two, and four
tablespoonfuls of flour to one cup of milk. And an equal volume of
butter, or one-third less than the flour, is called for.


Soft Gingerbread

To two beaten eggs in a mixing-bowl add two tablespoonfuls of butter,
melted, three-eighths a cup of sour milk, and one cup of molasses. Beat
all together; add two cups of flour, sifted with one-half a teaspoonful
of salt and one teaspoonful of baking powder, and one tablespoonful of
ginger. Lastly, add one teaspoonful of baking soda, dissolved in two
teaspoonfuls of water. Bake in a sheet, and serve with whipped cream for
a simple dessert.



QUERY NO. 4246.--"Can you give me a recipe for Deep-Dish Apple Pie? It
has a thick top covering, I cannot call it a crust, for it is something
between a cake and a biscuit dough--not at all like pie crust."


Deep-Dish Apple Pie

This is the genuine English Apple Pie--they would call ours an apple
tart. It is made in oval baking-dishes of thick yellow ware, about two
and one-half or three inches deep, and with flat rims an inch in width.
The first thing to do is to invert a teacup--preferably one without a
handle--in the bottom of the dish, then core and pare sour, juicy
apples--any number, from six to a dozen, depending on the size of the
family and the dish--and divide them in eighths. Arrange these in
alternate layers with sugar in the dish, with a generous sprinkling of
whole cloves over each layer, and pile, layer on layer, until not
another bit of apple can go in anywhere without toppling out. The apples
are piled up as high again as the depth of the dish, or higher. Now lay
over all a very rich biscuit dough, lightly rolled out to one-fourth
inch in thickness. Decorate this with leaves, or other cut-out designs,
and arrange them over the covering and moisten the under sides with
water, to make them adhere during the baking. Place long strips of the
dough over the brim of the pie-dish, and press with the bowl of a spoon
in concentric designs. Bake in a moderate oven for an hour. Pieces of
the crust are cut off for serving, and spoonfuls of the apple pulp are
served with them on the plate, then, as soon as convenient the inverted
cup is removed, and the rich liquid collected under it is spooned over
each serving of crust and apples.



QUERY NO. 4247.--"I wish very much to know the right temperature for
Baking both layer and loaf, white, butter Cakes, also for chocolate
Cake. Should the Baking begin with a cold or a warm oven? How long
should each kind of cake bake?"


Temperature for Cake Baking

The usual time and temperature for baking layer cakes is 400 deg. Fah.,
for twenty minutes. Loaf cakes, made with butter, with or without
chocolate, take a temperature of from 350 deg. to 375 deg, Fah. for from
forty minutes to an hour. These temperatures are approximate, and are in
accordance with the general rules for oven temperature, but this has to
be adapted to the recipe. The more sugar used the lower should be the
temperature, to avoid burning, and especially when molasses is used does
the need to decrease temperature become imperative. The more butter used
the higher should be the temperature, at least, until the cake is "set,"
to keep it from falling. Cakes with much butter need the greatest heat
at first, and then a reduced temperature. So do all cakes of small size.
Large cakes are better at a uniform temperature, not so high as the
average. A different flavor is produced, especially in very rich cakes
with a good many eggs, when put into a cool oven and baked with
gradually increasing heat, from that developed by a high initial
temperature and then a decreased heat. The quality of the flour and
shortening also affect the temperature and time needed in baking. It is
a good safe thing to follow the rules, and to temper them with judgment.
When the cake is just firm in the center, and has shrunk from the sides
of the pan, it is done, no matter what the temperature has been or how
long it has baked. But you will always get your cake at this condition,
more surely and safely, by following the rules, though you must be on
the alert to use them with flexibility.



QUERY NO. 4248.--"Will you please give me a recipe for Canned
Pimientoes?"


Canned Pimientoes

Cut round the stem of each, and with a small, sharp knife remove the
seeds and the white partitions inside. Set on a baking sheet in a hot
oven until the thin outside skin puffs and cracks, then remove it with a
small, sharp knife. Or they may be scalded, then dipped into cold water
and the skin be carefully removed. Sometimes the skin is left on. Now
press each one flat, and arrange them in layers, alternately overlapping
one another, in the jars, without liquid, and process for twenty-five to
thirty-five minutes at 212 deg. Fah. During the processing a thick
liquid should exude, covering the pimientoes.



QUERY NO. 4249.--"I should like a recipe for New York Ice Cream."


Classes of Ice Cream

There are three distinct classes of Ice Cream: The Philadelphia, which
is supposed to be made of heavy cream; the French, which is made with
eggs on a soft custard foundation; and the so-called American, which is
made on the foundation of a thin white sauce. All three classes are made
in New York, and in every other large city, but we have never heard that
any special recipe for ice cream is peculiar to New York. The less
expensive forms of cream, in that and every other city, are those based
on a thin white sauce, sweetened, flavored, and frozen.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Housewives the nation over will be enthusiastic over the
appointment of Mrs. Belle DeGraf as Domestic Science Director of the
California Prune and Apricot Growers. Mrs. DeGraf enjoys a countrywide
reputation as a home-cooking expert and as an authority on food values.]

=_I never knew what prunes and apricots could do until--_=

I came to analyze the flavor-and-health values of these two fruit-foods.
At first their use seemed rather limited but with each new dish others
immediately suggested themselves.

The chief nutritive element in both prunes and apricots, of course, is
fruit sugar. But you derive great value, too, from their mineral salts
and organic acids. These improve the quality of the blood and counteract
the acid-elements in meat, eggs, cereals and other high-protein foods.

Also, they are rich in tonic iron and other mineral and vitamine
elements needed for body tone. Nor should I forget to mention that
prunes especially provide a natural laxative made in Nature's own
pharmacy.

But aside from these essential health values, I found that Sunsweet
Prunes and Apricots offer wonderful possibilities--varying from the most
delicate soufflé to the more substantial cobbler, pie or pudding.

                                                     --_Belle DeGraf_

        The new 1922 Sunsweet Recipe Packet--edited by
        Mrs. Belle DeGraf--will be nothing less than a
        revelation to you. The recipes are printed on
        _gummed slips_ [5×3"] for easy pasting in your
        cook book. And it's free! California Prune &
        Apricot Growers Inc., 1196 Market St., San
        Jose, Cal.

                         SUNSWEET
               CALIFORNIA'S NATURE-FLAVORED
                    PRUNES & APRICOTS

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

        Another
        Mystery Cake

        Can You Name It?

The first Royal Mystery Cake Contest created a countrywide sensation.
Here is another cake even more wonderful. Who can give it a name that
will do justice to its unusual qualities?

        This cake can be made just right only with
        Royal Baking Powder. Will you make it and name
        it?

$500 For The Best Names

For the name selected as best, we will pay $250. For the second, third,
fourth, and fifth choice, we will pay $100, $75, $50, and $25
respectively. Anyone may enter the contest, but only one name from each
person will be considered. All names must be received by December 15th.
In case of ties, the full amount of the prize will be given to each
tying contestant. Do not send your cake. Simply send the name you
suggest With your own name and address, to the

          ROYAL BAKING POWDER CO: 158 William Street, New York

HOW TO MAKE IT

        Use level measurements for all materials

        1/2 cup shortening
        1-1/2 cups sugar
        Grated rind of 1/2 orange
        1 egg and 1 yolk
        2-1/3 cups flour
        1/4 teaspoon salt
        4 teaspoons Royal Baking Powder
        1 cup milk
        1-1/2 squares (1-1/2 ozs.) of unsweetened chocolate (melted)

        Cream shortening, add sugar and grated orange
        rind. Add beaten egg yolks. Sift together
        flour, salt and Royal Baking Powder and add
        alternately with the milk; lastly fold in one
        beaten egg white. Divide batter into two parts.
        To one part add the chocolate. Put by
        tablespoonfuls, alternating dark and light
        batter, into three greased layer cake pans.
        Bake in moderate oven 20 min.

FILLING AND ICING

        3 tablespoons melted butter
        3 cups confectioner's sugar
        3 squares (3 ozs.) unsweetened chocolate
        2 tablespoons orange juice
        1 egg white
        Grated rind of 1/2 orange and pulp of 1 orange

        Put butter, sugar, orange juice and rind into
        bowl. Cut pulp from orange, removing skin and
        seeds, and add. Beat all together until smooth.
        Fold in beaten egg white. Spread this icing on
        layer used for top of cake. While icing is
        soft, sprinkle with unsweetened chocolate
        shaved in fine pieces with sharp knife (use 1/2
        square). To remaining icing add 2-1/2 squares
        unsweetened chocolate which has been melted,
        Spread this thickly between layers and on sides
        of cake.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

"Holds Like Daddy's"

Not only that, but it is made with the _same care_ and of the same
_quality_ as Daddy's.

[Illustration]

=The Baby Midget Velvet Grip Hose Supporter=

Has taken the place of all makeshifts ever known for holding up baby's
tiny socks--equipped with that exclusive feature found only on Velvet
Grip garters for "grown-ups"--namely the

=All-Rubber Oblong Button=

_Sold everywhere or sent postpaid_

        =Lisle 12 cents=     =Silk 18 cents=

        =George Frost Company
        568 Tremont St., Boston=

Makers of the famous

=Boston Garter for Men=

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the custom of the congregation to repeat the Twenty-third Psalm
in concert, and Mrs. Armstrong's habit was to keep about a dozen words
ahead all the way through. A stranger was asking one day about Mrs.
Armstrong. "Who," he inquired, "was the lady who was already by the
still waters while the rest of us were lying down in green pastures?"

                                                      _Metropolitan._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Finest Relish with Beef as well as Poultry

Nature's own condiment--the tonic tang of health-giving cranberries
gives zest to the appetite, and a piquant flavor to meats--hot or cold.

When cooked with pot-roast or cheaper cuts of meats cranberries make the
meat tender and delicious. (See recipe folder for this and other
recipes.)

=_8 lbs. cranberries and 2-1/2 lbs. of sugar make 10 tumblers of
beautiful clear jelly. Try this recipe:--_=

Cranberry Jelly

Cook until soft the desired quantity of cranberries with 1-1/2 pints of
water for each two quarts of berries. Strain the juice through a jelly
bag.

Measure the juice and heat it to the boiling point. Add one cup of sugar
for every two cups of juice; stir until the sugar is dissolved; boil
briskly for five minutes; skim, and pour into glass tumblers, porcelain
or crockery molds.

Always cook cranberries in porcelain-lined, enameled or aluminum
utensils.

A recipe folder, containing many ways to use and preserve cranberries
will be sent free on request.

=_For quality and economy specify "Eatmor" Cranberries_=

=American Cranberry Exchange, 90 West Broadway, New York City=]

       *       *       *       *       *

        "Choisa"
        Orange Pekoe
        Ceylon Tea

        [Illustration]

        Pre-War
        Prices

        1-lb. Cartons, 60 cents
        1/2-lb. Cartons, 35 cents

        Pre-War Quality

        We invite comparison with any tea
        selling under $1.00 a pound

        S. S. PIERCE CO.
        BOSTON  BROOKLINE

       *       *       *       *       *

        Baked Apples with
        Marshmallows

[Illustration]

        6 apples
        3/4 cup boiling water
        1/2 box Campfire Marshmallows
        1 tablespoon butter

Wipe apples, remove core, cut through skin half way down to make points
and place in baking dish. Reserve six Campfire Marshmallows, cut
remainder in pieces and put in center of apples. Put bits of butter on
top.

Surround apples with water and bake in hot oven until soft, basting
frequently. Be very careful that they do not lose their shape. Remove
from oven, put a whole marshmallow in the top of each apple, and return
to oven until slightly brown.

Surround with the syrup from the pan and serve hot or cold with cream.

_Recipes on each package_

        The big
        6 oz.
        package

        Campfire
        Marshmallows

_Beautiful Recipe Book FREE_ Dept. A, THE CAMPFIRE CO., Milwaukee, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Baker's Fresh Grated
                     Coconut
               in pure coconut milk

_... and Cook says there's a secret behind the flavor_

Baker's Coconut has that tempting flavor of the ripe coconut fresh from
the Tropics. YOU'LL note its goodness the very first time you try it.
You'll realize, too, that coconut is real food, delicious and
nourishing--as well as a garnish for other foods.

There IS a secret behind the wonderful flavor of Baker's. See if YOU can
find it in the can.

_=In the can:=_--Baker's Fresh Grated Coconut--canned in it's own milk.

_=In the package:=_--Baker's Dry Shred Coconut--sugar-cured--for those
who prefer the old-fashioned kind.

Have YOU a copy of the Baker Recipe Booklet? If not write for it
NOW--it's free.

    THE FRANKLIN BAKER COMPANY, PHILADELPHIA, PA.

    Baker's Coconut First for Flavor]

       *       *       *       *       *

        DELICIOUS AND SUSTAINING
        DIABETIC
        FOODS
        QUICKLY MADE WITH

        Hepco
        Flour

        RICH IN
        PROTEIN
        AND FAT

        CONTAINS
        PRACTICALLY
        NO STARCH

        _Twenty Cents Brings a General Sample_

        Thompson's Malted Food Company
        17 River Drive  Waukesha, Wisconsin

       *       *       *       *       *

SERVICE TABLE WAGON

[Illustration:

Large Broad Wide Table Top--Removable Glass Service Tray--Double
Drawer--Double Handles--Large Deep Undershelves--"Scientifically
Silent"--Rubber Tired Swivel Wheels. A high grade piece of furniture
surpassing anything yet attempted for GENERAL UTILITY, ease of action,
and absolute noiselessness. Write now for descriptive pamphlet and
dealer's name.

        COMBINATION PRODUCTS CO.
        5041 Cunard Bldg., Chicago, Ill.

        It Serves Your Home
        & Saves Your Time]

       *       *       *       *       *

Domestic Science Home-Study Courses

Food, health, housekeeping, clothing, children.

_For Homemakers and Mothers; professional courses for Teachers,
Dietitians, Institution Managers, Demonstrators, Nurses, Tea Room
Managers, Caterers, "Cooking for Profit," etc._

"THE PROFESSION OF HOME-MAKING," 100 page handbook, _free_. BULLETINS:
"Free-hand Cooking," "Food Values," "Ten-Cent Meals," "Family Finance,"
"Art of Spending"--10c ea.

        =American School of Home Economics=
  =(Chartered in 1915) 503 W. 69th St., Chicago, Ill.=

       *       *       *       *       *

        Dress Designing Lessons
        FREE

Women--Girls--15 or over, can easily learn Dress and Costume Designing
during their spare moments IN TEN WEEKS

=Dress and Costume Designers Frequently Earn=

=$45 to $100 a Week=

=Many Start Parlors in Their Own Homes=

        Every woman who now
        does plain sewing
        should take up
        Designing

Hundreds Learn Millinery by Mail

Cut and Mail to

Franklin Institute, Dept. R 640 Rochester, N.Y.

Send me AT ONCE free sample lessons in the subject here checked.

  __=Dress Designing=     __=Millinery=

    Name ...................................
  Address ..................................

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Knox's Page


Household Discoveries with Gelatine

Housekeepers everywhere are constantly sending me new and unusual uses
for gelatine. These hints are so interesting that I am giving as many as
possible here, together with one of my own gelatine specialties. If you,
too, have discovered some new use for Knox Gelatine, send it to me that
I may publish it on this page.

A DELICIOUS THANKSGIVING DESSERT

        1 envelope Knox Sparkling Gelatine
        1/2 cup cold water
        White of 1 egg
        1 teaspoonful vanilla
        1 cup maple syrup
        2 cups cream
        1/4 pound nut meats, chopped
        1/8 teaspoonful salt

Soften the gelatine in the cold water ten minutes and dissolve over hot
water. Heat the maple syrup and pour on the beaten white of the egg,
beating until very light. Beat in the gelatine and, when cool, fold in
the cream, beating well, and add vanilla, salt and nut meats. Line mold
with lady fingers or slices of stale sponge cake. Turn in the cream and
chill.


_=For after-dinner candies, try Knox Gelatine mints=_

Fruit juices, from canned or "put-up" fruits, need not be served with
the fruit but poured off, saved and made into Knox Gelatine desserts and
salads. The juice from canned strawberries, loganberries, or
blackberries makes a most delicious jelly when combined with Knox
Gelatine, or with nuts, cheese and lettuce, a delightful fruit salad.

Canned apricot juice, jellied with spices and grated orange rind, makes
an appetizing relish for meat or fish.

Canned pineapple juice, molded with sliced tomatoes or cucumbers, makes
a most unusual jellied salad.

In these fruit juice desserts and salads, use one level tablespoonful
Knox Gelatine for every two cups of juice, or two level teaspoonfuls to
a cup of liquid. First soften gelatine in cold water and add fruit
juice, heated sufficiently to dissolve gelatine. Pour into wet molds and
chill.

Bread crumbs, rice and nuts, combined with Knox Gelatine, make a
nutritious "Vegetarian Nut Loaf." This may be used in place of meat and
is appropriate for a simple home luncheon or dinner. See detailed
recipe, page 5, of the Knox booklet, "Food Economy."


=MANY GELATINE DISCOVERIES IN KNOX BOOKLETS=

There are many additional uses for gelatine in my recipe booklets,
"Dainty Desserts" and "Food Economy," which contain recipes for salads,
desserts, meat and fish molds, relishes, candies, and invalid dishes.
They will be sent free for 4 cents in stamps and your grocer's name.

       *       *       *       *       *

        Any domestic science teacher can have
        sufficient gelatine for her class, if she will
        write me on school stationery, stating quantity
        and when needed.

       *       *       *       *       *

        ="Wherever a recipe calls for Gelatine--think of KNOX"=

                       MRS CHARLES B. KNOX
                          KNOX GELATINE
        =107 Knox Avenue=              =Johnstown, N. Y.=

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

        Buy advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

A Delicious and Sustaining Breakfast

All the wholesome, nutritious food elements of wheat and malt are
combined in

                  MALT
               BREAKFAST
                  FOOD

With cream or milk, it makes a healthful, substantial morning meal for
the whole family. At grocers,--in the blue and yellow package with the
little Dutch girl on it.

Try it--tomorrow

THE MALTED CEREALS CO. Burlington, Vermont]


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DELISCO

The Most Delicious Substitute for Coffee Drinkers

_Endorsed by Physicians and Professor Allyn of Westfield_

Soothes the nerves, equals in taste and aroma the choicest grades of
coffee, without the caffeine effects

                      --------------------------------
                     |  Delisco contains 21% protein  |
                      --------------------------------

For Children, Adults and Invalids

        At your Grocer's--50 cup pkg.--48c
        By Parcel Post Prepaid:
        1 package 55c; 2 packages $1.00

        Sawyer Crystal Blue Co.
        Sole Selling Agents
        88 Broad Street, Boston, Mass.

        -LOCAL AGENTS WANTED-]

       *       *       *       *       *

Mother: "No, Bobbie, I can't allow you to play with that little Kim boy.
He might have a bad influence over you."

Bobbie: "But, mother, can I play with him for the good influence I might
have over him?"--_New York Globe._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HEBE

Some HEBE Suggestions

Tomato Puree

Chicken Pattie

Veal Fricassee

Salad Dressings

Doughnuts

Waffles

Pumpkin Pie

Puddings

Try this recipe for Gingerbread--delicious and economical

        2 cups flour
        1/4 teaspoon salt
        1 teaspoon ginger
        1/2 teaspoon soda
        1/2 teaspoon mace
        1 egg beaten
        1/2 cup HEBE diluted with 2 tablespoons water
        1 cup seedless raisins
        1/4 cup brown sugar
        1/4 cup butter
        1/2 cup corn syrup
        1/2 cup molasses

Sift flour, salt, soda and spices into bowl. Melt together HEBE, water,
sugar, butter, syrup and molasses. Cool slightly and add to dry
ingredients with egg and raisins. Turn into greased and floured cake tin
and bake in moderate oven for an hour.

You'll love gingerbread made this way. It's a good wholesome food and an
always welcome dessert. HEBE gives it that good rich flavor and the fine
texture that makes it melt in your mouth--and HEBE adds nutriment too.

HEBE is pure skimmed milk evaporated to double strength enriched with
cocoanut fat. In cooking it serves a threefold purpose--to moisten, to
shorten and to enrich.

_Order HEBE today from your grocer and write to us for the free HEBE
book of recipes. Address 4315 Consumers Building, Chicago_

          THE HEBE COMPANY
        Chicago        Seattle

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WIN-A-SPIN" TOPS

Fortune may smile on the winner. White for fame, pink for gold and blue
for happiness. The longest spinner is the winner. Box of 3 tops, _50c.
postpaid_. (Ask for No. 4249.) Our catalog shows hundreds of novel,
inexpensive gifts for young and old. Send for a copy today and make your
Christmas shopping a pleasure. See the _Pohlson_ things in stores and
gift shops. Look for the Pohlson seal of distinction.

POHLSON Gift Shop Pawtucket, R. I.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Shurdone _CAKE and MUFFIN TESTER_

        Convenient, Sanitary and Hygienic
        Year's Supply for a Dime. Send 10c. (Stamps or Coin) to

                       PERCY H. HOWARD
        2 Central Square          Cambridge, Mass.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_We wish the following back numbers of_ AMERICAN COOKERY

        June 1915
        May 1917
        December 1919
        June 1920
        November 1920
        March 1921

and will remit one dollar to any one sending us the above SET of SIX
numbers

(_We desire only complete sets of 6 numbers_)

        The Boston Cooking School Magazine Co.
                     BOSTON, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

SALAD SECRETS

100 recipes. Brief but complete. 15c by mail. 100 Meatless recipes 15c.
50 Sandwich recipes 15c. All three 30c.

B. R. BRIGGS, 250 Madison St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ten-Cent Meals"

42 Meals with receipts and directions for preparing each. 48 pp. 10c.

Am. School of Home Economics, 503 W. 69th St., Chicago




The Silver Lining

It's Only Old Pot Liquor, After All

Respectfully dedicated to the eminent scientist, Dr. H. Barringer Cox


Southerners have been rather amused to read lately that the favorite
dish of the children and the colored people, "Pot Liquor," that is the
liquid in which turnip greens, beans, etc., with bacon, have been
boiled, has now been pronounced a most valuable food by scientists. "Pot
Liquor" is usually eaten with "corn pone," that is, plain corn bread.

        I feel advanced and erudite,
          Because I recently did read
        Where skilful scientist did write
          A column full of learned "feed."

        Oh, it was all about such things
          As "vitamines" and kindred terms;
        I read and read how some food brings
          Eviction to the naughty germs.

        I read of how we all should eat
          The "essence" strong of turnip greens,
        And oh, he showed in language meet
          For science that he did "know beans."

        My head did almost ache with weight
          Of all the learning I obtained;
        And when I read, through language great,
          I marvelled at the knowledge gained.

        Black "Mammy" would have never known
          A germ. Alas! that she has died
        Before her nurslings' feast, "corn pone"
          In juice of greens was glorified.

        Please, Mr, Scientist, so wise,
          Since you "pot liquor" do so raise
        To nth degree, nutrition size,
          Send us another screed to praise

        In learned phrase, "pot liquor's" true
          And constant partner, good "'corn pone";
        Oh, we "down South" do beg of you
          Leave not our childhood's friend alone;

        But drop in scientific stew--
          Of course in language hard to read--
        A "corn pone hunk"--we promise you
          A noble, satisfying "feed."

        Then honorable mention take
          Our "side meat," then such generous share,
        Such unction and such healing make
          As "inner consciousness" should bear.

        In earlier days we only knew
          "Pot Liquor" and we did not bow
        To "vitamines," Alas! 'tis true,
          Bacon, a real aristocrat is now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here are some of--Mrs. Rorer's Standard Books of peculiar interest just
at this time:

HOME CANDY MAKING

        Has an appealing sound. The idea of making
        candy is enticing. And here are ways easily
        understood for making all sorts of delicious
        confections. The directions are plain and
        easily followed.

        =Bound in cloth, 75 cents; by mail, 80 cents=


CAKES, ICINGS AND FILLINGS

        This is another book that has an appeal. Every
        housewife has pride in her knowledge of cake
        making, or at least likes to have them for her
        home and her guests. Well, here are recipes in
        abundance.

        =Bound in cloth, $1.00; by mail, $1.10=


KEY TO SIMPLE COOKERY

        A new-plan cook book. Its simplicity will
        commend it to housewives, for it saves time,
        worry and expense. By the way, there is also
        the layout of a model kitchen, illustrated,
        that will save many steps in the daily work.

        =Bound in cloth, $1.25; by mail, $1.40=


DAINTIES

        Contains Appetizers, Canapes, Vegetable and
        Fruit Cocktails, Cakes, Candies, Creamed
        Fruits, Desserts, Frozen Puddings, etc.

        =Bound in cloth, $1.00; by mail, $1.10=


PHILADELPHIA COOK BOOK

        A famous cook book, full of all the brightest
        things in cookery. Hundreds of choice recipes,
        all good, all sure, that have stood the test by
        thousands of housewives. The beginner can pin
        her faith on these tried recipes, and the good
        cook can find lots to interest her.

        =Bound in cloth, $1.50; by mail, $1.65=


MY BEST 250 RECIPES

        Mrs. Rorer's own selection of the choicest
        things in every department of cookery, as for
        instance, 20 Best Soups, 20 Best Fish Recipes,
        20 Best Ways for Meat, 20 Best Vegetable
        Recipes, and so on through the whole range of
        table food. =Bound in cloth, $1.00; by mail,
        $1.10=

         For sale by Boston Cooking-School Magazine, Co.,
                Department and Bookstores, or
        =ARNOLD & COMPANY, 420 Sansom St., Philadelphia=


Buy advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No. 4244 Doris brings you ribbon For your lingerie.

You'll find her very helpful

For one as young as she.]

=DAINTY DORIS=

Bringing 8 yards of finely-woven washable silk lingerie tape with
bodkin, all ready for running. Your choice of pink or blue in delicate
shades, 85c post paid. Just one of hundreds of equally attractive things
shown in our catalog of Gifts for every member of the family and for
every gift occasion. Select from our catalog and make your Christmas
shopping a pleasure. Send for it today. Look for the POHLSON things in
stores and gift shops of your town.

[Illustration: Pohlson Gifts]

=POHLSON GIFT SHOP, Pawtucket, R. I.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=PERSONAL BODY DEVELOPMENT=

=The correct method of obtaining a Perfect Figure, overcoming
Nervousness, Constipation, Biliousness, Flabbiness of flesh and thinness
of body.=

_=Price, $1.00. Fully Guaranteed.=_

        =THE NEW IDEAS CO.  14 Collins Bldg., LIMA, OHIO=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Quarts Only]

=FREE FOR 30 DAYS=

Have you ever wanted to obtain the =CREAM= from a bottle of =MILK=? This
=SEPARATOR= does it =PERFECTLY=. Send this ad., your name and address,
and we will send one. Pay postman 50 cents. Use for 30 days; if not
entirely =SATISFACTORY= return and we will refund your money.

        =B. W. J. COMPANY, Dept. A.C.=
        =1996 Indianola Ave.,  Columbus, Ohio=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

_PRACTICAL CHRISTMAS GIFT_

ROBERTS

Lightning Mixer

_BEATS EVERYTHING_


Beats eggs, whips cream, churns butter, mixes gravies, desserts and
dressings, and does the work in a few seconds. Blends and mixes malted
milk, powdered milk, baby foods and all drinks.

        Simple and Strong. Saves work--easy to clean.
        Most necessary household article. Used by
        200,000 housewives and endorsed by leading
        household magazines.

If your dealer does not carry this, we will send prepaid quart size
$1.25, pint size 90c. Far West and South, quart $1.40, pint $1.00.

=Recipe book free with mixer.=

=NATIONAL CO. CAMBRIDGE 39, BOSTON, MASS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Dishwasher for $2.50!=

Keeps hands out of the water, no wiping of dishes, saves 1/2 the time.
Consists of special folding dishdrainer, special wire basket, 2 special
long-handled brushes. Full directions for use. Sent prepaid for $2.50.
Full refund if not satisfactory.

=Am. School of Home Economics, 503 W. 69th. St., Chicago=

        Oh, so advanced I feel, for I--
          No science in my cranium small--
        In learned dress, old friend do spy--
          It's only our "Pot Liquor" after all.

                                BY M. E. HENRY-RUFFIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

Foreman: "What are you doin' of, James?"

Bricklayer: "Sharpenin' a bit o' pencil."

Foreman: "You'll 'ave the Union after you, me lad. That's a carpenter's
job."--_Punch._

       *       *       *       *       *

"Home-Making as a Profession"

Home-making is the greatest of all the professions--greatest in numbers
and greatest in its influence on the individual and on society. All
industry is conducted for the home, directly or indirectly, but the
industries directly allied to the home are vastly important, as the food
industries, clothing industries, etc. Study of home economics leads
directly to many well paid vocations as well as to home efficiency.

Since 1905 the American School of Home Economics has given home-study
courses to over 30,000 housekeepers, teachers, and others. The special
textbooks have been used for class work in over 500 schools.

Of late years, courses have been developed fitting for many well paid
positions:--Institution Management, Tea Room and Lunchroom Management,
Teaching of Domestic Science, Home Demonstrators, Dietitians, Nurses,
Dressmaking, "Cooking for Profit." Home-Makers' Courses:--Complete Home
Economics, Household Engineering, Lessons in Cooking, The Art of
Spending.

BULLETINS: Free-Hand Cooking, Ten-cent Meals, Food Values, Family
Finance, Art of Spending, Weekly Allowance Book, _10c. each_.

Details of any of the courses and interesting 80-page illustrated
handbook, "The Profession of Home-Making" sent on request. American
School of Home Economics, 503 W. 69th Street, Chicago.

                                                          --_Adv._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

        STICKNEY
        AND
        POOR'S
        SPICED
        POULTRY
        SEASONING
        _Stickney & Poor Spice Co._
        TWO OUNCES
        BOSTON]

=THANKSGIVING TIME= means company and lots of preparing for the Feast

=Turkey--Chicken--Roast Duck=

stuffed with dressing seasoned with

=STICKNEY & POOR'S POULTRY SEASONING=

PIES

Pumpkin--Squash--Mince

all seasoned with

=STICKNEY & POOR'S DEPENDABLE SPICES=

Stickney & Poor's Seasonings have been used by New England Housewives in
preparing Thanksgiving dishes for more than a century.

Your Mother and Grandmother learned to depend upon them, and you should,
too, because they are always pure, full strength, and of uniform
quality.

Ask your grocer for Stickney & Poor's Seasonings.

        Your co-operating servant,
                           "MUSTARDPOT."

STICKNEY & POOR SPICE COMPANY

1815--Century Old--Century Honored--1921

Mustard-Spices BOSTON and HALIFAX Seasonings-Flavorings

THE NATIONAL MUSTARD POT

       *       *       *       *       *

=JUST THE THING FOR THE HOT WEATHER=

=Gossom's Cream Soups (in Powdered Form)= =Pure, Wholesome, Delicious=

[Illustration:

        Maiden America
        Gossom's
        Pure Concentrated Soups]

Quickly and Easily Prepared.

Simply add water and boil 15 minutes and you have a delightful soup, of
high food value and low cost. One 15 cent package makes 3 pints of soup.

These soups do not deteriorate, so may be continually on hand and thus
found most convenient. The contents also keep after opening.

Split pea, Green pea, Lima, Celery, Black Bean, Clam Chowder, Onion and
(Mushroom 25c).

Sample sent prepaid on receipt of 20 cents, or one dozen for $1.75.

For Sale by leading grocers 15 cents a package, 20 cents in far West.

=Manufactured by B. F. Gossom, 692 Washington St., Brookline, 46, Mass.=

       *       *       *       *       *

="Free-Hand Cooking"=

_Cook without recipes!_ A key to cookbooks, correct proportions, time,
temperature; thickening, leavening, shortening, 105 fundamental recipes.
40 p. book. 10 cents coin or stamps.

=Am. School of Home Economics, 503 W. 69th Street, Chicago=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

        =Trade Mark Registered.=
        =Gluten Flour=

        40% GLUTEN

        Guaranteed to comply in all respects to
        standard requirements of U. S. Dept. of
        Agriculture.

        =Manufactured by=
        =FARWELL & RHINES=
        =Watertown, N. Y.=]

       *       *       *       *       *

Cream Whipping Made Easy and Inexpensive

CREMO-VESCO

Whips Thin Cream or Half Heavy Cream and Milk or Top of the Milk Bottle

It whips up as easily as heavy cream and retains its stiffness.

Every caterer and housekeeper wants CREMO-VESCO.

Send for a bottle to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

        Housekeeper's size, 1-1/2 oz., .30 prepaid
        Caterer's size, 16 oz.,      $1.00    "
        (With full directions)

             CREMO-VESCO COMPANY
        631 EAST 23rd ST.,  BROOKLYN, N. Y.

                      =Pacific Coast Agents:=
        =MILES MFG. CO., 949-951 E. 2nd St., Los Angeles, Cal.=

Bernard Shaw: "Say, Einie, do you really think you understand yourself?"

Einstein: "No, Bernie--do you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As the Sunday-school teacher entered, she saw leaving in great haste a
little girl and her smaller brother. "Why, Mary, you aren't going away?"
she exclaimed in surprise. "Pleathe, Mith Anne, we've got to go," was
the distressed reply. "Jimmy thwallowed hith collection."

       *       *       *       *       *

DELISCO is considered by connoisseurs a most delicious, refreshing and
healthful drink. It fully satisfies, by its aroma and flavor, the
natural desire of the coffee drinker who has heretofore continued to
take coffee because unable to find a satisfactory equivalent. When
properly made, experts have been unable to distinguish DELISCO from the
finer grades of coffee.--_Adv._

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cooking for Profit=

=BY ALICE BRADLEY=

=Principal, Miss Farmer's School of Cookery Cooking Editor, Woman's Home
Companion=

If you wish to earn money at home through home cooked food and
catering--if you would like to own and conduct a food shop, candy
kitchen, tea room, cafeteria or lunch room--if you wish to manage a
profitable guest house or small hotel, you will be interested in this
new correspondence course.

It explains just how to prepare food, "good enough to sell"; just what
to cook, with many choice recipes; how to establish a reputation and a
constant profitable market; how to cater for all occasions, and tells in
detail how to establish and conduct successful tea rooms, etc.--how to
manage _all_ food service.

The expense for equipment is little or nothing at first, the
correspondence instruction is under the personal direction of Miss
Bradley which assures your success, the fee for the course is very
moderate and may be paid on easy terms. For full details write to
American School of Home Economics, 503 W. 69th Street, Chicago.--_Adv._

       *       *       *       *       *

=DR. PRICE'S VANILLA=

To know pure, delicate, full-flavored vanilla extract at its very
best--try Price's Vanilla. Only the highest quality beans, carefully
chosen, are used. Perfectly cured and extracted to get the true, pure
flavor; this flavor is then aged in wooden casks to bring out all its
richness and mellowness. That--and that alone--is Price's Vanilla.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Look for Price's Tropikid on the label]

For nearly seventy years--the quality of Price's Vanilla has never
varied. It is always the best that can be made! Insist upon Price's from
your grocer--don't take a substitute. If he hasn't it in stock, he can
easily get it for you!

        =PRICE FLAVORING EXTRACT COMPANY=
        ="Experts in Flavor" In Business 68 Years=
        =Chicago, Ill.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=WHITE HOUSE _Coffee_=

[Illustration]

=_For the Business Man's Breakfast_=

A steaming cup of _White House Coffee_ at the morning meal gives, to
most men, just the needed impetus which carries him through a strenuous
day and brings to him the successes he strives for.

_=1-3-5 lb. Packages Only=_

        =DWINELL-WRIGHT CO.  BOSTON · CHICAGO=

_Principal Coffee Roasters_

       *       *       *       *       *

Buy advertised Goods--Do not accept substitutes

       *       *       *       *       *

=No SALAD is quite so PERFECT as when served with ROSE APPLES=

Six hundred leading hotels, from Bangor to Los Angeles, are using them.

A new sweet pepper used as salad cups, garnishes, etc.--beautiful
red--rich, nutty flavor--crisp--tender--melting--juicy.

If not on sale in your Fancy Grocery we will deliver, charges prepaid,
east of Denver, a case of six full quarts for $3.90. Each quart will
serve 13 to 16 people.

Try them at your next dinner. Your guests will rave. The first
expression is: "The lovely things, what are they?" Then at the first
taste: "How delicious; where can I get them?"

If dissatisfied after using one quart, return the remainder at our
expense and we will return all money paid.

A new book of SALADS in every case, or sent free on request, with the
name of your retail Fancy Grocer.

=KEHOE PRESERVING COMPANY, Terre Haute, Indiana=

       *       *       *       *       *

=French Ivory Manicure Sets=

(=21 Pieces=)

In black cobra grain, plush lined case.

Only =$7.00=. Only a few left

                         =H. L. CARROLL=
        =New Jersey Ave., S. E.    Washington, D.C.=

       *       *       *       *       *

="Where My Money Goes"=

_Weekly Allowance Book_--simple little book 32 pages, small enough for
your pocketbook, easily kept; gives classified record of all personal or
household expenses, _10 cents_.

=AM. SCHOOL OF HOME ECONOMICS, 503a W. 69th STREET, CHICAGO=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Wagner Cast Aluminum utensils are cast, not stamped.
Being in one solid piece there are no rivets to loosen, no seams to
break, no welded parts. Wagner Cast Aluminum Ware wears longer and cooks
better. The thickness of the metal is the reason--heat is retained and
evenly distributed--food does not scorch or burn as is liable in stamped
sheet utensils.

Wagner Ware combines durability and superior cooking quality with the
most beautiful designs and finish. At best dealer's.

_Don't ask for aluminum ware, ask for Wagner Ware_

        =The Wagner Mfg. Co.=
        =Dept. 74   SIDNEY, OHIO=]

       *       *       *       *       *

="Household Helpers"=

If you could engage an expert cook and an expert housekeeper for only 10
cents a week, with no board or room, you would do it, wouldn't you? Of
course you would! Well, that is all our "TWO HOUSEHOLD HELPERS" will
cost you the first year--nothing thereafter, for the rest of your life.

Have you ever considered how much an hour a day, 7 days a week, 365 days
a year is worth to you? Many workmen get $1 an hour--surely your time is
worth 30 cents an hour. We guarantee these "Helpers" to save you _at
least_ an hour a day, worth say $2.10 a week. Will you invest the 10
cents a week to gain $2 weekly? _Send the coupon._

And the value our "Helpers" give you in courage and inspiration, in
peace of mind, in the satisfaction of progress, in health, happiness and
the joy of living,--_is above price_. In mere dollars and cents, they
will save their cost twelve times a year or more. _Send the coupon._

These helpers, "Lessons in Cooking" and "Household Engineering," were
both prepared as home-study courses, and as such have been tried out and
approved by thousands of our members. Thus they have the very highest
recommendation. Nevertheless we are willing to send them in book form,
on a week's free trial in your own home. _Send the coupon._

In these difficult days you really cannot afford to be without our
"Helpers." You owe it to yourself and family to give them a fair trial.
You cannot realize what great help they will give you till you try
them--and the trial costs you nothing! _Send no money--send the coupon._

American School of Home Economics, Chicago.

=_FREE TRIAL FOR ONE WEEK_=

=A.S.H.E.--503 W. 69th Street, Chicago, Ill.=

=Send your two "HOUSEHOLD HELPERS," prepaid on a week's trial, in the De
Luxe binding. If satisfactory, I will send you $5 in full payment (OR)
50 cents and $1 per month for five months. Otherwise I will return one
or both books in seven days. (Regular mail price $3.14 _each_).=

  =Name and=

  =Address=

  =_Reference_=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

=MILK=--Nature's first food--is turned into an attractive, delicious
dish that children and adults _enjoy_ when it is made into Junket.

=Junket

MADE _with_ MILK=

is wholesome milk in tasty dessert form. It is eaten slowly and
_enjoyed_--hence it is the better way of serving milk.

Junket can now be made with Junket Powder, as well as with Tablets. The
new Junket Powder is already sweetened and flavored. Made in 6 different
flavors.

Both Grocers and Druggists sell Junket

_Send 4c. in stamps and your grocer's name, for sample (or 15c. for full
size package of Junket Tablets; 20c. for full size package of Junket
Powder) with recipes._

=THE JUNKET FOLKS, Little Falls, N.Y.=

Chr. Hansen's Canadian Laboratory, Toronto, Ont.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: =Angel Food Cake=]


=8 Inches Square, 5 Inches High=

You can be the best cake maker in your club or town. You can make the
same Angel Food Cake and many other kinds that I make and sell at $3 a
loaf-profit, $2, if you

=Learn the Osborn Cake Making System=

My methods are different. They are the result of twenty years experience
as a domestic science expert. My way is easy to learn. It never fails. I
have taught thousands. Let me send you full particulars FREE.

        =Mrs. Grace Osborn=  =Dept.= K 5   =Bay City, Mich.=

       *       *       *       *       *

="The Art of Spending"=

Tells how to get more for your money--how to live better and save more!
How to budget expenses and record them _without household accounts_. 24
pp. illustrated, _10 cents_.

=AM. SCHOOL OF HOME ECONOMICS. 503a W. 69th ST.. CHICAGO=

       *       *       *       *       *

=This Big 5 Pound Bag of Delicious Shelled Peanuts $1.75=

[Illustration: Send for Recipe Book]

Direct from grower by Prepaid Parcels Post to your door. More and better
peanuts than $5 will buy at stands or stores. Along with Recipe Book
telling of over 60 ways to use them as foods. We guarantee prompt
delivery and ship at once. 10 lbs, $3.00. Money back if not delighted.

=EASTERN PEANUT CO., 10 A, HERTFORD, N.C.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=Help! Help!! Help!!!=

Our two new household helpers on 7 days' free trial! They save you _at
least_ an hour a day, worth at only 30 cents an hour, $2.10 a week. Cost
only the 10 cents a week for a year. Send postcard for details of these
"helpers," our two new home-study courses, "_Household Engineering_" and
"_Lessons in Cooking_," now in book form; _OR SEND_ $5.00 in full
payment. Regular price $6.28. Full refund if not satisfactory.

=AM. SCHOOL OF HOME ECONOMICS, 503a W. 69th STREET, CHICAGO=

       *       *       *       *       *

=Salt Mackerel

CODFISH, FRESH LOBSTER

RIGHT FROM THE FISHING BOATS TO YOU=

[Illustration: Sea Foods]

=COOK BOOK FREE=

Write for this book, "Sea Foods; How to Prepare and Serve Them." With it
we send our list with delivered price of each kind of fish.

USE COUPON BELOW

FAMILIES who are fond of FISH can be supplied =DIRECT= from =GLOUCESTER,
MASS.=, by the =FRANK E. DAVIS COMPANY=, with newly caught, =KEEPABLE
OCEAN FISH=, choicer than any inland dealer could possibly furnish.

We sell =ONLY TO THE CONSUMER DIRECT=, sending by =EXPRESS RIGHT TO YOUR
HOME=. We =PREPAY= express on all orders east of Kansas. Our fish are
pure, appetizing and economical and we want =YOU= to try some, subject
to your complete approval or your money will be cheerfully refunded.

=SALT MACKEREL=, fat, meaty, juicy fish, are delicious for breakfast.
They are freshly packed in brine and will not spoil on your hands.

=CODFISH=, as we salt it, is white, boneless and ready for instant use.
It makes a substantial meal, a fine change from meat, at a much lower
cost.

=FRESH LOBSTER= is the best thing known for salads. Right fresh from the
water, our lobsters simply are boiled and packed in PARCHMENT-LINED
CANS. They come to you as the purest and safest lobsters you can buy and
the meat is as crisp and natural as if you took it from the shell
yourself.

=FRIED CLAMS= are a relishable, hearty dish, that your whole family will
enjoy. No other flavor is just like that of clams, whether fried or in a
chowder.

=FRESH MACKEREL=, perfect for frying, =SHRIMP= to cream on toast,
=CRABMEAT= for Newburg or deviled, =SALMON= ready to serve, =SARDINES=
of all kinds, =TUNNY= for salad, =SANDWICH FILLINGS= and every good
thing packed here or abroad you can get direct from us and keep right on
your pantry shelf for regular or emergency use.

        =FRANK E. DAVIS. CO.
        61 Central Wharf
        Gloucester
        Mass.=


        =FRANK
        E. DAVIS CO.
        61 Central Wharf
        Gloucester, Mass.=
        Please send me your latest Sea
        Food Cook Book and Fish Price List

        Name..................................

        Street.......................................

        City.........................................State...........

       *       *       *       *       *

We ask you to try

=PRINCE BRAND=

MACARONI or SPAGHETTI

We know it will please you because of its superior qualities. Easy to
cook, delicious in taste, very high in food value. Insist on getting our
quality.

=PRINCE MACARONI MFG. CO.= BOSTON

       *       *       *       *       *

=OYSTERS CLAMS=

DEHYDRATED

These delightful delicacies preserved with all their salt water flavor

        =ALWAYS READY     EASILY PREPARED=

In powder form so that but ten minutes in hot water or milk makes them
ready to serve. An oyster stew or broth; clam stew, bouillon and chowder
always in the kitchen ready for instant use. Packed in bottles that make
a quart of stew and in larger bottles that make 8 quarts.

=OYSTERS, small bottles, 30 cents each CLAMS, small bottles, 30 cents
each=

We pay delivery costs Enjoy a bottle of each of these delicacies

BISHOP-GIFFORD CO., Inc., Baldwin, L.I., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

=BREAKFASTS, LUNCHEONS _and_ DINNERS=

=By MARY D. CHAMBERS=

Should be in every home. It treats in detail the three meals a day, in
their several varieties, from the light family affair to the formal and
company function. Appropriate menus are given for each occasion. The
well-balanced diet is kept constantly in view. Table china, glass and
silver, and table linen, all are described and illustrated. In short,
how to plan, how to serve and how to behave at these meals, is the
author's motive in writing the book. This motive has been clearly and
admirably well carried out. Table etiquette might well be the subtitle
of the volume.

        Cloth, 150 pages.                      Illustrated, $1.25 net.

We will send this book postpaid on receipt of price, $1.25

THE BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Coal and Gas Range With Three Ovens That Really Saves

[Illustration: Coal, Wood, and Gas Range]

=Although it is less than four feet long= it can do every kind of
cooking for any ordinary family by gas in warm weather, or by coal or
wood when the kitchen needs heating. =There are two separate baking
ovens=--one for coal and one for gas. Both ovens may be used at one
time--or either one singly. In addition to the two baking ovens there is
gas broiling oven.

[Illustration: The Range that "Makes Cooking Easy"]

=See the cooking surface= when you want to rush things--five burners for
gas and four covers for coal.

The illustrations show the wonderful pearl grey porcelain enamel
finish--so neat and attractive. No more soiled hands, no more dust and
smut. By simply passing a damp cloth over the surface you are able to
clean your range instantly. They certainly do Make Cooking Easy.

                      =Gold Medal=
                       =Glenwood=

Write to-day for handsome free booklet 118 that tells all about it, to

Weir Stove Co., Taunton, Mass. Manufacturers of the Celebrated Glenwood
Coal, Wood and Gas Ranges, Heating Stoves and Furnaces.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Suggestions for Christmas Gifts

Would not many of your friends to whom you will make _Christmas Gifts_
be more pleased with a year's subscription to AMERICAN COOKERY ($1.50)
than with any other thing of equal cost you could send them?

The magazine will be of practical use to the recipient 365 days in the
year and a constant and pleasant reminder of the donor.

To make this gift more complete, we will send the December number so as
to be received the day before Christmas, _together with a card reading
as per cut herewith_. [Illustration]

This card is printed in two colors on heavy stock and makes a handsome
souvenir.

        We will make a Christmas Present of a copy of
        the =American Cook Book= to every present
        subscriber who sends us two "Christmas Gift"
        subscriptions at $1.50 each.


=Practical and Useful Cookery Books=

_By_ =MRS. JANET M. HILL=, _Editor of American Cookery_


        =AMERICAN COOK BOOK                             $1.50=

        This cook book deals with the matter in hand in
        a simple, concise manner, mainly with the
        cheaper food products. A cosmopolitan cook
        book. Illustrated.


        =BOOK OF ENTRÉES                                $2.00=

        Over 800 recipes which open a new field of
        cookery and furnish a solution of the problem
        of "left overs." There is also a chapter of
        menus which will be of great help in securing
        the best combination of dishes. Illustrated.


        =CAKES, PASTRY AND DESSERT DISHES               $2.00=

        Mrs. Hill's latest book. Practical, trustworthy
        and up-to-date.


        =CANNING, PRESERVING AND JELLY-MAKING           $1.75=

        Modern methods of canning and jelly-making have
        simplified and shortened preserving processes.
        In this book the latest ideas in canning,
        preserving and jelly-making are presented.


        =COOKING FOR TWO                                $2.25=

        Designed to give chiefly in simple and concise
        style those things that are essential to the
        proper selection and preparation of a
        reasonable variety of food for the family of
        two individuals. A handbook for young
        housekeepers. Used as text in many schools.
        Illustrated from photographs.


        =PRACTICAL COOKING AND SERVING                  $2.50=

        This complete manual of how to select, prepare,
        and serve food recognizes cookery as a
        necessary art. Recipes are for both simple and
        most formal occasions; each recipe is tested.
        700 pages. Used as a text-book in many schools.
        Illustrated.


        =SALADS, SANDWICHES AND CHAFING DISH DAINTIES   $2.00=

        To the housewife who likes new and dainty ways
        of serving food, this book proves of great
        value. Illustrated.


        =THE UP-TO-DATE WAITRESS                        $1.75=

        A book giving the fullest and most valuable
        information on the care of the dining-room and
        pantry, the arrangement of the table, preparing
        and serving meals, preparing special dishes and
        lunches, laundering table linen, table
        decorations, and kindred subjects. The book is
        a guide to ideal service.

        We will send any of the above books, postpaid,
        upon receipt of price; OR, add one dollar ($1)
        to the price of any of the books and we will
        include a year's subscription for AMERICAN
        COOKERY.

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO., Boston, Mass.=]

       *       *       *       *       *

=Experience= has shown that the most satisfactory way to enlarge the
subscription list of American Cookery is through its present
subscribers, who personally can vouch for the value of the publication.
To make it an object for subscribers to secure new subscribers, we offer
the following premiums:

CONDITIONS: Premiums are _not_ given _with_ a subscription or _for_ a
renewal, but only to _present_ subscribers, for securing and sending to
us _new_ yearly subscriptions at $1.50 each. The number of new
subscriptions required to secure each premium is clearly stated below
the description of each premium.

Transportation _is_ or _is not_ paid as stated.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIVIDUAL INITIAL JELLY MOULDS

Serve Eggs, Fish and Meats in Aspic: Coffee and Fruit Jelly; Pudding and
other desserts with your initial letter raised on the top. Latest and
daintiest novelty for the up-to-date hostess. To remove jelly take a
needle and run it around inside of mould, then immerse in warm water;
jelly will then come out in perfect condition. Be the first in your town
to have these. You cannot purchase them at the stores.

[Illustration: This shows the jelly turned from the mould.]

[Illustration: This shows mould upside down!]

Set of six (6), any initial, sent postpaid for (1) new subscription.
Cash Price 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

"PATTY IRONS"

[Illustration]

As illustrated, are used to make dainty, flaky patés or timbales;
delicate pastry cups for serving hot or frozen dainties, creamed
vegetables, salads, shell fish, ices, etc. Each set comes securely
packed in an attractive box with recipes and full directions for use.
Sent, postpaid, for two (2) new subscriptions. Cash Price $1.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

=SILVER'S SURE CUT FRENCH FRIED POTATO CUTTER=

[Illustration: HOW IT CUTS]

One of the most modern and efficient kitchen helps ever invented. A big
labor and time saver.

Sent, prepaid, for one (1) new subscription. Cash Price 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

=FRENCH ROLL BREAD PAN=

[Illustration: Open End]

Best quality blued steel. Six inches wide by 13 long. One pan sent,
prepaid, for one (1) new subscription. Cash Price 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

=SEAMLESS VIENNA BREAD PAN=

[Illustration]

Two of these pans sent, postpaid, for one (1) new subscription. Cash
Price 75 cents for two pans.

       *       *       *       *       *

=HEAVY TIN BORDER MOULD=

[Illustration]

=Imported, Round, 6 inch=

        Sent, prepaid, for one (1) new subscription.
        Cash Price =75 cents=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO., Boston, Mass.=

=PREMIUMS

PASTRY BAG AND FOUR TUBES=

(Bag not shown in cut)

[Illustration]

A complete outfit. Practical in every way. Made especially for Bakers
and Caterers. Eminently suitable for home use.

The set sent, prepaid, for one (1) new subscription. Cash price, =75
cents=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE A. M. C. ORNAMENTER=

[Illustration]

Rubber pastry bag and twelve brass tubes, assorted designs, for cake
decorating. This set is for fine work, while the set described above is
for more general use. Packed in a wooden box, prepaid, for two (2) new
subscriptions. Cash price, =$1.50=.

       *       *       *       *       *

="RAPIDE" TEA INFUSER=

[Illustration]

Economic, clean and convenient. Sent, prepaid, for one (1) subscription.
Cash price, =75 cents=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=CAKE ORNAMENTING SYRINGE=

[Illustration]

For the finest cake decorating. Twelve German silver tubes, fancy
designs. Sent, prepaid, for four (4) new subscriptions. Cash price,
=$3.00=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=HOME CANDY MAKING OUTFIT=

[Illustration]

Thermometer, dipping wire, moulds, and most of all, a book written by a
professional and practical candy maker for home use. Sent, prepaid, for
five (5) new subscriptions. Cash price, =$3.75=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The only reliable and sure way to make Candy, Boiled Frosting, etc., is
to use a

THERMOMETER=

[Illustration]

Here is just the one you need. Made especially for the purpose by one of
the largest and best manufacturers in the country. Sent, postpaid, for
two (2) new subscriptions. Cash price, =$1.50=.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

=VEGETABLE CUTTERS=

Assorted shapes. Ordinarily sell for 15 cents each. Six cutters--all
different---prepaid, for one (1) new subscription. Cash price, =75
cents=.

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL MAGAZINE CO., Boston, Mass.=

        =Bon
          Ami=
        _for mirrors_

[Illustration]

[Illustration: "_Hasn't Scratched Yet_"

Cake or Powder _whichever you prefer_]

Watch how easily Bon Ami and I clean this mirror. A damp cloth and a
little Bon Ami are all one needs. When the Bon Ami film has dried--a few
brisk rubs with a dry cloth and presto! every speck of dust and dirt has
vanished.

So it is with everything. The magic touch of Bon Ami brightens up
windows, brasses, nickel, linoleum and white woodwork.

       *       *       *       *       *

_"Americas Most Famous Dessert"_

[Illustration]

=JELL-O

In Whipped Form=

Of all forms of whipped Jell-O the Bavarian creams are most popular, and
they may well be, for in no other way can these favorite dishes be made
so easily and cheaply. Jell-O is whipped with an egg-beater just as
cream is, and does not require the addition of cream, eggs, sugar or any
of the expensive ingredients used in making old-style Bavarian creams.

Begin to whip the jelly when it is cool and still liquid--before it
begins to congeal--and whip till it is of the consistency of whipped
cream. Use a Ladd egg-beater and keep the Jell-O cold while whipping by
setting the dish in cracked ice, ice water or very cold water. A tin or
aluminum quart measure is an ideal utensil for the purpose. Its depth
prevents spattering, and tin and aluminum admit quickly the chill of the
ice or cold water.

PINEAPPLE BAVARIAN CREAM

Dissolve a package of Lemon Jell-O in half a pint of boiling water and
add half a pint of juice from a can of pineapple. When cold and still
liquid whip to consistency of whipped cream. Add a cup of the shredded
pineapple. Pour into mould and set in a cold place to harden. Turn from
mould and garnish with sliced pineapple, cherries or grapes.

=The Genesee Pure Food Company=

_Two Factories_

        _Leroy N.Y._        _Bridgeburg, Ont._

[Illustration:

        =Baker
        Breakfast
        Cocoa=

is pure and good, delicious and nutritious.

_Genuine made only by_

=Walter Baker & Co. Ltd.=

Established 1780

DORCHESTER, MASS.

_Booklet of Choice Recipes sent free_]

       *       *       *       *       *

=Established 1858

Sawyer's Crystal BLUE AND AMMONIA=

The Ammonia loosens the dirt, making washing easy. The Blue gives the
only perfect finish.

[Illustration: _SEE THAT TOP._]

[Illustration]

_The People's Choice for Over Sixty Years_

For the Laundry

SAWYER CRYSTAL BLUE CO. 88 Broad St., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: =SAVE MEAT=

by serving more stuffing when you serve roast meats, poultry, fish and
game.

If this dressing is flavored with Bell's Seasoning it adds to the
pleasure of the meal.

ASK GROCERS FOR

[Illustration: BELL'S SEASONING]]

       *       *       *       *       *

=MISS CURTIS' SNOWFLAKE Marshmallow Crême=

=The Original and Best=

[Illustration]

Inexpensive and easy to use. Makes delicious desserts. Awarded Gold
Medal at Panama-Pacific Exposition. Avoid imitations. The name EMMA E.
CURTIS is your guarantee of purity and quality.

_Sold by Grocers Everywhere_

[Illustration: _Emma E. Curtis_]

MELROSE, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

=VOSE PIANOS= have been established more than =70 YEARS=. By our system
of payments every family in moderate circumstances can own a VOSE piano.
We take old instruments in exchange and deliver the new piano to your
home free of expense. Write for catalog D and explanation:

=VOSE & SONS PIANO CO., 160 Boylston St., Boston, Mass.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 246, "Nutritión" changed to "Nutrition" (Food and Nutrition)

Page 255, "millenium" changed to "millennium" (the millennium for
housekeepers)

Page 259, "London" changed to "Loudon" (Loudon, I shall do)

Page 271, "di titians" changed to "dietitians" (pestilence, dietitians
tell)

Page 282, "Aprciot" changed to "Apricot" (Apricot Puffs with Custard)

Page 287, "supreme" changed to "suprême" (the suprême sauce)

Page 322, word obscured, "of" presumed and inserted into text (our
system of)

Page 322, "in" changed to "to" (piano to your home)

This magazine uses both to-day and today.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN COOKERY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.