Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

SEPTEMBER, 1898.

  VOL. LII.
  No. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  ANNUAL MEETING--PEACE,                                           105
  SHALL CUBA BE TAKEN FOR CHRIST?                                  106
  WHITE MAN'S COUNTRY AND COLORED MAN'S COUNTRY,                   107
  FOURTH OF JULY, S'KOKOMISH--CAPON SPRINGS CONFERENCE,            109
  CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR CONVENTION AT NASHVILLE,                      110
  SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES,                                            112
  MISSIONARY GOSPEL,                                               113
  LIBERTY COUNTY, GA.,                                             114
  PARAGRAPHS,                                                      115
  MR. S. S. MARPLES--MISS I. W. HUME,                              116


THE SOUTH.

  TALLADEGA COLLEGE, ALABAMA,                                      117
  TILLOTSON COLLEGE, AUSTIN, TEXAS,                                120
  KING'S MOUNTAIN, N. C.,                                          122
  ENFIELD, N. C.,                                                  124
  BLOWING ROCK, N. C.,                                             125
  THOMASVILLE, GA.,                                                126
  MACON, GA.,                                                      127
  ATHENS, GA.,                                                     129
  MEMPHIS, TENN.,                                                  130
  MERIDIAN, MISS.,                                                 131
  THE NEGRO'S PLACE IN AMERICAN LIFE,                              132
  LOUISIANA CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION,                             135
  COLORED TEACHER TO COLORED PUPILS,                               138


RECEIPTS,                                                          139


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS,                                       151

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

THE CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

FOURTH AVENUE AND TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as Second-Class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

Fourth Avenue and Twenty-second Street,--New York City.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D.
  Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D.
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D.


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D.


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq.


_Auditors._

  D. C. TIEBOUT.
  CHARLES NEWTON SCHENCK.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE,
  LEWELLYN PRATT,

  _For Two Years._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS,
  EDWARD S. TEAD,

  _For One Year._

  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,[A]
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELIJAH HORR,
  FRANK M. BROOKS,
  CHARLES S. OLCOTT.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _615 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  MISS D. E. EMERSON, _New York Office._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Fourth Avenue and Twenty-second
Street, New York; or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 615 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle
Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars constitutes a Life
Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the tenth of the month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear on the next number.
Please send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the
former address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.


FOOTNOTE:

  [A] Deceased.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. LII.    SEPTEMBER, 1898.    NO. 3.

       *       *       *       *       *

We look forward to the fifty-second anniversary of the American
Missionary Association to be held at Concord, N. H., October 25-27,
with exceptional interest. The sermon will be preached by Rev. Doctor
George A. Gordon. Distinguished speakers add to the interest of the
meetings. Missionaries from the field will present the varied features
of their work among the Indians, mountain people and the colored
people of the South.

The woman's meeting on Thursday afternoon will be particularly favored
with an address by Mrs. Kate Upson Clark, and by interesting speakers
from the missionary field.

We give a cordial invitation to pastors and friends of the Association
to come to this beautiful and historic town of Concord at this
anniversary. On the last page of the cover will be found full
information for delegates and friends who anticipate attending the
meetings. Fuller details as to the reception of delegates,
entertainment, hotel rates and railroad reductions will be given in
various religious papers.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEACE.


Now, when the war drums have ceased, we can think again of the
problems which were before us when Spain added those which are to ask
our attention. The greater problem before the American people is not
any new one. The Christianization of nearly three millions of colored
people yet in illiteracy and moral darkness is a call to Christian
love and service as loud as any call can possibly be. The messages of
the gospel of Peace, have the only promise of salvation to these
millions in darkness at our own doors. To give this to these needy
ones, who are not only near to our doors but who are ready to receive
the grace of Christ at our hands is the call of Christ for our
patience and fidelity. As we thank God that the smile of Heaven rests
upon our country once more in peace, we may well turn our thoughts
anew to our endeavor for the victories of Peace, and think as fairly
of our duty to lift these poor, ignorant millions above the perils of
increasing ignorance, as we have been thinking of the deliverance of
Cubans from their oppressions and wrongs. What these new possessions
now under our care may require of us, is another question which comes
with peace.

The millions of ignorant colored people in our own country not yet
reached need to be saved. They cannot save themselves. We owe them the
Christianity which we have. We owe them a chance for intelligent
faith. More than forty per cent. of nearly eight millions are yet in
density of ignorance and mentally and morally weak. They can be saved.
What has been done is the pledge of what may be done. Let us then
consecrate ourselves anew to the victories of peace and make our thank
offerings free and large for the glory which comes not of sieges and
battles, but the glory of Christian love and faith, of Christian
thinking and Christian working, for God's poor people who wait for
their day of redemption.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHALL CUBA BE TAKEN FOR CHRIST?


The Alumni Association of Oberlin Theological Seminary recently passed
the following vote:

    "Voted: That the Alumni of Oberlin Theological Seminary suggest
    to the American Missionary Association the importance of
    organizing at once for an extension of its educational and
    evangelizing work into Cuba as soon as the deliverance of that
    island from the dominion of Spain will permit."

At the recent Triennial National Council of Congregational Churches
held in Portland, Oregon, reference to the pressing of Christian
educational work into Cuba was greeted with enthusiastic applause.

And now there come letters from those who desire to volunteer for
service under the American Missionary Association to enter upon this
work in Cuba and Porto Rico. This Association has not the power to
issue bonds for the expense of such missionary campaign, nor to levy
war taxes. The significance, however, of these new fields of work and
the especial fitness of the American Missionary Association to enter
them must be apparent to all our constituents. The inhabitants of both
these islands are largely of a mixed race. The splendid band of young
colored people in the South have been trained during the years in the
American Missionary Association schools and are excellently well
qualified for carrying this Christian work among the peoples of these
island regions.

They are acclimated, born and reared in the southern climate. Some
even are immunes. Is it not a special providence that this band of
young people have been trained for just such work as this opening to
our Congregational fellowship in Cuba and Porto Rico?

The volunteers for work in these islands, however, are not confined to
any one race. The Oberlin Alumni suggest an "Oberlin Band" to be
organized and sent into this field. From the far West and from the
far East we receive letters from well-trained, earnest and godly
teachers and preachers anxious to volunteer for this service.

The sinews of war for this magnificent Christian campaign are wanting.
The responsibility of promptly entering these fields that God is
opening to Christian conquest and an intelligent and free gospel rests
upon those who can furnish these sinews of war. Shall Cuba and Porto
Rico be taken for Christ and an intelligent gospel?

       *       *       *       *       *

A WHITE MAN'S COUNTRY AND A COLORED MAN'S COUNTRY.


The government of the United States has just issued bonds to secure a
loan of $200,000,000 for the costs of war. It may be interesting to
our readers to know that every one of those bonds must be signed by
Mr. Judson W. Lyons, a colored man, who succeeded ex-Senator Bruce as
Register of the Treasury. On the ordinary paper money his name is
engraved, but on those bonds it must be written with his own hand,
else the bond is invalid. This will make necessary his signing his
name 40,000 times, and he is now engaged in doing this.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before the war began there was in the United States army only one
negro commissioned officer; now, as we count them, there are more than
one hundred and fifty. If we are correct in our figures there are as
the war closes about one hundred and sixty-four colored Americans who
bear U. S. commissions. These rank from second lieutenant up to
colonel.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the official report of the battle of Siboney by Gen. Joseph E.
Wheeler, who is an ex-Confederate general, special mention is made of
the bravery of the Tenth Cavalry (colored). He says:

"I was immediately with the troops of the First and Tenth Regiments
Cavalry, dismounted, and I personally noticed their brave and good
conduct, which will be specially mentioned by General Young."

"I was standing near Captain Capron and Hamilton Fish," said the
corporal to the Associated Press correspondent, "and saw them shot
down. They were with the Rough Riders and ran into an ambush, though
they had been warned of the danger. Captain Capron and Fish were shot
while leading a charge. If it had not been for the negro cavalry the
Rough Riders would have been exterminated. I am not a negro lover. My
father fought with Mosby's Rangers, and I was born in the South, but
the negroes saved that fight, and the day will come when General
Shafter will give them credit for their bravery."

       *       *       *       *       *

The testimony of George Kennan of the Red Cross as to the courage and
service of our negro soldiers is in evidence that the white man's
country is also the colored man's country. He says, "I do not hesitate
to call especial attention to the splendid behavior of our colored
troops. It is the testimony of all who saw them under fire that they
fought with the utmost coolness and determination. I can testify from
my own personal observation that they displayed extraordinary
fortitude and self control."

       *       *       *       *       *

Probably no institution in the East sent as large a percentage of
students as soldiers to bear the flag of our common country to victory
as did our missionary schools. Our students have not been taught that
war is glory. It was conscience with them. They went as deliverers
from oppression and saw their opportunity to prove their devotion and
gratitude to their country for their own deliverance. They have made
their record.

       *       *       *       *       *

Attorney-General Patterson, of Memphis, Tenn., in July last in an
attempt to secure a conviction for the murder of a negro, said:

"We are to-day engaged in a war with a foreign power, and for the
cause of humanity this great country is putting forth her splendid
power by land and by sea that Spanish cruelty shall no longer be on
Cuban soil, ... and if we can afford to interpose the strong arm of
the nation and expend blood and treasure to protect them, can we not
afford by the orderly methods of the law to stop cruelties at home as
barbarous as were enacted in Spanish dungeons? Is it not opportune
that we rise above the low level of race prejudice into the upper and
purer atmosphere of respect for law and order and the sanctity of
human life?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Within thirty days after the war was declared against Spain thirty-two
Americans--colored--were lynched and put to death without trial by
law, judge or jury, many of them protesting their innocence of any
crime. Let us pray that Spain may not long be able to say to any part
of our country, "Physician heal thyself."

       *       *       *       *       *

A delegate to the National Congregational Council at Portland, Oregon,
in a newspaper account of his experiences of good treatment everywhere
in the West, thus concludes: "After being entertained at the Brown
Palace in Denver, the Knutsford in Salt Lake, the Portland in
Portland, the Donnelly in Tacoma, after riding in the palace cars of
the trans-continental trains and the chair cars of the Northwestern, I
came to Chattanooga and took the 'James Crow' car to Atlanta.

HENRY HUGH PROCTOR,

Pastor First Congregational Church, Atlanta, Ga."

       *       *       *       *       *

FOURTH OF JULY AT S'KOKOMISH--WASHINGTON.

BY REV. MYRON EELLS, D.D.


Since the Indians have become largely civilized and citizens, the
Fourth of July has taken the place of their old festivals, combining
both. The old festivals lasted a week or more usually, and the expense
was borne by a very few. The time was occupied with feasting,
visiting, gambling, and closed with a distribution of gifts to the
invited ones. Neighboring tribes were invited. The distribution of
gifts is now omitted, and the time changed. This year the celebration
took place on this reservation, and the people began to assemble a
week before the Fourth. Nearly all had gathered on the second, when
about eight or nine hundred had assembled. The noticeable point in
connection with it was the absence of drunkenness while they were on
the reservation. Although nearly all were citizens, I have not been
able to learn that a single one drank any while here, even on the sly.
A few days before the Fourth I suggested to the leader that it might
be well to have some patriotic singing and speaking on that day, as
white people do, and that if he wished I would help him to arrange
about it. He replied in quite a speech, in which he thoroughly
acquiesced in my suggestions, and added that while he provided the
food he wanted all to have a good time, but that he had told every one
time and again that they could enjoy themselves much as they wished,
except that he did not wish any whiskey brought to the grounds. This
item he emphasized very strongly.

Twenty-three or four years ago, soon after I came here, the Agent
arranged a Fourth of July celebration. He was very particular on this
same point. But this same Indian intended to do differently. He went
off a few days before and procured some whiskey, drank some of it, and
intended to use the rest on the Fourth, and have a jolly time with his
friends. But other Indians informed the Agent about him; he was
arrested and lodged in jail, where he spent the Fourth, and a few days
beside. When I compare his actions then and now, is there not cause
for gratitude?

       *       *       *       *       *

CAPON SPRINGS CONFERENCE, WESTERN VIRGINIA.


The first Capon Springs Conference which met June 29th to July 3rd, to
consider the work of Christian education in the South, was a
successful gathering of many prominent educators. It represented
twelve states, the District of Columbia, seven religious bodies and a
number of schools, seminaries, colleges and other institutions for the
elevation of the ignorant, both white and black.

The Conference before its adjournment issued a message in which it
declared its deep interest in all efforts for the advancement of moral
and religious education in the South along Christian lines, and
especially that of the more needy of both races, bespeaking for this
the sympathy of all Christian people, and in particular the Southern
people.

The Conference also expressed its grateful sense of the generous aid
which education in the South had received from friends in the North
making for the unity and harmony of our common country. It testified
to a hearty belief that there should be institutions well equipped in
which provision should be made for the higher education of those
called to leadership, as preachers, teachers, etc. It especially
called attention to the opinion that the _gifts of the North in aid of
educational work_ in the South should proceed _upon lines of
intelligence, equality and discriminating selection, and that great
care should be taken by the people of the South in authorizing appeals
for outside aid_.

This message abundantly justifies such a Conference in the South to
bring Northern and Southern educators together.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR CONVENTION AT NASHVILLE, TENN. AND THE COLORED
PEOPLE.

BY REV. GEORGE W. MOORE.


The Christian Endeavor Convention at Nashville in July, was marked
with special interest. About five thousand delegates were present.
Arrangements had been made to entertain thirty thousand.

The meetings were perhaps better for being smaller than were
anticipated. The American Missionary Association work was well
presented and represented at the "Congregational Rally," July 8th. In
round numbers, two hundred Congregational delegates were present,
including forty ministers. Profs. Dunn and Spence, Rev. Mr. Bond and
J. C. Napier, Esq., spoke on our work, and the Jubilee Singers sang.
The Convention was in a manner on American Missionary Association
territory, and it was felt that its work should have an emphatic
place. Indeed, nearly all the speakers referred to our work, chief
among whom was Gen. Howard. The Northern delegates visited Fisk
University in large numbers and expressed their pleasure both as to
the scope and character of our work.

Before the convention the colored people had a feeling that they were
not wanted there. They had been told that they must conform to the
"_unwritten law_" of the South as to taking back seats at their
_local_ meetings, but would be on an equality at the Convention
itself.

In talking the matter over with the colored Congregational pastor, we
agreed that it was better to remain away from the local meetings, but
to attend the _Convention_. Consequently, the Congregational
Endeavorers of color and a number of others did so, and donning the
Convention badge attended. Those who attended were well treated.
Indeed, the colored people and the work of the Association were
brought into special prominence through the large chorus of Fisk
Jubilee Singers--twenty-two in all--which proved to be the favorite
singers of the Convention. Besides singing at all the sessions, they
also rendered a special programme of their music for half an hour on
one afternoon, when I made a brief address on our work as illustrated
by the singers and Fisk University. Our Northern friends have here
seen many side lights of Southern life and the colored people, such as
the "Jim Crow Car" and the "Separate Colored Waiting Rooms" at the
stations, etc. The colored delegates of the Pennsylvania and other
Northern delegations were sent into the "Jim Crow" car as soon as they
reached Southern soil. The Northern delegates also observed the
isolation of our missionaries. It is difficult for the Southern people
to understand why Northern friends are so much interested in colored
people and in their schools. Fisk University was, for example, the
Mecca of many Northern pilgrims. Not a few of them visited in our
home, and a number of delegates from New York and Massachusetts dined
with us, which would certainly have shocked their Southern hosts had
they known of it.

A Southern woman in commenting on the music of the Jubilee Singers,
remarked in the hearing of one of our teachers: "Those darkies are
very refined and sing well." A Southern woman inquired of me if I were
white. I replied: "I pass for a colored man." Then she asked: "How
much colored blood have you?" I replied: "It has never been
analyzed--perhaps one-eighth." "How strange," she said, "but that one
drop of Negro blood does make you belong to their side." I did not
find her reason for that conclusion--which has been reached without
reason--but I assured her that I was not ashamed to call them
_brethren_.

I think that our Northern friends saw much to convince them of the
necessity for our work in the South, and that even a war with
Spain--while it is doing much to bring our Southern brethren under the
old flag--does not and cannot at once change the habits, customs and
prejudices of the Southern people. We may as well realize that it will
take generations of hard, patient and self-sacrificing service on our
part and patient continuance of Northern influence, such as the
American Missionary Association is lovingly creating, to change their
traditions and the conditions of the colored people.

On the whole I think we had an excellent convention and believe that
the influence will be helpful for the colored people. A meeting at
Howard Congregational Church (colored) Sunday morning was of great
interest, when about two hundred Northern delegates were present. Rev.
Dr. Hill preached and several delegates spoke. In explaining to the
friends some things about the early life of Fisk at that place where
Howard Church stood, I suggested that all present who were graduates
of Fisk, former students and their parents, should rise, that the
visiting friends might see them. Over one hundred arose to the
surprise and delight of the visitors.

I have thought that the readers of the American Missionary Association
Magazine might like to have this phase of the Convention before them
as experienced by the colored people, from one who, as the Southern
lady said, belongs "to their side."

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES.

REV. GEO. W. MOORE, FIELD MISSIONARY.


There were fifteen graduates from the Normal and ten from College and
four from the Musical departments of Fisk University at its last
Commencement. Rev. H. H. Proctor, pastor of the First Congregational
Church of Atlanta, gave the Alumni address, and Prof. W. E. Dubois,
Ph.D., Professor of Sociology in Atlanta University, delivered the
Commencement address.

Mr. Proctor and Dr. Dubois are both graduates of Fisk University. Both
of them are men of liberal culture and at the same time earnest
toilers in the work of uplifting in the South.

The sixth anniversary of the dedication of the chapel of Plymouth
Church, Louisville, Ky., was an interesting occasion. Rev. E. G.
Harris, the pastor, has faithful workers in his church; some of them
are physicians, teachers and artisans. The church is growing in
numbers and influence. A neat lecture room, built by the people, is
free from debt. They have added a cabinet organ to the Church and a
piano to the Sunday School, to enhance the service of song.

A conference of Christian workers was held at Asheville, N. C., during
the summer for Bible study and the consideration of the best methods
of Christian work, and of the forces that affect the moral and
religious life of the colored people. This was the first conference of
the kind held in the South in the interest of the colored people. The
prominent promoters of this conference were representatives of the
American Missionary Association.

Prof. W. A. Waterman, of Fisk University, came on from Northfield to
conduct a course of Methods in Bible Study and Missionary Training
Service.

Mr. John Gaudy, a graduate of Fisk, and Mr. M. H. Neal, a senior of
Fisk, were both present and assisted in the Conferences. Both of these
young men propose to enter the ministry.

The Field Missionary spoke on "The Need of Systematic Study in our
Schools of the Needs and Condition of our People," "City Missions" and
"Normal Bible Study."

The Young Men's Institute, where the Conference was held, is the
largest and best appointed building of the kind in the country for
city mission work among the colored people. It is the gift of Mr.
George Vanderbilt, and cost $30,000.

The American Missionary Association was represented in Christian Work
among the colored soldiers by its field missionary, Rev. G. W. Moore,
who held a ten-days' evangelistic service at Camp Russell, Fort Macon,
N. C. The pastor of our church at Beaufort, N. C., Rev. W. D. Newkirk,
also assisted in the Christian work at Camp Russell.

The Third North Carolina Regiment of eleven hundred and eight colored
soldiers are in camp at Fort Macon, an island opposite Beaufort, N. C.
All the commissioned officers are colored men. Col. James H. Young, of
Raleigh, is in command of the regiment. The order of the place is
exceptional. No liquor is allowed, and profanity is forbidden. The
regiment presents a fine appearance on parades, and the men are making
rapid progress in military training and discipline. Evangelistic
services were held in a large gospel tent, and were largely attended,
and many of the men enlisted as soldiers of the cross. More than three
hundred men expressed their desire to become Christians at one of the
services. Over one hundred and fifty men avowed their faith in Christ
during these special services. The interest continues and the men are
seeking the way of life.

An interesting patriotic service was held during this visit, at which
Col. Young presided. The whole regiment was in formation. Rev. Geo. W.
Moore spoke on the meaning of the war and the patriotism of negro
soldiers. He said the revolutionary war stood for liberty, the civil
war for unity, and the present war for humanity.

Colonel Young, Adjutant Smith and Captain Hargrave made patriotic
speeches, the band played the "Star Spangled Banner," "Dixie" and
"America," and the soldiers, both officers and privates, cheered and
were filled with patriotic feelings. The Colonel and all the men of
the Third North Carolina Regiment thanked the American Missionary
Association for its interest in their welfare, as expressed by the
visit of its field missionary.

       *       *       *       *       *

A MISSIONARY GOSPEL.


"The first message at the birth of Christ was a _missionary_ message
(Luke ii. 10).

"The first prayer Christ taught men was a _missionary_ prayer (Matt
vi. 10).

"The first disciple, St. Andrew, was the first _missionary_ (John i. 41).

"The first message of the risen Lord was a _missionary_ message (John
xx. 17).

"The first command of the risen Lord to His disciples was a _missionary_
command (John xx. 21).

"The first apostolic sermon was a _missionary_ sermon (Acts ii. 17-39).

"Christ's great reason for Christian love was a _missionary_ reason (John
xiii. 35).

"Christ's great reason for unity was a _missionary_ reason (John xvii. 21).

"The first coming of Christ was a _missionary_ work (Luke iv. 18-21).

"The second coming of Christ is to be hastened by _missionary_ work
(Matt. xxiv. 14).

"Our Saviour's _last_ wish on earth was a _missionary_ wish (Matt. xxviii.
19).

_Church Missionary Society Gleaner, Scotland._

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIANITY AND CIVILIZATION IN LIBERTY COUNTY, GEORGIA.


Liberty County, Ga., is the county south of Savannah, on the sea.
Visitors from the North _en route_ to Florida pass directly through it
after leaving Savannah. Our American Missionary Association school at
McIntosh is in this county, and there are several Congregational
churches also under the auspices of the American Missionary
Association. Among these is one at Hagan, presided over by the Rev. J.
B. Fletcher.

The religious condition of the colored people in this county of
Liberty may be better understood in the light of the following
incident. On Saturday morning, August 6th, Rev. J. B. Fletcher,
accompanied by his wife, left Hagan for a place called Smiley, by
urgent invitation, to organize a Congregational church. The work of
organization was duly perfected on Sunday morning, the 7th, after
which the officers and members persuaded him to stop over that evening
and preach, which he readily consented to do. While in the pulpit a
gun was discharged through a window of the church, the contents
entering into the right side of Rev. Mr. Fletcher and wounding five
others. As medical treatment could not be obtained there, he was
hastily carried twenty miles to his home, where a physician was
immediately summoned. His wounds proved to be very severe, but were
not such as to prevent his recovery. The thigh was literally riddled
with buckshot, one hundred and thirteen having already been extracted
from his body. He writes us, "I am glad to have your sympathy and
prayers; they are of great strength to me. It will be quite a while
before I can walk as before, if ever. I feel happy to know that I am
counted worthy to suffer thus for Christ's sake. I am not discouraged,
and will be on the field again as soon as I can hobble around on
crutches."

A letter from a neighboring pastor adds, "The detective will have all
of the intended assassins arrested by the middle of the week. It is
found that they are all colored people, and officers of a so-called
Methodist Church, who as members of the Church Militant, took this
means to prevent the introduction of a Congregational church in that
vicinity."

A church whose officers propagate their faith with shotguns assuredly
has no right to the Methodist name, which it dishonors, nor to any
name, but it remains a significant illustration of sectarian
ignorance and superstition which we often find bitterly opposing the
introduction of a pure Christianity among the heathen of our own
country. Heathenism, not far away from one of the most beautiful
cities of the South--a city of beautiful churches and in a county
which rejoices in the name of Liberty--has furnished within the past
ten years many examples of such conditions and conduct as could not be
found in many places in Africa. It is not time yet for those who love
Christ and their country to be weary in well doing in this home land.

       *       *       *       *       *

The long experience of colored people in the South, in the work of
cultivating cotton has led to many enterprises looking to
manufacturing the raw article into goods. Several movements have made
good headway for a time, but most of them have failed to score a
permanent success. The last enterprise of this character is located at
Concord, N. C. It appears to have a substantial foundation and its
success seems almost assured. Speaking of the enterprise and its
supporters the "Baltimore Ledger" says:--"The Coleman Cotton Mill, at
Concord, will soon be ready for operation. It is a worthy enterprise
and should be substantially supported by the race in North Carolina
especially; and those outside of the state should feel much interested
as it is a purely negro enterprise. The white people of the state feel
much interested in the factory and many of them are giving substantial
aid. This is in evidence of the fact that many white people throughout
the entire South are willing to extend a helping hand to the race, and
thus help us rise to a higher plain of Christian manhood, if we will
but help ourselves. Self-help is one of the most essential qualities
in racial development. Without it no race can ever hope to achieve any
great victories or become strong or powerful. Let us then help
ourselves first, and before we seek outside help from our white
friends."

       *       *       *       *       *

From a former Principal of Ballard Normal School, Macon, Ga.:

"DEIR EL KOME, LEBANON, SYRIA.

"For a long time I have been wishing to hear from the American
Missionary Association both as to its work and its prosperity. For
that reason please find herewith an order for $40. I would like to
have the magazine sent to me here....

"The work here in Asia among the poor and ignorant is much the same
that it is elsewhere, except that the habits and superstitions of
centuries seem more unyielding than I ever saw them before. The
opportunities for Christian work yielding immediate results seem to be
tenfold greater at home than here. The need both here and there is
unlimited. Our hearts have anxiously turned towards our country in
this time of war."

       *       *       *       *       *

SAMUEL S. MARPLES.


Once more the American Missionary Association is called to mourn the
loss of one of its most useful and highly esteemed officers. Mr. S. S.
Marples, who died at his home in Brooklyn, June 23, 1898, in the
sixty-fourth year of his age, was a most judicious business man, a
devoted Christian, and useful in many walks in life. He was one of the
most prominent members of the Produce Exchange, New York City; at
various times a member of the Board of Managers, and holding important
positions on its Committees.

Mr. Marples' sympathies and interests were wide and useful in
benevolent and church work. For many years he was a member of the
South Congregational Church, Brooklyn, and was Superintendent of the
Sunday-school for several terms. He was closely identified with the
Manhattan Brooklyn conference of churches. He was prominently
connected with the New York Congregational Club and was its President
for several successive years.

Mr. Marples became identified with the American Missionary Association
by his election, in 1880, as a member of the Executive Committee. For
sixteen years he has served on its Finance Committee; for many years
as its Secretary and for the last part of the period as its Chairman.
The value of these services was constantly recognized by his
associates on the committee and will be appreciated more fully as the
years go by. For the year past Mr. Marples' health was very frail;
only for a part of the time was he able to attend to his business, but
never, as we are assured, did he lose his lively interest in the
affairs of the American Missionary Association, to which his attention
had been given so constantly and faithfully throughout the past
eighteen years.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS ISABELLA W. HUME.


Miss Hume, who was from 1893 to 1896 connected with our mission work
in New Orleans, died early in June. This devoted missionary was the
daughter of missionaries in India, and was born in that country.
Receiving her education in America her life was devoted to mission and
Christian work here. Previous to her connection with our work in
Louisiana, Miss Hume was laboring in the mountain regions of Vermont,
and the last work of her life was as pastor of the Congregational
Church in Gill, Mass. Relinquishing that on account of impaired
health, the last few months before her death were spent in severe
suffering. Greatly honored and esteemed in all her work, the
intelligence of her death brought a sense of loss and feeling of
sadness to the many whom she had labored to help to save. A singularly
faithful worker and devoted servant of Christ, surely she will have
many stars in her crown.

       *       *       *       *       *

The South.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENCEMENT AT TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

BY MISS ESTHER A. BARNES.


Never can the teachers and students of Talladega College forget the
Commencement of 1898, when so many brave young men left their
cherished plans to engage in the war with Spain. Those laughter-loving
boys, earnest in study, but full of fun, and careless sometimes, as
boys will be--one hardly knew them when the war spirit rose and they
stood in line with that new, steady light of resolution shining in
their dark eyes. In 1860, young men of Anglo-Saxon blood left that
same building to fight against the Union. One of those young men, now
governor of the state, thirty-eight years later, telegraphs to the
same school asking Negroes to defend that same Government, and they
cheerfully respond. Is not this a revolution of the wheel of time?

The governor's telegram came Wednesday, almost two weeks before
Commencement. All the volunteers were promoted, having completed
satisfactorily the work of the year with the exception of the closing
exercises. Thirty in all volunteered, three or four of whom were not
students, but a third of this number were unable to pass the severe
physical test. A farewell meeting was held in the chapel, and the
young soldiers told in stirring words the motives that led them to
offer their lives to their country; their resolve to fight for the
freedom of bleeding Cuba, their love of the Stars and Stripes, in
spite of the wrongs they themselves had suffered, their strong desire
to show that Negroes could not only live and work, but die, like men.
Many earnest appeals were made for prayers, that they might never turn
their backs to their enemies, nor yield to the temptations of camp
life. At last, a quiet little woman with an earnest face arose and
told in trembling tones her determination to go as a nurse if she
could find any opportunity. She was called to the platform and it was
beautiful to see the reverence with which the tall, young fellows
gathered about her.

Talladega College had reason to be proud of her sons as they marched
to the station with a flag and a band and went off with a ringing
cheer. Nor were her daughters wanting; their hearts were aching, but
their faces dressed in smiles as they sent their brothers away as
patriotically as those of fairer hue.

The Talladega students have not been permitted to meet any Spaniards
in battle, but their record in camp at Mobile has been true to their
promises. They have shown to everyone the advantage of education.
Their officers prize them highly, and the rough, ignorant men who are
their comrades, have felt their influence, so that the governor has
publicly commended their behavior.

After losing so many of the best students, it seemed hard to go on in
the ordinary routine of the school, but those who were left did their
best to fill two places at once, and the exercises were quite up to
the average in excellence. The written examinations were successfully
passed by large classes. The public examinations, as usual, attracted
much attention. A minister who attended Dr. Andrews' examination in
Homiletics, says: "Thorough instruction had led the students to such a
grasp of the subject as to make them independent thinkers. If these
young ministers will use the knowledge they have acquired by this
study, their sermons will be well prepared, well delivered, and they
will be faithful pastors as well as good preachers."

The class in church history showed satisfactory knowledge of what God
has been doing in His church in this country since its history began.
The class in prophecy has been studying Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and
the minor prophets. This study has interested the class exceedingly
and made them work hard. It has removed many doubts from the most
intelligent minds and made clear the wonderful plans of God.

In the college and normal departments, good work has also been done.
Classes were examined in Greek, Latin, general history and various
branches of science and mathematics. Some pupils in geometry showed a
clear comprehension and ability to carry on a train of reasoning
creditable to any student, but especially so to those who have
received their early training in country schools where incompetent
teachers preside three months in the year. One of these students says
that for years he worked on alone, puzzling over books by himself,
occasionally trying to find some one who could help him, only to be
thrown back on his own resources. A peculiarity of his is, that he
will not profess to understand what he does not see clearly. This
trait, in connection with his practical, unselfish plans for the
benefit of his people, seems likely to make this unassuming young man
of use in the world.

The examination in general history did not manifest a perfect
knowledge of all past events. Indeed, one student tried to find Spain
somewhere in the Congo region, when attempting to illustrate the
voyages of Columbus. Still it was apparent that these young men and
women had some historical facts fixed beyond the possibility of
forgetting, and that they had acquired the habit of thinking about
them and drawing their own conclusions which were often very
practical.

The classes in physical sciences, some of them instead of answering
questions, explained and exhibited the contents of the Museum. All
showed the excellent results of out-door and laboratory work. They
have learned to see. The visitors in the grammar room noted with
especial pleasure a masterly explanation of cube root by means of
blocks and figures that was positively fascinating.

But time would fail to tell of all the varied work, from the tiny tots
with their kindergarten plays to the sturdy farmers and engineers. Let
others decide whether it is better for the young ladies to do neat and
tasteful needle work or play a selection from Chopin. They can do
both.

All the exercises of Commencement were well carried out except the
Concert. The loss of an unusually fine musical treat was one of the
deprivations caused by the war, the singers of the Soldiers' Chorus
having become soldiers in earnest. It seemed a pity that every one of
the contestants for the prizes could not receive a prize, so original
and thoughtful were the orations and essays, and so good the
recitations. One of the best orations stated, that the way to elevate
the Southern farmer is not by means of teachers and preachers alone
but by the unselfish lives of scientifically trained farmers and their
wives who should be willing to live among the people and teach them by
example.

After the pleasant graduating exercises which sent out five more young
people, one of whom sent his oration from camp to be read, the Alumni
held a very delightful reunion. Many letters were read from graduates.
One wrote--"Every year, since I left Talladega, I have been more and
more convinced that many of the most prominent leaders of our people
lay too great stress on the possibilities of wealth and trades and too
little emphasis on the absolute and greater necessity of firm
Christian character. Neither wealth nor trades assure to us the favor
of God." Another writes from Texas of the work his wife is doing by
establishing a Woman's Rescue Society. From indifference, the women in
the town passed to curiosity then to sincerity, and nearly all soon
became actively engaged in the work which is accomplishing much good.

One of the college graduates, J. R. Savage, writes a letter of which
only the following extract can be given:

"It is hoped that the promising young manhood of the race will not be
satisfied with anything lower than the highest and best that the
schools have to offer. The first ten or twelve years of one's school
life are of necessity so largely mechanical that very little of what
is really education enters into them. Education is rather ability to
produce something and to think consecutively and coherently, than
capacity to receive something. Though a cultured mind may not create
anything, it is distinguished by its ability to combine two or more
elements in such a way as to form a new substance--to add something to
the world. Man sits at the feet of nature, learns her laws, and then
breathes into them his own soul, and nature becomes the living thing
we call Art. In addition to developing power of original and
independent thought, a liberal education prepares a man to enter into
and appropriate all the wealth of the ages. Those who are really
living in this grand and awful time, in this 'age on ages telling,'
are persons who have, in a sense, lived through all time."

Larger means would enable Talladega to give still more industrial
training than she does. But her chief mission will perhaps always be
to train leaders, to stand for higher education and to uphold the
supremacy of the ideal and spiritual over that which is merely
utilitarian and material.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PAST YEAR AT TILLOTSON, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

BY PRES. MARSHALL R. GAINES.


With the air full of vague rumors of yellow fever, and the consequent
panic; with the quarantine and general confusion in the running of
trains, and the withdrawal of many of them, the outlook last September
for the eighteenth year of our school was not the brightest. While it
is believed that not a single case of yellow fever occurred in Texas
last year, almost everybody was of the opinion that it had broken out
in the next town. Rumors were hard to trace and harder to refute. As a
result, most felt that it was best to stay at home and await
developments.

School opened on time, however, with a somewhat smaller attendance
than would have been expected under other conditions. Gradually the
panic subsided, quarantine was removed, and our students came in as
full numbers as in the preceding year, when the attendance had been
unusually large. The number of boarding students diminished
considerably, owing to our inability to find food for all who applied,
but this falling off was more than made up by day pupils. A little
uncertainty in regard to the continuance of the work of the high
school for colored students gave us a number of well advanced pupils
from that institution.

Good health, with its attendant good cheer, prevailed throughout the
year, and the work was earnestly and faithfully done.

A large proportion, probably four-fifths, of our students claim
membership in churches at entrance. There is not room for so extensive
revivals as visit some schools. The evidences of healthy religious
growth were not wanting. About thirteen cases of hopeful conversion
are believed to have taken place.

Active efforts in behalf of fellow students were greatly blessed.
About seventy-five new names for the pledge against the use of
alcoholics and narcotics were obtained. This means much. The use of
intoxicating drinks at Christmas festivals is very popular, and many a
young man is "the worse for liquor" at the holiday season.

The evidences of increasing interest in the school on the part of the
best citizens of Austin were apparent on many occasions.

Friends in the North, old and new, gladdened the hearts of teachers
and pupils by contributions in clothing, books and money for the aid
of needy students. One, a contribution of books, calls for special
mention. It came from Mrs. Isabella Beecher Hooker, of Hartford,
Conn., and contained over one hundred volumes of standard works. Among
them was a complete set of the books written by her sister, Mrs.
Harriet Beecher Stowe. These books are greatly enjoyed by our young
people. It is earnestly hoped that other contributions of a similar
nature will continue to be made.

The examinations at various times, and especially the closing ones,
May twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh, were highly creditable. Only a
small number failed of promotion.

The programme for Commencement week was carried out successfully.

It began on Friday evening, May twenty-seventh, with a speaking
contest and a prize debate, by the Philomathean Literary Society. The
discussion was as to the educative value of the study of the classics
compared with that of the sciences. The debate was well conducted, and
both sides supported their views with interest and energy. The
chairman of the judges was the president of one of the national banks
of Austin. The prizes, two sets of valuable books, were awarded to the
advocates of the study of the sciences.

Sunday, May twenty-ninth, was marked with interest in many ways. In
the morning the baccalaureate sermon, from the text, "For other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ,"
was delivered in the college chapel. The audience was good and
appreciative. In the evening came the closing meeting of the Young
People's Society. This is always an occasion of interest with us. The
circumstances call forth a review of the work of the year, or of the
course, with those about to leave, and many are the requests for
prayer, in view of the trials to come in the long vacation or the work
in broader fields. The tone of earnest desire to be faithful to Christ
and to be helpful in work for Him, was very strong.

Monday afternoon brought a small company of ladies and gentlemen from
the city, on invitation, to examine the collections of botanical
specimens presented by the pupils in that branch, and to select the
two most worthy. A number of very creditable collections were offered,
the competition was close, and resulted in the giving of three prizes.

Specimens of work in the sewing department and in carpentry were
opened to the public for inspection, and called forth deserved
commendation. Instruction in both of these departments is greatly
needed, and it is gratifying to note the marks of progress in the use
of the needle and in the use of carpenters' tools. The drawing by the
boys in the shop work was very noticeable.

The Annual Concert is a strong feature at Tillotson. People come from
miles around and fill the chapel to overflowing always, on Tuesday
evening before commencement. A slight admission fee is charged, to
help meet expense for music and incidentals. Early in the year, it was
decided to present on this occasion something a little more serious
than usual. It was anticipated that this might not be so popular, and
that there would be a falling off in receipts from sale of tickets.
Still it was felt that we ought to do something towards elevating the
standard along these lines.

Selections from the Oratorio of Elijah were chosen for this occasion.
At first the older students, upon whose hearty co-operation everything
depended, expressed their fears as to the result. But courage and
patience won the day with them. As they went forward with preparations
enthusiasm took the place of criticism. All fell into line, working
cheerfully and faithfully, drilling for the entertainment. Several of
the leading musicians of Austin became interested in the work of the
students, and attended the concert. They expressed great surprise and
pleasure at the success of the singers. This seems a good start in a
much needed improvement.

Wednesday, June first, came the graduation exercises.

The flowers of Texas are abundant and lend themselves for adorning
public halls with charming effect. For each of the public
entertainments of the week the chapel had been given a new array of
flowers and green, with variations striking and beautiful. This
morning the chapel seemed brighter than ever.

The only graduating address was upon "Literature and Authorship, with
the Valedictory." The young speaker, only nineteen, has already made
his mark as a writer and speaker of decided merit. A visitor of
distinction said, "It would have done credit to our State University."

Everything now points to the coming year as one of prosperity. While
it is true that the Sam. Houston College is expected to open in
September, and is to be a near neighbor, and while it is certain that
the denominational whip will be used to bring into it pupils of its
own denomination, it is also true that there is work enough for them
and for all, and we wish them God speed in their work. There will not
be too much light upon the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINCOLN ACADEMY, KING'S MOUNTAIN, N. C.

BY MISS L. S. CATHCART.


Lincoln Academy closed its year's work on the last day of May. We have
no building that will possibly seat over four hundred, with every foot
of space occupied, and as we have to plan for a thousand, we take it
for granted that the day will be fair, and prepare platform, seats and
awnings in the woods. The rain drove us from our work the previous
day, but the morning of commencement day was clear, and with the early
dawn we were at work, and by eight o'clock the grounds were ready for
our friends, who had thus early begun to gather. Within doors the
beehive was preparing to swarm, packing trunks, emptying straw ticks,
cleaning out rooms. By half-past ten the friends of the school are
gathered in great numbers, and our pupils form on the veranda of the
Home to march to the grounds and give the song of welcome.

I do not wonder that fathers and mothers look upon the school as it
marches to the ground with pride, for in neat, but simple clothing
(most of the dresses of the girls having been made in sewing-class),
and bearing in manner of walking as well as in every feature the
impress of work done during the past months, such a company of young
people is an inspiration; and one can but thank God for the planting
and fostering of such Christian schools all over our south-land.

Songs, recitations and dialogues are well rendered by the school,
filling about three hours--and no one too tired--and a stirring
address is given by Rev. O. Faduma, a native of Africa, on "Some
things needed for the development of the colored race."

As we look back upon the year of work we feel that we have been
abundantly blessed. We enrolled two hundred and nineteen pupils, not
more than some previous years--we cannot for want of room; but they
came earlier and stayed longer. Almost without exception good work was
done by the entire school. About twenty confessed Christ as their
Saviour. During the year we had not one case of serious sickness.
These are among the great blessings of the year whose work is now
closed. I do not think I should say the work is closed. A common
expression among farmers here is, "when the crops are laid by,"
between hoeing and harvesting, while they are growing: That is much
the way with our work, it is "laid by" to grow. Our pupils are
teaching, working in Sabbath Schools, "speaking for temperance," and
proving themselves in other ways. "They are growing," and we rejoice.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY REV. O. FADUMA.


It was my privilege the last of May to spend three days at Lincoln
Academy. The closing exercises drew together the friends of the
students from different parts of the country.

The school grounds had more than a thousand visitors, and as there was
no building large enough to seat them, the canopy of heaven afforded
ample roof in the groves. The exercises of the day were creditable
both to the instructors and pupils. The appearance of the students
showed much intelligence and a training of the best kind. The Academy
has been much crowded during the year, having had over two hundred
scholars.

A boarding-school has always an advantage among our colored people. It
moulds the morals of the students, and through them the morals of
their homes. There is a more direct influence of the teachers upon the
scholars than in the day schools.

That the institution is highly prized, is shown from the fact that
during the past years more students than can be accommodated have
yearly applied for admission; as fast as they could obtain added room
it has been filled.

Under the principalship of Miss Cathcart, whose name is now a
household word in North Carolina, and with the assistance of her
consecrated staff of teachers, the Academy has taken a prominent part
among the best educational institutions of the State. There is now a
golden opportunity for the moral, religious and industrial development
of the negro through Lincoln Academy.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENFIELD SCHOOL.


We copy from a recent number of the Charleston, S. C. _Enquirer_,
edited by Rev. Geo. C. Rowe, a description of the New Agricultural,
Industrial and Normal School at Enfield, N. C.:

This school is known as the Joseph K. Brick Agricultural, Industrial
and Normal School. It was founded by Mrs. Joseph K. Brick of Brooklyn,
N. Y., in memory of her deceased husband, Joseph K. Brick. The lands
include 1129 acres, most of which is under cultivation. It was
originally an old slave farm. One of the old slaves, a man now about
80, is still living, and we had the pleasure of hearing a speech from
him on the occasion of dedicating the boys' dormitory. The beautiful
shade trees standing in front of the college building were planted by
him before the war.

This school is located in Edgecombe County, N. C., midway between the
towns of Enfield and Whitaker, a distance of three miles each way. The
Roanoke River, well stocked with fish, bounds it on the north.

The school farm is plentifully supplied with birds, wild ducks,
turkeys and deer. While driving over this immense farm on Friday last,
two deer jumped up less than 50 yards from us. The land is very
productive and the timber is of the best quality. Water is abundant
and of the best one can desire; it is obtained at a depth of from 12
to 20 feet. The climate is delightful and healthful. The school farm
is amply supplied with a good quality of fruit trees.

The aim is to give due attention to the improvement of the mind,
morals and muscles. In order to do this, farming, blacksmithing,
carpentry, laundering, sewing, housekeeping and cooking are diligently
taught. Great attention is given to the raising of stock, such as
horses, mules, cows, hogs and fowl, and to the improving of the breed
of these animals. A good curriculum is fully provided in the literary
departments. The course runs from the primary up to and including the
normal course.

The school just closed the third year. Everywhere, in the buildings,
the general bearing of the pupils, the class-room work, all say there
is a marvelous advancement shown. Everything here is in its infancy,
but from the appearance of things, the stranger would think it had
required ten years to do what has been done here in just three years.

The workers to do this work number six teachers. They are cultured,
competent, Christian men and women.

Pupils who are anxious to secure an education here, but too poor to
pay in cash, have an opportunity to help themselves; such pupils
contract to work one year. They are allowed $10.00 per month for such
labor; a night school is provided free for them. The money so earned
is placed to their credit for the second year; every advantage of the
school is opened to them. Many avail themselves of this opportunity.

On the closing day large crowds, colored and white, came from far and
near. There were three sessions, morning, afternoon and evening. The
morning was given up to the dedicatory services, which consisted of a
sermon by Rev. G. V. Clark of Charleston, S. C., with singing and
other exercises. The sermon, which was practical and full of food for
thought, was enjoyed by an appreciative audience.

The afternoon session was a long one but varied, the three departments
being presented in papers by Profs. Martin, Watkins and Mrs. Davis.
Volunteer speeches were made by friends and patrons of the school.

At the evening session the over-crowded house listened attentively to
excellent recitations, dialogues, and an exercise in calisthenics
which was admirably rendered; the singing showed skillful preparation
and reflected great credit upon the teachers and pupils.

       *       *       *       *       *

SKYLAND INSTITUTE (MOUNTAIN WHITE), BLOWING ROCK, N. C.

BY MRS. ELLEN R. DORSETT, PRINCIPAL.


The closing exercises of Skyland Institute, at Blowing Rock, N. C.,
have each year to be carefully planned with regard to our small
audience room, and so we have not one great day, but three days of
interest.

The first of these was Wednesday, May 25th, when public examinations
took place. We were gratified to have among our visitors, parents who
had never before visited our school, also summer visitors, interested
in educational matters, who gave us words of cheer.

The following day our pupils gave an industrial exhibition. This was a
new feature in our school history, and it was one difficult to
inaugurate among the pupils--but it will not be difficult to continue,
because of its success. There were five classes of entries; sewing,
bread making, pastry and desserts, laundry work and boys' hand work.
There were three premiums in each class, and these were in money given
by interested friends. The first premium in each case was seventy-five
cents. After the judges had made awards, the dining room doors were
thrown open to the public, a surging crowd, and small samples of the
cooked food were given.

Upon May 27 our school room was beautified with azalias and ferns, and
in the corner stood our piano, which came to us during the year from
Connecticut friends, ready to do its part. People came from a
distance, and the woods across the street from us made a fine North
Carolina picture with the covered wagons, the topped buggies, surreys
and saddle horses. The audience without was as great in numbers, as
that within. The address was most acceptable. One of the old citizens
who waited to grasp the speaker's hand, told him how he wished that he
were young again, that he might make his own life successful. "It is
not too late now!" were the words of the preacher in reply.

Some tributes came to us in these last days regarding our work. One
man with a broken voice, told us that he was a better man because of
our Sunday-school and Christian Endeavor Society. He had been a
drinking man, but "for fifteen months had not tasted liquor." Parents
told us of the feeling of safety they had when they committed their
girls to our care, and gave us words of appreciation.

Already the applicants for admission to our boarding department for
the coming year far exceed our accommodations, while every Sunday our
school house is not large enough to accommodate the people who do
come. Many more would come but there is no room.

The spirit and progress of the work far surpass the equipment, and it
is with hearts of gratitude that we lift our eyes and behold "what God
hath wrought."

       *       *       *       *       *

ALLEN NORMAL INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, THOMASVILLE, GA.--LAST DAYS OF THE
SCHOOL YEAR.

BY MISS A. MERRIAM, PRINCIPAL.


Though there may be little to interest the general reader in a
"Closing Exercises" account of an American Missionary Association
Normal School, these occasions stand for much to both teachers and
scholars. To the former they mean satisfaction not unmixed with
solicitude as to how the knowledge acquired and the mental strength
developed by years of discipline will be used. To the graduate comes
the joy of achievement tempered by the recurring question, "What shall
I do _now_?"

There is another class to whom "Commencement" is a great day--the
fathers and mothers who have toiled long and hard to keep their
children in school. It is a picture one does not soon forget--those
dark faces gazing, with the pride and joy that dims the eye and makes
the lip quiver, upon their children, standing with the graduates.
There, too, is the old grandmother, who nods her turbaned head with
unwonted emphasis as she listens to the essay of her grandchild, whose
name she cannot read!

Prof. Jas. L. Murray, principal of the Albany Normal School, who
delivered the annual address, told his audience, in plain, forceful
words, what kind of an education was needed. Rev. T. M. Nixon, pastor
of the Congregational Church in Thomasville, gave an excellent sermon
on Sunday along a somewhat similar line of thought.

The majority of our graduates answer the question, "What shall I do
_now_?" by securing positions in the "government schools," as those
maintained in part, at least, by appropriations from the State are
called. It is gratifying to see the steadily growing tendency towards
improvement in public school buildings and appliances. One of our
graduates, who has taught two years in a poor little building used as
a church, has finally succeeded in getting together the lumber for a
little school-house, and, by dint of hard labor, has prevailed upon
the people of the neighborhood to put up the building. She hopes in
the fall to be able to get sash and glass for the four small windows.
The blackboards have been furnished by a Northern friend.

"Lighted to light" is the motto of the graduating class.

In order that those who are furnishing the oil for the lamp which has
guided so many into the right life may know how their work is regarded
by those among whom it is being done, a few sentences are quoted from
the leading newspaper of Thomasville, Ga.

"The exercises throughout were most creditable, and demonstrate that
the Allen Normal and Industrial School is keeping its place among the
foremost institutions of the kind. The course of instruction as
carried out by the principal and her efficient corps of teachers is
most thorough. Hand and heart are both educated. A pupil leaving this
institution with a diploma of this school, has something to be proud
of; more, has something--a good education--which cannot be taken away.
There is no telling the amount of good these graduates may do if they
will practice what they have been taught."

       *       *       *       *       *

BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

BY PROF. GEO. C. BURRAGE.


At "Ballard" about a month before the close of school, an evening
entertainment for the parents and friends of the pupils is given which
is designed to show what the pupils of the school can do in the way of
kindergarten exercises, dialogue, recitation and music, both vocal and
instrumental. This is called the "Junior Exhibition." The members of
the senior class do not take part in these exercises, as their turn
comes later.

A week before our graduates go from the school an informal reception
to the class and their friends is held in the "Teachers' Home," each
member of the class being allowed to bring one friend. In this way new
teachers make the acquaintance of those who are about to be graduated
and the old teachers have an opportunity to talk over past experiences
with their former pupils.

On the last Sunday of the school year we have the annual sermon to the
graduating class. Invariably the church is crowded. Wednesday of the
last week is Visitors' Day, when parents who visit the school at no
other time come in large numbers. The work of the industrial
departments is on exhibition, and the kindergarten work of the primary
department, also the work in drawing and the written exercises in the
different subjects taught in the school. An opportunity is afforded
also to attend recitations in all the rooms. At noon the class in
cooking serves a lunch which demonstrates in a practical manner the
proficiency attained in this important branch of domestic education.
The different dishes are sold at a nominal price towards defraying the
expense of this part of the exhibition. The same evening "The Alumni
Association" holds its literary exercises.

The graduating exercises on Thursday afternoon consist of essays and
recitations by the members of the class and music by members of the
school, followed by an address by as able a speaker as we can secure.
This year we had a most suggestive and helpful address from Rev. Dr.
Haynes of our American Missionary Association church at Athens, Ga.
The graduating class consisted of six young ladies, who in character
and scholarship are especially well fitted for teaching, which most of
them intend to follow. Our graduates are always in demand as teachers,
and the demand is greater than the supply.

The attendance at the graduating exercises has increased each year
until it has become too great for the capacity of our church, which is
not small. This year many were unable to gain admittance at all.

Immediately after the exercises at the church, a reception is given
the alumni of the school, which is a most enjoyable and useful
occasion. After an hour has been spent in social intercourse,
refreshments are served, when the members representing the different
classes are called upon for short addresses. It is most encouraging to
hear them testify as to the help and stimulus they have received from
the school.

The next day after the graduating exercises, the pupils assemble in
the school rooms in the mornings to hear the "promotion lists" read
and to have seats assigned them in the grades to which they have been
promoted; and the school year is ended, but not ended are the
influences and the prayers that have gone on with the fidelities of
the earnest teachers who day by day have put their lives into this
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLOSING EXERCISES OF KNOX INSTITUTE, ATHENS, GA.


Only a few years ago, the colored people of Athens took very little
interest in the closing work of our schools; but there has been a
great educational awakening among the colored people since, and I
doubt whether in the whole State of Georgia a city can be found in
which the colored people manifest interest in the closing work of our
schools more than they do in Athens.

Commencement week at Knox began with the anniversary sermon, preached
at the Congregational Church, to the students, Sunday morning, May
22d.

Monday and Tuesday following were devoted to examinations, and the
inspection of our industrial exhibit in carpentry and sewing, which
was in many respects the best of this kind ever made by any school in
Athens. We have never had as many visitors at any one time as we have
had since our industrial shop has been opened for work, and while
visitors have manifested an interest in every department of the work,
their greatest interest has been in this department.

Many short addresses were made by our visitors at this time, with
words of cheer and encouragement; but all recognized the fact of _a
needed enlargement_ and _increased facilities_.

One patron, on emerging from the industrial shop, said to me, "The
half that you are doing has not been told."

A lady visitor, who is 81 years old and has 31 grandchildren, and who
made clothes for the soldiers of both the Mexican War and the Civil
War, told us how happy she was to be at Knox Institute that day. Among
other things, she said, "I seen so much cruelty and meanness on these
grounds (meaning the grounds on which the Knox Institute stands) in
dark slavery days, I's come now to see the great good you are doing
here for our children. It fills me with joy to see these young people
risin'." She assured us that she felt "more like shouting than
speaking."

Wednesday night, at the County Court House, our musical and literary
entertainment was held. The high appreciation of Knox Institute was
shown by the fact that we were greeted by an audience of not less than
900 people, from Athens and the surrounding country. People came from
towns 50 or 60 miles away from Athens to witness our exercises. It was
estimated that not less than 600 people had gathered about the doors
before they were opened.

Thursday night, at the County Court House, were our graduating
exercises. Again this spacious house was taxed to its utmost to hold
the crowd that had gathered to witness these exercises. Four bright
students--three young women and one young man--using as their motto,
"Not for self, but for others," were graduated from our College
Preparatory Course. The annual address was delivered by Rev. W. D.
Johnson, D.D., formerly Secretary of the Educational Work of the A.
M. E. Church. Dr. Johnson's address was logical, and full of wholesome
advice to those whose courses were just completed. Thus ended another
school year.

       *       *       *       *       *

LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN.

BY PROF. A. J. STEELE, A.M., PRINCIPAL.


A graduating class of thirteen, averaging over twenty years of age,
recording an average attendance at Le Moyne Institute of six and a
half years per member, before an audience of three thousand people on
the evening of June 2d, attested the interest felt in the school and
the work it has done in West Tennessee.

A varied program of essays, orations, recitations and personations,
with musical selections of choruses from composers of high rank, all
occupying fully two and a half solid hours--these made the crowning
event of the twenty-seven years' work of Le Moyne Normal Institute.

The proud and eager interest of the masses of the colored people in
those of their young men and women who persevere in the face of great
difficulties and many discouragements to complete a course of study,
presents a very attractive and hopeful indication to a student of the
rising race.

One who has carefully and for years noted the position and influence
of these graduates among their own people, the stand they generally
take for order and system, and the force and intelligence they
naturally bring to bear on the many questions of social and moral
well-being constantly arising to be dealt with by the masses of their
people--one who has noted the complex working of the moral and
intellectual forces largely represented by the graduates of such
schools, will not wonder at the interest manifested by all classes in
the conferring even of a Normal School Diploma.

The year's work has been one of exceptional earnestness and value. A
total enrollment of 750 in all grades, places the attendance for the
year at the extreme high-water mark, and the extensive use students
are coming more and more to make of the valuable library and other
auxiliary appliances and helps of the school, attests a growth in
breadth of view and of scholarship which is very hopeful and
encouraging.

The religious work and tone of the school have, as always, been among
the prominent and foremost forces, dominating and directing every
other thought and resulting in a steady growth of character among the
pupils of all grades and in the conscious and open choice of a goodly
number of pupils of the life of faith; among others this choice was
made, late in the term by a student of the senior class, the last one
not a professing Christian.

Nearly every young man in the school and many of the young women are
working their way through the course by serving, usually in white
families, mornings and evenings, and so, while sustaining themselves
in school, incidentally giving a very effective object lesson to many
who have professed great doubt as to the value of education for the
colored people.

Few things have done more in Memphis than this sort of association to
convince those who would not listen to any other sort of argument,
that the "old time negro servant" is not so altogether lovely and
desirable under the new conditions, even as a servant, as he is often
rated by those who think regretfully of the ministrations of slave
labor under the old conditions.

In a survey of the whole field of labor among the colored people,
while there are very many disheartening conditions and situations,
especially to one who is looking for the worst, yet a fair application
of the rule of science known as the survival of the fittest, must
inevitably and surely work out the conclusion that these efforts of
school and of church for the upbuilding and evolution of a race are to
have their final reward in the accomplishment of the great work,
whereunto in the manifest providence of God they have been called.

By this unwavering confidence has the American Missionary Association,
with its teachers and missionaries, been sustained through all these
years of perplexing and difficult labors. In this faith thousands of
young colored men and women have stepped into the front line of the
advance movement of a race, and by this hope all that is promising in
the race looks out and forward to the rising dawn of equal opportunity
which American fairness, not to say civilization and Christianity, is
certain finally to concede.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINCOLN SCHOOL, MERIDIAN, MISS.

BY MRS. H. I. MILLER, PRINCIPAL.


Another mile stone in the path of Lincoln School, and one more very
pleasant Commencement period. On May 22d our annual sermon was
preached to the students. A large and appreciative audience listened
to an excellent discourse by the pastor. May 23d found us busy with
our examinations. Good, faithful work was done "to find out what we
don't know," as one young man said; but the results proved that those
examined knew many things.

Wednesday attested the interest of the Alumni by the letters from
absent ones, and the presence of thirty of the old graduates, some
from every class since 1890, which was the first class. Five former
graduates, now teachers in the public school of the city, gave us
pleasant words of hope and faith, and others from distant places told
of work for the Master, and efforts at uplifting the whole race.

Friday evening witnessed the graduation of sixteen young people; eight
from the Latin and eight from the English course. The essay, orations
and recitals were pronounced good by those not immediately concerned.
The house was crowded, scores were obliged to stand during the entire
period, yet there was the utmost attention and perfect quiet. This is
what most impresses the workers who have longest been here, the
increased good conduct and attention of the audience. Ten years ago an
attempt at a night entertainment was almost perilous, because of the
tumult and disorder of the audience, but now no more decorous
listeners could be asked for anywhere.

There was sadness also with the joy on this, our last night, for it
marked the close of the work of our loved and efficient colleague,
Miss Sarah Stimpson, who leaves America for Central Africa, to work
far in the interior in a new field, under the American Board. She has
given many beautiful lessons to her young pupils. May God ever keep
her instructions green and fresh in their minds and hearts!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEGRO'S PLACE IN AMERICAN LIFE.

BY M. H. NEAL (STUDENT.)


The Students of Fisk University arranged a meeting for last
Emancipation day in which they should discuss among themselves their
condition and their hopes. Among the speeches was an address, some
parts of which are given below. The Secretary of the Association, who
happened to be present, was greatly interested both in the sentiments
and in the way in which they were put, and he thinks our readers will
be likewise interested.

We have assembled to-day to commemorate that event in American history
which brought freedom to the slave; to celebrate a day upon which the
negro was lifted from the darkest depths of human servitude to a
sphere of liberty and life. How dark must have been the times when no
Bibles were read around our family fireside, when few words comforted
the sick and no befitting funeral services were observed for the dead.
We cannot look to the heights which we as a race represent nor can we
rightly consider our place in American life and thought without
reflecting upon the depths from which we have come and upon those who
assisted in making possible for us such large opportunities. We gladly
bow in homage to those noble hearted men and women who sympathized
with us and so lavishly poured out their earnings and sacrificed their
lives for the dawn of a day whose sun will never set. Blessed be the
memory of those who persevered amid prejudice in presenting testimony
against prevailing wrongs and in giving us of their deepest
convictions....

Paramount to all questions extending almost throughout our extensive
domain, is the so-called "negro question." This question has been much
discussed and poorly settled. Because in a few years the negro as a
whole has not become learned, does not possess streets of magnificent
and commodious buildings, has not presidents of railroad corporations
and banking interests, because he has not worked his way to the
highest office in the gift of his people, it is often said that he
cannot embrace American civilization and is entitled to no share in
his country's greatness and protection. Some of our own people have
been made to believe such contention and have begun to consider our
cause a hopeless one.

We know that the place demanded is the place to be earned only by
diligent application and persistent effort.

That we have been true to our country and loyal to its interests is
indisputable. We may point with pride to Attucks, a full blooded
negro, who stepped upon Boston Common and became one of the first
martyrs to die to maintain against British tyranny the patriotic
attitude of the American colonies. In the second war with Great
Britain the colored people were no less loyal; we figured
conspicuously in the bloody struggles of New Orleans. When the
majority of the American people denounced slavery as petty and
tyrannical, when through secession the Confederacy of the Southern
States was formed, when the South took up arms to overthrow the Union,
the Negro was again ready to answer his country's call. He was present
with Sherman when he made his famous march "from Atlanta to the Sea."
And even these fields which overlook our lovely city upon which he
dropped his sweat, were sprinkled with his blood when the time was
ripe for military action. He fought well at Gettysburg. Out of old
Nashville, too, with her slave system has come new Nashville with her
splendid schools. Thus in every contest of our country for existence
and independence, none have labored more incessantly and given their
lives more freely for the maintenance and perpetuity of our
institutions.

Moreover, in our record never have we joined with other classes, who,
with a rebellious spirit have excited civic revolt and disturbed
public peace. While it is true that many of the base and corrupt walk
the streets in idleness, the better element at the humble trades and
more exalted professions have set out to live by the sweat of their
own brow and with their powers to work out their own destiny.

We may not, indeed, boast of achievements which other races have
accomplished in hundreds of years. Nay, we confess that ignorance and
immorality and vice of every description exist among us. To eradicate
totally the curse of slavery in thirty years would be miraculous
indeed. There are among us some who steal, but not all of us are
rogues by any means. When a decision of our accomplishments is given,
some judge us by the number of prisoners among us. But there are among
us many good men and women, who uphold the right, who in competition
with other men and women have held their places with credit.

A comparison of the negro of to-day with the negro of thirty years ago
shows a contrast. A new negro has sprung upon the stage of action, one
who has had the advantages derived from the seminaries, colleges and
universities founded and fostered by philanthropic people. The
incredulous have been made to confess that we are susceptible of
higher education and refinement. Through books we have realized
intellectual growth. The wisdom of the past has enriched our souls,
kindled our imagination, and deepened our thoughts. We have begun to
look upon the world with new eyes. Our minds have been turned upon
ourselves. We compare ourselves with other races, not as _black_ men,
but as men, and we thirst for knowledge and for individual perfection.
We have learned to reflect and to form conception of right and to
determine our vocation in life. We have learned not to depend entirely
upon public opinion, but also to help make it. We have learned that
self must be overcome. We are studying self and we know by evolution
great improvements have been made mentally, morally and materially. We
believe that man fashioned in God's image and endowed with mental
faculties which are capable of development was not sent into the world
to serve, in order that other men may revel in luxuries and wasteful
living.

History teaches that every victorious race has had its struggles, and
certainly we are no exception. There are great hindrances in our
pathway and unjust prejudice against us. But prejudice is not as great
as it has been, and in the face of opposition we know there is a place
for us. We would dethrone Judge Lynch who stains the ermine of the
bench and invades the halls of justice, but after all, his slaughters
pale into insignificance when compared with those committed by
ignorance and intemperance. Industry and frugality and self-control
have been partly diffused among us, and these irresistible forces will
revolutionize the wrong, destroy the evils and bring the consummation
of our hopes for which we seriously plead. We are learning to think
and by the power of thought we are to take the place in American life
vouchsafed to every American citizen without regard to "race, color or
previous condition of servitude."

Our development has been and must be gradual in order to be permanent.
There has been no spasmodic growth in the oak of the forest. A few
years ago it was only a tiny twig, but silently, imperceptibly, and
daily, it has increased in strength and greatness, until now it stands
forth the giant of the forest with its large and manifold parts
extending far and wide, sheltering the cattle of the hills and the
fowl of the air. We do not demand the commanding position which the
Anglo Saxon occupies by reason of centuries of struggle, but as humble
citizens bringing to the government, which we love and honor, our
tribute we ask that our country may give us the assurance of equal
opportunity and protection. When a responsible duty in state is
assigned us, we ask the privilege of discharging the same unharmed.

The rail-splitter upon the sparsely settled lands of Kentucky was
fired with a purpose and a recognition of his place among men. He
toiled on against hindrances and adversities until he had cut his way
to the Capitol of the nation and had become the President of the
nation and the emancipator of four millions of slaves. The colored lad
upon Colonel Lloyd's plantation who heard the barking of the blood
hounds and felt the lash of the task master, likewise he realized that
such was not his place. He sought his place, and to-day America holds
in sacred memory that eloquent and matchless orator Frederick
Douglass.

Fellow-students, despair not, there is hope for us. Our pathway has
been rough, but our privileges have been likewise great. Our souls
have been touched, our thoughts directed and our visions enlarged. We
are standing here upon the base swell of the mount of prosperity,
viewing its lofty summit which towers above prejudice and contempt
into the atmosphere of recognition and respectability. Enemies may
assail us on our ascent, but will climb on: men have reached the top
and we can reach it. Though our ideal is high, if we have the patience
of our fathers and the courage demanded; if with unselfish devotion we
act well our part upon the stage of life, everywhere promoting to the
best of our ability those virtues indispensable in the welfare of a
people, our banner of intellectual and moral power will wave upon the
mountain heights, and its glory will bless our homes, our race, and
our nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOUISIANA CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION.

BY PROF. GEORGE W. HENDERSON, D.D., STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.


A new and highly significant chapter has been written during the past
year in the history of Louisiana. The state now has a new constitution
and the convention, exhausted by the labors of three months, has
adjourned. According to the law which called the convention, the
result is final, this unusual procedure of denying the people the
privilege of voting upon their organic law, being based upon the
example of Mississippi.

The convention just adjourned is the third of its kind in the history
of the South, or of the world, the first being the Mississippi
convention of 1890, the second, the South Carolina convention of 1895.
These facts illustrate the tendency of the South, especially the Gulf
States, to move in unison in all legislation affecting their colored
citizens.

The object of these conventions has been the disfranchisement of the
colored people, so far as it could be done consistently with the 15th
amendment, and, at the same time preserve the right as far as possible
to white men.

In some parts of the country, many intelligent men who have lived only
in an atmosphere of liberty and its unbroken traditions, have believed
that the suffrage movement in the South was solely in the interest of
clean politics and an intelligent electorate, but if the record just
made by the Louisiana constitutional architects does not convince them
that they have been mistaken, then they would not change their
opinion though one should rise from the dead.

There is an important bit of history back of the present result. Two
years ago the legislature submitted to the people an amendment
limiting the right of the ballot by an educational and property test.
That proposition was buried beneath a mountain of votes. This,
perhaps, was not a fair test of the public sentiment in the question
presented, for the reason that the amendment contained a vicious
clause, empowering the forthcoming legislature to alter the law in its
discretion, but it is undoubtedly true that no amendment conditioning
the suffrage upon education and property could pass the ordeal of a
popular vote. The politicians, however, were not to be discouraged by
this defeat, and accordingly they passed through the legislature the
bill which called the recent convention into being and made its
results final without popular ratification.

So far as the enlightened sentiment of the state was concerned, there
was undoubtedly, a strong desire for some change in the suffrage laws
to prevent the corruption which ignorance made easy, and the fraud and
violence which for years had filled law-respecting citizens with shame
and humiliation. Vitally connected with the suffrage, was the subject
of popular education; there was also the felt need of reforming the
judiciary system.

After long weeks of painful travail, the suffrage committee presented
an ordinance that filled the state with amazement, and was so palpably
unconstitutional and so grotesquely absurd that according to United
States Senator McEnery, it was regarded in Washington as a "joke." The
committee quailed before the storm of popular indignation, and
re-committed the ordinance to the suffrage committee. Yet the law
which was finally passed, though lopped of some of its worst
excrescences, is the same in principle, and will work out nearly the
same results as the first proposition. It requires:--

_1.--That every elector shall be able to read and write, or shall own
property at an assessed valuation of not less than $300._

_2.--Lacking these, he shall have been a voter in some state of the
Union prior to January 1, 1867, or the son or grandson of such, and
not less than twenty-one years old at the adoption of this
constitution._

_3.--Every foreigner naturalized prior to January 1, 1898, shall have
the right to vote without regard to other qualifications._

The purpose, which was openly and constantly avowed, was to let in
every illiterate white man and to shut out every illiterate colored
man, and the provision it is thought, is elastic enough for the
purpose.

The whole law curiously illustrates the triumph of politicians. A
distinguished state senator said to the writer: "The convention is in
the hands of politicians; the people are not in it." It adjourned May
12. Two members refused to sign the instrument, and a number of others
were conveniently absent. Of the convention itself, one of its own
members said: "I have never seen such a graveyard of political
reputations." The _Times-Democrat_, probably by far the most
influential democratic paper of the state, and which has fought the
battle for an honest suffrage law with great ability, in its issue of
May 13, makes this editorial comment: "No men ever received a greater
trust than the members of the convention; and few have betrayed it
worse; ... and no one doubts that the constitution would be
overwhelmingly beaten if submitted to the popular vote." It also calls
upon the people to overthrow it at the earliest opportunity.

The new constitution has certainly come into life under bad omens. It
stands condemned as unconstitutional by the two United States
senators, and by the ablest democratic lawyers in Congress. The State
press is almost unanimous in its opposition--some on constitutional
grounds, others on account of the clause which exempts foreigners from
its operation as to the educational and property requirements; and it
is evident that what public sentiment demanded was an honest law based
upon intelligence and property with a poll tax prerequisite. In this
public sentiment there were some gratifying revelations.

1. A strong opposition to the Mississippi and South Carolina laws, and
to everything that savored of fraud.

2. A general respect for the 15th amendment, not so much on account of
the principle of it as because it is a part of the supreme law of the
country, and as such should be observed in good faith.

3. The confession, hitherto held back, that the evils attending our
elections were not due solely to ignorant colored men, but quite as
much to ignorant and vicious white men, and perhaps still more to the
frauds practised by the election officers and unscrupulous
politicians.

Vitally connected with the suffrage was the subject of public
education. A memorial was framed setting forth the present condition
of our public schools and asking for the establishment of a public
colored normal school. Permission was given to present it to the
committee on education. This memorial was ably sustained by well known
educators, but the result did not meet expectations.

The object we had in view was two-fold--first, to forestall any
hostile action against the colored schools by creating a strong public
sentiment in their favor; second, to bring to pass, if possible, some
positive legislation in their behalf.

The first point was fully accomplished. And it was no small gain. The
debates show how thoroughly unfriendly the majority of the convention
was to the citizenship of the colored people. It is therefore a great
consolation to us that our public schools have not been crippled. But
we had unmistakable evidence that harm was intended. The ordinance to
discriminate against the colored schools was introduced by a member of
the committee on education. So effective was our campaign, however,
that the friends of this ordinance were put on the defensive, and in
face of the public sentiment which we had created, they did not dare
to press their measure.

In the discussion of the suffrage, the interesting fact was brought
out, that of the 120,000 colored voters, 38,000 could read and write,
and about 3,000 more would be let in under the property test. This is
certainly a remarkable showing when the circumstances are considered.
It is not a matter for great surprise that those who are hostile to
colored suffrage should not be anxious to improve colored schools.

We still have hope, but we must win our Waterloo by success in the
cause of popular education.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COLORED TEACHER TO HIS COLORED PUPILS.


Do not waste time complaining against the existing order of society.
Enter a manly protest against all forms of wrong and injustice, but do
not pass your days in wailful lachrymations against the regulations of
a civilization whose grandeur you have done nothing to make, and whose
severities you are doing nothing to mollify. Leave that to the
ignorant demagogue. Bring your knowledge of history and of human
nature to bear upon the situation. I have already pointed out to you
that the adjustment of man's relation to man constitutes one of the
primary problems of life. Where this adjustment is complicated by
diverse physical peculiarities and by different inherited or acquired
characteristics, the problem becomes one of the greatest intricacy
that has ever taxed human wisdom and patience for solution.

Race prejudice is as much a fact as the law of gravitation, and it
would be as suicidal to ignore the operation of the one as that of the
other. Mournful complaint is as impotent as an infant crying against
the fury of the wild wind. History has taught you that the path of
moral progress has never taken a straight line, but has ever been a
zig-zag course amid the conflicting forces of right and wrong, truth
and error, justice and injustice, cruelty and mercy. Do not be
discouraged, then, that all the wrongs of the universe are not righted
at your bidding. The great humanitarian movement which has been
sweeping over the civilized world from the middle of the eighteenth
century to the present time, manifesting itself in political
revolutions, in social and moral reforms, and in works of love and
mercy, affords the amplest assurance that all worthy elements of the
population will ultimately be admitted to share in the privileges and
blessings of civilization according to the measure of their merit. The
man whose education has resulted in practical intelligence, will find
the largest field for the exercise of his powers. I urge you to bring
your education to bear upon your practical tasks. You need not fear
that your knowledge will carry you beyond the needs of the situation.
In dealing with a people who exhaust their strength in working with
blunt iron without sufficient knowledge to wet the edge your wisdom
will ever be profitable to direct.

PROF. KELLY MILLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for May                       $16,694.16
     Previously acknowledged               37,197.68
                                          ----------
                                          $53,891.84
                                          ==========


NOTE.--Where no name follows that of the town, the contribution is
from the church and society of that place. Where a name follows, it is
that of the contributing church or individual. S. means Sunday-school;
C. means Church; C. E., the Young People's Society of Christian
Endeavor; S. A. means Student Aid.


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $190.06--of which from Estate, $5.00.

Bethel, 26.96. Eastport, Central, 6.43. Lewiston, Pine St., 39.40.
Newcastle, Second, 21.50. North Bridgton, S., _for S. A., Talladega
C._, 4.25. Norway, "Friends," 3. Orland, Miss Emma Buck, _for
McIntosh, Ga._, 1.68. Otisfield, C. E., 12. Portland, Second, C. E.,
6; Saint Lawrence, 5. South Paris, First, 13.64. Waterford, Ladies'
Miss. Soc., 20 cts. and Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas., $45.00:

Augusta, 18. Brunswick, 1. Portland, Bethel, 26.

ESTATE. Yarmouth, Estate, Susan S. Webster, by Harlan P. Prince,
Administrator, 5.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $219.42.

Barnstead Parade, 4. Bartlett, 7.60. Brentwood, 15. Colebrook, C. E.
Wilder, bbl. New Clothing, _for Talladega C._ Durham, 28. East
Alstead, 3.33. Epping, C. (5.41 of which from Mrs. Shepard's Class),
13.35. Exeter, Phillips C., Ladies' S. Circle, Clothing, _for
Williamsburg, Ky._ Laconia, 35. Lee, 3. Meredith, First, 18.40.
Nashua, Pilgrim, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 11. New Salem,
C., _for Campton, Ky._, 7. Northwood Center, 10.10. Penacook, 7.50.
Portsmouth, North, S., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 10. Portsmouth, S.,
_for A., N. & I. Sch._, Thomasville, Ga., 5. Rindge, 20. Somersworth,
11. South Barnstead, 2. Sullivan, 3. Swanzey, 5.14.

ESTATE. Concord, Estate of Miss Fannie A. Goss, Piano, _for Talladega
C._


VERMONT, $4,345.21--of which from Estates, $2,938.00.

Barnet, Miss. Soc., Clothing, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Brandon, 9.66.
Brattleboro, Center, 50.19. Burlington, Mrs. Gould, _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 1. Burlington, Ladies' Benev. Soc., Clothing, _for
McIntosh, Ga._ Cambridge, Second, 5. Clarendon, 4.10. Cornwall, C., by
E. R. Robbins, 500. Essex, C. E. of C., _for S. A., Talladega C._, 1.
Hartford, 50. Johnson, 25. Lyndonville, First, 8.61; C. E., _for
Mountain Work_, 3.70. Manchester, Samuel G. Cone, to const. MRS. B.
SHERMAN FOWLER, L. M., 40. Manchester, 12.72. Middlebury, 25.51.
Newport, First, 4.61. North Hyde Park, 3. Peacham, "Friend," 5.
Pittsford, 25. Saint Johnsbury, Mrs. Rebecca Fairbanks, 5. Victory,
Geo. A. Appleton, 15. West Brattleboro, C., _for S. A., Fisk U._,
33.80. Westfield, C. E., 6. Westford, C. E., 10, _for Grand View,
Tenn. Westford, C. E._, 7, _for S. A., Grand View Normal Inst., Tenn._
Wilmington, 6.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, Mrs. Rebecca P. Fairbanks,
Treas., $550.31:

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vermont, 300. Barnet, 6.48.
Brookfield, Jr. C. E., 75 cts. Burlington, First, 30. Cambridge, 5.
Coventry, 14. Franklin, 6.27. Granby, "A Friend," 5. Greensboro, 8.
Hardwick, East, 6. Jamaica, 5. McIndoe, 9. Pittsford, 6.05.
Springfield, Jr. C. E., 10. Saint Albans, 15. Saint Albans, W. H. M.
S., by Mrs. J. G. Smith, 50. Saint Johnsbury, North, S. Classes, 5.81;
South, W. H. M. S., 25; South, Jr. C. E., 5; East, Margaret M. Soc.,
5.25. Vershire, 2. Waitsfield, 7.70. Westminster, West, Jr. C. E., 3.
Woodstock, 20.

ESTATES. South Royalton, Estate, Mrs. Susan H. Jones, by John R.
Woods, Executor, 753.06. Springfield, Estate of Frederick Parks, 2,200
(less expenses 15.06), 2,184.94.


MASSACHUSETTS, $3,340.48--of which from Estates, $530.00.

Amesbury, Union Evan., 6. Andover, Miss L. M. Chandler, Clothing,
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Auburndale, 5. Ayers Village, Fannie L.
Kimball, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 3. Beverly, Mrs. H. O. Woodbury,
Clothing, _for Saluda, N. C._

Boston, Central, 454.38; Union, C. E., _for Mountain Work_, 75; Jos.
A. Brown, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25; C. O. Norcross, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 1; Mrs. R. H. Allen, Papers, _for Andersonville,
Ga._; King's Daughters, Books, _for Marshallville, Ga._ Dorchester,
Second, "A Friend," 15; Second, "Extra Cent-a-Day Band," 5; Miss S. J.
Elder, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 4.55. Jamaica Plain, Caroline F.
Dole, _for Talladega C._, 2.50. Roxbury, John G. Cary, 7.50. West
Roxbury, South Evan., 65.51.

Boxford, Woman's M. Soc., Clothing and Sundries, _for Talladega C._
Braintree, First, S., 5. Brookline, Harvard, Miss E. A. Tillinghast's
S. Class, _for S. A., Lincoln Acad., N. C._, 10. Cambridge, North Av.,
C. E., 6. Chesterfield, 3.71. Cohasset, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._
Concord, Trin., 16.03. Cummington, "A Friend," 8. Dalton, Mrs. J. B.
Crane, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 30. Easthampton, Payson, Clothing,
_for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._ Everett, Mystic Side, 6.03;
Mystic Side, "Extra," 1.50. Everett, Zion Bapt., _for Cappahosic,
Va._, 1.35. Fall River, Central, C. E., 25; Fowler, 18.75. Holliston,
Mrs. G. E. Partridge's S. Class, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 2.
Holyoke, First, Clothing, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Indian Orchard,
Evan., 19.42. Hawley, 5. Hinsdale, 40.10. Hyde Park, 22.11. Hyde Park,
First, S., 20.30. Lawrence, Trinity, 53.60; Trinity, S., 3.25.
Lawrence, Trinity, C. E. and K. D., ad'l, _to Furnish a Room in
Dormitory, Tougaloo U._, 27.30. Littleton, 9. Lowell, High St., S.,
50. Lowell, High St., by G. H. Candee, Treas., _for S. A., Fisk U._,
38. Ludlow Center, First, 9.63. Malden, E. S. Converse, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 100. Malden, C., by G. W. Reynolds, _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 50. Medford, Mystic, S., Prim. Dept., _for Tougaloo U._, 2.06.
Mittineague, 15.92. Monson, 26.06. Nantucket, C. E., Clothing and
Supplies, 3.06 _for freight, for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Newbury, First,
17.79. Newburyport, Belleville, 60.02; North, 15.28. Northampton,
First, 228.45. North Beverly, C. E., 3. North Rochester, C. E., 1.50.
Pepperell, 27.50. Pittsfield, Mrs. and Miss Campbell, _for Tougaloo
U._, 50; South, S., 12.50; C. E., 12.50, _for Furnishing Room,
Tougaloo U._ Plympton, 2.20. Quincy, Bethany, 63. Richmond, King's
Daughters, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 8. Rowley, 16.30. Sharon,
24.67. Shelburne, S., _for S. A., Talladega C._, 15.55. Somerville,
Prospect Hill, _for Freedmen and Mountain Work_, 50. South Amherst,
South, 7.40. South Framingham, Grace, 10. South Weymouth, Union,
33.50. South Weymouth, Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for A., N. & I. Sch.,
Thomasville Ga._, 15. Southwick, 2. Springfield, Olivet, 31.10.
Sutton, 15.41. Ware, First, 17. Warren, C. E., _for S. A., McIntosh,
Ga._, 2. Wayland, C. E., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 4.
Westboro, Evan., Ladies' Union, Clothing, Freight prepaid, _for
McIntosh, Ga._ Westboro, Ladies' Miss. Union, Clothing, _for A., N. &
I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ Westhampton, 20. Weymouth, Old South, 14.
Whitinsville, Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._ Winchester, First, 6.59.
Wollaston, 56.10. Worcester, Union, 100. Worcester, Central, Woman's
Ass'n, 10; "A Friend," 10, _for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._
Worcester, Adams Square, C., 7.

----, "A Friend," 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., $542.50:

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese
Work_, 20. Medford, McCollum, M. C., _for Mountain Work_, 5. Melrose,
to const. MRS. GEORGE N. DEW, L. M., 37.50.

ESTATES. Northampton, Estate of Numan Clark, 30. Worcester, Estate of
Maria G. Moen, by Philip W. Moen, Executor, 500.


RHODE ISLAND, $51.93.

Providence, Beneficent, C. E., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, and
to const. WILMATH H. COLWELL, L. M., 30; Centre, "Ministering
Children," _for S. A., Talladega C._, 15; Mrs. O. H. Haywood, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 5; North, C. E., 1.93.


CONNECTICUT, $7,650.54--of which from Estates, $6,300.00.

Berlin, Second, 23. Branford, Edwards Sheldon, _for S. A., Tillotson
C._, 10. Branford, Mrs. Edwards Sheldon, Box Supplies, val. 8, also
Sub. "Ladies' Home Journal" for 1898, and "Century Mag." for 1897,
_for Tillotson C._ Bridgeport, South, Clothing, _for Moorhead, Miss._
Bristol, "Friends," by Miss E. J. Peck, Clothing and Sundries, _for
Talladega C._ Cheshire, "A Friend," 5. Colchester, Ladies Benevolent
Soc., Clothing, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Darien, 15.11. East Canaan,
2.94. East Hartland, 10. Ellington, S., by E. H. Bancroft Sec., _for
S. A., Tillotson C._, 30. Glastonbury, J. B. Williams, _for Theo.
Dept., Talladega C._, 25. Hartford, First, 153.16. Hartford, Daniel
Phillips, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 20. Hartford, G. H. Hersey, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 1. Hartford Park, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._
Harwinton, 10.76. Harwinton, Mrs. Milo Watson, 5. Higganum, 18.
Ivorytown, Ladies, by Miss Minerva E. Norris, _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 27. Jewett City, Second, 14. Killingly,
Williamsville, 6. Lebanon, Goshen, C. E., 2.50. Lisbon, 18.
Middletown, First, Gleaners Soc., 10. Middle Haddam, Second, 2.
Middletown, South, 45.39. Mystic, Y. P. M. S., Clothing _for Moorhead,
Miss._ New Britain, First, Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._ New Haven,
Thomas P. Carleton, 50 cts. New London, First, 47.88. Putnam, Mrs. C.
C. Brown's S. Class, 8. C. D. Sharp's S. Class, 2, _for Savannah, Ga._
Southbury, 11.25. South Manchester, S., 9.15. Suffield, First (4.13,
of which bal. to const. MRS. MARY E. BROCKETT, L. M.), 21.65.
Suffield, Miss Grace Wales, Clothing, Freight prepaid, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._ Thomaston, 9.40. Waterbury, Second, Woman's Benev. Soc.,
_for Schp. Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 70. Willimantic, Ladies Aid,
Bedding and Clothing, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Wilton, 5. Winchester,
Ladies' Aid, Clothing, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Windsor Locks, 41.47.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $670.38:

Danbury, bal. _for S. A., Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Hartford, First, 50.
Hartford, Pearl St., C. E., 10. Higganum, _for S. A., Thomasville,
Ga._, 16. Higganum, 7.13. Milford, Plymouth, 10. New Haven, Plymouth,
50. New Milford, 20.25. Newington, _for Indian Hospital_, 11 and _for
Alaska M._, 4. Stonington, Agreement Hill, 40. Suffield, 50. Norwich,
Park, 164.53; Broadway, 150; First, 13.47; Second, 50. Greeneville,
15. Taftville, 7.

ESTATES. Guilford, Estate of Miss Amanda Stone, by Edward Eliot,
Executor, One and one-half Bbls. Clothing. New Haven, Estate of Sarah
A. Bliss, by Oliver S. White, Trustee, 300. West Hartford, Estate of
Maria Whitman, M. A. Andrews and J. W. Havens, Administrators, 6,000.


NEW YORK, $2,324.91--of which from Estates, $526.15.

Angola, Miss A. H. Ames, 5. Brooklyn, Central, 781.13; Plymouth,
445.09. Brooklyn, Clinton Av., C. E., Clothing, _for Hillsboro, N. C._
Brooklyn, Park, Clothing, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Brooklyn,
Tompkins Av., King's Daughters, Clothing, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._
Buffalo, Mrs. H. S. James, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 10.
Buffalo, Park Side M. E. Ch., Clothing _for Talladega C._ Buffalo,
People's, Ladies Easter Package, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._ Cambria,
6. Copenhagen, 13.27. East Bloomfield, First, C. E., _for Emerson
Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 8. Franklin, Rev. John Marsland, _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 7.50. Gloversville, 81.82. Homer, 5.20. Ithaca, First,
44.66. Lockport, First, Miss'y Soc., Clothing and Sundries, _for
Talladega C._ Munnsville, 3. New York, Payson Merrill, _for S. A.,
Tillotson C., Austin, Tex._, 10. New York, Camp Memorial, 4.60. New
York, Frank H. Scott, "Century" Mag. and "Saint Nicholas" for 1897,
_for Tillotson C._ Norwich, First, 17.64. Portland, J. S. Coon, 30.
Saratoga, Alanson Trask, _for Agl. Dept., Talladega C._, 25.
Sherburne, Miss Fannie L. Rexford, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 10.
Tremont, Trinity, 10. Wadham's Mills, 2.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $278.35.

Brooklyn, Lewis Av., 50; Lewis Av., Earnest Workers, to const.
HERBERT BOYLE, L. M., 30; Lewis Av., Zepho Circle, 5; Clinton Av.,
_for New Chinese Mission House, San Francisco_, 30; Lee Av., 20. Crown
Point, 12.56. Hamilton, 6. Ithaca, S., 33.79. Lysander, 15. Madrid,
7.50. Morrisville, C. E., 20. Mount Vernon, Jr. C. E., 4.50. Niagara
Falls, C. E., 10. Syracuse, Geddes, 14.

WOMAN'S H. M. UNION OF N. Y., _for S. A., Thomasville, Ga._, 20.

ESTATE.--Poughkeepsie, Estate of Margaret J. Myers, 600, (less
expenses, 73.85), 526.15.


NEW JERSEY, $120.01.

Atlantic City, "The Atlantic City Club," _for Cappahosic, Va._, 3.14.
Belvidere, J. C. Prall, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 10. Bound Brook,
54.14. East Orange, Brick Church, by Mrs. Bigham, Clothing, _for
Williamsburg, Ky._ Haddonfield, R. A. Cox and Sisters, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 5. Montclair, Ladies Soc. of C., Clothing, _for
Brewer Normal Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Plainfield, C., Clothing, _for
Marshallville, Ga._ South Vineland, Mrs. and Miss Gardner, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 1.50. Upper Montclair, Christian Union S., 32.13.
Vineland, First Bapt., _for Cappahosic, Va._, 4.10. Woodbridge, First,
C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._, 10.


PENNSYLVANIA, $85.50.

Buckingham, Trin. P. E., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 3.50. Erie, S. S.
Caughey, _for Lincoln Acad., Kings Mt., N. C._, 5. New Castle, Mrs.
Frank Chapin, _for McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Newton Square, Chas. E.
Stevens, 5. Philadelphia, Mrs. S. F. Corliss, _for Cappahosic, Va._,
10. Ridgway, First, 52.


OHIO, $193.89.

Akron, West Hill, 50. Bellevue, C., Jr. C. E., _for Knoxville,
Tenn._, 1. Cleveland, Irving St., S., 5. Dayton, Miss F. M. Williams,
_for A., N. & I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 5. Elyria, First, C. E., 20.
Freedom, First, 5. Kent, "A Friend," _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._, 2. Marietta, First, 56.69. Medina, H. G. Blake, G. A. R. Post,
_for Flag, Grand View Inst._, 10. Oberlin, Second, 19.95. Oberlin,
Mutual Benefit Ass'n, Clothing, and 4; Miss Nancy Squire, 2.25, _for
Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._ Toledo, W. M. U., _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 10. Wakeman, Second, 3.


INDIANA, $10.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF INDIANA, by Mrs. W. A. Bell,
President, $10.00:

Kokomo, 10.


ILLINOIS, $792.12.

Alton, Ch. of Redeemer, 78.40. Alton, Mrs. I. D. Gilman, _for Gregory
Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 2. Alton, Ladies M. Soc., _for Marion,
Ala._, 1. Aurora, New England, Corban Ass'n, Clothing, _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._ Chicago, Miss E. Willard, _for Marion, Ala._, 10.
Chicago, Green St., C. E., 2; Tabernacle, Int. Dept., C. E., 1.60.
Chicago, Miss S. R. Cutler, Clothing; "Friends," by Miss S. R. Cutler,
Clothing and Sundries, _for Talladega C._ Chicago, Mrs. A. E. Bunker,
Papers, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Elgin, First, W. H. M. U., Clothing,
_for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Evanston, First, (6.50 of which _for Fisk
U._), 99. Farmington, George W. Little, 30. Forrest, 9.82. Glen Ellyn,
Mrs. Emma Lloyd, 20 cts. Homer, C. E., 2.50. Oak Park, Second Ch., Jr.
C. E., _for S. A., Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 6. Plainfield,
Mrs. A. E. Hagar, 5. Polo, Ind. Presb. C., W. M. S. 3.20. Rockford,
Second, 94.04; Miss Anna J. Powell, 2.06. Roseville, Mrs. S. A.
Axtell, Box Trees, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Sandwich, 28.84. Sheffield,
60.10. Sycamore, First, (of which 36.83 _for S. A. Fisk U._), 68.90.
Sycamore, C. E. _for S. A. Fisk U._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, by Mrs. L. A. Field,
Treas., $281.56:

Ashkum, C. E., 2.50. Aurora, New England, 31.22. Chicago, Pilgrim,
18.10; Lincoln Park, 8.25; New England, 2.30; Auburn Park, 2;
Covenant, 1.40. Decatur, 5. Evanston, 22.50. Hinsdale, C. E., 2.
Lombard, W. M. S., to const. MRS. E. B. CUSHING, L. M., 57. Moline,
Second, 3. Oak Park, First, 11.90. Odell, S., 2.50. Paxton, 10.
Payson, 11. Plymouth, 3. Ravenswood, 20.37. Rockford, Second, 8.56.
Sandwich, 10. Seward, Winnebago Co., 11.50. Sterling, 20. Toulon,
2.46. Wheaton, First, 5. Wilmette, 10.


MICHIGAN, $235.99.

Carmel, 1.60. Chester, 4.10. Church, A. W. Douglass, _for Blowing
Rock, N. C._, 5. Coldwater, Sarah A. Dunn, 5. Detroit, First, 100.
Detroit, Mrs. Louie T. Carson's Children Easter Offering, _for Skyland
Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 2. Hudson, Papers, _for Blowing Rock, N.
C._ Kalamazoo, First, Bible Sch., Prim. and Intermediate Classes, _for
Indian Children, Crow M._, 5.50. Olivet, Ladies Soc. of C., Clothing,
_for Brewer Normal Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Webster, Webster B. Soc.,
1.55. West Bay City, John Bourn, _for Alaska M._, 100.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICH., by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $11.24:

Grand Blanc, 10.74. Grand Rapids, Plymouth, 50 cents.


IOWA, $440.01--of which from Estate, $16.67.

Algona, King's Daughters, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 6. Cedar Rapids,
First, Box Supplies, _for Tillotson C._ Davenport, Edwards, 28.40.
East Des Moines, Pilgrim, 6.05. Genoa Bluffs, 2. Hampton, S., 2.60.
Maquoketa, C., _for Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 11.35. Mount
Pleasant, 3.80. Muscatine, Pilgrim, 10. Osage, 53.15.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$299.99:

Algona, 6.35. Algona, 85 cts. Alden, 7. Cedar Falls, 5. Central City,
8. Chester Center, 1. Charles City, 40. Dubuque, Summit W. G., 2. Des
Moines, Pilgrim, 4; Plymouth, 6.89. Fairfield, 1.85. Genoa Bluffs,
3.42. Glenwood, 13.75. Grinnell, W. H. M. U., to const. MRS. J. B. GRINNELL
and MRS. GEORGE A. GATES, L. M's, 55.38. Independence, W. M.
S., 7; Mrs. Morse's S. Class, 2. Magnolia, "Magnolia Blossoms," 1.25.
Marshalltown, 5. Mason City, 14.39. McGregor, 10.75. McIntire, 50 cts.
Lyons, 2. Milford, C. E., 5. Mount Pleasant, W. M. S., 8.42; S., 88
cts. Montour, 4.75. New Hampton, 6.31. Ogden, W. M. S., 4; C. E., 2.
Pleasant Prairie, 10. Rowan, Jr. C. E., 1.50. Waterloo, W. M. S.,
18.75; C. E., 5. Webster City, L. M. S., to const. MRS. EDNA M. CROSLEY,
L. M., 30. Winthrop, 5.

ESTATE. Des Moines, Estate of J. H. Merrill, 16.67.


WISCONSIN, $202.48.

Brandon, 6.77. Columbus, 91.95. De Pere, Rev. J. W. Savage, _for S.
A., Talladega C._, 5. Kenosha, First, 15. Mondovi, First, 16.85. South
Kaukauna, S., 6.51. South Milwaukee, First, 5.53. Watertown, First,
11.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $43.87:

Clinton, 3. Milwaukee, Pilgrim, 2. Milwaukee, Grand Av., 10.
Platteville, 50 cts. Wauwatosa, 5. Whitewater, 23.37.


MINNESOTA, $33.14.

Ada, Jr. C. E., 1.61. Austin, First, S., 2.33. Beaver Creek, C. E.,
_for S. A., Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 5. Excelsior, 6.40.
Garvin, 2.55. Minneapolis, Oak Park, 2.50. Minneapolis, "Rodelmer,"
2.50. New Brighton, Clothing, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._ Robbinsdale,
10.25.


MISSOURI, $39.62.

Aurora, First, 5.30. Kansas City, Beacon Hill, S., 6.32. Kansas City,
Pilgrim, Bedding, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Saint Louis, First, S.,
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25. Saint Louis, People's Tab., 3.


KANSAS, $35.70.

Atchinson, 7.10. Athol, L. H. M. S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 1.
Centralia, "A Friend," _for Meridian, Miss._, 5. Russell, "One
Cent-a-Day Club," 2.40. Saint Mary's, Clothing, _for Meridian, Miss._
Seneca, L. H. M. S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 16. Valley Falls, 4.20.


NEBRASKA, $78.07.

Lincoln, Plymouth, 10.53. Lincoln, C. E., _for Santee Indian Sch._,
2.82. Paisley, First, 5. Rokeby, 3.15. Wahoo, C., 3.95; S., 54 cts.;
C. E., 50 cts.; Jr. C. E., 1.58.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NEBRASKA, by Mrs Geo. C. Hall,
Treas., $50.00:

W. H. M. U. of Neb., 50.


NORTH DAKOTA, $16.06.

Cathay, 1.31. Fargo, First, Woman's Soc., 5; Prim. S. Class, 2.50; C.
E., 2, _for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._ Hankinson, 3.75.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NORTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Mary M.
Fisher, Treas., $1.50:

Hankinson, S., _for Alaska M._, 1.50.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $81.32.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $81.32:

Aberdeen, 1.60. Aberdeen, S., 50 cts. Academy, C. E., 2.50. Alcester,
S., 2. Armour, S., 1. Buffalo Gap, 50 cts. Canova, S., 3. Columbia, C.
E., 2. De Smet, 2.50. Deadwood, 2. Elk Point, 4.50. Faulkton, S., 2.
Firesteel, 1.70. Gettysburg, S., 1.02. Huron, 11.20. Ipswich, S.,
2.40. Lead, 2.15. Meckling, C. E., 1.50. Mitchell, Jr. C. E., 3.
Mitchell, C. E., 5. Oahe, 1. Rapid City, 2. Redfield, Jr. C. E., 2.40.
Ree Heights, 60 cts. Spearfish, Jr. C. E., 1. Valley Springs, S., 1.
Yankton, 1.95. Academy, S., 1.36. Athol, 1.56. Morean River, 1.25.
Pierre, S., 1.50. Santee, 3. Vermillion, 5. Vermillion, S., 3.13.
Watertown, S., 1.25. Webster, S., 1.25.


WYOMING, $25.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WYOMING, by Amy E. Kevan,
Treas., $25.00.


IDAHO, $12.50.

Boise, First, 7.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IDAHO, by Mrs. G. L. Cole,
Treas., $5.00:

Mountain Home, 5.


COLORADO, $68.06.

Denver, First, _for Selma, Ala._, 52.76. Boulder, 15.30.


CALIFORNIA, $70.00.

North Ontario, R. C. Williams and wife, 5. Oakland, Miss M. L.
Newcomb, 60. Pomona, J. G. Dewey, 5.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $228.31.

Washington, First (25 of which from Gen'l E. Whittlesey), 228.31.


VIRGINIA, $4.00.

Hampton, Miss C. W. Field, _for Cappahosic, Va._, 1. Sassafras, Miss
Fannie Lancaster, _for Cappahosic, Va._, 2. Williamsburg, J. A. W.
Jones, _for Cappahosic, Va._, 1.


KENTUCKY, $2.00.

Lexington, Rev. J. S. Jackson, _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._, 2.


NORTH CAROLINA, $10.07.

Dry Creek, 2. Kings Mountain, C., 2.07. Saluda, "A Friend," 1. Troy,
S., 5.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $3.00.

Charleston, "A Friend," 3.


TENNESSEE, $144.00.

Big Creek Gap, "A Friend," _for Big Creek Sem._, 40. Deer Lodge, Rev.
Geo. Lusty, 4. Memphis, J. S. Menken, _for Kindergarten, Memphis,
Tenn._, 100.


GEORGIA, $14.50.

Atlanta, "A Friend," 2. McIntosh, Rev. J. A. Jones, _for De Forest
Chapel, Talladega C._, 5. McIntosh, Prof. Fred. W. Foster, 4; Richard
Clemens, 50 cts., _for S. A., McIntosh_, 4.50. Rutland, 2. Savannah,
Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 1.


ALABAMA, $139.31.

Birmingham, First, 1. Marion, "Friends," _for Marion_,
72.36. Mobile, C., by Rev. W. L. Johnson, 8. Shelby, Covenant, 4.20.
Tuskegee, Rev. E. J. Penny, _for Talladega C._, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ALABAMA, by Mrs. E. C. Silsby,
Treas., $52.75 (of which $42.75 bal. _for Share Jubilee Fund_)

Brewton, 2.50. Birmingham, 5. Jenifer, 50 cts. Marion, 2.75. Mobile,
5. Shelby, 2. Talladega, 14. Talladega, "Little Helpers," 10.
Talladega, W. H. M. U. of Ala., _for Indian M._, 10.


FLORIDA, $50.00.

Pomona, Rev. Moses C. Welch, 50.


MISSISSIPPI, $11.70.

Moorhead, Miss Eva Rogers, _for Moorhead Sch._, 8.50. Meridian, Mary
Harrison, 2; Amy Harrison, 1.20, _Graduates Fund_.


TEXAS, $9.50.

Austin, Tillotson, C. of Christ, 9.50.


INCOME, $640.00.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 158.75. Graves Sch'p Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 125. Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._,
18.75. Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._, 212.50. Le Moyne Fund, _for
Memphis, Tenn._, 37.50. Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 50. Tuthill
King Fund, _for Berea C._, 37.50.


TUITION, $4,697.59.

Williamsburg, Ky., 83.30; Cappahosic, Va., 41.50; Beaufort, N. C.,
16.75; Blowing Rock, N. C., 21.59; Chapel Hill, N. C., 6.25; Enfield,
N. C., 36.25; Hillsboro, N. C., 20.13; King's Mountain, N. C.,
35; Saluda, N. C., 23.12; Troy, N. C., 90 cts.; Whittier, N. C.,
39.94; Wilmington, N. C., 110.70.; Charleston, S. C., 273.12;
Greenwood, S. C., 89.32; Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 21.95; Grand View,
Tenn., Public Fund, 59; Grand View, Tenn., 63; Knoxville, Tenn.,
42.65; Memphis, Tenn., 524.05; Nashville, Tenn., 927.29; Pleasant
Hill, Tenn., 53.10; Marion, Ala., 45.38; Mobile, Ala., 73.40; Nat,
Ala., 27.14; Selma, Ala., 39; Albany, Ga., 86.15; Andersonville, Ga.,
12.25; Macon, Ga., 204.85; Atlanta, Ga., 217.55; McIntosh, Ga., 76.77;
Thomasville, Ga., 64.11; Savannah, Ga., 128.05. Florence, Ala,. 20.30;
Nat, Ala., Public Fund, 60; Nat, Ala., 36.18; Talladega, Ala., 359.99;
Martin, Fla., 12.39; Orange Park, Fla., 40; New Orleans, La., 389.51;
Austin, Tex., 107.10; Meridian, Miss., 64.50. Moorhead, Miss., 23;
Tougaloo, Miss., 68.85.


SUMMARY FOR MAY, 1898.

     Donations                            $10,962.59
     Estates                               10,315.82
                                          ----------
                                          $21,278.41
     Income                                   640.00
     Tuition                                4,697.59
                                          ----------
     Total for May                        $26,616.00
                                          ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for May                    $12.64
     Previously acknowledged                  223.13
                                             -------
     Total                                   $235.77

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for June                         $200.00
     Previously acknowledged               53,891.84
                                          ----------
                                          $54,091.84
                                          ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $484.91.

Bath, Winter St., 34.63. Eliot, First, 6.33; First, S., 1.25. Holton,
_for Le Moyne Inst., Memphis, Tenn._, 3. Islesboro, Miss Lucy E.
Pendleton, Clothing, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Lamoine, Miss Villa Hodgkin,
_for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 4. Manset, Manset Prim.
Band, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 2.06. Portland,
Williston, Clothing, _for Sch., Marshallville, Ga._ Portland, Bedding,
_for Tougaloo U._ South Berwick, 5.32. Wells Beach, Second, 4.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas.,
$424.32:

Alfred, 10. Acton, 3.25. Bath, Winter St., 41. Bethel, ad'l, 1. Broad
Cove, 1. Buxton, "A Friend," Mem. Offering, _for Mountain Work_, 50.
Castine, 10. Ellsworth, 25. Cornish, 4. Deer Isle, 5.12. Dennysville,
5. Dennysville, Dea. P. E. Vose, 6. Fort Fairfield, 3. Freeport,
10.50. Gray, 4.50. Hallowell, 10. Harpswell Center, 10. Kennebunk,
16.50. Limerick, 5. Machiasport, 5. Marshfield, 1.65. Minot, 13.15.
Newcastle, 17.35. North Ellsworth, C. E., 2. Norridgewock, 5. Orland,
9.50. Princeton, 1. Rockland, 22.70. Saco, 30. Somerset, 2.
Somersville, 2.15. South Freeport, 40. Steuben, 4.50. Thomaston, 5.25.
Topsham, 7.35. Union, 5. Wiscasset, 2. Woodfords, L. M. S., bal. to
const. MRS. CAROLINE T. KNIGHT, L. M., 23.80. Woolwich, 4.05.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,980.96--of which from Estate, $20.00.

Alstead, Third, 3.45. Canterbury, C. E., by F. H. Merrill, Treas., 6.
Concord, South, 125.43. Concord, South, Jr. C. E., _for Santee Indian
Sch._, 35. Dover, First, 100. East Barrington, "A Friend," _for
Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._, 3. Hollis, 11. Jaffrey, Miss Adams, _for
Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._, 4. Lisbon, Mrs. A. B. Taft, 6. Mason, C.,
Clothing, _for Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._ Pembroke, Mrs. Mary
W. Thompson, deceased, 1500. Plymouth, 20. Portsmouth, North, 81.08.
Suncook, "In memory of a precious mother, by her daughters," 35.
Westmoreland, 3.

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. AND HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $20.00:

West Concord, Y. L. M. S., _for Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U., Ladies'
New Hall_, 20.

ESTATE. Pembroke, Estate of Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, by George Parker
Thompson, Executor, 20.


VERMONT, $905.27--of which from Estate, $258.75

Bennington, "A Friend," 2. Burlington, L. B. S., _for Freight to
McIntosh, Ga._, 1.70. Cabot, C. E., 9; Rev. H. C. Hartwell, 4.50.
Dorset, C. E., by Marcia K. Gray, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._,
10. East Clarendon, ad'l, 5. East St. Johnsbury, "Friends," 2.25.
Holland, 5.20. Johnson, C. E., _for S. A., Straight U._, 5. Newfane,
9.42. North Bennington, Mrs. S. D. Jennings, 10; "A Friend," 5. North
Bennington, 2. Norwich, C., in part, 1. Roxbury, Quilt, _for Tougaloo
U._ Saint Albans, First, 75.50. Saint Johnsbury, South, S., _for
McIntosh, Ga._, 52. Saint Johnsbury, North, "H." 25. Townsend, 10.
Wallingford, 23.08.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Rebecca P.
Fairbanks, Treas., $388.87:

W. H. M. U., by Finance Committee, $19.02. Addison, County Conf., 1.
Albany, 2. Barton, 10. Barton Landing, Jr. C. E., 5. Bellows Falls,
Jr. C. E., 10. Bennington, North, Jr. C. E., 3. Brookfield, 9.
Burlington, First, Opportunity Circle, 58.15; First, 25; College, C.
E., 4.25. Fairlee, 5. Hinesburg, C. E., 5; Jr. C. E., 3. Johnson, 7.
McIndoes Falls, S., 7.65. Newbury, 11.80. Norwich, 6. Orwell, 22.50.
Orwell, Jr. C. E., 10. Pittsford, 5. Proctor, Jr. C. E., 5. Saint
Albans, First, W. H. M. S., 60. Saint Albans, Jr. C. E., 5. Saint
Johnsbury, North, Mrs. Horace Fairbanks, 25. South Hero, Jr. C. E.,
1.75. Saxtons River, 5. Underhill, Home Land Circle, 4. Vergennes, "A
Friend," 1. Wells River, C. E., 10. West Glover, 17. Williston, 3.75.
Windsor, Mrs. C. H. Fetch, 5. Woodstock, Primary and Intermediate S.,
15. Woodstock, 2.

ESTATE. Springfield, Estate of Frederick Parks, 258.75.


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,709.28--of which from Estates, $2,553.90.

Amesbury, Main St., 5. Amherst, "A Friend," 20. Amherst, Mary I.
Ward, 2. Amherst, Mrs. G. C. Munsell, Books, _for Lincoln Acad., Kings
Mountain, N. C._ Andover, Chapel C., 85. Andover, South, Books, _for
Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._ Auburndale, 51. Ayers Village, Miss Fannie
Kimball, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 3. Barre, S., 9.96.

Boston, Charlestown, Winthrop, 32.46. Dorchester, Mrs. Torrey, _for
Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 10. Dorchester, Central, L. A. Soc.,
Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._ Dorchester, Ladies, Central C., Clothing,
_for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ Jamaica Plain, Central, 183.15.
Roxbury, Immannuel, 218.14. Roxbury, Mrs. P. N. Livermore, _for S. A.,
Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 50. Roxbury, Mrs. Susan C. Parker,
Clothing, _for Sch., Marshallville, Ga._ West Roxbury, So. Evan.,
ad'l, 25 cts. West Roxbury, Mrs. N. S. French, _for S. A., Dorchester
Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 4.

Brighton, "W. A.," Special, 5. Brighton, Jr. C. E., 5. Brockton,
Olivet Mem., _for Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 8. Brookline, 5.
Brookline, Mrs. Elizabeth R. Lovett, _for Indian M._, 2. Brookline,
Ladies' Soc., Clothing, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._ Brookline,
George F. Arnold, Books, etc., _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._
Cambridge, Shepard Memorial, Adl., to const. REV. J. A. LANSING, WM.
E. STARK, FRED S. CUTTER, MRS. E. F. TAFT, MISS LUCY WHIPPLE and F. G.
COOKE, L. M's, 183.08. Cambridge, Prospect St., Men's Club, 13.34.
Cambridge, North Av., 1. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim, 2. Clinton, 25.13.
Conway, C., 23.42; S., 10. Cummington, 7.10. Dudley, First, 2.
Enfield, 35. Everett, First, L. M. A. Soc., 10. Framingham, "A
Friend," _for Indian Sch'p_, 17.50. Franklin, 11.18. Georgetown,
First, 13.36. Granby, L. B. Soc., Clothing, _for Grand View, Tenn._
Greenfield, Second, 70.70. Groveland, Perry C. E. and Parker Miss'y
Band, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. Haverhill, Fourth, 17. Riverside, 4.
Housatonic, 20.24. Hyde Park, Ladies' Aid, Clothing, _for Williamsburg
Acad., Ky._ Ipswich, South, 65. Lawrence, Trinity, C. E., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 25. Longmeadow, Longmeadow Benev. Ass'n, 61.04. Lowell, High
St., 166.00. Lowell, Eliot, 22.26. Lynn, First, 32; First, _for A. M.
Fund_, 3.56. Malden, First, C. E., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
Va._, 3. Manchester, C. E., _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._,
11. Medford, Mystic, 132.36. Medford, McCullum M., clothing, _for
Skyland Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._ Melrose, C. E., _for Alaska M._,
10.10. Merrimac, First, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50, Millbury, First,
22.10. Mittenague, Southworth Paper Co., Box Stationery, _for Chandler
Sch., Lexington, Ky._ Nantucket, C. E., _for Cartage, Belong Rock, N.
C._, 1. Newburyport, Whitefield, 7.36. Newton, Eliot, 50. Newton
Center, First, 81.20; "Extra Cent-a-Day Bank," 14. North Billerica,
12. Oxford, First, 5. Peabody, South, 81. Pepperell, Mrs. J. E. B.
Jewett, _for Freight to Greenwood, S. C._, 2. Pittsfield, South,
55.75; Mrs. Mary E. Sears, 5. Pittsfield, "A Friend," 25, bal. to
const. EDWARD TOLMA, ANNIE F. CROSSMAN and CHAS. E. DORR, L. M's.
Plympton, C. E., 2. Quincy Point, 10. Reading, 18. Reading, "A
Friend," 5. Saugus, 20.81. Silver Lake, Chapel, 2. Somerville,
Prospect Hill, 53.77. Somerville, Franklin St., Jr. C. E., _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._, 20. Somerville, Prospect Hill, Women's U., 10.
Somerville, Prospect Hill, "To help redeem for Christ the neglected
Mountain Whites and the long enslaved and despised Black Race of the
South," 50. Somerville, Winter Hill, C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50.
South Hadley, First, 17.25. South Hadley Falls, 5.95. South Weymouth,
Mrs. Josephine L. Dyer, _for S. A., Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch.,
Enfield N. C._, 25. Sunderland, 61.03. Taunton, Union, 18.25.
Wakefield, 24.25. Ware, East, 246.01. Warren, C. E., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Wellesley Hills, 13. Wenham, 6.
West Boxford, 3. West Boylston, First, 8.25. West Newton, Woman's
Guild, by Mrs. Helen M. Howard, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50. West
Wareham, Mrs. Julia R. Morse, 1. Weymouth, Mrs. R. R. Kendall,
Clothing, _for Enfield, N. C._ Whitman, First, 33.50. Winchester,
First, 226. Woburn, Christ Ch., to const. MISS MARY A. FRENCH, MISS
ALICE G. PRESTON and MISS LYDIA J. VALENTINE, L. M's, 90. Worcester,
Old South, 175.58; Union, 107.06. Worcester, Central, S. _for
Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Worcester, Pilgrim, Jr. C. E., _for
S. A., Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 6.

----, "A Friend," 100. ----, Miss E. R. Gould, _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. E., $500.00.

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., 480 _for Salaries_, 20 _for Chinese
M._

ESTATES. Boston, Estate of Rev. Edmund K. Alden, D.D., by Edmund K.
Alden, Executor, 900 (less tax 45), 855. South Hadley, Estate of Mrs.
Maria Burnham Gridley, by Loomis T. Tiffany, Executor, 1711.75 (less
expenses 12.85), 1698.90.


RHODE ISLAND, $22.15.

Providence, Plymouth, 21; North, C. E., 1.15. Providence, clothing, by
Miss Addie Myer, _for Sch., Marshallville, Ga._


CONNECTICUT, $13,009.34--of which from Estates, $10,869.99.

Berlin, Second, S., _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 35. Brookfield Center,
26.51. Burnside, "A Friend," 100. Burlington, L. B. Soc., _for
Furnishing Room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Bristol, Clothing, etc. _for
Tougaloo U._ Berlin, L. B. Soc., Clothing, _for Tougaloo U._ Cromwell,
C. E., by Bertha H. Sage, Treas., 1.95. Canaan, Pilgrim, L. M. S.,
Clothing, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Darien, C. E., _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 10. Fairfield, C. to const. MARY THEODOSIA BURR and
WALKER M. REDFIELD, L. M's, 77.50. Franklin, L. M. Soc. of C.,
Clothing, _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ Granby, South, 15; First,
5, _for Tillotson C._ Hampton, 10. Hebron, Ladies' Soc., _for Allen
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 12. Hartford, Students of Hartford Theo.
Seminary, 23; Mrs. Mary A. Williams, 15; Park, 30.68. Ivoryton, C. E.,
12; S., 5; Twelve Young Endeavorers, 1; Resolute Circle, K. D., 5;
Beacon Light Circle, 2; _for Furnishing a Room, Tougaloo U., New
Building_, 25. Lebanon, "An Old Worker," _for S. A., Dorchester Acad.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Milford, Plymouth, 14.32. Middletown, Mrs. A. B.
Crittenden, _for S. A., Tougaloo, U._, 2. New Britain, South, S., _for
Mountain Work_, 25. New Haven, Grand Av., 25; Ch. of the Redeemer, S.,
10. New Hartford, North, "Penny-a-Day Bank,", 18. New London, Second,
214.60. New Preston Village, 54.50. North Branford, 15.08. North
Woodbury, Mrs. Frank Dawson, _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._, 1. North Woodstock, Miss Esther E. Bishop and Sister, 20;
Ladies' Aid Soc., 4.36, _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ Norwich,
Broadway, 700; Broadway, Y. P. Union, 12.50; Greenville, S. 6.35.
Norwich, Mr. and Mrs. Chas. Bard, _for S. A., Tillotson C., Austin,
Texas_, 15. Old Saybrook, 15.15. Plainville, 39.75. Putnam, S. E.
Sharps' S. Class, _for Sch., Marshallville, Ga._, 1. Shelton, 38.19.
Somers, "C. B. P.,", 30. Southport, "A few friends," by Mrs. Martica
G. Waterman, _for Alaska M._, 305. Terryville, 67.10. Terryville, C.
E., _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ 13.41. Tolland, 13.
Torrington, Third, 33.01. Westport, Saugatuck, S., 4.18. Wolcott,
"Friend," _for Tougaloo U._, 1. Woodstock, First, 18.12.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $9.00.

Hartford, Mrs. W. P. Williams, _for S. A., Allen Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._, 1. Suffield, 8.

ESTATES. Cornwall, Estate of S. C. Beers, 298.71. Groton, Estate of
Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt, 571.28. West Hartford, Estate of Maria Whitman,
M. A. Andrews and J. W. Havens, Administrators, 10,000.


NEW YORK, $958.32.

Bergen, First, 7.16. Binghamton, First, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 25.
Bridgewater, "Friend," 5. Brooklyn, Clinton Av., 630. Brooklyn, Mr.
and Mrs. J. B. Barlow, Goods, _for Sch., Marshallville, Ga._ Brooklyn,
Clinton Av. Boys's Mission Band, _for Sch'p, Lincoln Acad., Kings
Mountain, N. C._, 40; South, 45; Central, S., 37.50; East, 1.55.
Brooklyn, Zenana Band, Clothing, _for Williamsburg Acad., Ky._ Canaan
Four Corners, 3. Candor, 5.40. Danby, Mrs. B. F. Tobey, Box "Youth's
Companions," _for Hillsboro, N. C._ Evans, 3. Fairport, 14.51. Groton,
Storrs A. Barrows, 25. Middle Island, Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, 10.
Mount Vernon, First, S., 4.26. Mount Morris, Mrs. H. Parsons,
Clothing, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ New York, "A Friend," _for
Piano, A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 25. New York, Bethany, S., _for
S. A., Fort Berthold, Indian Sch._, 25. New York, Misses Collins, _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 20. Port Chester, First, 2.
Riverhead, 9.19. Spencerport, Mrs. J. R. Loomis, Quilt, Sheeting, etc.
_for Tougaloo U._ Troy, H. G. Ludlow, _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._, 10. Warsaw, S., 10.75.


NEW JERSEY, $200.00.

Bound Brook, L. M. Soc., 5. Ocean Grove; Miss Flora I. Wellan, _for
Emerson Inst., Mobile, Ala._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE J. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. J. H.
Dennison, Treas., $190.00.

East Orange, First, 10. Montclair, First, W. H. M. S., 180.


PENNSYLVANIA, $118.41.

Germantown, Rev. Dr. Wood, 5; Mrs. E. B. Stokes, 5; Mrs. B. R. Smith,
1.50; _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ New Wilmington, "A
Friend," _for Chandler, Sch., Lexington, Ky._, 1. Philadelphia, The
Negro League, 50. Gloucester, Ed. Club, 27.54, _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._ Philadelphia, Central, in part, 10. Pittsburg, Dr.
Brady, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 5. ----, "Friends in
Penn. State Normal Sch.," by Mrs. Neda S. Thornton, _for Wash-house
and Workshop, Alaska M._, 5.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENN., by Mrs. T. W. Jones, Treas.,
$8.37:

Cambridge Springs, 5. Braddock, 3.37.


OHIO, $502.34.

Claridon, "Friends," _for Native Teacher, Fort Yates, N. D._, 50.
Claridon, S., _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 30. Cleveland,
Bethlehem C. and S., 38.81; Hough Av., 23. Cleveland, Mrs. A. J.
Smith, Clothing, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._ Columbiana, C. E.,
Clothing, _for Chandler Sch., Lexington, Ky._ Conneaut, S., 10.
Elyria, First, 42.88; "A Friend," 80; A. L. Garford, 25; Mrs. P. M.
Porter, 5; John Schaibl, 5; J. T. Burrows, 1. Kent, 6.50.
Fredericksburg, Ladies' Soc., Books, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._
Mansfield, C., Bedding, _for Lincoln School, Meridian, Miss._ Monroe,
First, 2.75. Oberlin, Henry Lincoln Post, G. A. R. Relief Corps and
Friends, _for Flag at Saluda Sem., Saluda, N. C._, 10. Tallmadge, C.,
to const. REV. PRESCOTT D. DODGE, L. M., 49.70. Tallmadge, ad'l, 75
cts. ----, "A Friend," 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. Geo. B. Brown, Treas.,
$120.95:

Austinburg, 3. Claridon, 10.25. Collingswood, Jr. C. E., 1. Lodi, C.
E., 2.50. Marysville, Jr. C. E., 1.50. Medina, 10. Oberlin, "Friends,"
35. Oberlin, Second, Jr. C. E., 3.60. Oberlin, Second; to const. MRS.
F. B. RICE, L. M., 30. Painsville, 7. Rootstown, 3. Strongsville,
2.50. Toledo, Central, Jr. C. E., 1; Washington St., Jr. C. E., 1.
Twinsburg, 4.


ILLINOIS, $260.50.

Abingdon, Mrs. M. C. Harris, 8. Batavia, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 7.71.
Batavia, Rev. J. E. Bissell, 5. Bowen, 6.25. Chicago, First, 42.84.
Chicago, Woman's Ass'n., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 20.
Chicago, Ch. of the Covenant, Clothing, _for Skyland Inst., Blowing
Rock, N. C._ Edelstien, 53 cts. Hennepin, 3. Joy Prairie, S., 6.22. La
Grange, 34.37. Lawn Ridge, 4.08. Naperville, R. H. Dickinson, 5.
Oakdale, Jr. C. E., _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Pittsfield,
6. Roseville, Mrs. S. C. Axtell, _for Freight to Moorhead, Miss._,
6.50. Roseville, Mrs. L. A. Axtell, Hats, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._ Seward, Winnebago Co., First, 42. Seward, First, 9. Wilmette,
First, 24.18.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
$27.82:

Caledonia, 8.17. Chicago, Covenant, 4.50. McLean, 5. Rockford, First,
6.15. Somonauk, 4.


MICHIGAN, $345.05--of which from Estate, $150.00.

Adrian, Julia A. Condict, 2.50. Alamo, Julius Hackley, 40. Chelsea,
5.60. Clinton, 10. Detroit, Woodward Av., 50.10. Grand Blanc, S., _for
Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 4. Luddington, S., _for Trinity Sch.,
Ala._, 5. New Baltimore, 4.85. Saint Joseph, Ladies' Soc., _for
Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 8. Sandstone, Union C., 12; C. E. of
Union C., 3. South Haven, C. E. Soc., 5; Miss Dora Delamere, 5, _for
Marion, Ala._ West Detroit, Leone F. Lockwood, 2. Whitehall, D. C.
Estabrook, 2.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $36.00:

Allegan, 2. Frankfort, 5. Litchfield, Miss C. A. Turrell, _for S. A.,
Pleasant Hill, Tenn. and Moorhead, Miss._, 10. Muskegon, _for S. A.,
Santee Indian Sch._, 7. Olivet, 11. Williamstown, 1.

ESTATE. Niles, Estate of Dr. James Lewis, 150.


IOWA, $137.56.

Algona, "King's Daughters," by Miss Clara Zahlton, _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 23. Anamosa, 80 cts. Doon, First, 4.15. Grinnell, C. E., by E. E.
Romain, Treas., 2. Iowa City, 27.11. Lansing Ridge, German, 2.
Larchwood, C. E., _for Alaska M._, 6. McGregor, C. E., by Elizabeth H.
Daniels, Treas., 15. Osage, 34.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$23.25:

Conniel Bluffs, First, 10. Tabor, 6.25. Webster City, 7.


WISCONSIN, $4,158.74--of which from Estate $4,000.

Appleton, Jr. C. E., _for Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 5.50.
Burlington, C. E., _for S. A., Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 4.
Columbus, Olivet, 10.70. Elkhorn, C., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 17.10.
Evansville, Jr. C. E., _for Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._, 4. Fort
Howard, 1. Green Bay, First Presb., 45.94. Hartford, Goods, _for
Lincoln Sch., Meridian, Miss._ Koshkonong, 5. Menomonie; 17.50.
Milwaukee, Pilgrim, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Trinity Sch., Athens,
Ala._, 1.50; Pilgrim, Jr. C. E., _for Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._,
4.50. Prentice, 5. Ripon, Ripon College, Clothing, _for Pleasant Hill,
Acad., Tenn._ Wauwatosa, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Trinity Sch., Athens,
Ala._, 4.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $33.00:

Green Bay, Pres. and Cong. C., 20. Janesville, 13.

ESTATE. Beloit, Estate of Mrs. Ellen B. French, Wm. B. Strong and A.
P. Waterman, Executors, 4,000.


MINNESOTA, $86.63.

Duluth, Geo. W. Keyes, 2. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 34.23; W. H. Norris,
15. Northfield, Moravia, Jr. C. E., _for A. G., Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._, 2. Rochester, 17.65. ----, Minnesota, 15.75.


MISSOURI, $21.66.

Cole Camp, 10.50. Kansas City, Beacon Hill, 4.01. Meadville, 4.55.
Rockville, Mrs. Addie Haynes, 60 cts. Sedalia, Second, 2.


KANSAS, $67.01.

Alma, 4.25. Centralia, 27.80. Eleanor, Fred. Tangeman, 10. Kanwaka,
5. Manhattan, First, 16.96. Wheaton, Clear Creek, 3.


NEBRASKA, $60.51.

Creighton, 3. Franklin, F. A. Wood, 5. Kramer, German, 3.90. Omaha,
St. Mary's Av., 43.36. Omaha, First, S., 1.25. Santee, Edith Leonard,
_for Fort Berthold, N. D._, 4.


NORTH DAKOTA, $92.00.

Elbowoods, Dr. J. L. Finney, _for S. A., Fort Berthold Indian Sch._,
7. Fort Berthold, Miss., H. B. Ilsley, _for S. A., Fort Berthold, N.
D._, 60. Fort Berthold, L. S. S., _for L. M. Fund_, 25.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $5.00.

Sioux Falls, First, 5.


COLORADO, $10.20.

Denver, Mrs. H. M. Semple, 20 cts. Idaho Springs, L. H. Wolcott, 10.


MONTANA, $20.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MONTANA, by Mrs. W. S. Bell, Treas.,
$20.00.

Castle, Children's Mission Band, _for Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._,
20.


UTAH, $2.00.

Salt Lake City, Wm. H. Tibbals, 2.


OREGON, $6.13.

Forest Grove, 6.13.


CALIFORNIA, $596.81.

Norwalk, Bethany, 3. San Francisco, Receipts of the California
Chinese Mission (see items below), 586.31. Stockton, Rev. J. C.
Holbrook, D.D., 7.50.


MARYLAND, $60.59.

Baltimore, D. D. Mallory, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 50.
Baltimore, First, 10.59.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $25.53.

Washington, Fifth, 13; Lincoln Memorial, 12.53.


KENTUCKY, $3.00.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 3. Lexington, "A Friend," one doz. plated
knives and forks.


VIRGINIA, $127.17.

Cappahosic, Conference Col., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._,
100.17. Cappahosic, Gloucester M. S., _for Gloucester Sch._, 5.
Churchland, Miss Addie White, _for Gloucester Sch._, 1. Hampton,
Elizabeth Upton, _for Indian M._, 10. Nest, Mrs. Juda Whiting, _for
Gloucester Sch._, 1. Richmond, G. G. F. Bragg, _for Gloucester Sch._,
5. Sassafras, Miss Maggie Booth, 2; Mrs. Alberta Tyler, 1, _for
Gloucester Sch._ Selden, Miss E. C. Scott, 1; Mrs. Ella Scott, 1, _for
Gloucester Sch._


TENNESSEE, $147.43.

Chattanooga, First, "Member," 3. Deer Lodge, Mr. Pease, _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 1. Knoxville, Miss I. F. Hubbard, Fire Escape and
Sash Door, Val., 45, _for Knoxville, Tenn._ Memphis, Le Moyne Lit.
Soc., 8.03. Nashville, Union, 103.08; S. of Fisk U., 7.82. Nashville,
Miss'y Soc., Fisk U., 12.50. Nashville, Rev. C. W. Dunn, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 10. Nashville, "A Friend," _for S. A., Fisk U._, 2.


LOUISIANA, $4.23.

Hammond, 4.23.


MISSISSIPPI, 35.40.

Hermanville, Miss. B. Blackburn, _for Tougaloo U._, 5. Jackson, Miss
Mary J. Gibson, _for furnishing room, Tougaloo U._, 10. Meridian,
Willie Bounds, 2, George W. Shumate, 3, ad'l to _Graduates Thank
Offering Fund_; S. Birthday Off., 1.90. Moorhead, Miss Eva Rogers,
_for piano_, 4.50; _for S. A._, 4. Shaw, R. T. Burroughs, _for piano,
A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 5.


GEORGIA, $15.75.

Atlanta, "Friend," _for Storr's Sch._, 40 cts. Atlanta, First, _for
Share Jubilee Fund_, 50 cts. Macon, George C. Burrage, 7.60; Alma C.
Childs, 3; Ellen B. Scobie, _for Ballard Sch., Macon, Ga._, 3.
Marshallville, C. E., of Lamson Sch., 1.25.


SYRIA, $40.00.

Beirut, Mrs. Liva A. Shaw, to const. MISS ELLEN B. SCOBIE, L. M., 40.


SOUTH AFRICA, $10.00.

Wellington, Miss Anna M. Wells, 10.


INCOME, $2,634.16.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 1,184.16; E. A. Brown, Schp. Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 15.75: De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
Talladega C._, 185; Endowment Fund, _for Southern Work_, 6.25; Haley
Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 25; Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._, 93.75;
Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta, U._, 6.25; Howard Theo. Fund, _for
Howard U._, 625.63; Howard Carter, Endowment Fund, 6.25; Le Moyne
Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 137.50; Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega
C._, 22.50; Luke Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._, 10; Theological
Fund, _for Fisk U._, 1.12; Tuthill King Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 95;
Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._, 87.50; Scholarship Fund, _for
Straight U._, 60; Seth Wadham's Theo. Fund, _for Talladega C._, 22.50;
Stone Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 25; J. & L. H. Wood, Sch'p Fund,
_for Talladega C._, 25.


TUITION, $4,370.90.

Cappahosic, Va., 40.50; Lexington, Ky., 125; Williamsburg, Ky.,
68.25; Beaufort, N. C., 14.95; Blowing Rock, N. C., 36.22; Chapel
Hill, N. C., 3.45; Enfield, N. C., 30.50; Hillsboro, N. C., 23.63;
Kings Mountain, N. C., 32; Troy and Candor, N. C., 2.41; Whittier, N.
C., 20.28; Wilmington, N. C., 112.45; Charleston, S. C., 291.20;
Greenwood, S. C., 80.39; Knoxville, Tenn., 42.35; Memphis, Tenn.,
540.90; Nashville, Tenn., 514.98; Grandview, Tenn., 56.65; Pleasant
Hill, Tenn., 101.55; Albany, Ga., 71.25; Andersonville, Ga., 9.25;
Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch., 215.35; Macon, Ga., 235.95; McIntosh, Ga.,
102.62; Savannah, Ga., 141.99; Thomasville, Ga., 110.52; Athens, Ala.,
124.10; Marion, Ala., 23.11; Mobile, Ala., 95.80; Selma, Ala., 36.30;
Orange Park, Fla., 44.50. New Orleans, La., 483.30; Jackson, Miss.,
254.60; Meridian, Miss., 138; Moorhead, 28; Tougaloo, Miss., 19.65;
Austin, Tex., 98.95.


SUMMARY FOR JUNE, 1898.

     Donations                            $13,377.24
     Estates                               17,852.64
                                          ----------
                                          $31,229.88
     Income                                 2,634.16
     Tuition                                4,370.90
                                          ----------
     Total for June                       $38,234.94


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for June                    $7.00
     Previously acknowledged                  235.77
                                             -------
                                             $242.77


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, William Johnston,
Treasurer, from April 15 to May 21, 1898, $586.31.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $161.36:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 8.60; Ann'y Off., 6.45. Los Angeles, Chinese
M. O., 5.85; Ann'y Off., 5. Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.20; Ann'y
Off., 8.79. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 6. Oroville, Chinese M. O., 2.10;
Ann'y Off., 4.71, Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 2.75. Riverside, Chinese M.
O., 3.60; Ann'y Pledges, 9.50. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5. San
Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 3. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 4.30; Annual
Membs., 5. San Francisco, Bethany Ch., Ann'y Off., 13; Central
Mission, Chinese M. O., 9,95; Annual Membs., 10; West Mission, Chinese
M. O., 7.05. Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O., 3; Annual Membs., 4. Santa
Cruz, Chinese M. O., 6.55; Ann'y Off., 5.80. Ventura, Chinese M. O.,
1.50; Ann'y Gifts, 4.50. Vernondale, Chinese M. O., 1.70; Annual
Membs., 2. Watsonville, Chinese M. O. 3.80; Ann'y Gifts, 75 cts.

FROM CHURCHES, $73.95:

Claremont, 13.10. San Francisco, First, 60.85.

FROM INDIVIDUALS, $86.00:

Charles Hetson, 50. John Stevenson, 30; Rev. F. B. Perkins, 5; C. A.
W., 1.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $259.00:

Bangor, Me., Hon. E. R. Burpee, 100. Auburndale, Mass., Miss Julia
Pickard, 5. Stockbridge, Mass., Miss Alice Byington, 100. Stockbridge,
Mass., Miss Adele Brewer, 3. New Haven, Conn., Mrs. Henry Farnum, 50.
Santee Agency, Neb., Indian S. S. Class, 1.

FOR CHINESE WOMEN AND GIRLS, $6.00:

Wheaton, Ill., College, S. 5; Mrs. Carrie B. Kennedy, 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JULY, 1898.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND

For the Education of Colored People.

     Income for July                       $8,545.00
     Previously acknowledged               54,091.84
                                          ----------
                                          $62,636.84
                                          ==========


MAINE, $471.48.

Auburn, High St., Y. L. M. Band, _for wash-house and work-shop,
Alaska M._, 10. Hallowell, H. T. L. Baker, 5. Richmond, 6. Rockland,
20.91. Skowhegan, L. M. Soc., by Harriet A. Nash, Treas., 18.50. ----,
"A Friend in Maine," 40.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury, Treas.,
$371.07.

Andover, 5. Auburn, High St., Y. L. M. B., 10. Bangor, First, 13;
First, C. E., _for Oahe_, 10; Central, 14; Hammond St., 11. Belfast,
15. Brewer, First, 14. Camden, 25.50. Dixmont, 1. East Orrington,
2.70. East Sumner, 5. Freedom, 3.45. Gorham, N. H., 5.27. Hampden, 30.
Jackson, 3. Kenduskeag, 2.70. Litchfield Corner, 15. North Belfast, 2.
Orono, 5. Orono, 1.60. Oxford, 2. Pownall, 10. Sandy Point, 2.38.
Searsport, First, 22.53. Searsport, Second, 6.50. Skowhegan, 19.36.
South Berwick, 57.48. South Paris, 12.50. Turner, 15. West Auburn, 5.
Winslow, 3. York Village, 21.10.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,090.37--of which from Estate, $500.00.

Amherst, 20. Campton, 6. Candia, 11. Francestown, 5. Goffstown, 7.86.
Hanover Center, C. E., _for Mountain Work_, 5.72. Henniker, 38.75.
Hopkinton, 16.11. Lyndeboro, 9. Nashua, First, 15. Newmarket, Thomas
H. Wiswall, 10. North Hampton, The late E. Gove, by Mrs. Abbie Gove
and Francis R. Drake, 126.75. North Hampton, Mrs. Abbie Gove, 10.
Plainfield, Mrs. S. R. Baker, 5. Walpole, 34.75.

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. AND HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $269.43.

Concord, "A Friend in First Ch.," 50. Concord, South, 22.50. Derry,
25. Epsom, 3.46. Hebron, 6.66. Lebanon, 26.81. Tilton, Mrs. Spencer,
5. Undesignated Funds, 130.

ESTATE.--Dover, Estate of Mrs. Abbie A. Kelsey, Miss Almie J. Kelsey,
Executrix, 500.


VERMONT, $1,813.82--of which from Estates, $1,558.88. Burlington,
College St., 74.62. Burlington, "Friends," 6. Greensboro, C. L. Guild,
5. Jeffersonville, Cambridge, Second. S., 2. Lyndon, 6.25. Montpelier,
Bethany, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 24. St. Johnsbury, North,
75. Randolph, First, 18. St. Johnsbury, "A. W. A.," 2. West
Brattleboro, 19.07. Woodstock, First, 23.

ESTATES.--East Hardwick, Estate of David Strickland, by J. W. Hovey,
Executor, 1,000. Northfield, Estate of Mary Hathaway, by H. R. Brown,
Executor, 258.88. Springfield, Estate of Frederick Parks, by A. M.
Allbe, Executor, 300.


MASSACHUSETTS, $2,453.36--of which from Estate, $15.00.

Abington, First, 9.50. Andover, South, 50; C. E., 25, _for Macon,
Ga._ Attleboro, Second, S., 12.60. Attleboro, C. E., _for Santee
Indian Sch., Neb._, 10.50. Baldwinsville, Ladies Soc., Clothing,
Freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Bernardston, 8.30. Beverly, Dane
St., 117.50. Billerica, C. E., 5.

Boston, Allston, 90.91. Dorchester, Second, 108.63. Roxbury, John G.
Cary, 7.50. Roxbury, Immanuel, ad'l, 1.

Boxford, First, S., _for Indian M._, 25. Brookline, Harvard, 82.67.
Brookline, Leyden, C. E., _for Alaska M._, 10. Cambridge, Miss A. M.
Longfellow, 5; Dr. A. McKenzie, 5; A parlor collection, 4.15; Mt.
Olive Bapt. Ch., 2.50, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._ Concord,
Charles Thompson, 3. Dana, 5. East Hampton, First, 27.32. East
Somerville, Mrs. M. C. Howard, 10. Everett, 25.13. Fall River, Central
Ch., C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Fitchburg, Rollstone, 8.54.
Foxboro, Mrs. Mary N. Phelps, to const. MRS. ANNA K. ALLEN, L. M., 50.
Framingham, Plymouth, 20. Gloucester, Trinity, 30. Granby, Ch. of
Christ, 15.05. Great Barrington, First, 19.12. Greenwich, C., 6: S.,
5. Hadley First, 11.20. Haverhill, Center., W. M. Soc., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 50. Holbrook, Winthrop, 2.17. Holyoke, First, C. E., 5.
Hubbardston, 7. Hyannis, 1.75. Ipswich, First, 10. Kendall Green,
Hastings Hall, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 14.01.
Leicester, 27.05. Lincoln, 1.30. Lynn, Chestnut St., 2.65. Malden,
First Bapt., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 20. Malden, Mrs.
R. P. Kemp, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1. Manomet, 3.
Mansfield, Orthodox, 12.07. Medway Village, 25. Newton, Eliot, 275.
Newton Centre, First S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 9.77. Northampton,
Edwards, C. E., 10. Northbridge, First, 12. Oakham, C., to const. MRS.
MARIA T. F. RUGG, L. M., 50. Oxford, First, to const. MRS. EDITH
HUDSON, L. M., 40. Pittsfield, First Ch. of Christ, 30. Sandwich, S.,
_for Ballard Sch._, 10. Sheffield, 8.30. Somerville, Highland, to
const. REV. GEO. S. ANDERSON, L. M., 30. South Hadley, Mount Holyoke
College, Faculty and Students, 100, _for Indian Schp., Santee, Neb._,
14 _for Freedmen_. Springfield, North, 57.39; South, 31.30; Robert H.
Clizbe, 10. Stockbridge, 17.44. Tapleyville, "S. R.," 1.25. Townsend,
Orthodox, 12.68. Waltham, Trin., 25.92. Wellesley, 71.47. West Newton,
Second, 104.71. West Yarmouth, 5. Wilbraham, "A Friend," 36.
Winchenden, North, 73. Worcester, Piedmont, quarterly, 35.20;
Plymouth, 34.11; Peoples, Primary Dept., 2.

----, "Peace," 50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS., by Miss Miriam L.
Woodberry, Ass't Treas., $40.00.

W. H. M. A. of Mass., bal. pledge _for Chinese M._, Women and Girls,
40.

ESTATE.--Boston, Estate of E. C. Parkhurst, 15.


RHODE ISLAND, $27.94.

Newport, United, quarterly, 10.25. Providence, Congdon St. Bapt. Ch.,
_for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 3.29; North, C. E., 1.40.
Slaterville, 13.


CONNECTICUT, $2,191.95.

Ashford, First, 4.78. Bridgeport, Second, 130.80. Bridgeport, Second,
S., _for Santee Indian M., Neb._, 25. Bristol, First, quarterly, 50.
Bristol, First, special, 20. Cheshire, "A Friend," 1. Collinsville,
14. Danielsonville, Westfield, 27.23. Groton, C., _for Tougaloo U._,
25. Groton, 10.46. Goshen, 38. Guilford, First, 40. Hadlyme, R. E.
Hungerford, 25. Hartford, First, 167.29. Hartford, Asylum Hill, L. B.
S., _for furnishing room, Tougaloo U._, 25. Hartford, Miss E. R. Hyde,
_for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1. Lakeville, Mrs. S. J.
Pennock, 4. Litchfield, First, 44.10. Manchester, North, S., _for
furnishing room, Tougaloo U._, 31.60. Meriden, "Friends," 10. Meriden,
Center, 75. Milford, First, 8.70. New Haven, Dixwell Av., 5. New
Haven, Dixwell St., C., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 8.48.
New London, First Ch. of Christ, 43.52. Norfolk, 98.99. Northfield,
12.84. North Madison, 4. Norwich, Park, 818.02. Plantsville, S., by A.
Z. Ely, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 7.40. Poquonock, 5.66. Putnam, Second,
32.67. Ridgefield, L. A. Soc., Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._ Salisbury,
C., 5.43 _for Freedmen_, 5 _for Mountain Work._ Saybrook, Mrs. Geo.
Dibble, 5. Shelton, S., 12.50. Stamford, Cong., C. E., _for Mountain
Work in Tenn._, 12.13. Voluntown and Sterling, 5. Waterbury, Second,
248.78. West Avon, 8. West Hartford, First Ch. of Christ, 18.95.
Willimantic, 23.12.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., Mrs. W. W. Jacobs,
Treas., $33.50:

Cromwell, 18.50. Portland, "United Workers," bal. to const. MRS. H. KILBY,
L. M., 15.


NEW YORK, $471.22.

Angola, C., 7; C. E., 5. Brooklyn Central, S., _for Indian M._,
37.50. Brooklyn, Pratt Institute, Box of Books, _for Library,
Lexington, Ky._ Chili Station, Martha A. Parker, deceased, (an
ex-slave), _for the education of Colored People_, by J. B. Johnston,
Att'y, 210. East Bloomfield, 40. East Bloomfield, Mrs. Eliza S.
Goodwin, 5. Fredonia, Martha L. Stevens, 50 cts. Morristown, First,
5.50. Mount Sinai, C. E., 3.40. New York, Chas. L. Mead, _for S. A.
Fisk U._, 13; Mount Hope, S., Bible Class, 10; "H. W. H.," _for
Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 5; "M. C. H.," 2. Niagara Falls,
First, 15. Northfield, C. E., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._,
9. Troy, Rev. F. R. Marvin, 3.10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $98.22.

Brooklyn, South, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Indian M._, 15. Brooklyn,
Puritan, C. E., 26. Brooklyn, Park, _for S. A., Lincoln Acad., Kings
Mt., N. C._, 4.50. Bridgewater, C. E., 10. Ellington, 5. Homer, 5.
Jamestown, First, C. E., _for Alaska M._, 10. Niagara Falls, C. E.,
10. Rutland, 7.72. Walton, 5.


NEW JERSEY, $453.56.

East Orange, "Cash," 100. Elizabeth, 5. Jersey City Heights, "C. L.
A.," 5. Lyons Farms, Presb. S., 15. Newark, Miss Kate L. Hamilton,
_for Chinese M._, 1. Plainfield, 119.56. Upper Montclair, Christian
Union, 150. Vineland, "A Friend," 12.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. J. H.
Denison, Treas., $45.50.

Bound Brook, Pilgrim Workers, bal. to const. MISS ELFLEDA DUNHAM, L.
M., 25. Bound Brook, 12. Philadelphia, Penn. Central, 8.50.


PENNSYLVANIA, $37.00.

Berwyn, Charles E. Stevens, bal. to const. himself, L. M., 2. Lander,
Alfred Cowles & Son, 35.


OHIO, $451.98.

Brecksville, First, 9. Chagrin Falls, 28.57. Cleveland, Euclid Av.,
28.92; Plymouth, 12; Franklin Av., 10. Gomer, Welsh, 18.50. Hudson,
C., quarterly, 9.50. Lakewood, 1.50. Lodi, 9.44. Medina, H. L. Loomis,
to const., H. A. CLARK, EMMA BURNHAM and F. J. CLARK, L. M's, 100.
Mount Vernon 25.85. Oberlin, First, 25. Perrysburg, S. P. Tolman,
10.50. Rootstown, W. J. Dickinson, 20. Tallmadge, S., 20.20. Wakeman,
Rev. Jesse Hill, _for Gold Bug, Ky._, 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. George B. Brown,
Treas., $118.00.

Akron, First, 5. Cincinnati, Walnut Hills, 16. Cleveland, First,
11.90; Euclid Av., 10; Hough Av., 7; Bethlehem, C. E., 2; Bethlehem,
2; Archwood Av., C. E., 1.50. Dayton, 2. Fairport, Jr. C. E., 1.50.
Gomer, 2. Hudson, 1.60. Oberlin, Second, to const. MISS MARY SHAFER,
L. M., 30. Oberlin, First, 12. Painesville, C. E., _for Storrs Sch.,
Atlanta, Ga._, 2. Ridgeville Corners, 3. Springfield, First, 3.50.
Toledo, Central S., Primary, 1; Second, C. E., 1.50. Vermillion, C.
E., 2.50.


ILLINOIS, $546.80.

Batavia, Miss Faith Ficher, 1; Miss Y. Babbitt, 1, _for S. A. Fisk
U._ Blue Island, C. E., 6. Chicago, Warren Av., 52.06; Rev. Geo. R.
Merrill, D.D., 10; Mrs. C. F. Holcomb, 20; Central Park, 4.50.

Chicago, Millard Av. Mission Band, 6.07; Miss Miriam E. Carey, 5; K.
Harris, 5; Green St. Cong. Ch., 2.73, _for S. A., Fisk U._; Green St.
Ch., W. M. S., _for Fisk U._, 1.22. Decatur, C., _for S. A., Fisk U._,
2. Elburn, 7.81. Evanston, First, 4. First, _for Fisk U._, 3. Geneseo,
Mrs. P. Huntington, 5; Mrs. A. E. Steele, 5; C., 4.85; Miss M. Miller,
1., _for S. A., Fisk U._ Geneva, Officers and Girls, State Home, 10;
Mrs. K. West, 1; C., 1, _for S. A., Fisk U._ Glen Ellyn, 8. Godfrey,
4.10. Hamilton, Chas. Gruff, 5. Hinsdale, 8.57. McLean, W. M. Soc.,
11.65; Mrs. Mary Moreland, 5; H. S. Woodrow, 2, _for S. A., Fisk U._
Moline, First, (69.90 of which _for a Schp., Fisk U._) 139.81. Normal,
6.55. Oak Park, Second, 18.79. Ottawa, 20.94. Providence, 14. Rockton,
First, 5. Waukegan, 11.92. Waverly, 8.25. Waverly, S., 5. Wheaton,
Wheaton College, 15.18; Woman's Miss. Soc., 2, _for S. A., Fisk U._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. L. A. Field, Treas.,
$95.80:

Elburn, 45. Mont Clair, 10. Oak Park, First, 7.50; First, C. E., 5.
Peoria, First, _for Fisk U._, 6.95. Rollo, 4.05. Rockford, Second, 3.


MICHIGAN, $39.75.

Charlotte, 10. Hart, First, 8.50. Muskegon, First, 18.35. Olivet, S.,
1.90. Pine Grove, 1.


IOWA, $142.91--of which from Estate, $11.67.

Charles City, 32.17. Cherokee, First, 25.05. Correctionville, 9.
Grinnell, S., 14.47. Harvey, 1.50. McGregor, J. H. Ellsworth, 20.
Quasqueton, C., 6.60; C. E., 2.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas.,
$19.95:

Anita, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 12.58. Des Moines, Plymouth, 2.92.
Orient, "A Friend," 1. Winthrop, Jr. C. E., 3.45.

ESTATE. Cedar Rapids, Estate of Clarence P. Emery, by J. H. Merrill,
Trustee, _for Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._, 11.67.


WISCONSIN, $288.35.

Beloit, First, 70. Beloit, Mrs. E. Barber, _for Furnishing Room,
Tougaloo U._, 25. Delevan, 8.09. Evansville, Jun. E. S., _for Trinity
Sch., Athens, Ala._, 5. Fulton, Rev. A. S. Reid, 2. La Crosse, 47.10.
Lake Geneva, First, 9. Racine, Mrs. Canfield Smith, 20; Mary
Jorghenson, 10. Sparta, First, 18. West Salem, C., to const. GEO. L.
HOOKER, L. M., 31.16. Whitewater, 20.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $23.00:

Eau Claire, 3. Milwaukee, Grand Av., 20.


MISSOURI, $7.22.

Pierce City, First, 7.22.


MINNESOTA, $153.47.

Ada, Sen. E. S., 12. Custer, Bethel, 1.70. Freeborn, 3.20.
Minneapolis, "Rodelmer," 2.50. Minneapolis, Fifth, C. E., 2. Moorhead,
First, 5.20.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
Treas., $131.87 (less expenses, $5), $126.87:

Austin, 6.55. Fairmont, 3.94. Glencoe, 12. Minneapolis, Park Av.,
12.84. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 10. New Ulmn, 4. Northfield, Carleton
College, _for Hospital Work, Fisk U._, 37.81. Rochester, 12.45. Sauk
Center, 3.22. Springfield, 2.50. Saint Paul, Plymouth, 10; Plymouth,
C. E., 10. Tatrum, C. E., 3.06. Wadena, C. E., 3.50.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $58.25.

Alcester, 5. Gothland, 3.25. Yankton, "Friends in S. D.," 50.


NEBRASKA, $38.73.

Crete, 29.70. Linwood, 7.21. Norfolk, Second, 1.82.


KANSAS, $44.01.

Emporia, First, 40.36. Smith Center, 3.65.


MONTANA, $5.00.

Missoula, 5.


CALIFORNIA, $349.16.

Byron, 2.10. Llano, Miss Lucy Morley, 5. Pomona, Mrs. L. H. P.,
12.50. San Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see
items below), 329.56.


OREGON, $4.00.

Eugene, First, 4.


WASHINGTON, $4.20.

Cheney, 4.20.


VIRGINIA, $2.75.

Cappahosic, Capt. S. Munsell, _for Gloucester Sch._, 1. Gloucester,
Mrs. S. L. Goldman, _for Gloucester Sch._, 1. Gloucester Co., Bethany,
S., _for Gloucester Sch._, 75 cts.


WEST VIRGINIA, $6.30.

Huntington, First, C. E., 6.30.


NORTH CAROLINA, $15.50.

Tryon, 9.50. Woodville, Pool Grove Bapt. C., _for Gloucester Sch.,
Cappahosic, Va._, 1.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF NORTH CAROLINA, by A. E. Farrington,
Treas., $5.00:

Oaks, _for Indian M._, 5.


TENNESSEE, $11.00.

Knoxville, Second, 1. Nashville, Rev. Chas. W. Dunn, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 5. Pin Hook Landing, Rev. C. B. Riggs and family, 5.


LOUISIANA, $4.00.

Belle Place, 4.


FLORIDA, $31.50.

Melbourne, First, 10.50; Miss C. L. Marsh, 3. Tallahassee, T. W.
Talley, _for Music, S. A., Fisk U._, 18.


ENGLAND, $2.44.

Leamington, Boy's Mission, by James Taylor, _for S. A., Fisk U._,
2.44.


SCOTLAND, $59.82.

"Friends," by F. J. Loudin and Jubilee Singers, _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 59.82.


INCOME, $901.39.

Atterbury Fund, 106.87. Avery Fund, _for African M._, 191. Belden
Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 30. De Forest Fund, _for President's
Chair, Talladega C._, 217.61. C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._, 50.
General Endowment Fund, _for Freedmen_, 50. Gen'l C. B. Fisk Sch'p
Fund _for Fisk U._, 11.25. Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._,
112.50. Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 22.50. Hammond Fund, _for
Straight U._, 22.50. Howard Theo. Sch'p Fund, _for Howard U._, 57.
Tuthill King Endowment Fund, _for Berea C._, 94 cts. Le Moyne Fund,
_for Memphis, Tenn._, 22.50. Luke Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._,
22 cts. Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._, 5.63. Scholarship
Fund, _for Straight U._, 40 cts. Stone Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._,
47 cts.


TUITION, $1,262.64.

Lexington, Ky., 188.15; All Healing, N. C. Public Fund, 200; Saluda,
N. C., 28.90; Whittier, N. C., 4.80; Charleston, S. C., 318.90;
Nashville, Tenn., 346.34; Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 3; Cotton Valley,
Ala., Public Fund, 80; Cotton Valley, Ala., 54.05; Orange Park, Fla.,
1; Tougaloo, Miss., 5; New Orleans, La., 32; Austin, Tex., 50 cts.


SUMMARY FOR JULY, 1898.

     Donations                             $9,192.29
     Estates                                2,085.55
                                          ----------
                                          $11,277.84
     Income                                   901.39
     Tuition                                1,262.64
                                          ----------
     Total for July                       $13,441.87


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

     Subscriptions for July                  $13.05
     Previously acknowledged                 242.77
                                            -------
                                            $255.82


SUMMARY.

     Donations                          $126,545.93
     Estates                              85,906.14
                                        -----------
                                        $212,452.07
     Income                               11,621.89
     Tuition                              36,324.31
                                        -----------
     Total from Oct. 1, 1897,
       to July 31, 1898,                $260,398.27


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, William Johnstone,
Treas., from May 19 to June 27, 1898, $329.56.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $216.71:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 4.70; Annual Membs., 7.25. Specials from
Chinese _for Rent_, 10.75; Wong Hing, _for New Mission House_, 5. Los
Angeles, Chinese M. O., 5.90. Ann'y Pledges, 24.61. Marysville,
Chinese M. O., 7.20; Ann'y Pledges, 9.25. Oroville, Chinese M. O.,
2.50; Annual Memb., 13.50. Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 2.75. Riverside,
Chinese M. O., 4.05; Ann'y Gift, 5. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5. San
Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 2. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 2.10; Ann'y
Pledges, 11.65. San Francisco, Bethany C., Ann'y Pledges, 27.50. San
Francisco, Central Mission, M. O., 9.85; Annual Memb., 12. San
Francisco, West Mission, Chinese M. O., 2.60. Santa Barbara, Chinese
M. O., 5.85; Ann'y Pledges, 5. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 6.30; Annual
Memb., 15.50. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 50 cts.; Ann'y Pledges, 1.
Vernondale, Chinese M. O., 2; Ann'y Pledges, 3. Watsonville, Chinese
M. O., 2.40.

PERSONAL GIFTS, $26.00.

Mrs. L. E. Agard, 20; Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D., 5; Mrs. Carolyn A.
Sawyer, 1.

EASTERN FRIENDS, $5.00.

Worcester, Mass., "Friends," 5.

FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $81.85.

Greenfield, Woman's Aux. to Mass. W. H. M. A., 25; Miss E. S.
Osgood, 25. Albany, N. Y., "Friends of Chinese," 21. Howard, Neb.,
Cong. C. E., by Mrs. O. V. Rice, 4.85. Watsonville, by Mrs. Martha
Ellis, 6.


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Av. and Twenty-Second St.,
  New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUBILEE YEAR FUND, ADDITIONAL SHARE.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ALABAMA, Talladega, Ala.

     Previously reported                 857
     Subscription reported above           1
                                        ----
     Total number of shares reported     858

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

  WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.
  _State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords;
  Mrs. L. J. Thomas, 115 So. Main St., Auburn;
  Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

  FEMALE CENT. INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION
  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 16 Rumford St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W. J. Van Patten, 386 Pearl St., Burlington.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Rebecca P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

  [B]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--


CONNECTICUT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 530 Farmington Ave., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 153 Decatur St., Brooklyn


NEW JERSEY.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. Frank J. Goodwin, Glen Ridge.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. S. Upton, Ridgway.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. W. Carroll, 48 Brookfield St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 515 The Ellington, Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. F. Coe, Elkhart.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. H. Ball, Anderson.


ILLINOIS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Oak Park.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Whitcomb, 463 Irving Ave., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Miss Bessie E. Crosby, Oak Park.


MISSOURI.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes St., Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. F. Doane, 3319 E. 9th St., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. F. Berry, Ottumwa.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, West Grand Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Isaac Platt Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. N. Thorne, 212 S. Union St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. E. Smith, 140 Gorham St., Madison.


MINNESOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth St., St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. M. M. Lander, Wahpeton.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. B. H. Burtt, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. M. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Brown, Rapid City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S. Cushman, Deadwood.


NEBRASKA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Q St., Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Charlotte C. Hall, C St., Lincoln.


KANSAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. H. Jaquith, 1157 Filmore Street, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read, Parsons.


COLORADO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette St., Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valentine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Brown, Wheatland.


MONTANA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Victor F. Clark, Livingston.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. J. Miller, Livingston.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. S. Bell, Helena.


IDAHO.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. E. Mason, Mountain Home.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. L. Cole, Mountain Home.


WASHINGTON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K St., Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth St., Seattle.


OREGON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. D. Clarke, 447 N. E. Twelfth St., Portland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Forest Grove.


CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, Saratoga.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. B. Perkins, 546 24th St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (including Southern Idaho).

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth St., E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. E. H. Ashmun, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. McCluskey, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, Greensboro.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, Oaks.


GEORGIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--
  Secretary--
  Treasurer--


FLORIDA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Spencer Snell, Talladega.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY and ARKANSAS.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Mary L. Corpier, Florence, Ala.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. C. Napier, 514 Capitol Square, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th St., Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, 2436 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda W. Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary L. Rogers, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


FOOTNOTE:

[B] While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State body for
Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 52, NO. 03, SEPTEMBER, 1898 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.