Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

JULY, 1894.

  VOL. XLVIII.
  NO. 7.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  FINANCIAL--SCHOOL ANNIVERSARIES                                  249
  VACATION                                                         251
  MR. WHARTON THE EVANGELIST--OLD SILVER DOLLARS                   252


THE SOUTH.

  ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES:--
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, TOUGALOO, MISS.                           253
    BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.                              255
    BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.                                 256
    ALLEN NORMAL SCHOOL, THOMASVILLE, GA.                          258
    McINTOSH, GA.--BURRELL SCHOOL, SELMA, ALA.                     260
    NORMAL SCHOOL, ORANGE PARK, FLA.                               262
    MERIDIAN, MISS.                                                263
    GRAND VIEW, TENN.                                              264
  CHURCH WORK:--
    THE EVANGELIST AT WORK                                         265


THE CHINESE.

  LETTER FROM REV. W. C. POND, D.D.                                268


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

  "WHAT PROGRESS DO YOU MAKE?"                                     269


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS                                        270


RECEIPTS                                                           272

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. C. J. RYDER, _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  RICHARD S. BARNES.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.

  _For Two Years._

  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.

  _For One Year._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


_District Secretaries._

  REV. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. Jos. E. Roy, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._
  Rev. W. E. C. WRIGHT, _Cong'l Rooms, Y. M. C. A. Building,
    Cleveland, Ohio._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street. Chicago, Ill., or Congregational
Rooms, Y. M. C. A. Building, Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH, the sum of ---- dollars, to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The Will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE  AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. XLVIII.      JULY, 1894.         NO. 7.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCIAL.

In some respects our report is favorable. Our receipts for the eight
months ending May 31st are $18,487.18 more than for the same period
last year. If the Association had received funds from the Government
this year for the eight months, $10,127.95, the receipts would have
been 28,615.13 more than last year. The payments for the eight months
have been $11,315.16 less than last year. With this showing the debt
of the current year to May 31st is $19,419.98 as over against
$49,222.32 to May 31st of last year, but as this debt of the current
year is to be added to the $45,028.11 due at the close of the year
September 30th, 1893, it makes the total debt May 31, $64,448.09.
Those who have read the statements made in the MISSIONARY will recall
that in the month of March our debt was reduced $10,718.47, and in
April $4,847.40, but the fear was then expressed, which has since been
realized, that these reductions might not continue. The month of May
shows an increase of the debt, bringing it now to $64,448.09. We
appeal most earnestly to the friends of the Association to stay the
progress of this debt.

       *       *       *       *       *

SCHOOL ANNIVERSARIES.

We begin in this issue of the MISSIONARY to print the reports of the
anniversary exercises of our schools. They will occupy largely this
number and the next, and will appear somewhat in the order of time in
which the schools closed. When the whole are published, they will make
an impression of the vastness, variety and usefulness of the work. It
will show institutions of higher grade in nearly all the States of the
South, normal and graded schools in nearly all the large cities, and
parochial schools connected with many of the churches. The industrial
feature of these schools will appear most conspicuously in the details
given.

In the account of the larger schools, Fisk University, Talladega
College, Tougaloo University, Straight University and Tillotson
Institute, Austin, Texas, we give but in part the full extent of the
plan originally laid down by the Association, for it does not include
Hampton Institute, Atlanta University and Berea College, children of
the Association which have set up and are conducting housekeeping on
their own account.

The origin of Hampton Institute was in that first freedmen's school at
Fortress Monroe, enlarged year by year, and at length falling under
the sagacious eye of Gen. Armstrong, it opened to him in almost
prophetic vision what his great genius and untiring industry brought
to full consummation. Nor did the American Missionary Association send
this child forth empty-handed. It turned over to its use the one
hundred and twenty-five acres of beautiful land, with its buildings,
permanent and transient, on which the wonderful plant is now
established.

Atlanta University was founded by the Association, and under the wise
leadership of President Ware, and the steady support of the
Association for many years, it at length reached a condition of
independence and self-support.

Berea College, founded by the intrepid John G. Fee, a missionary of
the American Missionary Association, owned by its own Board of
Trustees from the first, was for many years assisted by the generous
contributions of the Association.

These three institutions, though independent of the Association and
not under its care or support, if added to the list already given of
our higher schools, will show a line of educational lighthouses
stretching from the Atlantic to the Gulf and thence into the heart of
Texas. Such was the original plan of the Association, and such has
been the remarkably successful result.

But the work of the Association is not confined to the Negro race. In
the mountains of the South it touches with the wand of Christian
education the noble Highlanders of America with their proud
achievements and yet with their long-neglected education, needing the
inspiring uplift of the school and cultured church. To these
influences they yield a most hearty response, and no brighter reports
will be found than from these mountain regions.

The Indians have from the outset been the subjects of our watchful
care, and with some variation in their activity, the services among
them have brought forth some of the brightest results. Revivals during
the past year of greater power than any reported from any other part
of the field were experienced in these Indian churches.

The Chinese work on the Pacific Coast, under the admirable leadership
of Dr. Pond, has made steady progress in the conversion of souls here
and in carrying the gospel to China.

The mission in Alaska, brought to so sudden and terrible a close by
the murder of Mr. Thornton, is expected to be opened again this summer
by the return of Mr. and Mrs. Lopp to Cape Prince of Wales. With their
knowledge of the language and of the people, and with the advantages
of their past experience, we hope the mission will enter upon a new
and much more successful life than heretofore.

We invite the friends of the Association to study this work in its
variety and extent. We make no comparisons, but surely this work
touches the sympathies of the patriot and the Christian, and calls for
a steady and abundant support.

       *       *       *       *       *

VACATION.

We congratulate our teachers who are now returning from the South on
the vacation that awaits them in the hills and on the seashores of the
North. They have had the unbroken toil of eight or ten months in the
South, far from their homes and friends, finding little companionship
except with the pupils and their parents, sometimes ostracized and
scorned by the whites--and yet not always--for we rejoice to say that
there are many localities in the South where the work of our teachers
is appreciated and where they are themselves treated with Christian
courtesy by the whites.

We need not ask their friends at the North to welcome these returned
workers with that kindness that is restful, but we do ask that the
facts they reveal in regard to the South may be heard and heeded.
There is no set of witnesses more competent to tell of the actual
situation at the South, its home life, its industries, its struggle
with difficulties, than these same teachers. Sometimes the teachers
have been there but a short time and their labors may have been
confined to one locality, but in that narrow range their observations
among the colored people have been most minute. They have watched the
operations of the pupils closely from day to day, and have been
brought constantly in contact with the people in their cabins, in
their work, and in their trials.

But many of the teachers have been there for years and in different
locations, and their representation of the state of affairs is as
reliable as any that can be found from any source whatever. If the
observations and experiences of this corps of teachers could be set
forth, they would furnish, with all its lights and shades, the most
accurate picture that could be presented of the state of affairs in
the South. Pastors and churches would do well to give these returned
teachers an opportunity to present in the prayer-meeting and elsewhere
the exact facts as they have found them in the South.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. WHARTON, THE EVANGELIST.

Under the head of "_Church Work_" will be found in these pages a
sketch of the work of an evangelist in our churches during the past
year, written by himself. That evangelist is so unselfish and
consecrated to his work, and has been so long and so successfully
employed in it that we are sure our readers will be glad to have some
account of the man himself.

Mr. James Wharton is an Englishman, resident at Barrow-in-Furness,
near to Furness Abbey and the English lakes. He is not an ordained
minister, but a lay preacher, as Mr. Moody is. He accepts no salary
for his services, and consents to receive only the amount of his
traveling expenses. For over twenty years he has been thus engaged,
residing at his home in the summer but busy in gospel work, and in the
winters traveling to distant places. His labors have been in England,
Ireland, Scotland, the Shetland Islands, Wales, Canada, Spain and
America. During these ministrations he has traveled 88,000 miles, and
has made eleven trips to America.

In 1876, he learned of the condition of the emancipated slaves of this
country, and entered into correspondence with this Association with
reference to work here. He has spent eleven years here, and has
evinced great wisdom, good judgment and, as will be seen by the report
of his work this past year, has had great success. He was the first
man to attempt an open-air service in New Orleans after the war. He
stood on a cotton bale at the foot of Canal St., and continued the
service for several weeks, although the white people threatened to
shoot him. In his labors among the blacks of the South, he strikes the
happy medium between undue excitement and cold formalism. As he
returns from year to year, he rejoices to find the converts of earlier
years holding on their way with faith and a stable Christian life. Our
readers will be interested to read the sketch which Mr. Wharton gives
of his labors.

       *       *       *       *       *

OLD SPANISH DOLLARS.

A friend sends, with the following brief note, two Spanish dollars of
ancient date. We hope that some lovers of ancient coin will be able to
make a good offer for them:

"I send you by express two old Spanish silver dollars of date 1786 and
1800, for the work of the American Missionary Association. They belong
to my wife, who has had them a long time and now thinks they had
better be sent out to help in the Lord's work through the American
Missionary Association. Our hope is, that some lover of the great and
good cause, who has also a fancy for old and rare coins, may appear,
who would pay a liberal premium for them. If such should be the case,
we would be much gratified to be informed as to how much they bring to
the work."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Anniversary Exercises._

       *       *       *       *       *

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, TOUGALOO, MISS.

BY PRES. FRANK G. WOODWORTH, D.D.

While, owing to hard times, the enrollment at Tougaloo this year, 362,
was less than that of the two previous years, the average attendance
has been better than before, larger numbers having continued until the
close. The year has been marked by specialty good work on the
students' part, only one having failed of promotion. It has been a
notable year also in the religious development of many. One only of
the Normal Department is not now a professing Christian, and at the
farewell prayer-meeting he expressed the earnest desire soon to become
one. In the new Theological Department nine have been enrolled. The
prospect for next year is that this feature of the work will be
largely developed. The new College Preparatory Department has made a
most successful beginning, seven having been enrolled and having done
good work. The past year has also been notable in the industrial
departments. Great attention has always been given to these, though in
the girls' industries, especially, the facilities have been
exceedingly inadequate. During the year, Berkshire Cottage, the girls'
industrial building, has been completed, and in it are pleasant
accommodations for the needlework and cooking classes. Seventy girls
have had class instruction throughout the year in these branches. In
Berkshire Cottage is also carried on the work for which the building
was specially designed--the model housekeeping. When the rooms are all
furnished eight girls at a time, in two sets of four, will keep house
for two months at a time, gaining a practical knowledge of household
economies. This year sixteen girls have had this most important
training, the last four in the new cottage. Of this four, three were
in the graduating Normal class. The exhibits of the cooking and sewing
classes at Commencement, consisting of cakes, biscuits, confectionery,
etc., and a great variety of well made and useful garments, were
highly praised, and a large number sold to visitors. Few schools have
better facilities for the practical and most important work of
developing homemakers than has Tougaloo. Upon the trained young women
who can make good homes depends very largely the future of the Negro
race.

AGRICULTURE.

From the earliest history of the school there has been attention paid
to agriculture, and each year sees development in the acreage under
cultivation and the quantity of produce raised. This year nearly all
the fresh meat and the milk, sweet potatoes, molasses, vegetables,
etc., needed by the large boarding department, have been raised on the
farm, and some things have been marketed, besides the large amount of
corn and hay needed upon so large a plantation. The need of a special
agricultural building, to cost about $2,000, in which those students
who work upon the farm can live, and where they may have special class
instruction, is greatly needed.

MANUAL TRAINING.

The Manual Training Department has also this year received new
impetus. It includes work in wood and iron, and industrial drawing.
The methods are those of the most modern and most approved schools for
manual training. Sixty boys have had the woodworking, and twenty the
forging. Industrial drawing has been the new feature of the year.
There are twenty new and complete sets of drawing tools. For the lower
grades there is elementary or "one view drawing," and in the normal
grades both boys and girls have advanced work that includes the
fundamentals of machine and architectural drawing. Orthographic and
isometric projection are taught. The exhibit of this drawing work was
remarkably fine, and elicited hearty commendation. Its utility was
clearly recognized when on the walls were seen drawings of house
framings, house plans, architectural and building details, etc. It
should be said that the work along industrial lines is neither
optional nor elective, but that it is a part of the regular class-work
of the school as much as grammar or arithmetic.

Another feature has been the opening up of the "Tougaloo University
Addition to Tougaloo." About one hundred and twenty acres of
university land have been surveyed and plotted off into home lots of
about five acres each, to be sold to former students of the school and
to others who desire to educate their children at Tougaloo. Already
several lots have been taken and homes built, and in a few years there
will be quite a little educational community.

COMMENCEMENT EXERCISES.

The Commencement exercises, May 20th-23d, passed off pleasantly. On
Sunday, President Woodworth's baccalaureate was from the text, "He
endured as seeing him who is invisible." The farewell prayer-meeting
in the evening, conducted by Miss Page, valedictorian of the
graduating class, was peculiarly rich and helpful in its
reminiscences, forecastings and inspirations. All the graduates go out
as earnest Christians. The boys' gymnastic exhibition on Monday
evening drew a very interested audience, and the eighth grade
exercises on Tuesday morning were admirable. The alumni meeting was
the largest that has ever been held, one-third of the alumni having
been in attendance. Two notable papers were read, one by Miss Jessie
Rhone, of '84, on, "It is better beyond," and one by Mr. W. H. Lanier,
'81, on, "The conduct to be pursued by the educated colored young
people in gaining success." Both were hopeful and helpful.

Mr. Lanier's relation of his experience as teacher in one of the most
difficult towns of the State, where former teachers had been run off
and the school closed by the whites, and of the way in which he had so
conducted himself that men whose only greeting at first was, "Howdy,
boy," now recognize him cordially with, "How do you do, professor,"
was a most admirable illustration of how tact and good sense will help
to break down barriers. The Commencement concert on Tuesday evening
drew a very large crowd. Every seat was occupied and all standing
room, and it was clearly shown that the chapel at Tougaloo is all too
small. Over one hundred and fifty of the audience of about six hundred
were white. Better chorus work is not often heard. Tougaloo is
fortunate not only in having had competent music teachers, but in
having in Prof. Hill, Dean of the Normal Department, a most capable
musician.

For the first time in years Commencement day was showery, but a large
audience assembled to see the normal graduation. Seven graduated, and
their orations and essays were highly creditable. The annual address
was given by Rev. B. F. Ousley, now professor in the Alcorn
Agricultural and Mechanical College at Rodney, Miss., the State
institution for colored young men, and formerly a missionary of the
American Board in South Africa. It was a clear, thoughtful, and in
every way admirable presentation of the qualifications of "The Man for
the Age." Brief impromptu addresses were made by Rev. S. P. Smith,
American Missionary Association pastor in Jackson, Mr. W. H. Lanier,
of '81, Major Millsaps, one of the leading bankers of the State, Rev.
S. C. Mounger, presiding elder of the Methodist Episcopal Church
South, residing at Jackson, and Col. J. L. Power, of the Jackson
_Clarion Ledger_. The last three gentlemen emphasized again and again
the fact that the best white sentiment of the State is heartily in
favor of such work as is done at Tougaloo, and in full sympathy with
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

PROF. F. T. WATERS.

The Ballard Normal School, located at Macon, Ga., has closed with
flattering success in all departments. The work in all the grades
reflects much credit on the teachers, but no work is more marked than
that of the industrial department. The display was much more imposing
than was thought possible, the work having been delayed until late in
the year; it seemed at first unwise to try to make any display at all,
but all felt paid for the attempt. In the girls' department we found
work of all grades of sewing, dresses, waists, aprons and other
articles of wearing apparel, also darning, matching, buttonholes,
quilting, etc. Each article was marked with the name of the girl and
grade, and many were the exclamations of commendation from those who
visited the rooms where the display was made. Works deserving special
mention are buttonholes made by Martha Howard of the seventh grade;
patching by Lulu Gaston, and darning by Gertrude Williams. The
cooking-school, for lack of money, was discontinued after three
months, but during that time substantial progress was made, and there
can be no question about the advisability of pushing the industrial
work as far as possible the coming year. In the boys' department, too,
all were surprised to see the articles in display. There were joints
of every shape, all of them showing skill of high order; there were
many useful articles displayed, such as pen-racks, pen-trays,
towel-rolls, hat-racks, puzzles, etc. Many of the articles were given
away by the boys to the friends, and some of the articles will be
exhibited in the North to show the class of work done in our schools.
As it seems to me, no branch of work is more important than the
industrial, and great interest is taken in it by the boys. The lack of
money has made it necessary to curtail this very important part of our
educational work.

The work done in the last year leads me to believe that there should
be no cutting down in any part of the work of Ballard school, which I
regard as one of the most promising of the many American Missionary
Association schools, and especially should there be no cutting in
either of the industrial departments. More than any one thing, these
people need to be taught the use of time and the saving of money;
this, with the intellectual and moral training in our schools, will
make full grown men and women. The work-begun is one that should be
pursued with no let up.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.

MISS JULIA B. FORD.

The closing week began with the class reunion, Friday evening, May
18th, when, notwithstanding a wild wind and rain storm, a blithe
company assembled in the cosy rooms at the Teachers' Home.

Sunday afternoon, May 20th, an able baccalaureate address was preached
by the Rev. Alexander Ellis, of Savannah. The large audience, which
filled our flower-decked chapel, were said, by a resident, to be "the
best colored people of Savannah." Certainly the sight of this large
company of refined and intelligent persons of the Negro race might
have served as an inspiration to a worker for that race.

On Tuesday morning, after the usual opening exercises, the Rev. Mr.
Upshaw gave an instructive and stirring talk on the evils of the use
of narcotics. A good letter from the Junior Christian Endeavor band of
Ionia, Iowa, was read to the students, who returned a hearty vote of
thanks for the draft for five dollars therein contained for a clock
for our chapel, also for the promise of a scholarship for a student
next year. Then the long line of students repaired to their respective
class-rooms, followed by the friends who came to listen to their oral
examinations. The latter were in all grades, from the seniors who
replied to questions in Latin, mathematics, etc., to the tiny tots in
room No. 1.

INDUSTRIAL WORK.

A conspicuous feature in the day's programme was the exhibition of
articles made in the _sewing department_. Hundreds of specimens were
effectively displayed against the walls of the large office. There
were nicely made garments, bright patchwork quilts, dressed dolls
illustrating hygienic styles of dress, buttonhole work and neat
patches. Much of the work done won warm commendation from the visitors
present, and that by the boys of the third grade received a full share
of praise. In many cases it was difficult to believe that the
specimens of work done in May were wrought by the same pairs of hands
as the great, uncouth stitches made on the companion pieces furnished
in January. Yet each pupil has had but two hours' instruction a week.
We hope during the coming year to enlarge and improve the department.
Extending our sincere thanks to the kind friends who have sent us
supplies for the sewing, we would, by the way, very modestly suggest
that a good sewing machine is needed here, and if one should be
forthcoming from the beneficent ones who have an especial interest in
this most important branch of education, we should indeed hail its
advent with fervent gratitude.

Tuesday noon found us with our friends again gathered in the chapel,
where prizes were awarded to those who had made the most improvement
in sewing. One little girl had said to her sewing teacher: "Oh, if I
can only get a prize for sewing, just a card, or anything, to show my
mother that I am improving, and that she is getting something in
return for the dollar she pays for my tuition!" From the nice books,
etc., sent us in boxes by Northern friends, we distributed our prizes.
To this little girl we were glad to give something, which rejoiced her
heart, and the gleaming eyes of several other pupils--notably those of
the boys of the third grade--as they came forward for the coveted
honor, was a pleasant sight. Before dismissal, the Rev. L. B. Maxwell
gave us a bright and helpful little talk. Tuesday night, in the
freshly decorated and densely crowded chapel, was given an exhibition
by members of all grades of the school. The songs, recitations,
readings, gymnastics and tableaux elicited much delighted applause.

Thursday morning the school assembled to listen to the reading of
promotions. One of the pleasantest memories of Beach Institute which
the workers there carried away to their vacation was that of the sight
of the eager yet self-controlled company of students, which, holding
its breath to listen, yet, when it heard, spent no breath in murmurs
of delight or of disappointment. Only the graver, self-reproachful
expression or radiant smile betrayed the feelings of the listener.

ANNIVERSARY EXERCISES.

Thursday evening the Anniversary exercises took place. Palmettoes,
roses, etc., made our chapel a place of beauty. Over the platform in
artistic design, the class motto, "_Row, not Drift_," hung above a
great boat decorated with the blossoms of the cape jasmine, suspended
over its crossed oars, tastefully tied with the class colors--nile
green and cream white. All showed effectively against a soft
background of white overlaid with festoonings of the long gray moss.
Our eight graduates, seven girls and one stalwart youth, "a rugged
young oak in the midst of roses," rendered their parts in spicy
essays, humorous reading, graceful and spirited recitations and
earnest oration in a manner which won due signals of appreciation. The
choruses, etc., were sung in good style, the diplomas were given, the
successful contestant for the scholarship from the new tenth grade was
announced, the class song was sung, and then Richard R. Wright, who in
his boyhood sent to Northern friends the message, "_Tell them we are
rising_," and who is now President of the Georgia State Agricultural
College for Colored Youth, followed with an address replete with that
which might instruct and enthuse this class of 1894, which was about
to embark in boats in which they were to "_Row, not Drift_."

As one listened to this address, again what an inspiring scene met the
eye--the gifted, cultured speaker, his very life an inspiration, the
semicircle of earnest, hopeful young graduates, the chapel and
adjoining rooms crowded with an audience whose appearance betokened
education and refinement, among whom were doctors of divinity, editors
and other professional men. One could but only exclaim, "Within these
thirty years, verily, '_What hath God wrought!_'"

Oh, that American Christians could be brought to such a sense of the
tremendous needs of this Negro race at the South, that through myriad
channels the needed supplies would flow, to continue and enlarge this,
the Master's own blessed work.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALLEN NORMAL SCHOOL, THOMASVILLE, GA.

MISS K. B. DOWD.

For this event we had made great preparations. For weeks practicing
had been going on vigorously, despite regular lessons and extreme warm
weather. The class to graduate consisted of four members, and we felt
anxious that as residents of Thomasville they should do themselves
credit, and grandly did they rise to meet our expectations.

Commencement exercises began Sunday evening with the baccalaureate
sermon preached by our pastor, Rev. C. F. Sargent. It was listened to
by a full house, composed of the best people among the colored race of
the city. Tuesday at 8 P.M. the school marched to the school-building
to find it already crowded to its utmost capacity, there being not
standing room then. Half an hour later tiers of eager faces were
peering through the open windows. Hack-loads came from the town and
adjoining towns, only to find entrance impossible. Some half a dozen
of the white citizens stood upon boards at the rear of the building
through the two hours' programme, and declared they "enjoyed it very
much." The concert lasted an hour and was followed by gymnastic drills
given by the boarding pupils. Their wielding of the heavy dumbbells
elicited hearty applause. With no breaks they went through with
marching, stepping movements, wand-drills and the anvil chorus, the
exercises closing with a full chorus, "The Song of the Sea," by
Veazie. Our only regret was that so many must be turned away. Between
the concert and the gymnastic drills, Miss Dickerman's tiny ones
entertained the company with motion songs, recitations and solos,
showing the careful drill and thorough work of the year.

Wednesday was a busy day indeed, for the church had to be trimmed for
the great event, namely, the graduating exercises. Long folds of blue
and yellow, the class colors, hung from the highest point in the
ceiling over the pulpit to the windows on either side. Directly in the
center, in large gold letters, was the class motto "Forward." Huge
bouquets of the most exquisite roses, sent in by friends and pupils,
were everywhere. A bank of ferns in front of the platform completed
the decorations. Just before the time to go to the church a heavy
thunder shower came up and the prospect for the evening was dubious
indeed, but by eight there was nothing more than clouds and mud to
trouble us. Upon reaching the church we found it full, despite the
rain, and among the audience were the editor of the city paper and one
of the leading physicians.

Prayer was offered by one of the colored ministers of the city,
followed by the "Te Deum Laudamus," by the school. The essays "Joan of
Arc," "Evangeline," "England's Growth in Free Government," and "H.
H.," were well read and well received. Comment was made by the doctor
upon the correct pronunciation of the class, a remark being made to
the effect that it was superior to the work done in their own schools.
There were no class honors, for _all_ had worked faithfully and well.
The speaker of the evening was T. S. Inborden, of the Albany high
school, a graduate of Fisk University. His address was an earnest
appeal for "growth."

The diplomas were presented by Rev. C. F. Sargent. His words to each
member of the class were most appropriate and heartfelt. The
"Good-night" song was followed by the benediction and that by the
hearty congratulations and good wishes of the friends of the school,
leaving in our hearts happiness and content that the hard work of the
year is appreciated and our school both blessing and blessed.

       *       *       *       *       *

McINTOSH, GA.

PROF. FRED. W. FOSTER.

Wednesday morning, May 16th, marked the beginning of the end of our
year's work. After our usual devotional exercises we commenced the
public examination of our school in all the various classes. It was an
exhaustive review of as much of the work of the year as could be
covered in the given time. All passed off to the satisfaction of the
teachers and the great delight of a good number of visiting patrons
and friends. It was a thorough test, and was well met by the various
classes from primary to normal, and gave evidence of earnest work and
real advancement.

Although Wednesday's examination was the test of actual work, Thursday
was the day which marked the high-water point in the matter of general
interest, being the occasion of our regular anniversary. The exercises
consisted of declamations by a number of young men, and recitations by
young women, interspersed with music by a choir selected from the
school. Although my boys and girls wear dark skins and come from the
rice field and turpentine swamp, and their native speech is sometimes
little better than a jargon, still I would not have hesitated to put
them beside boys and girls coming from much more favorable
surroundings. Our music, too, rendered by young people whose previous
practice, for the most part, extended no farther than Gospel hymns or
plantation melodies, could not have failed to convince one of careful
drill and earnest effort, and was a very pleasurable part of the day's
programme.

The County Superintendent of schools was with us through the whole of
Thursday, and expressed his keen appreciation of the work done. While
these two days gave evidence of solid work accomplished, it is only by
daily contact during the entire year that one can realize the gain in
scholarship, methods of work, ability to think and express thought,
and the growth in morals and Christian character that has been made.

       *       *       *       *       *

BURRELL SCHOOL, SELMA, ALA.

PROF. A. T. BURNELL.

Burrell School has just closed a very pleasant and successful year,
having, despite the hard times, a larger enrollment than any of the
three years preceding; the attendance being also slightly better at
the very last. Selma is an educational center, and, for the colored
people, has five institutions receiving generous patronage--the A. M.
E. ("Payne") Institute, the Reformed Presbyterian ("Knox") Academy,
the Baptist University, Burrell School, and the public school
supported by the city, the latter just taking possession of a
commodious brick building; so we may truly say that the youth of the
despised race now have an upward look. And yet _not one-half_ of the
colored children of Selma are even enrolled, much less regular
attendants at school.

These people are fond of public exercises, and give large audiences
and interested attention that seem to know no diminution, even when
some twenty closing exercises of the different grades occur, as within
the past ten days. Burrell came in for her share, beginning with the
annual sermon by the principal on the 20th of May, and offering two
evening programmes on the 24th and 25th in the Congregational Church,
each well patronized, the last named securing an especially full
house. "Maud Muller" and the "Songs of Seven" were given with
tableaux, while Carleton's "First Settler's Story" and the "Tramp
Story" showed that careful training had been given in elocutionary
lines. The primary and intermediate grades presented the customary
variation of recitations, dialogues and songs. One and all did well;
the church was tastefully decorated, our twenty-eight foot flag having
a prominent place; the patrons and friends of Burrell were loud in her
praise, and the teachers on the evening of their departure were given
a banquet by a surprise party at the "Home."

INDUSTRIES.

One feature of the programmes at the church, calling attention to some
work of Burrell not done at these other schools, illustrating shop,
sewing and drawing, were interesting for their own sake; first a
presentation of models executed at our shop, then a tableau of the
boys having on their aprons and caps and tools in hand; then the girls
of the fourth and fifth grades grouped with different articles of
sewing about the sewing teacher, who stood directing one of the number
at work upon the new sewing-machine. The drawings exhibited were two
large, finely executed crayons that won the admiration of all. These
industries, for which over $50 had been solicited the past year, were
fully shown at Burrell School building during the week on public days
when some fifty patrons favored us with their presence and praise,
former pupils lamenting the lack of these features during their school
days.

BIBLE STUDY.

Better than all special attractions, than the general interest in
texts and teachers, has been the marked interest in Bible study and
evident conversion of a number of our pupils whose lives show a
changed purpose. The Endeavor Society has had a part in this, and each
of the last meetings seemed to be better than the others, so that it
is hoped that the organization may be maintained through the summer.
It was the prayer of a "father in Israel" here, "Turn loose thy Spirit
upon us, for sinners are running wild to hell; uphold our heads above
the swelling tides of sin in which others are floundering; and, after
the confusion of this life is wound up, permit us to march around thy
throne above, eternally."

There is in the above the true idea, however strangely it is phrased;
but the words of our pupils sometimes need translating, and they
continually interest even a teacher of long-standing among them. Only
recently the writer has come upon these expressions: "He called me
out of my name," meaning that the objector had been called "a fool,"
perhaps; and "I've done spoiled it out," the excuse of one who had
erased his examples before the teacher could correct the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

NORMAL SCHOOL, ORANGE PARK, FLA.

BY REV. T. S. PERRY.

At Orange Park Normal School the year just closed has been a
prosperous one. Owing to straitened means and hard times, the
enrollment has been a little less than last year; but in the grade of
scholarship there has been a distinct advance.

Many pleasant incidents have occurred, notably the Christmas festival.
A United States flag, nine feet by fifteen, presented to the school at
Christmas, was hoisted over the building February 22d, with great
enthusiasm. Appropriate exercises, including such patriotic songs as
"The Star Spangled Banner," "The Red, White and Blue," "The Battle
Hymn of the Republic," gave added spirit to the occasion.

Of a hundred pupils not one has died or been seriously sick during the
year--a fact that speaks much for the sanitary condition of the
school.

The concluding exercises, beginning with our annual picnic, May 19th,
have all been interesting. The literary societies have done themselves
much credit. The closing day, May 30th, brought together from near and
far an assembly of all sorts and conditions, of every hue from fairest
blonde to ebony, which completely filled the spacious chapel. The oral
reviews or examinations, the music, both vocal and instrumental, were
highly appreciated; while the calisthenics showed admirable drill. In
the evening came more music, essays, recitations and the like, to the
great enjoyment of a crowded audience.

The exhibit made by the industrial department was extremely
gratifying. Many specimens of plain sewing, neatly and strongly done,
showed that the girls have been making progress in the practical arts
of the house-keeper and home-maker; while abundant samples of fancy
needlework displayed not only rare deftness of hand, but an artistic
taste as well. Pretty quilts, elegant bed-spreads, handkerchiefs of
drawn work, tasty tray-cloths, embroidered table-covers, doilies,
aprons, neckties, etc., were displayed in profusion.

The boys' exhibit of wood-work was no less gratifying. Their numerous
picture-frames and book-shelves, of tasteful designs and handsome
workmanship, would in many cases have done no discredit to expert
craftsmen; while many articles by the smaller boys gave proof that
hand, eye and judgment were being trained in an admirable way. The
workshop is also an excellent school of applied arithmetic, as well as
of practical handicraft. Free-hand, and some surprisingly good
mechanical drawings were exhibited; also plain, colored and relief
maps, illustrating the geography of our own and other lands.

The botanical work exhibited was worthy of all praise. Fifty varieties
of flowers, comprising nearly all the most important orders, have been
examined and classified, and half as many handsomely mounted.

This young school is doing a work of inestimable value. On the very
spot, where less than a generation ago gangs of slaves toiled under
the overseer's lash, and within rifle-shot of the plantation
whipping-post, their children are now developing into worthy
citizenship; and youth, both white and colored, are growing up into
enlightened Christian manhood and womanhood.

Many of our students are poor--very poor--and are working out their
salvation by efforts none the less pathetic because so bravely and
cheerfully made. The truest heroism is unconscious. Touching stories
could be easily told. Those who struggle so courageously and
perseveringly for an education do not need to be pitied, but they need
to be aided and encouraged. May the Lord inspire those who can to hold
out a helping hand and so fulfill their own prayer, "Thy Kingdom
come."

       *       *       *       *       *

MERIDIAN, MISS.

MRS. H. I. MILLER.

Our school closed on the 29th of May, and it has been a full one
despite the trials we have had because of hard times. On the 27th, our
pastor, Rev. C. L. Harris, preached his annual sermon to the school.
The church was crowded as never before, not even at its dedication.
The topic, "The satisfied soul," was handled with marked ability, and
the audience was deeply moved. On Monday our school-rooms were visited
by many friends, and our ex-graduates from Tougaloo were welcomed
home. The "students'" sociable at night was a pleasant affair, and
gave us a chance to plan with our scholars about their work this
summer. All are eager for work that they may enter school in the fall;
all seem ready to do whatever they can find to do.

The most spiritual feature of our closing exercises was on Tuesday
morning, when at the opening hour the house was filled with friends to
unite in a "Congregational love-feast," as they called it. We had
several clergymen and teachers, and one lawyer and a host of friends
to cheer us with their words, or to aid us in our service of song and
prayer. One friend told of a wealthy colored man who had pledged to
give three thousand dollars to the American Missionary Association to
carry on these Christian schools, although he himself is not a
Christian. May his example incite others to come to our help.

After two hours of pleasant interchange of good fellowship we all went
to the church, where the industrial work was on exhibition. It was
arranged with great artistic effect. Each room had its display by
itself in miniature booths constructed out of the finished sewing. The
primary rooms had festoons of "blockwork," and under an awning made
from a bright patchwork quilt, made by them, hung their dainty
pockets, tidies, scarfs, etc., quaintly outlined in bright needlework.
There were scores of buttonholes arranged in a wheel pattern, and they
were beautifully done, and were admired by all. There were three
entire quilts, twenty-nine garments of various kinds, and twenty-five
neatly hemstitched handkerchiefs, besides a large quantity of articles
for home decoration. Perhaps the exhibit which attracted most
attention was the young men's department. There were fourteen
handkerchiefs and eight Windsor ties hemstitched by the young men, and
hardly any of them had ever used a needle, yet their dainty work was
pronounced _equal_, if not superior, to that of the young ladies.
There were in all four hundred and sixty-three articles made, some
from old material, some from scraps and some from new cloth. Before
the winter term the young girls had cut and prepared their own sewing.

GRADUATING EXERCISES.

At eight o'clock in the evening the house was filled to overflowing
with people who wished to witness the graduation of twelve young
persons, or to hear the various exercises from the younger children,
and to listen to our well rendered music. The exercises were all
excellent, although they were greatly marred by the vast audience on
so warm a night. There were no failures, but fine delivery and
appearance. The mayor of the city was pleased to pronounce it "grand."

And so closed our school year, but "the half has not been told" if we
omit to tell of the spiritual growth. Twenty-four in our school have
united with our church, almost as many more with other denominations,
and some have now gone to their own homes, and will there confess what
Christ has done for them this year. It has been a beautiful year. We
can but feel that God has been with us. The flowers and blackboard
decorations were very attractive, and our dear old flag draping the
entire wall behind the platform added not a little to the
attractiveness of our rooms. On Sunday the sadness of parting was
accentuated, and it was from a full heart each one gave the Y. P. S.
C. E. benediction of "The Lord watch between thee and me while we are
absent one from the other."

       *       *       *       *       *

GRAND VIEW, TENN.

FROM "DAYTON LEADER," DAYTON, TENN.

GRAND VIEW, TENN., MAY 19.--Commencement exercises at Grand View
Normal Institute were held last night. This excellent school is
situated on the eastern brow of Walden's Ridge, fifty-five miles north
from Chattanooga. It overlooks a view of fertile valley below, and
beyond a vast expanse of numberless wooded hills with glimpses of the
Tennessee river winding between, while on the horizon looms the dim,
majestic form of the Smoky Range.

It is an institution of the American Missionary Association
(Congregational), and is equal to many of our lesser colleges.
Mathematics is carried through trigonometry and surveying. Latin and
music are taught, also, as well as the ordinary studies of the common
and high schools. Above one hundred and fifty pupils, from a dozen
different States, were on the roll of the past term. The teachers are
of the highest order and their efficiency was emphatically
demonstrated by the splendid work of last night's exercises.

While there was, of course, a marked difference in the oratorical
powers of the young speakers, yet the uniformly high moral and
intellectual tone of the admirably composed essays was a feature
gratifying indeed to the numerous fathers and mothers present. There
were present men of learning, teachers and preachers from surrounding
cities, whose words of frank encomium upon the exercises emphasized
their excellence. The visitors crowded the spacious hall to its utmost
capacity and a large "overflow meeting" looked in through the windows.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Church Work._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE EVANGELIST AT WORK.

MR. JAMES WHARTON.

It has again been my privilege to spend the winter in the South in the
interests of the colored population under the auspices of the American
Missionary Association, and in each section of the country visited I
am glad to record a marked change for the better both morally and
spiritually in advance of twenty years ago, and this I consider is due
in a great measure to the influence and instrumentality of the
Congregational churches and schools in connection with them.

The untold good that is being done by the various institutions under
the American Missionary Association will never be known this side of
eternity, and wherever I have gone I have found the people speaking in
the highest terms of praise of the efforts which are being put forth
to help raise the standard already attained.

During the last winter I have visited and held revival services at
Dudley and Raleigh, N. C.; Hampton, Va.; Howard University,
Washington, D. C.; Oaks and Hillsboro, N. C.; Athens and Thomasville,
Ga.; High Point, N. C.; and at each place the ministers and teachers
of the schools have worked admirably, with the result that the
churches have been quickened and scores of the most promising young
people of both sexes from different parts of the States have been led
to trust in Jesus as their Saviour and to commence a new life for Him.
It has been a great joy to me on returning to places formerly visited
to find after years of absence the converts going on still in the
"good way," witnessing for Christ and working for the welfare of
others, and, in many cases, settled for life in comfortable
frame-built houses where once it was the one-roomed log cabin with its
evil influences. In spite of the distress so keenly felt by everyone,
the past year has been one of unusual interest and revival. The old
idea, of visions, dreams and voices being necessary to a person's
assurance of his acceptance of God, seems to be yielding to a more
perfect and Scriptural way: "Thus saith the Lord."

WASHINGTON, D. C.

In Plymouth church, Rev. S. Brown, pastor, protracted meetings were
held, resulting in the lifting heavenward of the members. Among the
converts was a Mrs. T., who had been a seeker for thirty-three years.
While listening to an address on Ex. xii Chap. 13 v., "He sprinkled
blood," the light she had been so long looking for began to dawn upon
her soul, and before the address closed she was rejoicing in God's
wondrous love. She could scarcely keep her seat for joy; she arose to
testify that God had saved her that night. Her testimony caused
considerable rejoicing, as she was well known to all as a "long-time
mourner."

HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

At the invitation of Dr. Rankin, the Evangelist and Pastor Brown held
a ten days' mission, resulting in some good cases of conversion, two
brothers being among the number, the sons of a Methodist minister, one
studying to become a doctor and the other a pharmacist.

HAMPTON, VA.

During the week of prayer we felt a deep wave of spiritual blessing
sweep over the institution such as had not been realized for years
past. Quite a number of the students were brought over on the Lord's
side, including several young Indian students.

OAKS, N. C.

Meetings were held here for ten days, and although snow covered the
ground several inches thick, the people attended well, and every night
a large proportion of the congregation was composed of white folks who
did not hesitate to worship under the same roof with their colored
brethren.

HILLSBORO, N. C.

Here the revival commenced in the school. When the Christian pupils
were asked to show hands only about three testified, but ere the
meeting closed a marked change was seen, for a large number became
Christians during the meeting. As there is no Congregational church
the Baptists kindly offered their church building for our use, which
from the first was packed to its utmost, the people standing around
the doors and windows unable to get inside, so eager were they to
hear the word preached. Several "long-time mourners" were converted,
including three old grandfathers and two or three grandmothers. People
of all classes came in from the country for miles around, willing to
leave their fields and work to attend the services. Many of the older
inhabitants of the town said that such a revival had not been known
since before the war, for in a few days the converts reached the
number of one hundred and sixteen. As a result, a goodly number were
added to the Sunday-school. A society of Christian Endeavor was
organized and a weekly prayer-meeting started, the young converts
readily taking part.

ATHENS, GA.

The members took an active part here in helping on the good work. At
Knox Institute meetings were held for the pupils and a large number
professed conversion. At the church three public school teachers were
converted, also the mother of two of them.

MACON, GA.

I was rejoiced to find in this city quite a number of young converts
who decided for Christ seven years ago still going on steadily, many
of them now grown up into fine young men and women, and still seeking
to glorify God in a consistent life and walk. Here one editor of a
weekly newspaper came over on business and made his way to the
services, and the first night gave himself to the Lord, going home to
the town from whence he came to tell his friends what great things the
Lord had done for him.

THOMASVILLE, GA.

After the first meeting it was evident the Lord had something good in
store for us. At the close of every succeeding service anxious souls
were to be found kneeling at the front seat seeking Christ, and great
was the joy of all when they saw those whom they were interested in
deciding for Him. Every night the young ladies of the boarding
department with a part of the congregation formed a large circle
outside the church door to sing some of the "old-time" hymns, which,
in the stillness of the night under the starry heavens, and with
nearly all the singers dressed in white, made the scene more a
heavenly one than can well be imagined. Their sweet voices pealed
forth the strains of Zion, which on the gentle breeze were wafted to
many an ear of those who lived in the neighborhood, and hearts were
touched, and many drew nigh to listen who never ventured inside the
church door. Many of the young ladies ere this have gone back to their
homes in the country, others to their summer schools, and from these
services will carry with them the happy influence of the gospel which
will in turn reach the ears of those entrusted to their care, the
result of which will be many a sad heart made glad, and many a dark
home brightened, and, above all, God will be glorified. Brethren, pray
for the three hundred and forty converts of this last winter's
campaign.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM REV. W. C. POND, D.D.

I have been telling our pupils and the Christian people in the several
localities that their schools must close unless they are sustained by
contributions on the field, during June, July and August. And the
responses have been encouraging. I do not think that a single one of
the missions which I have visited will fail to take care of itself
during those months, unless it be San Bernardino. The times are
wretchedly hard, but the missions seem to have gotten a good hold on
the consciences and hearts of our best people.

The great fire at Santa Cruz swept away the entire Chinese quarter,
including our mission house. I enclose two letters from Mrs. Hall, the
teacher there, which will interest you I am sure, and will, perhaps,
afford a paragraph or an item for the magazine:

_Dear Dr. Pond:_--I have been very busy this week hunting a mission
house. Mr. Cruzan has been very kind, and has not only advised me, but
has taken me in his carriage all over town, looking for a
mission-room. We have finally settled on a cottage about a block from
where the mission formerly stood. Mr. Birkensees has a number of
cottages there, which he has concluded to rent to the Chinamen. We
have secured a cottage with six small rooms, and he is building on a
schoolroom in front (18 by 26 feet), with every convenience we want.
He is putting an attic above the schoolroom, which can be used as
sleeping-rooms. Mr. Hall is overseeing the work, and Mr. Birkensees is
having it built to suit me. We hope to go on with the mission work by
Monday night. The rent, I am sorry to say, is more than we had
expected to pay, but we could do no better. It will be $12.50 per
month, but the brethren will pay $5 each month, instead of $2.75 which
they formerly paid, besides the monthly collection.

The brethren saved from the flames the organ, pictures, books, carpet,
in fact almost everything in the schoolroom. The tables and some of
the chairs were burned, and will have to be replaced; but when I heard
that they had saved these things I was very much surprised, as they
were surrounded by fire in no time, as the fire broke out opposite the
mission house and there was no water to stay it. I have heard people
say that our brethren worked like heroes. They carried everything,
organ and all, by hand, for blocks, and finally stored them in Mrs.
Tagan's shed. They had many heavy trunks to move, besides the school
furniture. They worked systematically, displaying no selfishness, but
went right on with the moving without losing their wits. Many of their
belongings were lost, their dishes, stoves, chairs, tables, etc.,
which they cannot do without.

The Christian people here have been very kind, and have shown a great
deal of sympathy for our Chinese brethren since the fire, and I think
many will give little things, such as dishes, etc., which will be a
great help to them.

Of course I feel very sorry for our mission brethren, but I am glad
Chinatown is in ashes. We were all getting sick from the impure air.
Some of the boys had been sick for months on account, I think, of the
filth surrounding our mission rooms, and I believe it was the Lord's
will that it should burn, and besides I am certain that we can do a
better work where we are. The Chinamen are driven from their nests,
and I believe many will come to school now. They are disgusted with
their idols, because they did not save them from the fire. About six
Chinese women were driven out, so I will commence work with them soon,
if possible. Then I find a good many little children, too, and I will
try to get some Christian lady to teach them. I hope I may save the
women. I could never locate them in Chinatown, and the Chinamen told
me there were only two in town, but I find they told me an untruth,
and I will now endeavor to reach them.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

"WHAT PROGRESS DO YOU MAKE?"

PROF. CHAS. L. PARKER.

In our letters from different parts of the country, the above is the
oft-repeated question. My answer, which is the purpose of this letter,
will not deal with statistics either of church or of school, for the
best work done among the mountaineers is not recorded in the church
books or school curriculums; it is the work accomplished in the lives
of individuals and through them. Often these individuals are never
known outside their own community.

A little over a year ago, in company with a friend, I went to visit a
Sunday-school in a mountain community way back in the "Ridges." The
Superintendent, a man whom we had met before at a Sunday-school
convention, invited us to speak. After the services we went home with
him to dinner. His family consisted of a wife and five children. He
deplored the fact that they had not better opportunities for education
and better church privileges, so we suggested that, when the crops
were harvested, he should move with his family to C---- to send them
to school.

The idea pleased Mr. W----, and in course of time he came. Mrs.
W---- entered the school with her children as a regular student, being
in some of the same classes with her little girls. All worked
diligently through the winter, enjoying an intellectual feast, of
which they had hitherto known nothing. It is unnecessary to say that
the winter passed too quickly with them, and the time came for
"making a new crop" all too soon. They left the school reluctantly and
returned to the mountain home, taking with them a spirit of progress,
which will make even a rugged fastness into a blooming garden.

Last Sunday we visited the Sunday-school again, no longer a small one,
for it enrolls over one hundred and fifty pupils. Mr. W---- has also
organized a "Saturday class," at which the youth and grown people of
the neighborhood meet after the week's work on the farm, and learn to
read and write and spell. On Sunday they "meet out" at 9 o'clock in
the morning for Bible study and worship, and again in the afternoon
for sacred song service and church. Thus they spend the entire day.
The county Superintendent has visited Mr. W's "Saturday class," and is
about to recommend such movements throughout the county, as a means of
keeping up an interest in education during the long period between the
sessions of the free school, which rarely last longer than three
months in a year. Who knows but that from this small beginning great
good may grow?

Mr. W. is not a Congregationalist, nor is he a minister of the gospel,
but he and his estimable wife are doing good work for Christ in their
own community. This is by no means an isolated instance; all over our
mountain country are schools established by the American Missionary
Association, which are doing valuable work in and through their
students.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

  WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.
  _State Committee_--Mrs. C. A. Woodbury, Woodfords;
    Mrs. A. T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
    Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

  FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.
  President--Mrs. Joseph B. Walker, Concord.
  Secretary--Mrs. John T. Perry, Exeter.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

  [A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, Boston Highlands, Mass.
  Secretary--Miss Anna A. Pickens, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Sarah K. Burgess, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secret'y--Mrs. Wm. O. Weeden, Upper Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A. H. Claflin, 191 Franklin St., Allegheny.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennee, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 211 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. G. W. Cowles, 417 Sibley St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Flora K. Regal, Oberlin.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.

INDIANA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 221 Christian Ave, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. E. Dewhurst, 28 Christian Ave., Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.


IOWA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. V. H. Mullett, Clinton.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. J. Nichoson, 1513 Main St., Dubuque.


MICHIGAN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 179 West Alexandrine Ave., Detroit.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. H. Hatfield, 301 Elm Street, Kalamazoo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. H. A. Miner, 540 State Street, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman, White Water.


MINNESOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Fullerton, 3016 Harriet Ave., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. W. P. Cleveland, Caledonia.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.


NEBRASKA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. T. Duryea, 2402 Cass Street, Omaha.
  Secretary--Mrs. S. C. Dean, 636 31st Street, Omaha.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. J. Powell, 30th & Ohio Sts., Omaha.


MONTANA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. O. C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


MISSOURI.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes St., Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


KANSAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D. D. DeLong, Arkansas City.


OREGON.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John Summerville, 108 Second Street, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 283 Fourth St., Portland.


WASHINGTON.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 323 Blanchard St., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 434 South K St., Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth St., Seattle.


CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
  President--Mrs. M. L. Merritt, 478 Edwards St., Oakland.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 911 Grove St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Havens, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


NEVADA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NEW MEXICO.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith St., Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.


LOUISIANA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss Bella Hume, corner Gasquet and Liberty Sts., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Miss Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. S. Shattuck, Welsh.


MISSISSIPPI.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Miss Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


ALABAMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. H. W. Andrews, Talladega.
  Secretary--Mrs. T. N. Chase, Selma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. S. DeForest, Talladega.


FLORIDA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.
  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore. Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Jos. E. Smith, 304 Gilmer Street, Chattanooga.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland, 1214 Grundy St., Nashville.


COLORADO.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. W. Pickett, White Water.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs S. A. Sawyer, Boulder.


WYOMING.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. G. S. Ricker, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Whipple, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock Springs.


OKLAHOMA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Miss M. McConnell, Guthrie.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Guilds, Choctaw City.


UTAH, (Including Southern Idaho).

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. B. Thrall, Salt Lake City, U.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth St., E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NORTH CAROLINA.

  WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. W. Freeman, Dudley.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, High Point.


TEXAS.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


GEORGIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. A. F. Sherrill, 19 Highland Ave., Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.
  President--Mrs. Emma Cash, 1710 Temple St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. K. W. Bent, Box 443, Pasadena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] For the purpose of exact information, we note that while
the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R.
I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1894.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND FUND.

_For the Education of Colored People._

     Income for May                                           $36,660.00
     Previously acknowledged                                    8,449.85
                                                              ----------
                                                              $45,109.85
                                                              ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $136.99.

  Bangor. Hammond St. Sab. Sch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._        10.53
  Denmark. Mrs. L. A. Berry, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        1.00
  Gray. Cong. Ch.                                                   6.00
  Hallowell. "In His Name," _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._     1.00
  Kennebunk. Union Ch. and Soc.                                    39.36
  Kennebunk. Ladies, Bbl. C., _for High Point, N. C._,
    Freight Prepaid
  Lewiston. Y. P. S. C. E. of Pine St. Cong. Ch., _for
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                 15.00
  Lewiston. Ladies of Pine St. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                                   10.00
  Limerick. "A Friend," _for Thunderhawk Mission, Fort Yates,
    N. D._                                                          1.00
  Norridgewock. "Friends."        5.00
  North Waterford. Rev. D. McCormick, Bbl. C.,
    2, _for Freight, for Blowing Rock, N. C._                       2.00
  Orland. Y. P. S. C. E., by Miss Jennie N. Buck, Treas.,
    _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                      5.00
  Patton. Cong. Ch., _for Alaska M._                                7.00
  Portland. L. M. Circle State St. Ch., Bale Goods, 2, _for
    Freight, for High Point, N. C._                                 2.00
  Showhegan. Island Av. Ch.                                        27.10
  South Bridgton. C. E. Choate, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     5.00
  Willard. Mrs. Chas. Loverell, Box C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $274.31.

  Amherst. Capt. G. W. Bosworth                                    82.00
  Auburn. Pike Chase                                                5.00
  Boscawen. Aux. to N. H. Cent Union, by Mrs. A. J. Carter,
    _for a Share, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                             7.00
  Colebrook. "Mrs. W.," Two Old Spanish Silver Dollars
    of Date 1786 and 1800
  Concord. "A Friend."                                              5.00
  Conway. West Side Sab. Sch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   6.00
  Exeter. Second Cong. Ch. (10 of which _for Indian M._)          110.53
  Gilsum. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.50
  Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                                6.90
  Henniker. "A Friend," _for Thunderhawk Mission, Ft. Yates,
    N. D._                                                          4.00
  Hillsboro Bridge. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                     4.44
  Keene. Mrs Harriet I. Buckminster, 1; Miss Mason, 1               2.00
  Manchester. Miss H. J. Parkhurst, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                  20.00
  Manchester. South Main St. Cong. Ch.                             13.13
  Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                          12.00
  Nashua. "M. E. E."                                                1.00
  Penacook. Mrs. M. A. N. Fiske                                     5.00
  Plaistow, N. H., and North Haverhill, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.   12.00
  Warner. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  West Concord. Granite Mission Band, _for Wilmington, N. C._       2.00
  From W. H. Spalter, County Treas.:
    Marlboro. Cong. Ch.                                 8.51
    Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                  26.30
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch.                                  8.00
                                                      ------       42.81


VERMONT, $936.65.

  Albany. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                3.00
  Benson. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.10
  Cornwall. Cong. Ch., 29.46; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 15           44.46
  Danville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 17.73, and Sab. Sch., 10.85        28.58
  Hyde Park. Second Cong. Ch., 17; Sab. Sch, 10.50;
    Y. P. S. C. E., 2.50, to const. M. B. EATON L. M.              30.00
  Jericho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       4.60
  Manchester. Samuel G. Cone, 50; Cong. Ch., 19.74                 69.74
  Norwich. Rev. N. R. Nichols                                      19.00
  Pittsford. Cong. Ch.                                             34.00
  Pittsford. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        3.58
  Post Mills. "Cheerful Workers," _for Student Aid,
    Williamsburg Acad., Ky._                                        3.50
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                              2.50
  Saxton's River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               23.00
  Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       14.25
  Underhill. Cong. Ch.                                              5.50
  Vergennes. Cong. Ch.                                             15.00
  Westminster, West. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                                   5.00
  West Randolph. "A Friend," 2.50 _for Freedmen, and_ 2.50
    _for Indian M._                                                 5.00
  Wilmington. Cong. Soc.                                            6.08

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt., by Mrs. Wm. P.
    Fairbanks, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Barnet. Junior C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_          1.25
      Barton. Mission Circle, 8.66; Junior C. E.,
        5, _for Indian Sch'p_                          13.66
      Bellows Falls. Junior C. E., _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                         10.00
      Bennington. Second Ch. Junior C. E., _for
        Indian Sch'p_                                   5.00
      Bethel. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_            1.00
      Bradford. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_          2.00
      Brattleboro, West. Jun. C. E., _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                          2.00
      Brookfield. Second Ch., W. H. M. S.              10.00
      Cambridge. W. H. M. S.                           10.00
      Chelsea. Sarah P. Bacon Miss Soc.                10.00
      Coventry. W. H. M. S.                            18.00
      Derby. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_              .52
      Fairlee. Ladies of.                               2.50
      Fairfield, East. Jun. C. E., _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                          2.50
      Fairfax. Mrs. M. S. F.                            2.00
      Franklin. Ladies.                                 7.50
      Grafton. Sab. Sch., 73 cts.; C. E., 32 cts.,
        _for Indian Sch'p_                              1.55
      Greensboro. W. H. M. S.                           8.00
      Hardwick. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_          2.56
      Hardwick, East. W. H. M. S.                      12.00
      Jericho Center. Jun. C. E., _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                          3.50
      Montpelier. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_       10.00
      Morrisville. Junior C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_     3.00
      Orwell. L. M. S.                                 40.00
      Pittsford. W. H. M. S.                           25.00
      Pittsford. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_         4.25
      Queechee. W. H. M. S.                            10.00
      Randolph, West. W. H. M. S.                       9.00
      Richmond. Homeland Circle, 9.14; Sab. Sch.,
        3.50                                           12.64
      Richmond. Primary Sab. Sch., _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                          3.50
      Rutland. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_          10.00
      Rutland. Lester District Junior C. E., _for
        Indian Sch'p_                                   7.00
      Salisbury. Home Miss'y Army, _for Indian
        Sch'p_                                          1.36
      Saint Johnsbury. So. Ch. W. H. M. S.             48.70
      Saint Johnsbury. So. Ch. Junior C. E., _for
        Indian Sch'p_                                  10.00
      Springfield. W. H. M. S.                         10.00
      Springfield. Junior C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_     3.00
      Swanton. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_           5.00
      Waitsfield. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_        2.50
      Wallingford. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_       5.00
      Wells River. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_      10.00
      Williamstown. Jun. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_      2.25
      "Thank Offering."                               262.52
                                                      ------      623.76


MASSACHUSETTS, $8,652.90.

  Amherst. South Cong. Ch.                                         13.00
  Amherst. "The Sunbeams," North Cong.
    Ch., _for Student Aid, Lincoln Acad._                          12.06
  Andover. West Ch., Junior Miss'y Soc.,
    _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._                               20.00
  Andover. Sab. Sch. South Ch. 25; Y. P. S. C. E.,
    South Ch. 50, _for Indian Sch'p, Santee, Neb._                 75.00
  Belmont. Mrs. W. H. Goodridge, 2 Bbls,
    C., and 2 _for Freight, for Beaufort, N. C._                    2.00
  Beverly. W. H. M. S. of Dane St. Ch., _for
    Evarts, Ky._                                                   50.00
  Boston. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              783.86
      Mrs. Charlotte M. Fisher, by Miss Kate
        G. Lamson, _for Marshallville, Ga._           200.00
      E. F. Billings, _for Indian M., Santee, Neb._    25.00
      J. H. Sawyer, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._     10.00
      Edward Sawyer, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._     5.00
    Charlestown. Winthrop Cong. Ch. and Soc.           45.27
    Dorchester. "An Old Subscriber."                    5.00
    South Boston, Phillips Ch., W. H. M. Soc.,
        _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     37.00
      "Friends in Phillips Ch."                         9.00
                                                      ------    1,120.13
  Chelsea. Mrs. E. V. R. Evans.                                     1.00
  Clarendon Hills. ----, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 1.50
  Clinton. C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
  Conway. Cong. Ch.                                                40.73
  Danvere (Tapleyville). Mrs. Sarah Richmond                        2.00
  Dedham. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.                                15.81
  Douglass. Junior Soc. of C. E., by Myra A. Proctor, Supt.        10.00
  East Bridgewater. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                      2.04
  Easthampton. "Memorial Gift" from Estate of Herbert S.
    Parsons, to const. MRS. L. E. PARSONS L. M.                    30.00
  East Weymouth. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
  Edgartown. First Cong. Ch.                                        9.91
  Essex. Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Coll.                              5.23
  Everett. Mrs. Mary P. Allen, 10; "A Friend," 1                   11.00
  Fall River. J. P. Newell, _for Burrell Sch._                     10.00
  Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                               9.05
  Gill. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._         2.25
  Granby. S. M. Cook, to const. MRS. ARTHUR W. FISKE L. M.         30.00
  Hatfield. Cong. Ch., adl                                          5.52
  Haverhill. Center Cong. Ch.                                      69.00
  Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, in "Memory of Prof. Carroll
    Cutler, late of Talladega C.," _for the Debt_                 500.00
  Haverhill. Harriet F. Welch, _for Thunderhawk M., Fort
    Yates, N. D._, to const. M. C. D. WELCH, MRS. RUTH M.
    WELCH and M. LOUISE WELCH L. Ms                                90.00
  Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     52.85
  Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                                     20.34
  Holyoke. Prayer Circle, Second Cong Ch., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               5.00
  Hyde Park. Woman's Home Miss'y Union (30 of which _for Indian
    M._) and to const. MRS. SARAH HENRIETTA HATHAWAY and
    MRS. HARRIET W. BROWN L. Ms                                    60.00
  Hyde Park. Class No. 45 Cong. S. S.,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                                10.00
  Hyde Park. Cong. Ch.                                             20.00
  Ipswich. "Lend-a-Hand Soc." First Cong. Ch.                       3.00
  Leominster. Mrs. W. M. Howland, 50;
    F. J. Lathrop, 51, _for Building, Cumberland Gap, Tenn._      101.00
  Linden. "Mrs. S. A. D."                                           1.00
  Lowell. High St. Cong. Ch., 160.33; John St. Cong. Ch.,
    41.66; First Cong. Ch., 41.53; "A. B. S.," 5                  248.52
  Lowell. Young People's Miss'y Soc. of Pawtucket Cong Ch.,
    _for Nat, Ala._                                                 9.00
  Marshfield Hills. Y. P. S. C. E. of Second Cong. Ch.              1.31
  Medfield. Y. P. S. C. E. of Second Cong. Ch.                      5.00
  Medford. Charles Cummings, to const. EDWARD A. GROUT,
    MARY E. GROUT and HELEN T. WILD L. Ms                         100.00
  Medford. M. T. Haskins                                           20.00
  Melrose. Intermediate Dept. Cong. Sab. Sch.,
    _for Y. P. S. C. E. Hall, McIntosh, Ga._                       10.00
  Milford. Woman's Home Miss'y Soc.,
    by Mrs. W. W. Woodbury, _for Saluda, N. C._                     7.64
  Milford. Rev. Webster Woodbury, Box Library Books,
    1, _for Freight for Pleasant Hill Academy, Tenn._               1.00
  Millbury. "S. J. W."                                              1.00
  Milton. "A Friend" in Cong. Ch., _for Indian M., Santee, Neb._   25.00
  Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case Paper, _for Talladega C._
  Monson. Cong. Ch.                                                20.73
  Nantucket. First Cong. Ch.                                        1.40
  Newburyport. North Cong. Ch.                                     40.00
  Newton. Eliot Ch. (of which 300 _for Indian M._,
    100 _for Thunderhawk Mission, Fort Yates, N. D._
    and 25 _for Cumberland Gap, Tenn._)                         1,107.69
  Newton Highlands. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
    _for Pleasant Hill Academy, Tenn._                             20.64
  Newton Highlands. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.,
    Stereopticon Coll., _for Mountain Work_                         8.00
  Newton Highlands. Oak Hill S. S.                                  7.00
  Norfolk. Union Cong. Ch.                                          2.00
  Northampton. First Ch.                                          101.03
  Northampton. Dorcas Soc. First Ch.,
    _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                 36.50
  Northampton. "A Friend," (15 of which _for Indian M., N. D._),
    to const. MISS C. M. CLARK, L. M.                              30.00
  Northampton. Miss Anna C. Edwards, _for Warner Inst._             1.00
  Northboro. Evan. Cong. Soc.                                      21.00
  North Wilbraham. Extra-cent-a-day Band,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                     30.00
  Norwood. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.                               10.00
  Pepperell. "A Friend," Box Books, _for Evarts, Ky._
  Peru. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                         4.28
  Pittsfield. Mrs. H. P. A. Campbell, _for Student Aid,
    Tougaloo U._                                                   25.00
  Pittsfield. Sarah Martin, _for Burrell Sch._                     10.00
  Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                             80.00
  Reading. Cong. Ch.                                               18.00
  Rockville. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 12.00
  Royalston. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Sch. Building,
    Evarts, Ky._                                                   10.00
  Salem. Miss C. Philbrick                                         10.00
  South Braintree. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Special, _for
    Evarts, Ky._                                                   10.00
  South Framingham. R. L. Day, _for Indian M._                    100.00
  South Framingham. Sab. Sch. Grace Cong. Ch., _for Mountain
    Work_                                                          18.47
  Springfield. Mrs. W. H. Haile, 50; Y. P. S. C. E. South Ch.,
    25; Miss Helen Spring, 5, _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._  80.00
  Springfield. Faith Ch.                                            5.25
  Sutton. Cong. Ch.                                                15.17
  Three Rivers. Union Evan. Ch., Stereopticon Lecture              10.00
  Topsfield. Cong. Ch.                                              2.00
  Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                          7.30
  Waltham. Anna M. Simonds, _for Martin, Fla._                      5.00
  Ward Hill. Cong. Ch. Stereopticon Coll.                          12.00
  Ware. East Cong. Ch. to const. WALDO F. WINSLOW, MARTHA
    ELIZABETH SMITH, GRACE I. BACON and JENNIE GILMORE L. Ms      153.99
  Waverly. Cong. Ch.                                               20.31
  Wenham. Cong. Ch.                                                10.50
  Westhampton. Cong. Ch.                                           26.10
  Whitman. First Cong. Ch.                                         47.35
  Winchester. Mrs. Edwin Clapp                                      5.00
  Woburn. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Colored and Indian M._
    and to const. MRS. CLARA M. PRIOR, MRS. ELIZABETH P BUXTON,
    MRS. LAVINA A. HARTWELL, and MRS. HARRIET T. BROWN L. Ms      126.18
  Woburn. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    15.55
  Woburn. Mrs. Wheeler's Class, North Cong. S. S., _for Indian M._  1.00
  Woods Holl. Cong. Soc.                                            3.11
  Worcester. "A Life Member, and Friend of the Colored People."    10.00
  ----. "A Thank Offering," _for Straight U. and Beach Inst._,
    by a former worker                                            100.00
  Hampden Benevolent Association, by George R. Bond, Treas.:
      Agawam. Y. P. S. C. E. (25 of which _for
        Pleasant Hill, Tenn._), to const. OSCAR L.
        KING L. M.                                     30.00
      Longmeadow. Gents' Benev Ass'n                    1.00
      Mittineague                                      31.29
      South Hadley Falls                               12.11
      Springfield. First, 45; Hope, 42.63;
        South, 35; Indian Orchard, 32.40              155.03
      Westfield. First                                 77.39
                                                      ------      306.82

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass, and
    R. I., Miss Sarah K. Burgess, Treas., _for
    Woman's Work_:
      W. H. M. A., _for Teachers Salaries_            330.00
      Brighton. Ladies' Aux.,
        _for Student Aid, Straight U._                 20.00
      South Hadley Falls. Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
        _for Student Aid, Straight U._                 10.00
                                                      ------      360.00
                                                                --------
                                                                5,946.25

  ESTATES.

  Greenfield. Estate of William B. Washburn,
    by Franklin G. Fessenden, Executor                            497.33
  South Framingham. Estate of Moses S. Little,
    by B. T. Thompson, Executor                                 2,209.31
                                                               ---------
                                                               $8,652.90


RHODE ISLAND, $54.00.

  Chepachet. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        2.00
  Newport. United Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls Supplies and C,
    _for Teachers' Home, Evarts, Ky._
  Providence Central Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         50.00
  Providence. Y. P. S. C. E. North Cong. Ch.                        2.00


CONNECTICUT, $5,233.22.

  Ansonia. V. Munger                                               10.00
  Bozrah. Charles Baldwin, 10; Simeon Abell, 2nd, 3                13.00
  Bridgeport. Jun. Endeavor Band of North Church                    3.25
  Bridgeport. Junior Endeavorers of North Ch., by Miss Edith
    B. Palmer, 35 Testaments, _for Hillsboro, N. C._
  Bridgeport. Park Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., Box Sewing Material;
    Friends, Sewing Machine, _for Williamsburg Acad., Ky._
  Bridgeport. South Cong. Ch., Ladies' S. C., Bbl. C.,
    _for Saluda, N. C._
  Central Village. Cong. Ch. ad'l                                   1.00
  Cornwall Hollow. C. E. Soc. by Mrs. K. M. Sedgewick,
    _for Mountain Work_                                             2.00
  Coventry. First Cong. Ch. to const. LOUIS A. KINGSBURY L. M.     39.14
  East Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
  Enfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 25; Y. P. S. C. E.
    of Cong. Ch. 25, _for Student Aid, Straight U._                50.00
  Farmington. Mrs. Sarah E. Barney, _for a Teacher for
    Mountain Highlanders_                                         180.00
  Farmington. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                       38.33
  Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                                40.38
  Guilford. A Friend, in First Cong. Ch.                            4.00
  Hartford. A Friend, _for Thunderhawk M., Fort Yates, N. D._      50.00
  Hebron. Ladies Soc. by Mrs. G. A. Little, _for Allen
    N. and I. Sch. Ga._                                            12.00
  Litchfield Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            4.00
  Manchester. Second Cong. Ch.                                     90.37
  Manchester. Sab. Sch. North Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                       12.47
  Milford. Sab. Sch. Plymouth Ch.                                  24.10
  Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                            100.00
  Naugatuck. C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Williamsburg Acad., Ky._                                       25.00
  New Britain. Mrs. L. H. Pease, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._    10.00
  New Haven. Taylor Cong. Ch.                                      11.00
  New Haven. Mrs. E. Salisbury, _for Warner Inst._                 10.00
  Newington. Mrs. Augusta E. Deming, _for Salary Share,
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                          25.00
  New London. Second Cong. Ch.                                    380.64
  North Branford. Cong. Ch.                                        32.84
  North Haven. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Allen N. and I. Inst. Ga._                                      5.00
  Norwalk. Circle of King's Daughters Mrs. Mead's Sch.,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            10.00
  Norwich. Ladies of Park Ch. 162; Ladies of Broadway Ch.,
    100, by Mrs. M. F. C. Barstow, _for Teacher, Blowing
    Rock, N. C._                                                  262.00
  Old Lyme. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Mrs. Arthur Shirley,
    _for Thomasville, Ga._                                         21.00
  Plainville. Henrietta R. Mitchell                                 3.00
  Rocky Hill. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                                2.18
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                             35.16
  South Glastonbury. Wm. S. Williams                              200.00
  Southington. Cong. Ch.                                           25.94
  South Manchester. Cong. Ch.                                      86.54
  South Norwalk. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._          50.00
  Suffield. "Helping Ten.," _for Student Aid, Skyland Inst._       15.00
  Suffield. Mrs. A. R. Pierce, 2 Bbls C., _for Meridian, Miss._
  Thomaston. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       25.00
  Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                                        6.49
  Thompson. Cong. Ch.                                              25.09
  Wallingford. H. L. Judd, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._         100.00
  Waterbury. Y. P. S. C. E., by C. R. Lawrence, Chairman
    Miss. Com., _for Indian Sch'p_                                 70.00
  Wauregan. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Alaska M._            5.00
  Wauregan. By Rev. S. H. Fellows, ad'l _for Alaska M._             1.50
  Westchester. Cong. Ch.                                            6.53
  West Hartford. Christian Workers Assn. of First Ch.
    of Christ, _for Saluda, N. C._                                 15.00
  Westport. Sab. Sch. Saugatuck Cong. Ch.                           3.43
  West Winsted. Ladies' Sew. Soc. Second Cong. Ch.,
    Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  Wethersfield. Mrs. Elvira Wells, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._   5.00
  Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                             4.65
  Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
  Winsted. Box C., 1.80 for Freight, _for Marion, Ala._             1.80
  Woodstock. Ladies Soc., Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  ----. "P. B. E." to const. MISS FRANCES M. HAZEN, L. M.          30.00
  ----. Miss Stanley, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg Acad., Ky._    4.00
  ----. "A Friend," by Miss L. Stevenson, _for Organ,
    Andersonville, Ga._                                             1.00

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn.,
    Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cromwell. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                    21.00
      Farmington. L. B. Soc. of Third Ch.              25.00
      Griswold. Ladies' H. M. Soc.                     10.00
      Naugatuck. Ladies Aid Soc.                       50.00
      New Britain. So. Ch. Ladies' Benev. Soc.,
        _for Tougaloo U._                              70.00
      New Haven. Aux. College St. Ch., 35;
        L. B. Soc., Davenport Ch., 25                  60.00
      Norwich. Mission Students in Broadway Ch.         2.30
      South Manchester. Aux., A Friend                  5.00
      West Haven. Ladies' H. M. Soc.                   25.00
      West Winsted. Y. P. S. C. E. Second Ch.           3.49
      W. C. H. M. U. of Conn.                          50.00
                                                      ------      321.79
                                                                --------
                                                                2,551.62

  ESTATES.

  Brooklyn. Estate of Mary E. Ensworth, by P. B. Sibley,
    Executor                                                      600.00
  Groton. Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt                           581.60
  Norwich. Estate of Mrs. Mary B. Coit, by George
    D. Colt, Executor                                             500.00
  Waterbury. Estate of Benjamin A. Linsley,
    by Samuel Holmes and Rev. E. E. Lewis, Trustees             1,000.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $5,233.22


NEW YORK, $6,438.74.

  Albany. Mrs. T. C. Cooper, _for Cappahosic, Va._                 1.00
  Brooklyn. Joseph Keasbey Brick, deceased, by his widow,
    Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for the Joseph E. Brick
    Agricultural and Industrial School, Edgecomb Co.,
    N. C._                                                     5,000.00
  Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch.                                         234.15
  Brooklyn. Bethany Ch., C. E. Soc., _for Student Aid,
    Williamsburg Acad, Ky._                                        9.00
  Cambria. Ladies' M. Soc. of Molyneux Corners,
    by Mrs. A. W. Sherman, Treas.                                  5.00
  Clifton Springs. "A Friend."                                     5.00
  Cortland. Mrs. J. S. Dean                                        5.00
  Coventryville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 50 cts. ad'l to
    Contribution of 19 received in Feb. which was
    acknowledged incorrectly from Coventry in the April Number      .50
  Dansville. "Friends," by Mrs. M. L. Jenkins,
    _for Reindeer, Alaska M._                                      2.00
  East Bloomfield. Mrs. Eliza S. Goodwin                           5.00
  East Rockaway. Bethany Cong. Ch.                                15.00
  Homer. Cong. Ch.                                                 7.50
  Jamesport. Y. P. S. C. E., by E. W. Tuthill, Cor. Sec.           5.00
  Livonia Center. Mrs. Wm. Calvert and Miss M. A. Jackman         12.00
  Lockport. First Ch., Ladies' Soc.,
    Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  Marion. "Life Member."                                           2.00
  Middle Island. "Friends," 25; Mrs. Hannah M. Overton, 15;
    Joseph N. Hurtin, 5; Amelia Smith, 3; Cash, 2, _for
    Thunderhawk M., Fort Yates, N. D._                            50.00
  New York. Rev. M. E. Strieby, D.D., 3 Boxes Books,
    and 11.50 _for Freight, for Library, Tougaloo U._             11.50
  New York. Mrs. L. H. Spellman, 30; Wm. C. Conant, 2,
    _for Thunderhawk M., Fort Yates, N. D._                       32.00
  New York. Miss Grace Dodge, _for Savannah, Ga._                 25.00
  New York. Miss D. E. Emerson, _for Moorhead City, Miss._        20.00
  New York. E. L. Champlin, 5; "M. C. H.," 2; "V. S. B.," 2        9.00
  North Walton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                8.76
  Ogdensburg. First Cong. Ch.                                      9.57
  Palisades. Home Circle, Bbl. C., _for Moorhead City, Miss._
  Perry Center. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. C., _for
    Tougaloo, Miss._
  Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Ch.                                   96.00
  Riverhead. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       4.00
  Rome. Rev. Owen Enoch, 1; "Three Friends." 60 cts.               1.60
  Sherburne. "A Friend."                                           5.00
  Sing Sing. Mrs. Harriet M. Cole, 30; Mrs. C. E. Judd, 30,
    _for Thunderhawk Mission, Fort Yates, N. D._,
    and to const. REV. J. JONES VAUGHAN L. M.                     60.00
  Stanley. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         3.40
  Syracuse. D. H. Gowing, _for Cappahosic, Va._                   25.00
  Tremont. Trinity Cong. Ch.                                       8.27
  Troy. By Mrs. Archer Balden, _for Cappahosic, Va._              10.00
  Utica. Miss Caroline E. Backus, _for Indian M._                  5.00
  Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                                                8.04
  Winthrop. Junior Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., by Rev.
    F. Hassold                                                     3.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. Y., by Mrs. J. J.
    Pearsall, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Albany. First Ch. W. H. M. S.                    75.00
      Brooklyn. Clinton Av. Y. L. G.                   65.00
      Brooklyn. Central Ch., Zenana Band               25.00
      Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Evan. Circle                 13.50
      Buffalo. First Ch., W. H. M. S.                  25.00
      Buffalo. First Ch., W. H. M. S., _for Debt_       6.00
      Groton. C. E.                                     2.00
      Honeoye. Aux.                                    15.00
      Lysander. ----                                   20.00
      New Haven. Willing Workers                       15.00
      Syracuse. Plymouth Ch., W. C. A.                 65.50
      Syracuse. Plymouth Ch. Prim. Dept. S. S.         20.00
      Syracuse. Geddes Ch., W. M. S.                   14.00
      Warsaw. Earnest Workers                          15.00
      West Groton. Y. P. M. C.                         20.00
      Annual Meeting of Hudson River Ass'n              6.12
                                                      ------      402.12
                                                               ---------
                                                               $6,105.41

  ESTATE.

  Holly. Estate of Miss Columbia N. Harrison,
    by F. J. Harwood, Adm'r                                       333.33
                                                               ---------
                                                               $6,438.74


NEW JERSEY, $128.59.

  Elizabeth. First Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
  Glen Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                            25.00
  Newark. "A Friend," _for Industrial Ed._                         20.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. J. Ass'n,
    by Mrs. J. H. Denison, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Washington, D. C. First Cong. Ch., W. H. M. S.
        (30 of which _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._)               75.59


PENNSYLVANIA, $475.97.

  LeRaysville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._      4.25
  New Milford. Horace A. Sumers                                    10.00
  Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch.                                 348.72
  Philadelphia. C. C. Harrison, 100; Mrs. C. Anderson
    and Miss R. Scott, 5; Mrs. S. Fisher Corlies, 1,
    _for Cappahosic, Va._                                         106.00
  Philadelphia. Prof. Geo. L. Weed, Lot Books and Catechisms,
    _for Talladega C._; and Books, _for Meridian, Miss._
  Wrightstown. Miss N. A. Wiggins, _for Cappahosic, Va._            2.00

  Woman's Missionary Union of Penn., by Mrs. T. W. Jones,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Ridgway. W. M. S.                                             5.00


OHIO, $906.28.

  Akron. First Cong. Ch.                                          95.28
  Brecksville. First Cong. Ch.                                     9.30
  Brooklyn Village. Cong. Ch.                                     12.45
  Chillicothe. Plym. Ch., 1.07; Sab. Sch., 1.55; Junior
    Soc., 13 cts.                                                  2.75
  Cincinnati. Central Cong. Ch., 60, and Sab. Sch., 10.21         70.21
  Cincinnati. W. H. Lodburg, _for Cumberland Gap, Tenn._           5.00
  Cleveland. Y. P. S. C. E. of Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., 10;
    Mrs. C. A. Garlick, 2                                         12.00
  Cleveland. C. E. Soc.,  Box Papers & Sch. Supplies,
    _for Evarts, Ky._
  Dover. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                               1.75
  Elyria. First Cong. Ch. (of which "A Friend," 300; Heman
    Ely. 25; "A. E. G.," 15), by E. W. Metcalf, Treas.           379.87
  Hudson. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Ballard Normal Sch._                                           8.00
  Kingsville. "A Friend," _for Thunderhawk M., Fort Yates,
    N. D._                                                        15.75
  Kingsville. Rev. E. J. Comings                                  10.00
  Lenox. Cong. Ch., W. M. S., 15; Y. P. S. C. E., 6.32            21.32
  Mansfield. First Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. and L. M. Soc.,
    _for Ballard Normal Sch._                                     10.00
  Medina. First Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
  Nelson. Cong. Ch.                                                8.35
  Norwalk. Mrs. C. Lawrence                                         .50
  Oberlin. Sab. Sch. First Ch., _for Indian M._                   20.00
  Ravenna. J. F. Loudin, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               25.00
  Shandon. Cong. Ch.                                              19.00
  Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                            18.00
  Sheffield. Mrs. R. C. Burrell, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._    5.00
  Sullivan. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
  Upper Sandusky. Mrs. Emma M. McKean, _for Indian M._             1.00
  Wauseon. Cong. Ch.                                               4.75
  Wayne. Sab. Sch of Cong. Ch.                                    21.00
  Williamsfield. Cong. Ch. (5 of which _for Thunderhawk M.,
    Fort Yates, N. D._)                                           10.00

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
    by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cleveland. Euclid Av., W. M. S.                  15.00
      Conneaut. Y. P. S. C. E.                          6.00
      Kelley's Island. W. M. S.                         5.00
      Mansfield. First, "Five Friend."                 24.00
      Mansfield. First, W. M. S., _for Ballard Sch._    5.00
      Marietta. First Y. L. M. S.                      15.00
      Marietta. Harmar, W. M. S.                        5.00
      Oberlin. First, L. A. S.                          5.00
      Tallmadge. "Cheerful Workers."                    5.00
      Toledo. Central S. S., Birthday Fund,
        _for Tougaloo U._                              10.00
      Williamsfield. W. M. S.                           5.00
                                                      ------      100.00


INDIANA, $14.70.

  Elkhart. Cong. Ch.                                               12.70
  Sparta. John Hawkswell                                            2.00


ILLINOIS, $946.90.

  Alton. Church of the Redeemer, Ladies' H. M. S., 8.29; Sab.
    Sch. Ch. of the Redeemer, 6.21 _for Washburn Sem., N. C._      14.50
  Aurora. Y. P. S. C. E. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Lincoln Acad._                                            15.00
  Bunker Hill. Cong. Ch.                                           30.15
  Champaign. Cong. Ch.                                             35.00
  Champaign. First Cong. Ch., 16; Y. P. S. C. E., 11, _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                          27.00
  Chandlerville. Cong. Ch.                                         22.30
  Chicago. Plymouth Ch.                                            74.25
  Chicago. Fred. U. Upham, _for Pleasant Hill Academy_             43.00
  Chicago. Mr. Williams, _for Building, Cumberland Gap, Tenn._     10.00
  Chicago, Tabernacle Y. P. S. C. E., _for Thunderhawk M.,
    Fort Yates, N. D._                                              7.39
  Chicago. Miss F. P. Rice, _for Moorhead City, Miss._              4.00
  Chicago. Douglass Park, 4; Washington Park, 4                     8.00
  Earlville. "J. A. D."                                            25.00
  Edelstein. Cong. Ch.                                              2.08
  Elgin. Miss Linda Jenne                                           5.00
  Glencoe. S. S.                                                   12.80
  Griggsville. Cong Ch.                                            25.61
  Hamilton. Charles Dorman, 5; Y. P. S. C. E., 1                    6.00
  Jacksonville. Mrs. Geo. L. Roberts                                5.50
  Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                               46.14
  Lombard. First Ch.                                                3.75
  McLean. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           2.00
  Moline. First Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
  Moline. Bessie K. Young, "Ben Hur," _for a Senior,
    Emerson Inst._
  Oak Park. Rev. Jos. E. Roy, D.D., to const. ROY B. GUILD L. M.   30.00
  Oak Park. Jessie N. Ballard, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._       3.50
  Oglesby. E. T. and H. A. Bent                                    10.00
  Oneida. Marion D. Wetmore, 3 years numbers "Youth's
    Companion," _for Emerson Inst._
  Ottawa. First Cong. Ch.                                          41.89
  Paxton. W. M. Soc., 25; Senior and Junior C. E., 25, _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                          50.00
  Rio. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                                  8.00
  Rockford. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch.                             25.00
  Sandwich. Cong. Ch.                                              28.55
  Somonauk. Cong. Ch.                                               9.50
  Summerdale. Y. P. S. C. E.                                       10.00
  Thawville. Cong. Ch.                                              4.00
  Tonica. Cong. Ch.                                                 8.00
  Tonica. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           3.53
  Turner. King's Daughters,_for Margaret Smith's Book Acc't,
    Emerson Inst._                                                  2.00
  Wilmette. First Cong. Ch., to const. HENRY E. MOORE L. M.        41.05

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work_:
      Atkinson. W. M. S.                               20.00
      Batavia. W. M. S.                                 5.00
      Chicago. Englewood Pil. W. M. S.                 40.20
      Chicago. Leavitt St., W. M. U.                    1.92
      Chicago. Leavitt St., W. M. S.                    1.71
      Chicago. Covenant W. M. S.                        1.50
      Dundee. W. M. S.                                 10.00
      Lake Forest. Mrs. C. E. Latimer                   4.55
      Lombard. W. M. S.                                46.00
      Lombard. "Young People."                         30.00
      Mendon. "A Friend."                               5.00
      Moline. First W. M. S.                           15.50
      Oak Park. W. M. S.                               10.00
      Odell. W. M. S.                                  10.00
      Payson. W. M. S.                                 10.50
      Rantoul. W. M. S.                                 7.00
      Rockford. First, W. M. S.                        18.00
      Rockwood. Second, W. M. S.                        3.50
      Stark. W. M. S.                                   2.00
                                                      ------      237.41


IOWA, $448.86.

  Anamosa. Cong. Ch., 3, and Sab. Sch., 4.06                        7.06
  Cedar Rapids. Bethany Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
  Cedar Rapids. L. R. Munger, _for Freight to Savannah, Ga._        1.50
  Des Moines. North Park Cong. Ch., 11.45; Y. P. S. C. E., 5,
    and Sab. Sch., 1.92                                            18.37
  Des Moines. North Park Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. C., _for
    Tougaloo, Miss._
  Doon. Cong. Ch.                                                   8.00
  East Des Moines. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                5.00
  Glenwood. Emma C. Williams, _for Le Moyne Inst._                  5.00
  Grinnell. Girls' Junior C. E. Soc., _for a Pupil,
    Cassedy Sch., Talladega, Ala._, by Susie B. Tallman Sup't       2.75
  Ionia. Cong. Ch.                                                  7.37
  Lansing. Rev. Andrew Kern                                         3.00
  Mount Pleasant. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Ottumwa. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                             7.50
  Perry. Cong. Ch.                                                  3.60
  Reinbeck. Cong. Ch.                                              11.70

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, _for Woman's Work_:
      Algona. H. M. S.                                  3.00
      Berwick. Mission Band                             5.00
      Central City. L. M. S.                            3.00
      Chester Center. H. M. S.                           .25
      Council Bluffs. L. M. S.                         10.00
      Dubuque. L. M. S.                                13.00
      Dubuque. Union Y. P. S. C. E.                     4.00
      Davenport. Ladies                                10.15
      Des Moines. Plymouth W. M. S.                    13.55
      Des Moines. Pilgrim W. M. S.                      2.00
      Farragut. W. M. S.                               10.00
      Grinnell. Easter Offering, 24; Boys' and
        Girls' Army, 1; W. H. M. U., 9.95; Sunday
        Eve Coll., 6                                   40.95
      Iowa City. W. M. U.                               3.00
      Lyons. L. M. S.                                   6.50
      Miles. W. M. S.                                  15.00
      Mount Pleasant. L. B. and L. M. S., 12.75;
        S. S., 1.29                                    14.04
      Magnolia. W. M. S.                                1.50
      McGregor. W. M. S.                                8.85
      Mason City. Y. P. S. C. E., 10; W. M. S., 6.73   16.73
      New York. W. M. S.                                5.00
      Nora Springs. Miss. Circle, 3; Mrs. H. B. Shaw,
        75 cts.                                         3.75
      Ottumwa. L. M. U.                                11.00
      Old Man's Creek. H. and F. M. S.                   .50
      Onawa. W. M. S.                                  10.00
      Prairie City. C. P. Emery and Wife, by I. H.
        Merrill, Trustee                                8.56
      Rockford. L. M. S.                                1.20
      Rowen. Y. P. S. C. E., 1.80; Jr. Y. P. S. C. E.,
        1.10; Sab. Sch., 65 cts.                        3.55
      Shenandoah. W. M. S.                              4.14
      Sibley. W. M. S.                                  1.00
      Toledo. W. M. S.                                  1.39
      Waverly. Y. P. S. C. E.                           6.25
      Wayne. L. M. S.                                   6.00
      Waterloo. L. M. S.                                8.25
      Iowa. W. H. M. U., Undesignated Funds           101.90
                                                      ------      353.01


MICHIGAN, $693.31.

  Allegan. Henry Randolph                                           1.00
  Detroit. Woodward Av. Cong. Ch., 65.65; Woodward Av.
    Woman's Union, 25, _for Tougaloo U._                           90.65
  Detroit. Sab. Sch. Woodward Av. Cong. Ch., 13.29;
    Mrs. J. L. Hudson, Discount on Sewing Machine, 11,
    _for Greenwood, S. C._                                         24.29
  Dexter. "Colored Man," _for Organ, Andersonville, Ga._             .50
  Grand Rapids. Y. L. M. S. of Park Cong. Ch., _for
    Indian M., Santee, Neb._                                       10.00
  Hancock. First Cong. Ch.                                         47.42
  Imlay City. First Cong. Ch.                                       4.60
  Jackson. Mrs. S. A. Cooley, _for Tougaloo U._                    20.00
  Kalamazoo. T. Hudson (50 of which _for Indian M.,
    Fort Yates, N. D._)                                           100.00
  Lansing. Plymouth Cong. Sab. Sch., 8; Bement and Sons,
    Discount on Stove, 8, _for Greenwood, S. C._                   16.00
  Muskegon. First Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._                     26.69
  Saint Joseph. First Cong. Ch.                                    51.36
  Vermontville. Woman's Miss'y Soc.                                 2.40
  Webster. Cong. Ch.                                               15.30
  West Bay City. John Bourn, _for Alaska M._                       50.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mich.,
    by Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Allendale. L. M. S.                               5.00
      Benton Harbor. Y. P. S. C. E.                     6.00
      Detroit. First Ch. W. H. M. A. (of which
        Mrs. Strong, 10; Miss Martha Miller, 25)       60.00
      Imlay City. Jun. C. E. S., _for Indian Boy,
        Santee, Neb._                                   2.10
      Saint Joseph. Aux.                                3.00
      South Haven. Aux.                                 2.00
      Stanton. W. H. M. U.                              5.00
                                                      ------       83.10
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $543.31

  ESTATE.

  Niles. Estate of James Lewis, M. D.                             150.00
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $693.31


MINNESOTA, $133.34.

  Glencoe. First Cong. Ch.                                          1.11
  Graceville. Cong. Ch.                                             7.20
  Northfield. Students Carleton College, _for Savannah, Ga._       30.00
  Robbinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                            5.25

  Minnesota Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. M. W.
    Skinner, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Austin                                           12.87
      Excelsior                                         1.40
      Fairmont. S. S.                                   1.85
      Hutchinson. C. E. Soc.                            2.00
      Minneapolis. Lyndale                             10.00
      Minneapolis. First Ch.                            1.00
      Rochester                                        22.66
      Saint Paul. Park                                 17.00
      Saint Paul. Park, _for Student Aid, Grand View,
        Tenn._                                         10.00
      Saint Paul. So. Park                              1.00
      Waseca                                            3.00
      Winona. First S. S.                               7.00
                                                      ------       89.78


MISSOURI, $12.00.

  Lebanon. "A Friend," _for Thunderhawk Mission,
    Fort Yates, N. D._                                              2.00
  Meadville. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
  Saint Joseph. C. E. Soc. of Tabernacle Ch.                        5.00
  Willow Springs. Cong. Ch., Pkg. Papers, _for Meridian, Miss._


WISCONSIN, $145.45.

  Brandon. Cong. Ch.                                               16.62
  Kenosha. First Cong. Ch.                                         49.83
  Menasha. Cong. Ch.                                               20.00
  Oak Center. Mrs. S. B. Howard                                     3.00
  Prairie du Chien. W. A. Hodge, _for Tougaloo U._                 25.00
  Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                             14.00
  Sparta. First Cong. Ch.                                           2.00
  Sun Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                           15.00


KANSAS, $110.18.

  Partridge. Cong. Ch.                                             10.00
  Topeka. Central Ch.                                              14.93
  Topeka. Mrs. Ralph Gaw, _for Meridian, Miss._                     1.00

  Kansas Woman's Home Missionary Union
    by Mrs. E. K. DeLong, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Blue Rapids                                       7.00
      Emporia. First Ch.                                5.00
      Eureka                                            5.00
      Ford                                              2.00
      Kirwin                                            3.75
      Leavenworth                                      20.00
      Neosha Falls                                      1.00
      Pluma                                             4.50
      Sabetha                                          10.50
      Topeka. First Ch.                                10.00
      Wabaunsee. C. E.                                  7.00
      Wellsville                                        3.00
      Wichita. Plymouth                                 5.50
                                                      ------       84.25


NEBRASKA, $74.76.

  Franklin. Mr. and Mrs. F. A. Wood, _for Thunderhawk
    Mission, Fort Yates, N. D._                                    20.00
  Harvard. First Cong. Ch.                                          6.65
  Linwood. Cong. Ch.                                               17.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Nebraska,
    by Mrs. G. J. Powell, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Beatrice. Y. P. S. C. E.                          5.00
      Blair. Mission Band                                .50
      Irvington. Y. P. S. C. E., 2.38; Sab. Sch., 1.63  4.01
      Omaha. St. Mary's Av., Y. P. S. C. E.            20.00
      Omaha. Plymouth, Ladies' Soc.                     1.60
                                                      ------       31.11


SOUTH DAKOTA, $25.60.

  Ashton. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00

  South Dakota Woman's Home Missionary Union,
    by Mrs. A. M. Wilcox, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Athol. W. M. S.                                   2.00
      Elk Point. W. M. S.                               1.60
      Fort Yates. Indian W. M. S.                       1.00
      Oahe. Indian W. M. S.                             1.00
      Redfield. W. M. S.                               12.00
      Spring Lake. W. M. S.                             1.00
      Ruk Micronesia. Miss Rose Kinney                  2.00
                                                      ------       20.60


COLORADO, $5.00.

  Boulder. Mrs. L. P. Housel                                        5.00


CALIFORNIA, $861.90.

  Grass Valley. Cong. Ch.                                          12.65
  Messina. Highland Ch. of Christ                                   8.55
  Needles. Rev. J. Overton                                          2.00
  Oakland. Miss M. L. Newcomb                                      60.00
  San Francisco. Receipts of the California Chinese Mission
    (see items below)                                             771.90
  Soquel. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.80
  Stockton. Cong. Ch.                                               3.00


OREGON, $19,15.

  Albany. First Cong. Ch.                                           4.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Oregon,
    by Mrs. W. D. Palmer, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Champoeg. W. M. S.                                5.15
      Wilsonville. W. M. S.                            10.00
                                                      ------       15.15


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $45.00.

  Washington. First Cong. Ch.                                      34.00
  Washington. "Friends," _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._       11.00


VIRGINIA, $15.00.

  Falls Church. First Cong. Ch.                                    10.50

  FOR CAPPAHOSIC, VA.:
    Bayport. Mrs. M. S. Reed Bar                        2.00
    Cobbs Creek. Addison Monrowe                         .75
    Cobbs Creek. Robert Monrowe                          .50
    Gloucester. By Mrs. R. Yeats                         .75
    Yorktown. Godfrey Harrod                             .50
                                                      ------        4.50


WEST VIRGINIA, $3.70.

  Ceredo. Cong. Ch., _for Bethel, Ky._                              3.70


KENTUCKY, $33.00.

  Campton. "Friends," _for Morgan Co. Sch., Ky._                   18.00
  Campton. Rev. J. W. Doane, _for Indian M._                        5.00
  Newport. Y. P. S. C. E. of York St. Cong. Ch.,
    _for Ky. Mountain Work_                                        10.00
  Williamsburg. Box Books from Unknown Source


TENNESSEE, $77.91.

  Bon Air. Cong Ch.                                                 1.25
  Cumberland Gap. From School Entertainment, _for Building_        14.70
  Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch.                                             2.00
  Memphis. Miss'y Union Second Ch.                                  7.00
  Nashville. Miss'y Soc. Fisk U., 10; Cong Sab. Sch. Fisk U.,
    8.76, _for Indian M._                                          18.76
  Nashville. "Helpful Circle of King's Daughters" of Fisk U.        1.20

  Tennessee Woman's Missionary Union, by Mrs. J. E. Moorland,
    Treas.:
      _For Santee Agency_, 18; _for Thunderhawk M., Ft. Yates,
        N. D._, 15                                                 38.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $29.90.

  Blowing Rock. Bbl. and Box C., _from Unknown Sources_
  Bryson. Bapt. Ch.                                                 1.50
  High Point. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
  Salem. Cong. Ch.                                                   .60
  Saluda. Rev. E. W. Hollies, 10; Miss M. A. Parsons, 63 cts.      10.63
  Strieby. Cong. Ch.                                                1.40
  Southern Pines. Union Sab. Sch., by Rev. A. A. Newhall,
    _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._                          14.77


SOUTH CAROLINA, $16.00.

  Charleston. Graduating Class of Avery Inst., 1894, 1 each        16.00


GEORGIA, $2.59.

  Cypress Slash. Cong Ch.                                            .35
  Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 1.26; Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke,
    74 cts.; Rev. J. Loyd, 24 cts.                                  2.24


ALABAMA, $123.87.

  Athens. Miss Mary E. McLane                                      25.00
  Athens. Result of Collecting, by Miss K. S. Dalton,
    _for Athens_                                                   30.70
  Lawson. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.55
  Selma. Rev. A. T. Burnell, bal. to const. ESTHER ADALINE
    BURNELL L. M.                                                  12.65
  Selma. Miss G. D. Pike, _for Burrell Sch._                        1.00
  Talladega. Pres. H. S. DeForest, _for Talladega C._              14.54

  Alabama Woman's Missionary Union, by Mrs. G. W.
    Andrews, President.
      Kymulga. W. M. S.                                             3.34

  Alabama Woman's Missionary Union, by Mrs. N. B.
    Silsby, Treas., _for Indian M._
      Blockton                                          1.00
      Birmingham                                        1.00
      Jenifer                                           5.00
      Miss Showers                                       .50
      Shelby                                            1.15
      Talladega                                        22.44
                                                      ------       31.09


FLORIDA, $40.00.

  Orange Park. Rev. T. S. Perry                                    30.00
  Orange Park. Y. P. S. C. E., by Carrie Parrott,
    Pres., ad'l _for Alaska M._                                    10.00


MISSISSIPPI, $42.00.

  Tougaloo. A. S. Hill, 30; Miss C. E. Parkhurst, 12,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                                42.00


ENGLAND, $242.75

  ----. Mrs. Mary Carpenter, by Hon. Frederick Douglas,
    _for Cappahosic, Va._                                         242.75

                                                              ----------
  Donations                                                   $21,528.95
  Estates                                                       5,871.57
                                                              ----------
                                                              $27,400.52


INCOME, $1,082.50.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                          343.75
  De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
    Talladega C._                                     125.00
  Graves Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._               125.00
  Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._                18.75
  Howard Theo. Sch'p Fund, _for Howard U._            202.50
  Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                  75.00
  Luke Mem. Fund, _for Talladega C._                   10.00
  Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._                      50.00
  Stone Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._                 25.00
  Straight U. Sch'p Fund, _for Straight U._            20.00
  Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                    87.50
                                                      ------    1,082.50


TUITION, $4,684.25.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                               6.00
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                           127.95
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                              25.75
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                           8.73
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                             25.05
  King's Mountain, N. C. Tuition                       27.00
  Malee, N. C. Tuition                                  6.34
  McLeansville, N. C. Tuition                           6.56
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                                20.50
  Troy, N. C. Tuition                                   1.50
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                              18.20
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                           146.00
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                           352.05
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                            106.17
  Cumberland Gap, Tenn. Public Fund                   218.75
  Cumberland Gap, Tenn. Tuition                        32.50
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                              7.25
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                             38.65
  Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                              321.80
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                            672.63
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                         42.45
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                                  80.85
  Andersonville, Ga. Tuition                           16.10
  Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch. Tuition                    154.80
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                                  220.75
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                               176.79
  Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                             48.50
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                                4.00
  Martin, Fla. Tuition                                 11.18
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuiti                              63.73
  Anniston, Ala. Tuition                               27.25
  Athens, Ala. Tuition                                 77.37
  Florence, Ala. Tuition                               12.75
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                                 84.77
  Mobile, Ala. Tuition                                136.55
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                                   213.99
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                                  61.10
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                             141.26
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                             161.95
  Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                              17.00
  Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                             114.23
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                            476.75
  Austin, Tex. Tuition                                 84.75
  Helena, Ark. Tuition                                 86.00
                                                     -------    4,684.25
                                                              ----------

  Total for May                                               $33,167.27
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                                  $142,616.00
  Estates                                                      51,505.63
                                                             -----------
                                                             $194,121.63
  Income                                                        6,608.56
  Tuition                                                      34,491.90
                                                             -----------
  Total from Oct. 1 to May 31                                $235,222.09
                                                             ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for May                                           $35.46
  Previously acknowledged                                         495.31
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $530.77
                                                                 =======


ENDOWMENT FUNDS.

  Shoreham, Vt. Estate of Miss Eliza A. Hand, by Richard
    L. Hand, Executor                                             500.00
  Framingham, Mass. Estate of Sally N. Brewer, by John H.
    Temple                                                        339.76
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $839.76
                                                                 =======


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION from March 25th to
  May 17th, 1894, William Johnstone, Treas.:

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS:

    Fresno. Chinese Mon. Offs., 12.50; Anniversary
      Cash Col., 15.75                                 28.25
    Hanford. Chinese Mon. Offs., 4.55; Anniversary
      Cash Col., 3.15                                   7.70
    Los Angeles. Chinese Mon. Offs., 7.05;
      Anniversary Cash Coll., 20.05                    27.10
    Marysville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                     19.25
    Oakland. Chinese Mon. Offs., 20; Chinese
      New Year Gifts to Christ, 14.25; First
      Cong. Ch. (20 of which from S. S. Primary
      Class), 86; East Oakland Pilgrim Ch.
      Y. P. S. C. E., 5.50                            125.75
    Oroville. Chinese Mon. Offs.                        3.00
    Petaluma. Chinese Mon. Offs.                        3.00
    Riverside. Chinese Mon. Offs., 3.55; Yong Kay, 5    8.55
    San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.                 16.00
    San Bernardino. Chinese Mon. Offs.                  6.00
    San Diego. Chinese Mon. Offs. 4.70; Annual
      Memberships and Anniversary Cols., 33.70; A
      Friend, 1                                         9.40
    San Francisco. Bethany Ch. Anniversary Offs., 39;
      Chinese New Year Gifts to Christ, 11.35;
      Central Mission Chinese Mon. Offs., 17.75;
      Barnes Mission Chinese Mon Offs., 2; West
      Mission Chinese Mon. Offs., 2.50                 72.60
    Santa Barbara. Chinese Mon. Offs, 17; E.
      Kimberly, 3; Anniversary Cash Col., 7.75;
      Pledges Paid, 15                                 42.75
    Santa Cruz. Chinese Mon. Offs.                      7.00
    Saratoga. Chinese Mon. Offs.                       15.50
    Stockton. Chinese Mon. Offs.                        7.65
    Ventura. Chinese Mon. Offs. 5.35; Anniversary
      Offs., 2.50                                       7.85
    Vernondale. Anniversary Offs., 2.10; Pledges
      Paid, 16.75; Chinese Mon. Offs., 1.70            20.55
                                                      ------      457.90

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Southern Cal.
      North Cong. Ch. of Pasadena                       5.00
      "A Steadfast Friend."                           100.00
                                                      ------      105.00

  EASTERN FRIENDS:

    Bangor, Me. Hon. E. R. Burpee                     100.00
    Belfast, Me. Miss E. M. Pond                        5.00
    Stockbridge, Mass. Miss Alice Byington, 100;
      Miss Adele Brewer, 3                            108.00
    Wheaton, Ill. Cong. Ch., "Light Bearers"            1.00
                                                      ------      209.00
                                                                --------
  Total                                                          $771.90
                                                                ========


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N. Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 48, NO. 07, JULY, 1894 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.