Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






[Illustration: The American Missionary]

MAY, 1896

VOL. L

No. 5

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND,                                           145
  ARREST OF OUR TEACHERS IN ORANGE PARK, FLA.,                     146
  PARAGRAPHS--JUBILEE FIELD DAYS IN THE INTERIOR,                  147


THE SOUTH.

  THE OPENING CHURCH MISSIONS (Illustrated),                       150
  GRACIOUS REVIVAL IN SELMA, ALA.,                                 155
  COTTON VALLEY, ALA.,                                             156
  IMPARTIAL TESTIMONY,                                             157
  WHAT OUR GRADUATES ARE DOING,                                    158
  ALL HEALING, N. C.--PLEASANT HILL, TENN.,                        160


THE INDIANS.

  PONCA, NEB.--FLYING BY'S VILLAGE,                                160
  HUT AND HEAVEN,                                                  161


THE CHINESE.

  LOS ANGELES MISSION,                                             162


WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS,                                       164

SHARES OF THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND,                                   166

RECEIPTS,                                                          167

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  EAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.

  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.

  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, 21 _Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., 153 _La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to
the Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances,
to the Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary
of the Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of
thirty dollars constitutes a Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L.     MAY, 1896.     No. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND.


In the last number of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY we published the plea of
the Executive Committee of this Association for an offering to relieve
the Association in its financial necessities. We present below the
working point of that document in these words:

     It is proposed to raise during the next six months a special
     Jubilee Year Fund of $100,000, in shares of $50 each, with the
     hope and expectation that these shares will be taken by the
     friends of missions without lessening those regular
     contributions which must be depended upon to sustain the
     current work.

As the means of securing these gifts we subjoin the blank form of a
pledge, which, when signed by individuals or officers of churches, may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York. When the
amount pledged is paid our treasurer will send as a receipt a neatly
printed certificate. On another page will be found a list of pledges
already made.

We solicit especial attention to the closing paragraph of the sentence
quoted above, asking that these special gifts _shall not lessen the
regular contributions_, upon which the Association must depend to
sustain the current work.

We send forth this appeal under a deep sense of responsibility. We
know that business is still depressed and that many of the friends to
whom we make this plea have responded generously to the calls of
sister missionary societies. But we feel that it is a duty we owe to
God and to the needy peoples for whom we labor to attempt the relief
of this Association in its embarrassing and hindering liabilities. We
confidently believe that many of the churches and generous
individuals to whom we make this plea, feel as we do, a sense of duty
and responsibility in this important matter. Some to whom this may
come may be able to respond at once with a pledge of _one_ or _more_
shares. But to those who cannot, we urge that they lay by in store as
God may prosper them the means for as prompt a response as possible to
our call.


  Share, $50.                        $100,000

  THE JUBILEE YEAR FUND
  OF THE
  AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  I hereby take ...... shares (Fifty Dollars each) in the Jubilee Year
  Fund of the American Missionary Association, to be paid before the
  close of the fiscal year, Sept. 30, 1896.

  _Name_ .....................................
  _P. O. Address_ ............................

       *       *       *       *       *

ARREST OF OUR TEACHERS IN ORANGE PARK, FLORIDA.


Rev. T. S. Perry, of Limerick, Me.; Mr. O. S. Dickinson, of West
Granville, Mass.; Principal B. D. Rowlee, of East Woodstock, Conn.;
Mrs. B. D. Rowlee; Miss Edith M. Robinson, of Battle Creek, Mich.;
Miss H. S. Loveland, of Newark Valley, N. Y.; and Miss Margaret Ball,
of Orange Park, Fla., with two patrons of the school (white) residing
in Orange Park, were all arrested by the Sheriff at Orange Park, Fla.,
on Friday the 10th of April, charged with the crime of teaching young
people of two races under the same roof. They were not taken to jail,
but were given until Monday--the intervening days of Saturday and
Sunday--to procure bail. This esteemed pastor of the Congregational
Church in Orange Park, the most worthy teachers and the patrons are
awaiting trial for this crime! and are only saved from jail by the
bail which has been procured for them. This is as far as the State of
Florida has descended in its shame at present.

This enactment, which we have been careful not to call a law, was
pronounced by the National Council to be "not only repugnant to
Christian principles, but also opposed to the civil rights guaranteed
by our Constitution," and the Association was called to persistently
resist it with all legal measures.

Senator Hoar of Massachusetts writes of it: "I am amazed that even in
Florida such things can be done. I think that this cannot stand a
moment before the Courts of the United States."

Arrests of Christian teachers because they instruct a few white
children under the same roof with colored children will not only call
the attention of the Nation to the gross darkness which dwells in the
minds of those who could make such an enactment, but it will bring
about a public opinion which will hasten the progress of the State
from its present low condition faster than almost any other agency.

Meanwhile Florida remains in shame.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hamilton Club has added the name of a colored man to the list of
its members. It is the first of the leading men's social organizations
in Chicago to abolish the color line. This special honor was conferred
upon Adelbert H. Roberts. The name passed the test of posting and the
directors were unanimous in his favor.--_Chicago Times-Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

HORSE NEEDED.--A faithful minister in our mountain field has great
need of a horse. He reaches half a dozen preaching-stations among
these Highlanders, often going on foot. Fifty dollars would purchase
him a good horse, and if any friend will respond to this appeal it
will increase the efficiency of an earnest missionary very greatly. If
a larger amount than this is received it will be expended in the work
among these mountain people.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. H. E. PARTRIDGE, of Pomona, Tenn., will be glad to write full
particulars concerning an opening for a Christian merchant in a store
on the Cumberland Plateau.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUBILEE FIELD DAYS IN THE INTERIOR.

SECRETARY CHARLES J. RYDER.


A reduction in the secretarial force of the American Missionary
Association, in order to cut down current expenses and decrease the
debt, has resulted in a serious loss in the effectiveness of the
collecting field. The office at Cleveland, together with a most
efficient and acceptable district secretary, was discontinued for
economy's sake. The expenses, however, had to be cut down in some way,
and so the burden was placed upon one of the secretaries in the New
York office. With multiform duties already upon the hands of each one
in the administration of the mission field, and almost constant Sunday
service among the contributing churches, it seemed almost impossible
to take up this new burden of work, which in some societies involves
the constant labor of a large number of secretaries. To accomplish an
undertaking which seemed almost impossible the pastors were conferred
with, and cordially and generously promised all the assistance within
their power for the American Missionary Association in its depleted
condition. Right royally did these good brethren redeem their pledge.

A series of Jubilee Field Days was planned and carried out with great
success and interest, largely through the co-operation of these
faithful brethren in the ministry of the churches in the interior.

Just a word concerning the plan adopted. A campaign of five weeks was
planned. Jubilee Field Day Rallies were to be held twice every weekday
except Saturday, and as many times on the Sabbath as possible. Ohio,
Michigan, and Indiana were the States to be reached.

The purpose of the campaign was to instruct and stimulate the churches
and congregations reached. It was also hoped that the collections
would pay all the expenses of this effort to scatter missionary
information and enthusiasm, and that the regular collections of the
churches would be largely increased.

The speakers consisted of the pastors of the several churches and
missionaries from the fields, and the writer of this article. Just a
word in reference to these friends who presented the work to the
churches. The value of the address of the pastor in each case was very
great. Standing on the vantage ground that an honored and beloved
pastor occupies in any church and community, his indorsement and
earnest and discriminating commendation carried greatest weight. I
desire thus publicly to recognize the service of those generous
brethren in the ministry to the American Missionary Association. That
service was large.

The colored work was represented by Rev. George V. Clark, pastor of
the Congregational Church at Memphis, Tenn. Born a slave, rescued by
an American Missionary Association missionary from the degrading
influences of a saloon into which he drifted as a lad when freedom
came and no other opening was before him, his testimony and earnest
appeal stirred the deepest convictions of his hearers. The quaint old
slave melodies, which Mr. Clark sometimes heard as a boy in slave
times, and often since by those who are freemen now, he rendered with
peculiar effect. The weird and quaint pathos of these songs coming
originally from the crushed and bleeding hearts of slaves, held the
large audiences in hushed and sympathetic attention. Is there anything
in the world like these slave songs sung by those who have known the
bitterness of slavery?

From far-away Dakota Miss Dora K. Dodge brought the message to these
several gatherings, of the discouragement and want, the hopefulness
and progress, of the Christian work among the Indians. Her mission,
seventy-five miles out on the prairie, with only Christian
Indians--John Bluecloud and his wife--for associates, is of unique
interest and importance. No one could have told the story of this
wonderful movement among the red people of the prairie with more
simple and earnest eloquence than did Miss Dodge.

Rev. W. G. Olinger, a native mountaineer, presented the work "Among
the American Highlanders." Born in the humble cabin of the
mountaineer, stirred from his earliest boyhood with the great desire
for education and improvement, he struggled up through great
discouragements, until to-day he can stand on any platform with
interest to those who hear and with honor to himself. His manly
presence is the illustration of the wonderful possibilities of these
mountaineers; and his story is their agonizing cry for the light and
opportunities which only an intelligent gospel and educational
privileges such as the American Missionary Association is bringing,
can satisfy.

The secretary, who had charge of the campaign, presented "The Claims
of the American Missionary Association on this Jubilee Year."

The immediate results of this series of Jubilee Field Days were most
encouraging. Nearly twenty thousand people gathered in the various
audiences. Lincoln Memorial Day, celebrated at Oberlin, was most
delightfully spent. Every service during the day, including
Sunday-school, Mission Circle, Endeavor Society, as well as church
services, was an American Missionary Association rally.

On the Sabbath large churches and towns were reached. During the week
important centers were selected, and many surrounding churches sent
pastors and delegates to the Jubilee Field Day services.

From a financial standpoint the result was also encouraging. More than
three times as much was gathered as the campaign cost, and pastors and
church members everywhere testified that the meetings were resultful
in spiritual uplift and blessing, as well as in stimulating interest
and greatly increased gifts.

The general feeling seemed to be that this was American Missionary
Association year, and that during this Jubilee season the specials
should float into this treasury and the regular contributions should
be greatly increased. While _en route_ the joyful message came to us
that the Board and the Home Missionary Society were both out of debt.
When announced from various pulpits by American Missionary Association
speakers, this glorious fact met with cordial applause. All the more
did it seem incumbent upon the churches to take hold of the American
Missionary Association, still burdened with its debt, and lift it out
of the slough of financial despond. This, however, is only the
reflection of the feeling among the churches throughout the land. The
determination to lift the debt of the American Missionary Association,
and to make it possible to continue at least its depleted work, is
universal. Special collections, regular contributions, and hundreds of
individuals taking the fifty-dollar shares in the Jubilee fund, will
accomplish this most desirable result.

       *       *       *       *       *

The South.

THE OPENING CHURCH MISSIONS.

BY SECRETARY F. P. WOODBURY.


The Eureka Church-Arbor, shown below, sheltered the opening service of
the new plantation missions in Southern Georgia. The people came under
the shadows of the piney woods from every quarter. The first mission
church was organized under this rude booth. There the meetings
continued until the cold and rainy months of winter. Now, by the help
of a grant from the Church Building Society, a small church building
will speedily become the home of a beneficent church and school work.

[Illustration: THE EUREKA CHURCH-ARBOR.]

This church of the forest took its start from the earnest convictions
of its pastor, Rev. J. B. Fletcher. After long study of the New
Testament, with the help of few other books than his tattered Greek
lexicon, he resigned his ecclesiastical connection because he had
found, as he thought, the free church polity on Bible principles. His
discovery was substantially the Congregational system. He called his
first church "Eureka." It now has nine other churches associated in
the same work. A mission preacher, a devoted man residing near, a man
who is highly respected by all the people, has immediate charge of
the Eureka work and holds the Sunday-school and other services.

[Illustration: A PASTOR'S HOME.]

The abodes of many of the plantation preachers are as simple and
humble as those of their people. We give an illustration of one of
these homes. Usually there is a division into two or perhaps three
rooms. Sometimes a small lean-to is built at the side or end, for use
as kitchen. The chimney, erected on the outside, is often constructed
of clay bound with sticks. It starts in a broad fireplace of stone,
which warms the whole building. Some of these cabins have small glass
windows; others of them have only openings for windows, with wooden
shutters. In such dwellings there reside vast numbers of the
plantation preachers, and some of our own mission preachers, at the
early stages of mission work in the back country.

[Illustration: MARIETTA CHURCH AND PARSONAGE.]

The picture given herewith of the church, parsonage, and school, in
Marietta, Georgia, illustrates very many of the American Missionary
Association church missions in the South. A neat church, a plain but
comfortable house, with its adjoining school-room, are the type of the
improving influences in both religious and educational service, which
we seek to carry among these shadowed and suffering millions.

In both the Carolinas, as well as in Georgia, there is an awakening in
the hearts of the colored people, both in the towns and in the
country, for a better church life. This is inciting movements from the
centralized forms of church government, with their arbitrary methods
and hard taxation, into independency. Often the poverty of the people
prevents their attaining anything beyond present and scanty shelter
for their new free churches. The accompanying photograph is an
illustration of such a chapel among the plantations of South Carolina.

[Illustration: A SOUTH CAROLINA CHURCH.]

In very many parts of the plantation South, the very idea of a church
free from outside control and allied to education and morality, is
utterly unknown. Neither education nor morality form any constituent
element of the common church life. Their introduction is looked upon
with suspicion by the masses, and is met by hostility in every
possible form of persecution by many of the old-time preachers and
their personal adherents.

[Illustration: SCHOOL IN ANDERSONVILLE, GA].

Nothing more contributes to the introduction of better forms of
church life than do those mission schools which awaken the desire for
something better in religion than the senseless and corrupt "old-time"
ways. Such a school as that in Andersonville, Ga., is the initiative
of a church mission. School education is of little advantage unless it
is linked with moral training; and there is no moral training
comparable with that of a pure and true Christian church. Our mission
school teachers call for and need the re-enforcement of gospel
preaching on the Lord's day, and the faithful work of a pastor during
the week. A great deal of hard work in the school would be frittered
away and lost without the distinctive church work which must
supplement, and confirm it. To send the pupils back into the Egyptian
darkness of most plantation and country churches is, for vast numbers,
to throw away all that has been done for them. That they feel this is
shown by the frequent and earnest appeals which come from them to have
virtuous and educated ministers sent for the starting of better
churches among their homes.

[Illustration: SCHOOL AT KING'S MOUNTAIN]

While this is the narrow and local influence of our smaller schools,
it is also the broader and deeper influence of our larger schools,
like that at All Healing, N. C. (King's Mountain P. O.) Here the
religious life is intensified. A number of devoted teachers supplement
each other's work. A unique Congregational church has been formed, its
pastor being the principal of the school, who adds this work to all
his other services. The influence of the constant religious work done
in this church-school and school-church is felt a hundred miles
around. Young men and young women go out with higher ideals, and they
awaken a demand in their home neighborhoods for both religion and
education of a higher character. It is not too much to say that such
work as that of Miss Cathcart and her fellow teachers at King's
Mountain tends toward a general advance of the communities from which
her pupils come.

[Illustration: HAGAN COUNC'L.]

In Georgia, after the Eureka church movement was noised about, Mr.
Fletcher received and now receives calls from every side, chiefly from
the plantation people. At Piney Grove, a preaching station was begun
in an old dwelling house, and a little church of twelve members is the
result. At Shady Grove, ten miles away, a small church building is
going up for the brotherhood there. The ground was given and the work
of building is carried on by a respectable colored farmer of the
neighborhood, who with many of his neighbors welcomes a church
fellowship which stands for education and pure religion. At Alford, in
the adjoining county, there is now a membership of thirty-two, for
whose use a comfortable church building is furnished by the white
people. This, with Nellwood as an out-station, will probably soon
receive an excellent pastor, trained in our Congregational ways and
principles. A beginning has been made at Portal, twelve miles beyond.
In the next county westward, the church work began at Swainsboro with
twenty-nine members, at Kemp with seventeen members, near Garfield
with thirteen members, and at Pilgrim with twenty-three members.

Word comes to us that Mr. Fletcher, who is covering three counties in
his work, has lost his faithful horse. This quite disables him from
service. His fields lie at distances which make walking impossible,
being from ten to fifty miles apart. The same day with this loss a
member of the family, a young man, was brought home suffering from a
broken leg. Are there not means which can reach us in the form of a
special gift for the emergency of this faithful pioneer worker?
Anything received beyond the immediate stress of need, will be placed
to the support of his work.

The Hagan Council, called for the orderly recognition of these poor
struggling pioneer churches, met in an old half-ruined school-house,
as shown in the picture given herewith. It was a humble place, and
they were humble bodies of poor people who thus asked recognition from
the Congregational churches of the land. But it is not for us to
despise the poor. Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom? That little group in front of that
poor old school-house may become historic as the precursor of a great
movement of blessing to millions among the poorest of the poor in our
nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRACIOUS REVIVAL IN SELMA, ALA.

BY REV. A. T. BURNELL.


You will be interested to hear of the gracious revival we have had the
past three weeks under the lead of the English Evangelist, Rev. James
Wharton. Over 400 have professed Christ, and of these 140 were
enrolled in Burrell School. To the very end of the meetings,
"mourners" came forward, once in the church as many as fifty; but this
was exceeded in immediate results at two schools where as many as
fifty accepted Christ, after the briefest address. Following the
Oberlin plan, I offered prayer with each class one day; the next, I
suspended my recitations for a continuous prayer-meeting, permitting
pupils to elect this instead of a class or study-period (certain
grades, certain hours). At another time, instead of chapel the
grade-teachers retained the Christians while the rest were addressed
in the chapel,--the majority falling to their knees for prayer to rise
in peace. Of course we have had regular prayer-meetings, with
volunteer room gatherings at noon and like groups in the yards at
intermission. When, on account of the late meetings each night, it
seemed best to close at noon, most of the school gathered for a
meeting in the chapel; and, with several after meetings, large numbers
spent that half-holiday in the building, praying for and laboring with
classmates. A member of Grade Eleven, for whom special effort had
been made, came out at this time.

Some of the converts have made detailed confession of sins (stealing,
_e.g._); some who have been neglectful of school privileges have
returned to get the religious impetus; and at least two that had been
dismissed for meanness have experienced a change of heart. We shall
look for permanent results, and work to that end with hope; yet this
people are so emotional and so stolid! so ready to move along a
certain line in a body, but indifferent to duty when it leads along an
uninteresting path of individual effort. Indeed, the home life of many
is unfavorable to genuine Christianity; some being persecuted, even,
because they have not seen a vision, till they are made to believe
they "have got nothing."

Mr. Wharton preaches the pure and simple gospel plainly and vividly;
is attractive in person and of commanding presence. At his departure
there were many expressions of regard and grateful remembrance, and he
will always have a warm place in the affections of Selma people, who
have been impressed in so short a time by the life and words of this
man of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

COTTON VALLEY, ALA.

BY A TEACHER.


I have been asked to tell something of the work and school in Cotton
Valley. Hence I send a little description of it as it appears to a new
teacher, just having entered the missionary field.

There are many features about the work here that make it a most
interesting one. First, it is situated in a dense black belt, where
the people are anxious to improve, and are appreciative of all that is
done for them. Next, Cotton Valley is quiet and retired, being forty
miles from Montgomery, nine from Union Springs, and thirteen from
Tuskegee; so that, while we are enabled to teach without interruptions
that break into school life in cities, we are yet not so far removed
as to be incommoded when business necessitates our going to a city.

Doubtless Miss Lilla V. Davis, the pioneer, founder, and principal of
our school is well known to most of the friends and helpers of the
American Missionary Association, but, for the sake of those who are
not so well informed, and because hers is a story worthy of being told
anew, I will say a word of her whom all Cotton Valley delights to
honor. She, ten years ago, left her home in Boston, Mass., and coming
down here under the most adverse circumstances, and in the midst of
the lowest humanity, established this school. Her teaching in those
days was not so much from books, but she went into the homes of the
people and made them feel that she was one of them. She talked and
read to them, taught them the rules of decency and virtue, and that
cleanliness is next to godliness. Thus, step by step has she been
leading them on until now, instead of a valley of ignorance, it is "as
a city set on a hill, whose light cannot be hid," for instead of a
one-room-log-cabin we have a nice, comfortable school building,
planned and furnished in modern style. I mean by this, that what we
have is up-to-date and not that we have all we need, for our largest
room, the one we call and use as our chapel, needs settees,
blackboards, maps, and lights; and last but not least, we need a
piano, as at present our only musical instrument is a baby organ,
which is now so nearly worn out that many of the reeds instead of
responding to the touch of the solicitous performer sit in silence,
considering themselves too aged to jump up and down, and take part in
such active service.

Our school this year is larger than ever, and our students, I think,
would compare well with those of more favored schools in cities. The
present enrollment is nearly two hundred, and when the weather is
good, and all are in, we find the work rather heavy, as there are only
three teachers, and we all believe in thorough work.

We have a large and interesting Sunday School to which the parents as
well as the children come; also a Christian Endeavor Society, and a
Circle of King's Daughters.

Perhaps it would be interesting to say, that the relation of the white
people of the settlement to the school is most friendly. They respect
Miss Davis to the highest degree, and are willing and glad to show any
favors to her or her teachers.

Thus far, I have shown you only the favorable side of the picture, but
I would beg my readers to remember that it has also a painful side.
Those we are teaching are the children of ancestors who have lived for
centuries in darkness and ignorance, with only eleven years of light;
and there is still a great work to be done here. We find it necessary
to instruct them, not only in books, but along the lines of all the
virtues which go to make a man a man, and a woman a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPARTIAL TESTIMONY.

BY REV. VINCENT MOSES, NEWBURY, MASS.


My wife and I recently spent about four weeks in New Orleans, La.
While we were there, Straight University was constantly under our
observation; and, without suggestion from any one, it comes to mind
that testimony to the efficiency of American Missionary Association
work in Straight would be welcome to you.

We not only attended more than once the general morning devotional
exercises in the "Daniel Hand Preparatory School" and the "Central
Building," but were also present during a recitation to nearly every
teacher in the Preparatory, Grammar, Normal, College Preparatory,
College and Theological Departments. The departments of music,
woodworking, sewing and printing, and also the Boarding Department
came under our observation.

The impression made upon us throughout was most favorable. The claims
of the catalogue are fully sustained in every particular. We have been
familiar with work in all these grades in the schools of several
Northern States; but we have never seen more thorough work, never a
school on the whole more satisfactory in deportment and scholarship.
We cannot compare this with other American Missionary Association
institutions. This is the only one we have visited. So we are glad to
let this represent them all, and confess to a surprise in finding that
we had never known better schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT OUR GRADUATES ARE DOING.

FROM GRADUATES OF STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.


I.

     "I am principal of the public schools of Vicksburg, Miss. I
     have been teaching fourteen years, having had charge of my
     present work nine years. I have under my present charge eight
     hundred pupils, all the school can accommodate. Several hundred
     have been turned away."

II.

     "Am editor of the _Southwestern Christian Advocate_, and
     practicing physician and minister. Have taught school in
     Alabama and Louisiana."

III.

     "My present occupation is clerk in the War Department,
     Washington, D. C. I have taught three years in New Orleans. I
     graduated as doctor of medicine, April 13, from the medical
     department of Howard University."

IV.

     "I am principal of the Harper Industrial Institute, Baton
     Rouge, La. Have taught almost continuously since graduating in
     1879. For the American Missionary Association I entertain a
     feeling of the greatest possible gratitude. What little I am I
     owe to the training of dear old Straight."

V.

     "I have been until last spring principal of the colored schools
     of Manhattan, Kansas, since 1885."

VI.

     "The very name of the dear old institution is sweet to me, and
     while those who guarded the old mother in the memorable past
     have somewhat vanished, the purposes for which she was
     instituted are being vigorously pushed and great good
     accomplished. Many of her sons and daughters can be found
     throughout this Southland engaged in the various pursuits of
     life, doing a grand work for Christ and humanity. All honor to
     the American Missionary Association for this excellent school,
     and incessant praises to Him who guides and directs her
     efforts."

VII.

     "I am instructor of ancient languages in Wiley University,
     Tex.; have been since 1887. I am a member of the Louisiana
     Conference."

VIII.

The following extract is of special importance as showing the breadth
and completeness of the system of instruction of Straight University
and the economy upon which it is based:

     "I am always glad to do whatever lies in my power that will in
     any way be beneficial to Straight University, my _alma mater_.
     I am, as you know, a normal graduate of 1891. Though I had
     never before taken the first thought of learning anything about
     wood-working, I thought I would go into the shop the first day
     anyway; and I shall always be heartily thankful that I did so.
     From that day to the end of my course, without interruption to
     my studies, I worked in the carpenter shop, and acquired such a
     knowledge of carpentry that I am now able to support myself by
     following that trade. Still more, from the knowledge I gained
     of making pieces of furniture, such as center-tables,
     washstands, etc., I think I could be useful in the cabinet
     trade."

IX.

The following gives some idea of what the department in theology is
doing:

     "Having a desire to do something for Christ and humanity, I
     began the study of theology and other studies at Straight, that
     I might be thoroughly equipped, 'a workman that needeth not to
     be ashamed.' I was compelled to give up for two years, and it
     seemed to me that there was no use of my trying further, when
     just then through the dark cloud the sun shone again, and I
     hope now, if life lasts, to keep on till I finish the course.
     All that I am, or ever expect to be, is due to Straight
     University. May God bless her and the many friends who have
     made it possible for us to attend."

       *       *       *       *       *

ALL HEALING, NORTH CAROLINA.


During the summer about forty of our pupils taught in the public
schools; some had eighty or ninety scholars. In this way our school
really influences many whom we cannot reach. It is so good to see the
interest our young teachers take in their work and how, when they find
a bright boy or girl, they always try the first thing to induce that
one to come to school. Then, too, we see a growing desire among the
scholars to come into school early in the fall, and we rejoice in a
family of fifty-seven six weeks earlier than we had the same last
year.

The richest blessing of the year has begun to fall upon us, the
presence of the Holy Spirit leading souls to Christ. During this month
five have felt that God had forgiven their sins. Is not that enough to
compensate us for anything we may give up to engage in the work?

       *       *       *       *       *

PLEASANT HILL, TENNESSEE.


A boy we could not receive, although we would have been glad to have
done so, said he had worked all summer for his share of a crop which
was about 100 bushels of corn. He would have about twenty bushels of
the corn left after he had bought himself a few clothes, which he must
have if he came to school, and he thought he ought to help his mother
a little. It was his only chance to get what he so much desired. He
realized that twenty bushels of corn, worth only about $5.00, was very
little for him to do for himself. He would try to prove himself worthy
of any help we could give him.

Still another boy writes: "It is not much I can do for myself, for I
have not been able to find anything to do to get any money, although I
have tried hard. But a friend has just given me a chance to assist him
in his school for a couple of months. I don't know how much he will
pay me, but you shall have _every cent_ I _do_ get. I do want to come
into school, I need the education so much; I want to make a true man."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Indians.


There has been an interesting revival at Ponca Church, Nebraska, under
the direction of Rev. James Garvie, our Indian pastor.

The friends who attended the annual meeting of the Association at
Lowell will remember Mr. Garvie very pleasantly, as he was one of the
speakers on that occasion. He is as successful in the great work which
comes to him, as the pastor of one of our churches on the prairie, as
he was in telling the story of the work among his people to Eastern
congregations.

Even the building of a barn at the prairie mission may be turned to
the spiritual advantage of the Indian people, as is proved by the
experience of Miss Mary P. Lord at Flying By's Village, N. D. The
following extract, from a recent letter of hers, tells the story most
interestingly. Frank and Daisy are her horses, who are really
four-footed missionaries. Miss Lord writes: "On Sunday the ponies took
me twelve miles to conduct service at Oak Creek Sub-Agency, where my
people were gathered for the Monday morning issue of rations. Service
over at noon, a drink of water and a feed of grain, and then two hours
and a half later we were twenty miles away to attend afternoon service
at Little-Eagle's village, where I played the organ for the English
singing of the boarding-school children there. Yesterday they brought
me to Fort Yates, thirty miles."

       *       *       *       *       *

HUT AND HEAVEN.

BY REV. C. L. HALL, FT. BERTHOLD, N. D.


Three years ago in our visit to the Indian homes, we found
Netkuschiripas (Little Eagle) on his bed unable to get out of the
house. Mary, his wife, washed for white people, hoed corn, and
tenderly cared for him. He told me he believed in Jesus and would join
us as soon as he could come out. It did not seem that he ever would
get better then, but his faith put new life into his body, and two
years and a half ago he was baptized in church, and got about to do a
little work now and then. This fall his working days came to an end.
He could only lie on his bed or sit in the sun at the door. Mary had
to haul the firewood and nurse him, as well as work out. For a while
they stayed at a neighbor's house, but an old Indian woman insisted
that he should wear his beads and other heathen adornments. He refused
to do so, saying that now he was a different person. As this annoyance
was kept up he and Mary left and stayed by themselves in a dug-out on
the south side of a bank on the edge of a willow bottom. His bed was a
few boards with a straw mattress and a few quilts. The room was
lighted by a single sash--the rude shelter of two of God's children.
When he felt himself sinking, he said: I do not know what God's will
for me is, but whatever it is I am ready. I have no fears. The day
before he died he said: I have one heart. I trust only in Jesus; I
have said this to you often. We laid him away just after the morning
meeting last Sunday. This is not extraordinary; we are glad so many
are like John and Mary. Twice the gates have opened this winter for
us, and now part of our church gather above and part here. Five more
are to confess their faith at the next communion. Pray for these
little ones.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese.

THE LOS ANGELES MISSION.

BY. REV. WM. C. POND, D.D.


An interesting letter from Mrs. Rice, wife of Rev. O. V. Rice, who has
charge of our mission at this prosperous and ambitious metropolis of
Southern California, prompts me to give my space this month to a
review of our work there. It had already begun when, twenty-two years
ago, I became superintendent. I tried to visit it in the spring of
1874, but a severe storm on our usually placid Pacific delayed our
steamer so long that I could spend only a few hours there. This was
sufficient, however, to show me that we had a good teacher and some
very promising pupils, but an indifference to contend with on the part
of American Christians which was both surprising and painful.

A few months after this I heard that Rev. Ira M. Condit, a missionary
recently returned from China, able to talk the Chinese language
fluently, and a very estimable brother, had gone to Los Angeles to
establish a Presbyterian mission. I did not hear of it by letter from
him nor from any one connected with the Presbyterian work in this
State. Denominational comity just then had not reached in the minds of
our Presbyterian brethren sufficient dignity to call even for a bow in
recognition. But I waived this matter, and believing that, with his
manifest advantages, he could do better work than we, and that there
was not room enough in the field, as it then was, for two missions, I
turned over to him our whole school--pupils, teacher, and whatever
conveniences or good-will we had gathered--and retired from the
locality. It was about two months only when I heard of six or eight
conversions in the Presbyterian Chinese mission of Los Angeles, but
they were the very ones of whom our teacher had spoken hopefully to me
on my visit to the city.

An interval of several years occurred. The great boom came, and Los
Angeles sprang to the front among the inland cities of the State and
boasted that before long San Francisco would be one of its suburbs.
The Chinese population increased to about 6,000. Among these were many
of our own brethren and several who were members of my own church.
They pleaded for a Congregational mission, and showed that because the
two Presbyterian missions were at one end of the Chinese quarter, and
there was nothing of the sort at the other end, nearly a mile distant,
there was a large field for us where we would come into no
competition, and where all that we might do would be a distinct
addition to the work done for Christ among their countrymen. We
yielded to their persuasions and found their prediction amply
verified. Our school became at once the largest and our work the most
active and fruitful in the city. In the four months ending with
August 31, 1888, 133 pupils were enrolled, and the average membership
month by month was 69. Street-preaching, hand-to-hand evangelistic
work, and the skillful, faithful labor of our teacher, Mrs. Sheldon,
and our enthusiastic helper, Loo Quong, were used of God for the
conversion of many souls.

But as in other specially delightful places for homes, persons
multiplied who desired to enter into this missionary work. Instead of
three, there came to be six or eight missions there. Competition
ensued. Our school, though comparing well with any, was reduced in
size and influence, and as we began to be straitened for funds and
there were many points where no one was caring for Chinese souls, our
aid was withdrawn and I supposed the work would cease. Not so. Our
Chinese brethren clung to each other and to their own mission work.
They rented quarters neither spacious nor comfortable, but cheap, and
contrived, with the aid of one true-hearted Christian woman, to keep
up their school, maintain their Association, add four members to it as
converts to the Christian life, and present seven of their number to
the First Congregational Church for baptism. We felt that a mission
with such "grit and grace" deserved to live. _Long may it live!_

Three persons converted at this mission have been brought into our
work as missionary helpers. Many have testified for Christ in their
own land.

At present it is in excellent working order and our Christian Chinese
are enthusiastic, generous, and at peace among themselves. Let me copy
a few sentences from a letter from one of them who was temporarily at
work at Pasadena. "I am very sorry for I left our school. Pray God for
me that I may be back to it again. You will be kind and teach our
people; that is such good work for you. God will want thus such person
[_i.e._, God wants persons who do as you do.--W. C. P.] You very much
interest our people. May God reward it to you! Before I went to the
mission school I never thought to be a Christian; now I did do it. I
am very thankful God has direct me out from the superstition to find
pathway about the truth, God and Heavenly Father. Now I am feel such
good comfort in my mind, but I do not satisfy [I am not satisfied] to
know the salvation alone, but needed you pray for my countrymen that
they all find life in Jesus Christ."

And now for an extract, briefer than I desired to make, from Mrs.
Rice's letter: "Last night we gave a farewell reception to our
brother, Yon Mon, who is about to leave for China. The brethren seized
this opportunity to present to a lady from Norristown, Pa., who has
kindly helped our work, a very nice letter of thanks with their names
signed to it. A gentleman who came to the city with her, and who is
about to open a fine store here, attended her to the mission house,
out of courtesy but very reluctantly, for he was bitterly opposed to
Chinese and to any and all efforts made for them. The brethren took
him for a friend and when introduced shook hands. He said it 'was as
much as his life was worth' to extend his hand in response to theirs.
But the same sense of courtesy constrained him to come with his friend
a second evening, and at its close he asked if he might be permitted
to say a word 'just to the boys.' Whereupon he expressed his pleasure
at all he had seen since coming into the school, and advised the boys
to keep right on doing right. They would meet bitter enemies among the
Americans, but not to mind them but go right forward. Then he
announced that if by February 5 we would have thirty regular pupils,
he would make the school 'a handsome present.' I wish some of the
other opponents of our work could in like manner be _compelled_ to see
our schools. Seeing would be believing, would it not?"

The latest contribution of our Los Angeles Mission to our general work
is Jue See, who has come to take Yip Bow's place (Yip Bow also having
come from the same mission) as helper in Oakland and at the West
School in this city, while Yip Bow goes to Sacramento. I am greatly
pleased with him. He will, when trained for the work (and we train for
work mainly _by working_), make one of the best of our Chinese
helpers.

I add just one word of good news. Our teachers are _all_ paid in full
for last year's work. Their faith has not been put to shame. Two of
our Chinese helpers still lack something, and two other creditors will
probably have to make large donations in order to square their
accounts, but I _know_ that _one_ of them will not complain, and the
other will be doing only what she promised, and while I fear it may be
a hardship, it is no greater hardship than almost every landlord or
landlady, in these days of pressure, has been forced to undergo. So I
feel like singing the Doxology!

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


MAINE.

WOMANS'S AID TO A. M. A.

  State Committee--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords;
    Mrs. A. T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
    Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 16 Rumford St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION

  President--Mrs. J. H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS AND R. I.

[A]WOMANS'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Massachusetts Ave., Boston, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. R. J. Hegeman, 32 Forest Street, Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. W. Thomas, Lansford.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T. W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sydney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. H. Ball, Dewhurst.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. A. Field, Wilmette.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K. L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T. O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. C. Denison, 132 N. College Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. M. Blackman, Whitewater.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. P. Lyon, 17 Florence Court, S. E., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. P. Cleveland, Caledonia.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. H. Thrall, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. H. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Gilchrist, Hot Springs.
  Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Second Street, Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. James W. Dawes, Crete.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Read, Parsons.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valantine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. P. F. Powelson, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. N. Smith, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. A. Paddock, Weiser.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D. L. Travis, Pocatello.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 South K Street, Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. W. George, 620 Fourth Street, Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 546 Third Street, Portland.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland.

  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 911 Grove Street, Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison Street, Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 253 S. Hope St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. J. Washburn, 1900 Pasadena Ave., Los Angeles.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Winslow, Albuquerque
  Secretary--Mrs. E. W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H. W. Bullock, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. S. Sevier, McLeansville.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, Oaks.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H. B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. S. Jackson, Montgomery.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. J. Lewis, 15 Echols Street, Memphis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. E. Moreland, 216 N. McNary Street, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Mrs. Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. M. Crawford, Hammond.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


[Footnote A: While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. And R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Shares of the Jubilee Year Fund.


  CHARLES L. MEAD, Esq., New York.
  H. W. HUBBARD, New York, two shares.
  JAMES H. FOY, New Haven, Conn.
  THEODORE BLISS, Philadelphia, Pa., two shares.
  H. SHELDON, Canton, Pa.
  Mrs. L. H. SPELMAN, New York.
  W. P. HUBBARD, Bangor, Me.
  Rev. J. B. SEWALL, South Braintree, Mass.
  Mrs. E. W. SOUTHWORTH, Springfield, Mass.
  Mr. S. R. HEYWOOD and wife, Worcester, Mass., two shares.
  Rev. G. S. F. SAVAGE, D.D., Chicago, Ill., two shares.
  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., New York, two shares.
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., Stamford, Conn.
  Rev. JAMES F. CROSS and wife, Rosebud Agency, S. D.
  HENRY GAYLORD, Cheshire, Conn.
  Rev. W. E. WHEELER and wife, Pleasant Hill, Tenn.
  Rev. J. W. COOPER, D.D., New Britain, Conn.
  Dea. SAM'L HOLMES and wife, Montclair, N. J., two shares.
  Rev. A. J. LYMAN, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Rev. WM. H. WARD, D.D., Newark, N. J.
  Rev. NEHEMIAH BOYNTON, D.D., Boston, Mass.
  Hon. D. L. FREEMAN, Central Falls, R. I., two shares.
  Misses D. E. and S. L. EMERSON, New York.
  LUCIEN C. WARNER, M.D., New York.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Esq., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1896.

       *       *       *       *       *

_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

_For the Education of Colored People._

  Income for February                                  $ 4,197.35
  Previously acknowledged                               27,110.00
                                                       ----------
                                                       $31,307.35
                                                       ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $623.96.

  Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 8; Cong. Ch., Y. P. S.
    C. E., 2                                               $10.00
  Auburn. Saml. J. M. Perkins                               10.00
  Bath. Mrs. M. A. Fiske, _for Indian M., Independence,
    N. D._                                                   2.00
  Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch.                               30.20
  Boothbay Harbor. Second Parish Cong. Ch.                  20.00
  Brewer. Manly Hardy (50 of which _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._)                                                 90.77
  Calais. First Cong. Soc.                                  20.00
  Elms. Mrs. M. C. Bean                                     10.00
  Farmington. First Cong. Ch.                               35.64
  Farmington. Y. P. S. C. E., Box Papers _for Nat,
    Ala._
  Freedom. Y. P. S. C. E. and Sab. Sch., _for Cal.
    Chinese M._                                              1.00
  Green's Landing. Cong. Ch.                                 4.75
  Hallowell. Mrs. Stimson, _for Moorhead, Miss._             5.00
  Hampden. First Cong. Ch.                                   4.54
  Island Falls. Mrs. T. S. Alexander, _for Student Aid,
    Fort Berthold, N. D._                                    1.00
  Lewiston. "Busy Workers" of Pine St. Cong. Ch., 8;
    Junior Soc., 8; Mr. and Mrs. Matthews, 8, _for
    Wilmington, N. C._                                      24.00
  Ligonia. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                               1.15
  Mount Desert. William Kittredge                          200.00
  North Waterford. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem.
    Day Offering                                             1.00
  Phippsburg. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
  Portland. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     40.00
  Portland. West Cong. Ch.                                  14.00
  Portland. Mrs. M. T. W. Merrill, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     5.00
  Portland, Prim. S. S. Class, by Lizzie C. Fuller,
    Bundle _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Rockland. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Talladega C._              10.00
  Searsport. First Cong. Sab. Sch., 5; Y. P. S. C. E.,
    2; Givers and Gleaners, 5, _for Student Aid,
    McIntosh, Ga._                                          12.00
  Skowhegan. Bloomfield Y. P. S. C. E., by Miss Lizzie
    M. Allen, Sec.                                           1.50
  Skowhegan. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Box Hats _for S.
    Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._
  South Berwick. "H."                                       10.00
  South Berwick. Sab. Sch. Class, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     2.25
  South Freeport. Miss Fannie E. Soule, Box C. _for
    Moorhead, Miss._
  South Gardiner. Jr. C. E. Soc., B. of C. _for Marion,
    Ala._
  Westbrook. Mrs. Ellie Adams, _for freight to
    McIntosh, Ga._                                           1.50
  West Woolwich. Bbl. C. _for S. Inst., Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Winterport. Mrs. M. B. Manter                             10.00
  York. First Cong. Ch.                                      4.51

  Maine Woman's Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V.
    Woodbury, Treas.:
      Portland. Second Parish Aids              20.00
      Waterville. Ladies of Cong. Ch.            5.15
      Waterville. Cong. Ch., Willing Workers    10.00
                                              -------       35.15


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $615.85.

  Acworth. Cong. Soc.                                        3.75
  Alstead Center. Dish Towels _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Andover. Bbl. Of Bedding _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Berlin Mills. Mrs. J. B. Carruthers, _for Student Aid,
    Fort Berthold, N. D._                                   10.00
  Chester. Y. P. S. C. E. and Others, _for enlargement of
    building, Memphis, Tenn._                               10.00
  East Andover. Bbl. Of Bedding, etc., _for King's
    Mountain, N. C._
  Exeter. First Cong. Ch., adl.                              1.50
  Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.54
  Hebron. Pkg. Aprons, etc., _for S. Inst., Blowing Rock,
    N. C._
  Hill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  11.00
  Hillsboro Center. Cong. Ch.                                9.07
  Hudson Center. Cong. Ch., 20.90; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 2   22.90
  Keene. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., to const. AUSTIN
    ELLIS, Mrs. MYRTIE TYLER, EUGENE ALDRICH, FLAVEL BEAL,
    Mrs. HERBERT WOODWARD, and CLINTON SMITH L.M's         180.00
  Keene. Cong. Ch., Mrs. H. I. Buckminster, Bbl. C. _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Lempster. Helen Bingham and Marianna Smith                 1.00
  Littleton. First Cong. Ch.                                25.56
  Manchester. Y. P. S. C. E., First Cong. Ch.                5.00
  Manchester. Bbl. C. _for S. Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Mason. Cong. Ch., Miss L. E. Goodwin, Bbl. C., _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Milton. Cong. Ch., 25c. adl.; Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong.
    Ch., 2.50                                                2.75
  Newfields. Miss H. L. Fitts, _for Wilmington, N. C._      44.75
  Northampton, Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
  Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                      38.86
  Troy. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                     15.15
  Westmoreland. "A Friend"                                   5.00
  ----. "L. F. B."                                         170.00

  New Hampshire Female Cent. Inst. and Home Miss'y Union,
    Miss A. A. McFarland, Treas.:
      Wilton. Aux. Mite Boxes                                6.33
                                                          -------
                                                          $573.16

ESTATE.

  Milford. Estate of Caroline B. Harris, by J. E.
    Foster, Ex.                                             42.69
                                                         --------
                                                          $615.85


VERMONT, $319.00.

  Barre. "A Friend"                                          1.00
  Benson. Cong. Ch., 5; C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch. 1            6.00
  Burlington. College St. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            6.00
  Chelsea. Cong. Ch.                                         9.57
  Dorset. Y. P. S. C. E., by Marcia K. Gray, _for
    Student Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._                 9.00
  East Hardwick. Mrs. Geo. P. Byington, 3; Ladies'
    Soc., Bbl. C., _for Marshallville, Ga._                  3.00
  Essex. Cong. Ch.                                           3.33
  Georgia. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Johnson. First Cong. Ch.                                  33.00
  Morrisville. First Cong. Ch.                              13.05
  North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                               57.05
  Northfield. Cong. Ch.                                     25.95
  North Pomfret. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., Lincoln
    Mem. Day Offering                                        4.50
  Peacham. Cong. Ch.                                        14.36
  Randolph. "A Friend"                                      10.00
  Rupert. Cong. Ch.                                         24.25
  Rutland. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._      25.00
  Townsend. "A Friend"                                       5.00
  Victory. Geo. A. Appleton                                 15.00
  Wallingford. "Friend"                                      1.00
  West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                               15.00
  Westfield. C. E. Soc., by Mrs. Chas. Chaffee, Treas.      10.00
  Westminster. C. E. Day Off. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                           5.00
  Westminster West. Mission Band, by Stella A.
    Goodell, Sec., _for Cal. Chinese M._                     1.00

  FOR McINTOSH, GA., by Prof. Fred. W. Foster,
    Brownington Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.
      Chelsea. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
        Student Aid_                            11.94
      Peacham. H. M. U., Bbl. C., Freight Pd.
      Worcester. Mrs. Sophia Hobart, _for
        Student Aid_                             5.00
                                              -------       16.94


MASSACHUSETTS, $5,610.41.

  Amesbury. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C. _for Talladega,
    Ala._
  Amherst. "A Friend"                                       10.00
  Amherst. Colored Sab. Sch., Mrs. E. Tuckerman, Bbl. C.
    _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Ashfield. Cong. Ch.                                       33.10
  Auburndale. Miss A. C. Strong, "Teacher's Helps" _for
    Straight U._
  Auburndale. Annie Strong, Bbl. C. _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._
  Belchertown. First Cong. Ch.                              30.76
  Boston. Old South Ch., in part               237.74
    Old South Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._   75.00
    Park St. Ch., adl.                          25.00
    Y. W. C. A., by Miss Edson, 2; Mrs.
      Kendall, 1; "Friends," Bbl.C.; Misses
      Lamson, Fiske, Thompson, and others, 2
      Bbls. C. _for Marshallville, Ga._          3.00
    Brighton. Y. P. S. C. E., by F. W.
      Dickerman, _for Sch., Grand View,
      Tenn._                                    10.00
    Brighton. Jr. End. Soc. of Cong. Ch.         1.50
    Dorchester. Elisha B. Worrell, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                     50.00
    Second Cong. Ch.                            25.00
    "A Friend," Second Cong. Ch.                20.00
    Jamaica Plain. Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney,
      _for enlargement of building,
      Memphis, Tenn._                           20.00
    Roxbury. "A Friend," _for Indian M.,
      Independence, N. D._                      10.00
    Mrs. Susan E. Parker, _for Student Aid,
      Marshallville, Ga._                        5.00
    Mrs. Parker and Miss Parker, 2 Bbls. C.,
      etc., _for Marshallville, Ga._
                                               ------      482.24

  Boxboro. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Boxboro. Y. P. S. C. E., by L. C. Hager, Cor. Sec.,
    _for Cal. Chinese M._                                    1.00
  Boxford. Ladies' Ben Soc., Bbl. Bedding _for Talladega,
    Ala._
  Cambridgeport, R. L. Snow                                 25.00
  Cohasset. Cong. Ch.                                        1.74
  Dalton. First Cong. Ch., to const. E. L. BROWN, PERRY
    HELMS, ELLA BELLOWS, EFFIE M. CHURCH, MINNIE D.
    BRAGAW and Mrs. J. W. FLANSBURG L.M's                  191.03
  Danvers. First Ch. C. E. Soc., _for Joppa, Ala._           5.66
  Dedham. Islington Cong. Ch.                                2.20
  East Charlemont. Cong. Ch.                                10.75
  Easthampton. First Cong. Ch.                              53.90
  Easthampton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       23.00
  East Longmeadow. First Cong. Ch.                           6.26
  Easton. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   23.50
  Everett. W. C. Levett, _for Gloucester Sch._               1.60
  Fairhaven. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                 7.52
  Foxboro. Bethany Cong. Ch.                                22.18
  Framingham. "A Friend," _for Indian Schp._                17.50
  Georgetown. First Cong. Ch., 11.18; First Cong. Ch. Sab.
    Sch., 10                                                21.18
  Gill. Y. P. S. C. E., by Miss Jessie S. Moore, Sec.,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans_, and a bal. to const.
    MRS. WM. C. MARVEL L.M.                                 13.70
  Gill. Mrs. E. L. S. Moore and Lyman Hale, _for Indian
    M._                                                      2.00
  Globe Village. Free Ch.                                    6.10
  Grandville Center. Rev. Geo. A. Beckwith, _for Cal.
    Chinese M. Building Fund_                                2.00
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              46.42
  Groton. "A Friend"                                       100.00
  Hanson. Cong. Ch.                                          7.09
  Hatfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           8.75
  Haverhill. Calvary Bap. Ch., _for Gloucester Sch._        25.00
  Haverhill. ----                                           20.00
  Haverhill. "M. L. C.," Jubilee Offering                    5.00
  Holyoke. First Cong. Ch.                                  42.74
  Huntington. First Cong. Ch.                                4.00
  Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch.                                35.70
  Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                 6.95
  Lawrence. "Scatterers of Sunshine," Cong. Sab. Sch.,
    _for Student Aid, Fort Berthold, N. D._                  5.00
  Lawrence. Box of bedding, etc., _for Marshallville,
    Ga._
  Longmeadow. First Ch. of Christ                           71.30
  Lowell. Ellen W. Mace (5 of which _for Indian M., Fort
   Yates, N. D._)                                           10.00
  Lowell. Mrs. Mary C. Stetson                               5.25
  Malden. "Two Friends," 3; Mrs. T. D. Goodhue, 1            4.00
  Mansfield. Cong. Ch., Ladies' M. Soc.                     10.00
  Marblehead. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      15.00
  Marlboro. Union Cong. Ch., 140, and Sab. Sch., 10;
    Y. P. S. C. E. of Union Ch., 10; T. B. Patch, 1        161.00
  Millbury. Miss C. C. Waters, _for Wilmington, N. C._       5.00
  Mill River. Y. P. S. C, E., by W. H. Rhodes, Treas.        2.00
  Milton. H. O. Apthorp, _for Gloucester Sch._               5.00
  Mittineague. Southworth Co., Case paper _for Tillotson
    C._
  Milford. Y. P. S. C. E., by Maria P. Westcott, Treas.,
    _for Student Aid, Grand View Acad. Tenn._, and to
    const. HUBBARD L. HUNT L.M.                             30.00
  Natick. Mrs. R. Eugene Bowers, _for S. Inst., Blowing
   Rock, N. C._                                              5.00
  Neponset. Mrs. Arthur A. Windsor                          10.00
  Newton. Sab. Sch. Eliot Cong. Ch.                         18.00
  Newton Centre. A Friend, _for King's Mountain, N. C._      1.00
  Newbury. First Cong. Ch.                                  16.50
  Newburyport. Belleville. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Sch.
    building, Grand View, Tenn._                            25.00
  Newburyport. The Misses Ridgway, _for Straight U._         5.00
  Newburyport. Jr. C. E. Soc. of Prospect St. Ch.            1.00
  Northampton. A. L. Williston                             300.00
  Northampton. Sab. Sch. First Ch. of Christ                50.00
  Norwich. Ladies of Park Ch., Bbl. C.; Mrs. E. A. Coit,
    Freight 2, _for S. Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._           2.00
  Pittsfield. Mrs. Mary E. Sears, 10; "A Friend," 2.50       12.50
  Reading. Cong. Ch.                                        18.00
  Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                        5.17
  Rosendale. Children's Mission Band, _for Thomasville,
    Ga._                                                     4.00
  Salem. South Ch., Y. P. S. C. E.                          20.00
  Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch., 25.66; Franklin St.
    Ch., 3.59                                               29.25
  Somerville. Miss M. S. Higgins, Box of Books; Miss
    Lydia Hayes, Box of Books _for Straight U._
  Southampton. Cong. Ch.                                    20.28
  Southampton. "Sunshine Band," _for King's Mountain,
    N. C._                                                   3.00
  South Braintree. Rev. J. B. Sewall, _for Share Jubilee
    Fund_                                                   50.00
  South Braintree. Cong. Ch.                                15.43
  Southbridge. Brookside Mission Circle, _for Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                  16.00
  South Hadley. Mount Holyoke, Col. by Miss Sarah Worden,
    _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._                        5.00
  South Hadley. "A Friend"                                   1.00
  South Hadley Falls. "In His Name"                         15.00
  South Hadley Falls. Y. P. S. C., _for Straight U._        10.00
  South Natick. Y. P. S. C. E., John Eliot Ch.               5.00
  South Sudbury. Memorial Cong. Ch.                         60.55
  South Weymouth. H. B. Reed, _for Straight U._             10.00
  South Weymouth. Cong. Ch., Mrs. C. Fogg, Bbl. C., _for
    Wilmington, N. C._
  Spencer. Mrs. E. W. Norwood's Sab. Sch. Class, _for
    Wilmington, N. C._                                       3.25
  Springfield. Mrs. E. W. Southworth, _for Share Jubilee
    Fund_                                                   50.00
  Springfield. Miss E. W. Southworth, _for Gloucester
    Sch._                                                   15.00
  Springfield. Olivet Cong. Ch.                              6.00
  Stoneham. Miss Mary A. Peffers, _for Straight U._          2.00
  Sutton. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering               2.00
  Townsend. Cong. Ch.                                        7.26
  Turner's Falls. Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._)                                      20.00
  Turner's Falls. First Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                   8.00
  Wakefield. Primary Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                    15.00
  Wareham. C. E. Society, Bbl. C. _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  West Barnstable. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  West Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                           4.77
  Westfield. Second Cong. Ch. Primary S. S. Class, _for
    Wilmington, N. C._                                       2.00
  Westhampton. Cong. Ch.                                    27.13
  West Newbury. First Cong Ch., 15; Y. P. S. C. E., 3; Jr.
    Y. P. S. C. E., 1; Mr. Goodrich, 1, _for Straight U._   20.00
  West Richfield. Emma, David and Esther Alger, _for
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   10.00
  Weymouth and Braintree. Union Ch.                         46.50
  Winchester, Cong. S. S. (Estate of S. A. Holt)             5.00
  Wollaston. Cong. Ch.                                      80.00
  Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             46.86
  Worcester. Immanuel Ch., Bbl. Bedding, etc., val. at 20,
    _for Beach Institute_
  Worcester. Cent. Cong. Ch., Mrs. S. K. Price, Box C.
    _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Yarmouth. E. D. Payne, _for Freight to Raleigh. N. C._     1.00
  ----. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._           5.00
  ----. C. Mfg. Co., Case of Paper _for Greenwood, S. C._

  FOR McINTOSH, GA., BY PROF. FRED W. FOSTER:
    Arlington. Mrs. E. T. Hillard, _for
      Freight_                                   2.00
    Dalton. Mrs. Zenas Crane, Bbl. C.
    Dorchester. Harvard Ch., Bbl. C.
    Dorchester. Mrs. Mary Houston, _for
      Student Aid_                               2.00
    North Adams. Braytonville Y. P. S. C. E.,
     _for Student Aid_                          18.00
    Northhampton. Edwards Ch., Prof. Wood's
      Bible Class, _for Student Aid_             6.43
    Warren. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid_    8.00
    West Roxbury. Mrs. Myra French, _for
      Student Aid_                               4.00
                                               ------       40.43

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and R. I.,
    Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas.:
      _For Salaries of Teachers_               340.00
      Roxbury. Walnut Ave. Ch. Aux.              7.00
                                               ------      347.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $3,252.26

  ESTATES.

  Lowell. Estate Leonard Worchester, by Samuel A.
    Chase, Executor                                        100.00
  Reading. Estate of Ruth L. Pratt, by Joseph H.
    Gleason, Executor                                      300.00
  Sharon. Estate of Margaret J. Tolman, by William
    R. Mann, Adm'r                                           8.00
  Somerville. Estate of Ephraim Stone, balance by
    Lorenzo K. Lovell, Adm'r, 2,525.15, less expenses,
    575                                                  1,950.15
                                                        ---------
                                                        $5,610.41

  CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

  Gray, Me. Rev. H. O. Thayer, Bbl. of C., etc., _for
    Saluda, N. C._
  Yarmouth. Mass. E. D. Payne, Bbl. of C. _for Raleigh,
     N. C._


RHODE ISLAND, $161.62.

  Barrington. Cong. Ch.                                     69.25
  Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.                          59.22
  Providence. Central Ch. and Sab. Sch., 16, and 3
    Boxes C. _for Raleigh, N. C._                           16.00
  Providence. Social Circle, Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    and Box C. _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Woonsocket. Globe Cong. Ch.                               17.15


CONNECTICUT, $5,242.50.

  Bantam. Mrs. Ella M. Grannis                               6.00
  Berlin. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._     35.00
  Bethel. Friends by Claire F. Luther                        3.00
  Branford. Cong. Ch., 29; H. G. Harrison, 10               39.00
  Bridgeport. "Warren"                                      25.00
  Bristol. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                              20.00
  Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Thomasville, Ga._      3.00
  Canaan. Pilgrim Ch.                                       18.08
  Cheshire. "A Friend"                                       1.00
  Collinsville. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
  Coventry. Hattie E. Gilbert                                 .50
  Cromwell. Primary S. S. Class, Cong. Ch., _for
    Thomasville, Ga._                                        2.00
  Darien. Mrs. N. C. Gleason                                  .50
  East Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                   6.00
  Ellington. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._      7.14
  Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                    27.30
  Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                54.49
  Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch.                              176.85
  Groton. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._    8.00
  Haddam. Y. P. S. C. E., Miss Winifred M. Lewis, Cor.
    Sec., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                7.55
  Hartford. Park Cong. Ch.                                 143.59
  Hartford. Sab. Sch. Pearl St. Cong. Ch., _for
    Industrial Work, Fisk U._                               40.00
  Hartford. Mrs. E. R. Rexford, _for Indian M., Standing
    Rock, N. Dak._                                          20.00
  Hebron. Ladies' Soc., _for A. N. and I. Sch.,
    Thomasville, Ga._, 12.25; Y. P. S. C. E., _for Sch.,
    Grand View, Tenn._, by Mrs. G. A. Little, 5             17.25
  Lakeville. Mrs. S. P. Robbins                              2.50
  Manchester. "E."                                           2.00
  Mansfield. First Cong. Ch.                                14.15
  Mansfield Centre. Chas. H. Learned                         5.00
  Meriden. First Cong. Ch., "A Friend"                      10.00
  Middlefield. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                 1.15
  Middletown. First Ch.                                     29.87
  Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.66
  Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                     150.00
  New Britain. Mrs. J. B. Smith, 2, _for Freight_; South
    Cong. Ch. Bbl. C. _for Tougaloo, Miss._                  2.00
  New Hartford. North Cong. Ch.                             19.12
  New Haven. Davenport Cong. Ch., 89.62; "A Friend," 5;
    Chas. Sanford, 5                                        99.62
  New Haven. James H. Foy, _for share Jubilee Fund_         50.00
  New Haven. N. S. Bronson, 10; Pres. T. Dwight, D.D., 5;
    Prof. Geo. B. Stevens, 5; Prof. A. Fairbanks, 5; Prof.
    Arthur Hadley, 5; Judge L. W. Cleveland, 5; Dea. S. A.
    Clark, 5; Hon. James Graham, 5; Mrs. F. S. Porter, 1    46.00
  New Haven. Humphrey St. Y. P. S. C. E., 40.25; Howard
    Ave. Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., 15; Miss Edith
    Woolsey, 10, _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._        65.25
  New Haven. Miss Myrta A. Lyman, _for Student Aid,
    Tougaloo. U._                                            5.00
  New Milford. First Cong. Ch.                              15.22
  New Preston. Village Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  129.21
  Newtown. Cong. Ch.                                        11.20
  Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                       128.85
  Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Tougaloo U._                                            27.01
  North Woodstock. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for
    Moorhead, Miss._
  Norwich. "A Friend in First Ch."                         100.00
  Norwich. Miss Ida E. Sutherland, 4 Boxes Books _for
    Hillsboro, N. C._
  Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch. Quarterly                         27.18
  Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          8.87
  Plainfield. First Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.                 6.03
  Prospect. B. B. Brown                                     20.00
  Ridgebury. Cong. Ch.                                       3.00
  Rockville. Y. P. S. C. E., by Mrs. A. W. Annis, _for
    Mountain Work_                                          10.00
  Saybrook. Mrs. Geo. Dibble                                 5.00
  Sharon. First Cong. Ch., Mr. and Mrs. E. B. Reed          10.00
  Seymour. Mrs. Emma Francis, _for Marshallville, Ga._       4.00
  Simsbury. _For freight to Fort Berthold, N. D._             .75
  Somersville. Cong. Ch.                                     8.15
  Sound Beach. C. E. Soc. of Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    Papers _for Talladega C._
  Southington. First Cong. Ch.                              18.32
  South Manchester. L. B. Soc. First Cong. Ch., _for
    Thomasville Ga._                                        22.00
  Suffield "Helping Ten" Circle, King's Daughters, _for
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   10.00
  Stamford. Cong. Ch.                                       20.22
  Stamford. Cong. Ch. Jr. C. E. Soc., Lincoln Mem. Day       5.00
    Offering
  Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                                 9.38
  Warren Cong. Ch.                                           8.00
  West Haven. First Cong. Ch., 6.88; James Tolles, 5        11.88
  West Haven. William H. Moulthrop, _for King's Mountain
    and Blowing Rock, N. C._                                 5.00
  West Suffield. Cong. Ch., to const. Miss ELLEN E.
    THRALL L.M.                                             34.79
  Wethersfield. Sab. Sch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._       15.50
  Whigville. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                      5.10
  Winchester. Ladies' Sewing Soc., _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     3.00
  Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               47.04
  Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.                   10.00
  Winsted. Children's Mission Circle of First Cong. Ch.,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                               8.00
  Woodbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 18.86
  Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       14.85

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn., Mrs.
    W. W. Jacobs, Treas.:
      Hartford. First Ch. "A Friend"            25.00
      Hartford. First Ch. Jr. Aux.              60.00
      Kent. Furnace                             50.00
      Naugatuck. Ladies' Aid Soc.               40.00
      New Britain. South Ch., Ladies' Benev.
        Soc.                                    46.50
      Watertown. Aux.                           10.00
      Winchester. L. B. S., _Jubilee Fund_       5.00
                                                -----      236.50
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,206.50

  ESTATES.

  Berlin. Estate of H. N. Wilcox                            30.00
  Cornwall. Estate of Silas C. Beers                     1,443.00
  Groton. Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt                     63.00
  New London. Estate Charles D. Boss, by Mrs. Elizabeth
    M. Boss, Executrix                                   1,500.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $5,242.50


NEW YORK, $10,129.67.

  Albany. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., and groceries,
    _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Aquebogue. Cong. Ch.                                       8.80
  Berkshire. "Friend," _for Wilmington, N. C._               5.00
  Bridgewater. C. E. Soc. Cong. Ch.                          5.00
  Brooklyn. Church of the Pilgrims, 737.21; Tompkins Av.
    Cong. Ch., 73.85; Puritan Ch., 22.00; Sab. Sch. Ch.
    of the Pilgrims, 14.30; East Cong. Ch., 9.13           856.41
  Brooklyn. Miss C. A. Johnson, _for Gloucester Sch._        2.00
  Brooklyn. "Penny Aid Soc.," 8 Towels _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._
  Buffalo. Fitch Mem. Cong. Ch.                              2.20
  Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch.                              38.85
  Clifton Springs. "Two Friends"                            12.00
  Corona. Union Evan. Ch. Sab. Sch., 2.89 and Box of
    Literature _for Beach Inst._                             2.89
  Deansville. Cong. Ch.                                      7.50
  Eagle Harbor. M. P. Lyman                                  1.00
  East Albany. Mrs. J. Buckman, _for freight to Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                             2.95
  East Rockaway. Sab. Sch. Bethany Cong. Ch.                 3.58
  Fairport. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering            10.00
  Fairport. A. M. Loomis                                     5.00
  Flushing. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                12.72
  Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       17.48
  Himrod. Mrs. Hester B. Ayers                               5.00
  Honeoye. Cong. Ch.                                        21.50
  Ithaca. Jun. Y. P. S. C. E., 4 and Sewing material,
    _for King's Mountain, N. C._                             4.00
  Kiantone. H. & F. M. Soc. by Alice L. Spencer, Sec.        2.75
  Lisle. Mrs. F. P. Edminster, Bbl. C. _for McIntosh,
    Ga._
  Massena. Cong. Ch.                                         5.60
  Mt. Morris Pres. S. S., 5; Pres. Ch., Bbl., _for
    Moorhead, Miss._                                         5.00
  Munnsville. Mission Circle, Box C. _for Skyland Inst,
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  New York. Mrs. L. H. Spelman, _for Share Jubilee Fund_    50.00
  New York. C. Irving Fisher                                10.00
  New York. Dr. B. Lord, _for Gloucester Sch._               5.00
  New York. M. E. Ch. Jr. C. E. Soc., by Miss G. L. Wood,
    _for Indian M._                                          3.50
  New York. Miss Lottie Hiskok, Box of Books _for Marion,
    Ala._
  New York. Miss Grace H. Dodge, Pkg. Pictures, Books,
    etc., _for Beach Inst._
  Northfield. Lucy and Alice Wood, _for McIntosh, Ga._       5.00
  Oxford. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering              31.00
  Pulaski. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Randolph. Cong. Ch., adl.                                  1.00
  Rochester. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch., _for Indian
    Schp._, bal. to const REV. WILLIAM F. KETTLE, DANIEL
    R. CLARK and SAMUEL B. GRISWOLD L.M's                   25.00
  Rome. Cong. Ch.                                            3.10
  Sayville. Cong. Ch.                                       19.26
  Schenectady. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong Ch.                   15.00
  Sherburne. "Little Lights," _for Student Aid, Talladega   18.00
    C._
  Syracuse. W. E. Abbott, 5; Danforth Ch., 3.50              8.50
  Syracuse. C. A. Hamlin, Box C. _for Hillsboro, N. C._
  Tarrytown. "A Friend" (25 of which _for Gloucester
    Sch., Cappahosic, Va.)_                                125.00
  Troy. "A Friend," 10; Miss S. A. Willard, 3, _for
    Gloucester Sch._                                        13.00
  Warsaw. "Earnest Workers" of Cong. Ch. Bbl. C. _for
    Macon, Ga._
  Wellsville. First Cong. Ch.                               30.00
  West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                34.25
  West Bloomfield. Y. P. S. C. E., 5; Rev. and Mrs. N. W.
    Bates, 2; Miss S. L. Brown, 1, _for Macon, Ga._          8.00
  Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch.                             10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. Y. by Mrs. J. J.
   Pearsall, Treas.:
       Albany, Home Circle                       5.00
       Aquebogue, L. S.                         10.00
       Brooklyn. Central Ch. L. B. S., to
         const. Mrs. W. C. PECKHAM L.M.         50.00
       Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. East Ch.             20.00
       Gloversville. L. B. A.                   30.00
       Gloversville. Jun. C. E.                  5.00
       New York. Broadway Tabernacle, S. W. W.  54.00
       Poughkeepsie, L. H. M. S.                20.00
       Schenectady. L. M. S.                    35.00
                                               ------      229.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,685.92

  ESTATE.

  Gloversville. Estate of Sarah B. Place. Specific,
    1,000; Residue, 7,500, less Expenses, 56.25,
    7,443.75, by Daniel B. Judson and Wm. H. Place,
    Executors                                            8,443.75
                                                       ----------
                                                       $10,129.67


NEW JERSEY, $217.10.

  Dunellen. Mrs. Lane. Lamp _for S. Inst., Blowing
    Rock, N. C._
  East Orange. First Cong. Ch.                               2.00
  Passaic. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.10
  Princeton. Prof. Wm. A. Packard, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           10.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of the N. J. Ass'n. Mrs.
   J. H. Denison, Treas.:
     Montclair. First Cong. Ch. W. H. M. S.                180.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $235.67.

  Arnot. Cong. Ch.                                           3.40
  Braddock. Cong. Ch., 4.25; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 5.02       9.27
  Canton. H. Sheldon, _for Share Jubilee Fund_              50.00
  Germantown. Mrs. L. Smith, 1; Miss Dolphus, 1, _for
    Gloucester Sch._                                         2.00
  Philadelphia. Theodore Bliss, _for 2 Shares Jubilee      100.00
    Fund_
  Philadelphia. Burnham, Williams & Co., 25; R. C. Ogden,
    25; Miss M. Blanchard, 10; A. F. Stevens, 5; Miss E.
    W. Stevens, 5, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._   70.00
  Pittsburg. I. F. Crawford, 50c.; W. E. Van Bownhorst,
    50c., _for Gloucester Sch._                              1.00


OHIO, $421.89.

  Akron. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. _for Moorhead,
    Miss._
  Akron. Missionary Society of First Cong. Ch., Box
    Bedding _for Tougaloo, Miss._
  Amherst. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                 3.60
  Ashland. J. O. Jennings                                   10.00
  Bellevue. First Cong. Ch.                                 12.23
  Bellevue. First Cong. Ch., _Jubilee Offering_              6.73
  Berea, Strongsville, and Rockport. Cong. Churches,
    Union, _Jubilee Offering_                               17.00
  Castalia. W. Story                                         1.00
  Chardon. First Cong. Ch., 7.65; Y. P. S. C. E. of
    F. C. Ch., 3                                            10.65
  Cleveland. Union Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  Cleveland. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Mrs. H. C. Beffenger,
    Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Coitsville. Geog. Hall Mission, _for Student Aid,          3.75
    Talladega C._
  Collinwood. C. E. Society, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo      3.00
    U._
  Columbus. Sab. Sch. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 21;
    Washington Av. Welsh Ch., 12; Mrs. F. W. Wallis, 1      34.00
  Dover. Mrs. Arthur Weston, Bibles and Testaments,
    _for Tougaloo U._
  Jefferson. Cong. Ch. (1 of which from "A Friend")         13.05
  Kingsville. Mrs. S. C. Kellogg, _for Mountain Work_,
    10; Miss Eliza Stewart Comings, 10                      20.00
  Mansfield. Mrs. J. Calhoun, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     5.00
  Mantua. Miss Caroline M. Davis                             1.00
  Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch., _Jubilee Offering_               56.00
  Newark. Plym. Cong. Ch., 15.30, _Jubilee Fund_; L. M.
    Soc. of Plym. Ch., 20.20                                35.50
  New London. Cong. Ch.                                      3.43
  Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 27.14
  Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Miss'y Soc., Blouse Waists
    _for S. Inst., Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Oberlin. Wm. M. Mead, _for Mountain Work_                 10.00
  Oberlin. Mrs. W. P. Kennedy, Bbl. _for Moorhead,
    Miss._
  Painesville. First Cong. Ch.                              25.05
  Painesville. Miss M. Evans, _for Macon, Ga._               5.00
  Painesville. "Friends," Box C. _for Storrs Sch.,
    Atlanta, Ga._
  Rootstown. Mrs. C. N. Seymour                             10.00
  Springfield. Lagonda Av. Cong. Ch., 2.50; Lagonda Av.
    Cong. Ch. L. M. Soc., 1; "Jubilee Offering," 1           4.50
  Sweden. Mr. and Mrs. E. L. Morris                          2.00
  Vermillion. Jr. C. E. Soc.                                 1.15
  Wellston Cong. Ch., by H. Bevan, Sec., Lincoln Mem.
    Day Offering                                             1.30
  Willoughby. F. A. Page                                     2.00
  Windham. Ladies' Helping Hand Soc., of Cong. Ch.,
    Bbl. C. and freight 75 cts., _for Pleasant Hill,          .75
    Tenn._
  Youngstown. Elm St. Cong. Ch.                              5.00
  ----. "Friend in Ohio" _for Indian M._, Jubilee
    Offering                                                 1.70

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. G. B. Brown,
    Treas.
      Akron. W. M. S.                           20.00
      Austinburg. W. M. S.                       5.00
      Brecksville. W. M. S.                      3.00
      Cleveland. Euclid, Y. L. M. S.             5.00
      Madison. W. H. M. S.                      15.00
      Marietta. Harmar, W. H. M. S., _for
        Indian Schp._                           15.00
      Oberlin. Second Ch. Sab. Sch.              7.50
      Oberlin. First, L. A. S.                   5.00
      Toledo. Central Ch., W. M. U., 5; Busy
        Bees, 1                                  6.00
      Toledo. Boys' Home                         3.86
                                               ------       85.36


INDIANA, $6.80.

  Andrews. Cong. Ch. Lincoln Mem. Day Offering               2.00
  Ridgeville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                            3.80
  Versailles. Mrs. B. N. Rebuck, for Mrs. J. D. Nichols,
    deceased                                                 1.00


ILLINOIS, $694.89.

  Albion. Mrs. James Green, 3; Mrs. P. W. Wallace, 1         4.00
  Aurora. New Eng. Cong. Ch., 17.60; New Eng. Ch., W. M.
    S., 29.78                                               47.38
  Aurora. First Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E., _for King's
    Mountain, N. C._                                        18.00
  Champaign. First Cong. Ch.                                43.36
  Chandlersville. Cong. Ch.                                 52.96
  Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 57.11; South Ch., W. H. M.
    U., 49.40 (30 of which to const. MRS. J. L. McKEEVER
    L.M.); D. S. Munger, 10; Ch. of the Redeemer C. E.
    Soc., 5                                                121.51
  Chicago. Mrs. F. E. Cutler, 4; Miss Susan R. Cutler,
    4, _for Theo. Student Aid, Talladega C._                 8.00
  Chicago. Prof. F. R. Nichols, _for enlargement of
    building, Memphis, Tenn._                                5.00
  Chicago. Bundle Blankets _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Earlville. "J. A. D."                                     25.00
  Englewood. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Student Aid, Williamsburg Acad., Ky_                    10.00
  Englewood. North Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., etc., _for
    Beaufort, N. C._
  Forest. Cong. Ch.                                          9.66
  Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                     9.31
  Hyde Park. Mrs. H. C. Gould                                 .50
  Jacksonville. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for Macon, Ga._       14.00
  Jacksonville. Mrs. George L. Roberts                       5.00
  Lawn Ridge. By Geo. M. Sims, Treas., Cong. Ch.              .75
  La Salle. Mrs. F. X. Kilduff. Box C. _for Tougaloo,
    Miss._
  Maywood. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,            10.00
    Tillotson C._
  Metropolis. Trinity Cong. Ch.                              2.65
  Oglesby. E. T. Bent, 10; Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Bent, $15,
    _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                          25.00
  Ottawa. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch.                               5.90
  Paxton. Mrs. J. B. Shaw, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        5.00
  Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        3.97
  Rock Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      7.28
  Saint Charles. Cong. Ch.                                  11.00
  Summer Hill. Cong. Ch.                                     4.00
  Sycamore. Hon. Henry Wood, _for Austrian Crown_, given
    by little Marie Kuchera, of Bohemia                     10.00
  Waukegan. German Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  Woodburn. A. L. Sturgess                                  10.00
  Yorkville. Cong. Ch., 6.76; Cong. Sab. Sch., 1.68          8.44
  Yorkville. Miss Elizabeth J. Lane, Jubilee Offering        5.00

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A. Field,
    Treas.:
      Atkinson. W. M. S.                        20.00
      Champaign. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
        Central Ch., New Orleans, La._          10.00
      Chicago. New England W. M. S.             20.00
      Chicago. Lincoln Park W. M. S.             5.25
      Chicago. Bethlehem W. M. S.                2.00
      Evanston. W. M. S. (10 of which Bequest
        of Mrs. Chloe B. Wells)                 28.00
      Glencoe. C. E. Soc.                       17.15
      Jacksonville. Jr. C. E. Soc., _for
        Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._             2.50
      La Salle. C. E. Soc.                       5.00
      Marshall. W. M. S.                         2.00
      Oak Park. W. M. S.                         9.20
      Odell. W. M. S.                           10.00
      Rockford. Second Ch. W. M. S.             33.10
      Rockford. First Ch. W. M. S.              21.46
      Waukegan. W. M. S.                        10.00
      Waukegan. C. E. Soc.                       1.36
      ----. Clara and Edward Doocy                .20
                                                -----     $197.28


MICHIGAN, $554.69.

  Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                43.35
  Calumet. First Cong. Ch.                                  61.33
  Chassell. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
  Clinton. Y. P. S. C. E., by E. A. Carney, Treas.          12.50
  Detroit. First Cong. Ch., Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C. _for
    Greenwood, S. C._
  Grand Haven. Miss Margaret Lewis, _for furnishing new
    hall, Tillotson C._                                      4.25
  Greenville. Mrs. R. C. Ellsworth, 10; "A Friend," 1       11.00
  Marshall. Mrs. J. S. Stout                                 5.00
  Olivet. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 15; Benev. Soc. of Cong.
    Ch., 5, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                 20.00
  Olivet. Y. W. C. A., _for Student Aid, Lexington, Ky._     4.00
  Port Huron. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                10.00
  Ransom. Cong. Ch.                                          4.48
  Scio Centre. Sab. Sch., by Robt. G. Lyon, Sec.             2.76
  Stanton. Jubilee Offering, by Rev. W. C. Burns             4.44
  West Bay City. John Bourn, _for Alaska M._, and to
    const. REV. J. G. GRABIEL and THOMAS R. SHAVER L.M's   100.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas.
      Allegan. W. M. S.                          2.50
      Armada. L. A. S.                            .50
      Benton Harbor, Y. P. S. C. E., _for
        Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch._         4.00
      Cheboygan. W. H. M. S.                     3.50
      Kalamazoo. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
        Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch._         2.50
      Lansing. Plymouth, Y. M. Guild, _for
        Student Aid, Santee Indian Sch._         4.18
      Manistee. Young Woman's Guild, _for
        Indian Schp._                           25.00
      Maybee. L. A. S. and W. H. M. U.            .15
                                               ------       42.33
                                                          -------
                                                          $336.44

  ESTATE.

  Niles. Estate of Dr. James Lewis                         218.25
                                                          -------
                                                          $554.69


IOWA, $392.01.

  Algona. King's Daughters, 10; Mrs. H. E. Stacy, 6,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              16.00
  Atlantic. Mrs. W. Sanford _for Student Aid, Fisk U._      25.00
  Belle Plain. Mrs. Winterstein, Bbl. of C. _for
    Marion, Ala._
  Burlington. Cong. Ch., 111.50; Miss Mercy Lewis, 50c.    112.00
  Cedar Rapids. Mrs. J. C. Brocksmit                         5.00
  Cedar Rapids. "Willing Workers," _for Student Aid,
    Beach Inst._                                             2.00
  Corning. Rev. and Mrs. A. M. Beeman, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                             25.00
  Davenport. Mrs. E. J. Rowell, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     5.00
  Decorah. First Cong. Ch.                                  22.48
  DeWitt, First Cong. Ch.                                    5.25
  Eldora. Rev. and Mrs. Evarts Kent, _for Student
    Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        5.00
  Eldora. C. M. Duren, Pkg. Sewing Material _for
    Beach Inst._
  Fort Dodge. Cong. Ch.                                     26.00
  Garner. Cong. Ch.                                          8.55
  Grinnell. W. H. M. U., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._    10.00
  Grinnell. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                      1.00
  Independence. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
  Independence. S. S. Class of First Cong. Ch., 4, by
    Miss Grace Potwin; Mrs. E. M. Potwin, Pkg. Sch.
    Cards, _for Student Aid, Beach Institute_                4.00
  Le Grand. Miss L. M. Craig                                 9.07
  McIntire. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for freight
    to Savannah, Ga._                                        1.50
  Postville. Jr. C. E. Soc., _for Student Aid, Beach
  Inst._                                                     2.00
  Postville. Bbl. C. _for Meridian, Miss._

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L.
    Bentley, Treas.:
      Cedar Rapids. First, W. M. S.              5.25
      Central City. W. M. S.                     5.00
      Charles City. Y. P. S. C. E.              20.00
      Creston. L. H. M. Circle                  10.00
      Des Moines. Plymouth, W. M. S.             4.15
      Earlville. W. M. S.                       10.00
      Eldon. Y. P. S. C. E.                      1.17
      Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                     21.59
      Magnolia. W. H. M. U.                      3.50
      Ottumwa. Jr. C. E.                         3.00
      Tabor. L. H. M. S.                         3.50
      Victor. W. H. M. U.                       10.00
                                               ------       97.16


WISCONSIN, $324.33.

  Appleton. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.00
  Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                        29.42
  Genesee. Cong. Ch.                                         7.50
  Hartland. Mrs. Mary LeRoy, Box C. and Papers _for
    Tougaloo, Miss._
  Ironton. O. C. Blanchard                                   5.00
  Kenosha. Thomas Gillespie, M.D.                           10.00
  Liberty. Cong. Ch.                                         2.50
  Menasha. Rev. S. T. Kidder                                 5.00
  Milwaukee. Sab. Sch. North Side Ch.                        2.00
  Milwaukee. Robert P. H. Millard, _for Moorhead, Miss._     1.00
  New Richmond. First Cong. Ch.                             40.45
  Norrie. Cong. Ch.                                          1.71
  Peshtigo. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Pine River. Miss Mary B. Spencer, _Jubilee Offering_       5.00
  Raymond. Cong. Ch., _for Cal. Chinese M. Building_         1.90
  Ripon. Mrs. C. H., _for Moorhead, Miss._                    .50
  Spring Green. L. H. M. S., by Mrs. C. B. Pearson           6.25
  Washburn. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Wausau. Jr. C. E. S., _for Moorhead, Miss._                1.65
  Whitewater. "Friends," 117; State Normal Sch., 35;
    "Friend," 15. _for enlargement of building, Memphis,
    Tenn._                                                 167.00
  Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        15.45


MINNESOTA, $64.78.

  Ada. Cong. Ch.                                             7.14
  Chowen. Rev. E. E. Rogers, _for enlargement of building,
    Memphis, Tenn._                                          2.00
  Graceville. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering           5.50
  Minneapolis Lyndale Cong. Ch., 15; W. H. Norris, 15;
    "Rodelmer," 2.50                                        32.50
  Minneapolis. Jr. E. Soc. of Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 5; A. B.
    Brickett, 2.10, _for Indian M., Independence, N. D._     7.10
  Minneapolis. Como Ave. Ch., _for freight to Fort
    Berthold, N. D._                                         2.00
  Minneapolis. Willing Workers, Park Av. Sab. Sch., _for
    Marion, Ala._                                            1.00
  Northfield. Carleton College, Box Pictures _for S. Inst.,
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  St. Charles. Cong. Ch.                                     2.69
  Sauk Center. E. A. Smith, _for Student Aid, Fort
    Berthold, N. D._                                         2.00
  Stillwater. Grace Cong. Ch.                                2.85


MISSOURI, $532.71.

  Cameron. Rev. D. E. Todd, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._   5.00
  Kansas City. Clyde Cong. Ch.                              24.82
  St Louis. Hope Cong Ch.                                    8.80
  Sedalia. First Cong. Ch.                                  27.93

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Mo., by Mrs. K. L. Mills,
    Treas.:
      Bevier. Cong. Ch. Jr. C. E. S.             1.00
      Bonne Terre. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.        10.00
      Brookfield. Park Ch. L. H. M. S.          15.00
      Brookfield. Park Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.        5.00
      Carthage. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.           31.75
      Hamilton. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.            6.75
      Joplin. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.             10.00
      Kansas City. First Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.,
        _for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._,
        7.20; First Ch. Y. L. M. S., 25; First
        Ch. Ladies' Union, 7                    39.20
      Kansas City. Clyde Ch. Ladies' Union,
        52.35; Clyde Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.,
        11.35; Clyde Ch. Sab. Sch. (two
        classes), 2.50                          66.20
      Kansas City. S. W. Tabernacle Y. P. S.
        C. E., 10; Southwest Tabernacle L. H.
        M. S., 14; S. W. Tabernacle Jr. C. E.
        S., 5                                   29.00
      Kansas City. Olivet Ch. L. H. M. S., 5;
        Y. P. S. C. E., 2.50                     7.50
      Neosha. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.              6.00
      New Cambria. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.         6.25
      New Cambria. Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.      5.00
      Nichols. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.             5.00
      St. Joseph. Tabernacle Ch. L. H. M. S.    12.50
      St. Louis. Central Ch. L. H. M. S.        26.00
      St. Louis. Plymouth L. H. M. S.           16.50
      St. Louis. Pilgrim Ch. L. H. M. S.
        (30 of which to const. MRS. JOHN
        McCULLOGH L. M.), 62.85; Pilgrim Jr.
        Y. P. S. C. E., 15                      77.85
      St. Louis. First Ch. L. H. M. S., 21;
        First Ch. Y. L. M. S., 45.32            66.32
      St. Louis. Olive Branch L. H. M. S., 2,
        and Y. P. S. C. E., 1.50                 3.50
      St. Louis. People's Tab. Y. P. S. C. E.    2.50
      Sedalia. First Ch. Ladies' Union          20.86
      Springfield. First Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.     10.00
      Webster Groves. Cong. Ch. L. H. M. S.     11.00
                                              -------
                                              $490.68
        Less expenses                           24.52
                                              -------      466.16


KANSAS, $164.72.

  Clay Centre. Clarence Eastman Cong. Mem. Ch.               5.35
  Kensington. Cong. Ch., _Jubilee Offering_                  7.00
  Paola. Cong. Ch.                                          11.00
  Paola. Cong. Ch., Box C. _for Saluda, N. C._
  Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ                             3.50

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Kansas, by Mrs. E. C.
    Read, Treas.:
      Antrim. Lena Gibbs and Sister              2.00
      Atchison                                   5.00
      Centralia                                  5.00
      Chapman                                    5.00
      Douglass                                   2.00
      Dover                                      5.00
      Emporia                                   10.00
      Kansas City. Pilgrim Ch.                   3.00
      McPherson                                  3.50
      Olathe                                     2.00
      Ottawa. Y. P. S. C. E.                     2.50
      Ottawa                                     5.00
      Paola                                     12.50
      Parsons                                    5.00
      Russell                                    5.00
      Sabetha                                    5.00
      St. Mary's                                 6.00
      Sedgwick                                   5.00
      Seneca                                    15.00
      Smith Center                               4.00
      Topeka. Central Ch. (16.50 of which
        Thank offering)                         26.68
      Topeka. First Ch.                          1.00
      Wellsville                                 5.50
                                              -------
                                              $140.68
        Less expenses                            2.81
                                              -------      137.87


NEBRASKA, $25.10.

  Ashland. Cong. Ch.                                        15.40
  Kilpatrick. Cong. Ch.                                      1.65
  Maple Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     4.05
  Santee Agency. Miss Edith Leonard, _for Laboratory,
    Santee_                                                  3.00
  Santee Agency. Jr. Endeavor Soc., by Grace Lawson,
    Treas.                                                   1.00
  Tecumseh. Mrs. L. S. Chittenden, Pkg. Sewing Material
    _for Lexington, Ky._


NORTH DAKOTA, $74.92.

  Caledonia. Jr. End. Soc., by Jane Clark, Treas., _for
    Cal. Chinese M._                                         1.50
  Cando. Cong. Ch., 3.60; Cong. Sab. Sch., 2.04              5.64
  Fargo. Miss Curtis's Sab. Sch. Class, 3; Mission Band,
  First Cong. Ch., 3, _for Indian M., Independence, N. D._   6.00
  Fort Berthold. A. R. Creighton, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                     5.00
  Fort Berthold. Mrs. Susan W. Hall, _for Dakota Home_       5.00
  Fort Yates. Grand River Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering     4.00
  Harwood. Mission Band, _for Indian M., Independence,
    N. D._                                                   4.45
  Independence. Miss E. Kehoe, _for Indian M.,
    Independence, N. D._                                    15.00
  Standing Rock. Cong. Ch., 11.70; Cannon Ball, Branch
    Cong. Ch., 6; Grand River Ch., 10.63, by Rev. G. W.
    Reed, Lincoln Mem. Day Offering                         28.33


SOUTH DAKOTA, $73.87.

  Oahe. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering                23.62
  Sioux Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              14.74
  Webster. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of South Dakota, Mrs.
    F. H. Wilcox, Treas., _for Indian Schp., Santee N. T.
    Sch., Neb._:
      Armour. W. M. S.                           2.00
      Ashton. W. M. S.                           1.76
      Badger Lake. W. M. S.                      8.00
      Burnside Academy. W. M. S.                 1.25
      Chamberlain. W. M. S.                      1.25
      Columbia. W. M. S.                         1.50
      Deadwood. W. M. S.                         2.25
      Henry. W. M. S.                            1.50
      Huron. W. M. S.                            2.00
      Iroquois. Infant Class, Birthday Box        .25
      Pierre. W. M. S.                           2.50
      Santee, Neb. W. M. S.                      3.25
                                               ------       27.51


COLORADO, $25.83.

  Grand Junction. First Cong. Ch.                           12.00
  Highland Lake. Ch. of Christ                               1.28
  Otis and Hyde. Cong. Chs.                                  3.00
  Pueblo. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                  9.55


UTAH, $37.00.

  Park City. First Cong. Ch.                                37.00


CALIFORNIA, $122.00.

  Belmont. Mrs. Elizabeth L. Reed, 10; By Mrs. E. L.
    Reed, 2                                                 12.00
  Monrovia. Mrs. H. T. Clapperton                            5.00
  Pasadena. "G. L."                                         10.00
  Pomona. "Mrs. L. H. P."                                   10.00
  California Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Mary
    M. Smith, Treas.:
      Highland. W. M. S.                         5.00
      Los Angeles. First Ch. Y. L. M. Soc.
       (75 of which from Mrs. A. A. Mayhew)     80.00
                                               ------       85.00


WASHINGTON, $7.30.

  Colfax. Y. P. S. C. E., Plym. Ch.                          3.25
  Roy. Cong. Ch.                                              .65
  Yelm. Cong. Ch.                                            1.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Washington, by Mrs.
    J. W. George, Treas.:
      Fairhaven. W. M. S.                                    2.40


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $46.00.

  Washington. People's Cong. Ch.                             5.00
  Washington. Plymouth Ch., 8.29; W. M. Circle, 3, and C.
    E. Soc. of Plym. Ch., 4.71; Lincoln Mem. Day Offering   16.00
  Washington. "A Jubilee Offering," _for Student Aid, Nat,
    Ala._                                                   25.00


MARYLAND, $30.00.

  Baltimore. MRS. M. R. HAWLEY, to const. herself L.M.      30.00


VIRGINIA, $5.50.

  Gloucester. Miss F. Lancaster, 1; H. W. Smith, 1; C.
    Holmes, 50c.; The Grove Bap. Sab. Sch., 3, _for
    Gloucester Sch._                                         5.50


KENTUCKY, $19.28.

  Lexington. Chandler Sch., 5.33; Hand Sch., 2.67; Chandler
    Mission S. S., 1; Hand Mission S. S., 1                 10.00
  Lexington. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_                    2.83
  Pioneer. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
  Pleasant View. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering        2.45
  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00


TENNESSEE, $244.08.

  Deer Lodge. Cong. Ch. (result of a Birthday Party), 10;
    Cong. Ch. 1                                             11.00
  Grand View. Rev. Henry W. Webb, _Jubilee Offering_         1.00
  Jonesboro. Lincoln Mem. Day Offering, by Rev. S. A.
    Paris                                                    1.44
  Knoxville. Miss Ida F. Hubbard                             4.13
  Memphis. Students of Le Moyne Institute, _for
    enlargement of building, Memphis, Tenn._               103.00
  Memphis. John B. Clough, 25; J. S. Menken, 25; Dr. D.
    T. Porter, 25, _for enlargement of building, Memphis,
    Tenn._                                                  75.00
  Mill Creek. Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering           1.76
  Nashville. Howard Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering          25.00
  Nashville. Union Ch., Fisk U., 10; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
    Fisk U., 4.20; Miss'y Soc., Fisk U., 7.55               21.75


NORTH CAROLINA, $14.50.

  Blowing Rock. "A Friend," _for Blowing Rock_               1.00
  Chapel Hill. Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        1.00
  Enfield. M. M. Jackson, 1; Ella M. Thomason, 1             2.00
  High Point. Miss S. E. Edwards, _for Gloucester Sch._       .50
  Strieby. Cong. Ch. (of which Edmon Potter, 25c.; Leala
    Tyson, 15c.), Lincoln Mem. Day Offering                  2.00
  Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            4.00
  Wadesboro. Little Mills Cong. Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                 4.00


SOUTH CAROLINA, $12.45.

  Columbia. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                1.45
  Greenwood. Greenwood Sch. and Ch.                         11.00


GEORGIA, $22.04.

  Andersonville. Cong. Ch.                                   2.35
  Macon. Miss Mary Simons, 4; Mrs. Alfred Marsh, 1, _for
    Macon, Ga._                                              5.00
  Macon. Miss E. B. Scobie, Pkg. Patchwork _for Helena,
    Ark._
  McIntosh. Prof. Fred W. Foster, _for Student Aid_          5.00
  Rutland. Rutland Ch., 3.66; Sab. Sch., 62c., and Y. P. S.
    C. E., 22c.; Byron Ch., 2; Lincoln Mem. Day Offering     6.50
  Woodville. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. (1.75 of which Lincoln Mem.
    Day Offering), 2.14; Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 1.05      3.19


ALABAMA, $41.06.

  Athens. Sab. Sch. and C. E. S., Lincoln Mem. Day
    Offering                                                 1.77
  Birmingham. Cong. Ch., 2.80; Sab. Sch., 60c.; Ladies'
    Missionary Soc., 7.14; Abraham Lincoln Cent. Soc.,
    1.45; Y. P. S. C. E., 70c.; Lincoln Mem. Day Offering   12.69
  Fort Payne. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                  1.00
  Ironaton. Rev. P. O. Wailes                                3.00
  Nat. From Unknown Source, Box Books and Pictures
  New Decatur. People's Ch., Lincoln Mem. Day Offering      20.80
  Shelby. Cong. Ch.                                          1.00
  Talladega. Rocky Mount Mission Sab. Sch.                    .80


LOUISIANA $64.00.

  New Orleans. University Cong. Ch. (35 of which from
    "Students and their friends") to const. ALFRED LAWLESS
    and ARMAND V. BOUTLE L.M's, _Jubilee Offering_          60.00
  New Orleans and Chacahoula. Morris Brown Ch. and Zion
    Ch.                                                      2.00
  Thibodeaux. First Cong. Ch.                                2.00


FLORIDA, $36.20.

  Daytona. First Cong. Ch.                                  20.80
  Martin. Teachers and Pupils of Union Sch., by Miss
    Mattie J. Brydie, _Jubilee Offering_                    15.40


MISSISSIPPI, $55.00.

  Meridian. "A Friend," _for Student Aid_                   10.00
  Tougaloo. Miss C. E. Parkhurst, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           15.00
  Tougaloo. Miss M. P. Roberts, _for Tougaloo, Miss._       15.00
  Tougaloo. Frank H. Ball, 10; Mrs. L. M. Sisson, 5, _for
    Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                               15.00


TEXAS, $10.95.

  Austin. Tillotson Ch. of Christ, 4.55; C. E. Soc. of
    Tillotson C., 1.40, _for Jubilee Offering_               5.95
  Helena. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00


CANADA, $5.00.

  Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                  5.00
                                                       ----------

Donations                                              $13,185.84

Estates                                                 14,098.84

                                                       ----------
                                                       $27,284.68


INCOME, $2,223.46.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                   195.02
  De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
    Talladega C._                                3.87
  Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                5.45
  Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._            13.67
  Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._            5.45
  Income, _for Talladega C._                 2,000.00
                                            ---------    2,223.46


TUITION, $4,682.32.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                       10.00
  Evarts, Ky. Tuition                           22.85
  Lexington, Ky. Tuition                        99.67
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                    122.15
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Public Fund                 175.00
  Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition                      12.50
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                      52.90
  Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                       494.00
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                     506.90
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                  55.67
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                       17.50
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                   26.75
  Chapel Hill, N. C. Tuition                    16.05
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                      25.09
  King's Mountain, N. C. Tuition                30.00
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                        105.74
  Troy, N. C. Tuition                            2.00
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                       20.98
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                    168.00
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                    274.15
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                     121.70
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                          120.00
  Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch. Tuition             160.00
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                           211.41
  Marietta, Ga. Tuition                          7.50
  Marshallville, Ga. Tuition                     3.50
  McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                         60.35
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                        163.51
  Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                      50.80
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                         2.85
  Joppa, Ala. Tuition                            3.91
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                          57.45
  Mobile, Ala. Tuition                          78.20
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                             56.25
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                          108.45
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                      219.59
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                       65.75
  Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                      123.75
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                     480.05
  Martin, Fla. Public Fund                      19.00
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuition                     59.25
  Helena, Ark. Tuition                         156.40
  Austin, Texas. Tuition                        85.25
                                              -------    4,682.32
                                                       ----------

Total for March                                        $34,190.46
                                                       ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                            $87,099.78
  Estates                                               66,936.42
                                                      -----------
                                                      $154,036.20
  Income                                                 6,352.76
  Tuition                                               23,491.00
                                                      -----------

  Total from Oct. 1 to March 31                       $183,879.96
                                                     ============


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for March                                  $43.10
  Previously acknowledged                                  315.68
                                                         --------
  Total                                                   $358.78


ENDOWMENT FUND.

  New York, N. Y. Estate of Olivia P. Atterbury, balance
    in full of $5,000, by Anson P. Atterbury, Executor,
    _for the education and preparation of colored persons
    as Missionaries to Africa_                            $250.00


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  Bible House, N. Y.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 50, NO. 05, MAY, 1896 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.