Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

January, 1900.

  Vol. LIV.
  No. 1.


[Illustration: JUBILEE HALL.

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

THE CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

FOURTH AVENUE AND TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as Second-Class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE

  FINANCIAL                                                        1

  FRESH LEAFLETS FOR 1900                                          1

  THE PROGRESSIVE SOUTH                                            2

  GREETING TO PORTO RICANS                                         3

  PIONEERS IN PORTO RICO (Illustrated)                             5

  FISK UNIVERSITY (Illustrated)                                   12

  CHEYENNE AND ARAPAHOE INDIANS (Illustrated)                     20

  SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES                                            24

  NEWS FROM ARCTIC ALASKA                                         26

  CHRISTIAN ENDEAVORERS AMONG THE INDIANS (Illustrated)           28

  LINCOLN MEMORIAL SUNDAY                                         31

  RECEIPTS                                                        32

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS                                     46

  SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S AND CHILDREN'S WORK               48

       *       *       *       *       *

The AMERICAN MISSIONARY presents new form, fresh material and
generous illustrations for 1900. This magazine is published by the
American Missionary Association quarterly. Subscription rate fifty
cents per year.

Many wonderful missionary developments in our own country during
this stirring period of national enlargement are recorded in the
columns of this magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. LIV.     JANUARY, 1900.     NO. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCIAL.


The receipts to December 31st, the first quarter of the fiscal year,
are $6,586.98 more than for the same period last year--an increase
in donations of $6,874.52, in income of $890.20, and in tuition of
$1,652.58--a decrease in estates for current work of $2,830.32 under
the policy of reserve legacy account.

We are greatly cheered by this increase in donations. We appreciate
the cordial response of the churches, Sunday-schools, Endeavor
Societies and individuals to the necessities of this great work. We
call especial attention to the efforts which are being made to
increase the gifts of this Association for the current year
thirty-three and one-third per cent. This is the amount of increase
which the Council Committee of Fifteen have asked from the churches.
The large work demands at least this per cent. of addition to the
gifts for the current year. Will not each individual church and
Sunday-school see that their contribution for this year is at least
a third larger than for the former year?

In addition to this amount needed for the work which has been
established in other years, the claims of Porto Rico are pressing.
Ten thousand dollars was a very conservative estimate of the amount
that was needed at once in this new island territory. The churches,
and especially the Sunday schools, have responded generously in
bringing up the gifts to about half this amount. There is imperative
need immediately for the full amount, properly and energetically to
press the work in Porto Rico along the lines of Christian education
and evangelization.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRESH LEAFLETS FOR 1900.


  "Annual Statistical Leaflet."

  "Annual Report, 1899."

  "Universal Brotherhood Through Christ," Sermon by Rev. C.
  H. Patton, D.D.

  "Michael E. Strieby," (illustrated) Sec. J. E. Roy, D.D.

  "The Hand of God or Failure," Rev. H. A. Stimson, D.D.

  "By Their Fruits Ye Shall Know Them," Rev. C. E. Jefferson, D.D.

  "What Has Been Done for the Indians," Rev. J. R. Nichols, D.D.

  "The Evangelical Side of Missionary Work," Rev. Sydney Strong,
  D.D.

  "Why and How?" Rev. Gerald H. Beard, Ph.D.

  "The Americans in the Southern Mountains," Rev. Archibald
  Hadden.

  "The Story of Three Million Highlanders," Rev. M. N. Sumner.

  "In the Cypress Swamps," (illustrated) Miss C. F. Knowlton.

  "Difficult Problems with Pleasing Results," Prof. J. L. Wiley.

  "Our Churches a Necessity to the South," Rev. George V. Clark.

  "Fisk University," (illustrated) Prof. J. G. Merrill, D.D.

  "Pioneers in Porto Rico," (illustrated) Sec. C. J. Ryder.

  "Christian Endeavorers Among the Indians," Prof. F. B. Riggs.

  "People Passed By," (reprint) by a Missionary.

  "The Debt of Our Country," (reprint, illustrated) Sec. C. J. Ryder.

  "Arctic Alaska," Mr. W. T. Lopp.

  "Christian Endeavorers and the A. M. A.," Rev. Francis E. Clark,
  D.D.

  "Cheyenne and Arapahoe Indians," (illustrated) Rev. W. M.
  Wellman.

These leaflets may be had for personal use and distribution on
application to this office.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROGRESSIVE SOUTH.


It is encouraging to note the signs of progress at the South towards
meeting the heavy responsibilities of the situation. It is a mistake
to imagine that the Southern situation does not improve from year to
year. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, appreciate the trend
of events and the necessity for the elevation of the depressed
millions with whom they are intermingled. The Southern tragedies of
murder and violence have awakened the same horror in their hearts as
throughout the country at large. There is a rising sentiment against
lynching and for enforcing justice by the cold and passionless
execution of law. There is a strong desire to give the advantages of
education to both the ignorant whites and the ignorant blacks. There
is a growing sympathy for the beneficent efforts to this end which
are put forth from the North.

It is a great mistake to confuse the whole South with certain lower
elements in its vast and varied populations. It is also a mistake to
imagine that sporadic instances of violence here and there are
sufficient indices of the situation at large. Millions of the
Southern whites and blacks are dwelling together in amity and co
operation for the advance of education and for moral progress.
Illustrations are multiplying on every side of the desire on the
part of the progressive South to fulfil the duties and meet the
heavy responsibilities thrust upon it by the masses of population
submerged in ignorance.

These immense masses are the burden not only of the South, but of
the American people at large. Ignorant labor is shiftless and
wasteful labor. The growth of varied and inter-related manufactures
cannot rest upon a labor element of clumsiness and stupidity. Civil
duties demand intelligence and morals. The best patriotism of the
South joins hands with that of the North in the elevation of the
lowly and ignorant. What has been done is only the initiation of the
ten times more which must be done.

It is a significant fact that the last national census showed that
the white illiteracy of the South was deeper than even the foreign
illiteracy of the North; while that of the Southern black population
was fearfully darker. Both public and private efforts are being made
in countless communities of the South to begin the lifting of this
great burden. Some of the States have already taken encouraging
measures in this direction. While there are reactions, the general
tide is that of progress. It is easy to make too much of the violent
reactionary outcries of a few Southern newspapers. It must be
remembered that these shrill expostulations against progress are
comparatively isolated and do not represent the general and
deliberate sense of the intelligent South. The day has come when
intelligent leaders, North and South, can unite their efforts and
push forward the work of popular upliftment throughout the South.
The lesson of the hour is not that of impatience and denunciation,
but of mutual sympathy and co-operation. The hopeful progress of the
past is a presage to the magnificent progress assured to the
immediate future.

No more timely words have been spoken than those of a Southern
philanthropist when he said: "The Negro must be educated. It is
absolutely necessary to both races that his education go on. In our
extremity we look to wise and just people in the Northern States to
help us to help both races."

  F. P. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREETINGS TO PORTO RICANS.


At a meeting of the representatives of the different benevolent
societies of our Protestant denominations who are entering upon
mission work in Porto Rico a committee was appointed to draw up
a paper containing a greeting to these people. The paper was to
be published in Spanish and English. The copies in English were
to go especially to the missionaries to be scattered among
English-speaking people. The Spanish translation was intended for
the native Porto Ricans. This paper was signed by representatives
of different denominations as will be seen. This broad,
comprehensive and loving message from the Christians of America to
the people of Porto Rico, who are now a part of our own country,
must meet the approval of all those interested in the progress of
the Kingdom of God rather than some narrow denominational victory.
This greeting to the Porto Ricans is as follows:

"We rejoice that your beautiful island has become part of the United
States. We take you by the hand as fellow-citizens of this Republic.
We pray that you may share fully with us in all the blessings it has
to give. We have come among you to show our interest in and our
sympathy with you, and to do what we can to help you and your
children toward the larger life that is possible to us all.

"We come to you as we have gone to all other parts of our beloved
land--as messengers of the gospel of Jesus Christ our Saviour. We
have come as brethren in Christ, as joint-members of that spiritual
body of which He is the head, to preach and teach among you, and
thus in mutual helpfulness to build up the Kingdom of our common
Lord and to answer His prayer 'that they all may be one,' and that
His will may 'be done in earth as it is in heaven.'

"We are agreed in the great truths of our holy religion, and we will
work together that they may produce in this historic island all the
choicest fruits of Christian life and culture. We would teach the
children the way of eternal life, and bring to the men and
women--full of cares and burdens--the rest and comfort and hope that
come through faith in the Saviour. And so shall they and we all be
brethren and sisters in Christ.

"These are the common purposes that bring us hither. In the name of
our common Master we pray you give us and our preachers welcome, and
join your labors with ours that this island, so charming in its
natural features, may more and more have the beauty of a pure and
purifying religion. Then happy will be your homes and happy your
people--as Holy Scriptures declare, 'Happy is that people whose God
is the Lord.' Education will brighten the lives of the children;
Christian morality will stand guard in every community against sin,
and the peace which Christ promised to His people will rest upon us
and ours.

"Praying for God's richest blessings upon you, beloved people of
Porto Rico, and asking your co-operation with us, we are

  Yours in Gospel of Jesus Christ,

  (Signed) C. L. THOMPSON,

  T. J. MORGAN,

  W. H. WARD."

       *       *       *       *       *

PIONEERS IN PORTO RICO.

SECRETARY CHARLES. J. RYDER.


The opening of this new island territory for the Christian schools
and the evangelistic work of the American Missionary Association is
of great interest. Many questions are naturally asked by those who
are in sympathetic touch with this new and important movement.

_Who have gone to this field? Where have they gone and what fields
are opening? Why have they gone?_ These questions present themselves
to the attention of those who have watched with great interest the
opening of this island to an intelligent and progressive Christian
influence. Let us answer these questions in this article.

[Illustration: A SHACK--A PEASANT'S RESIDENCE.]

First, who have gone in this pioneer band of missionaries to Porto
Rico?

The educational work is especially under the care and direction of
Prof. Charles B. Scott and his wife. Prof Scott is a graduate of
Rutgers College and of Oswego State Normal School. He is a teacher
of many years' experience and thoroughly qualified for the
establishment and direction of the educational work of the
Association among this people. Mrs. Scott, a graduate of Michigan
University, also takes an active part in this work. They are both
devoted Christians, and the religious quickening and spiritual
elevation of the people comprise an important part of their
efforts.

[Illustration: MISS JULIA D. FERRIS.]

Miss Julia D. Ferris goes from Saginaw, Michigan. She received her
education at Wellesley College after leaving the High School of her
own city. She has been a teacher for several years and has attained
marked success in this work.

[Illustration: MISS ISABEL FRENCH.]

Miss Isabel French is a graduate of a classical school in New York
City and pursued a post-graduate course at Barnard College. She has
had large experience in teaching and in Christian and philanthropic
work, which qualifies her for this mission field.

[Illustration: MISS JENNIE L. BLOWERS.]

Miss Jennie L. Blowers has already had experience in the mission
schools of the American Missionary Association, having taught in
Chandler Normal School at Lexington, Ky. Her home is in Westfield,
New York. She was reappointed to work in the South, but was ready to
enter this more distant island field. She is well qualified for this
new work.

[Illustration: MISS KATHERINE M. ROWLEY.]

Miss Katherine M. Rowley comes from Oberlin, Ohio, being a member of
the First Congregational Church of that city. She is a graduate of
Oberlin College and is cordially recommended for this missionary
service by her professors and teachers.

Miss Mary L. Daniels is a member of Dr. Munger's church in New
Haven, Conn. She has been a teacher in the public schools, where she
has attained a high position as a very competent instructor. She
takes with her the regard and confidence of a large circle of
friends and there is every prospect of her abundant success.

[Illustration: MISS MARY L. DANIELS.]

All these teachers understand the Spanish language to some extent.
This is essential, in order to do the work in Porto Rico.

Rev. John Edwards, a pastor from Ohio, has been sent out by the
Association as an evangelist in this same field. The preaching of
the gospel is greatly needed, and Mr. Edwards' circuit covers a
large area in evangelistic services. He is in eastern Porto Rico,
where there is scarcely any other missionary work.

And so this little band of eight devoted men and women have entered
upon the pioneer work in opening up Porto Rico to an intelligent
gospel. They have gone out with the prayers and sympathy of
thousands of those who have been greatly interested in the important
work in this island territory. The future promises large things in
the building up of Christian character and the establishment of
progressive Christian institutions.

[Illustration: REV. JOHN EDWARDS,

_Evangelist_.]

_Where have these missionaries gone?_ They landed first at San Juan,
on the northeastern portion of the island. They established a school
at Santurce, which is a few miles distant from San Juan. From this
field Miss Blowers writes as follows:

[Illustration: AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION SCHOOL, SANTURCE.]

"The schoolhouse opens on the street (the military road), where
there is a constant stream of passers by. There is not an hour in
the day that there are not spectators peering in at doors and
windows with idle curiosity or eager interest. Sometimes there are
not more than three or four, but often as many as eighteen or
twenty. Let me tell you of the various persons who composed this
outside audience, as I watched them one morning. A native policeman,
a business man waiting for his car, three beggars, boys with large
trays of bread, fruit and sweetmeats on their heads, a washerwoman
with a huge basket of clothes poised securely on her head, the
driver of an ox-cart, who stopped his team while we sang "America,"
three women going to market, a party of daintily dressed,
sweet-faced senoritas with their chaperone, a dirty, wild-looking
old hag who almost frightened me, a young mother carrying a naked
baby in her arms, and boys--well, it was no use to count them. What
do you think? Are we not being well advertised?"

[Illustration: ON THE MILITARY ROAD FROM SAN JUAN TO LARES.]

Great care was taken in locating these schools. Rev. A. F. Beard,
Senior Secretary of the A. M. A., and Rev. William H. Ward, D.D., a
member of the Executive Committee, visited the island to examine the
conditions and discover the best points for such work. Prof. Scott,
after reaching the island, also made thorough investigation
concerning the most important location. He wrote after reaching
Porto Rico: "The railroad from Arecibo is impassable. I hired a pony
and a boy to guide me and started for the town. The only way of
traveling now, except on military roads, is by pony. I had never
ridden two miles on horseback in my life, but it had to be done and
I am still intact, and have ridden twenty to twenty-five miles
to-day without even getting stiff. We reached Arecibo, having to
ford or ferry streams five times. There were no bridges left.

"Friday I rode to Lares, eighteen miles over the roughest trail
imaginable. Much of it is as steep as a stairway, with stones of all
sizes replacing the steps. But I managed to stick to my pony. We
reached Lares at eight o'clock, the eighteen miles taking nine
hours, with three hours at noon waiting for the rain to cease."

Lares, a town of 3,000 population, is situated in the western part
of the island. It was finally decided that this should be the place
for the second school planted by the American Missionary
Association. Prof. Scott writes also: "Lares is a very pleasant
place, built around the top of a hill, the best residences at the
top, with best possible drainage and supplied with excellent spring
water. I had a letter to the Alcalde (Mayor) and to the leading
doctor of the town, a very intelligent man, who speaks English. I
examined several buildings and found one admirably adapted to our
purpose. It is central, with a large room on the ground floor and
five bedrooms, a dining room and kitchen for the teachers.
Everything is in excellent order. The sanitary condition, with some
changes, cannot be surpassed. The house seems just built for our
purpose, and with a minimum expense can be enlarged to give two
good-sized dormitories. All the people whom I saw were very much
interested in our work. The city can do nothing. They have paid no
salaries for months."

The schools at Lares and Santurce represent the present educational
work of the Association in Porto Rico. Both schools are well under
way and large numbers of eager pupils are in attendance. Prof. Scott
wrote so urgently for reinforcements in order to meet the needs
already pressing, that an additional missionary teacher was sent in
January. Miss Johanna Blinka was selected for this important
mission, as she was thoroughly acquainted with the Spanish language
and had had large experience in educational and missionary work.
This completes the force of eight teachers already engaged in the
educational work under the American Missionary Association in the
island of Porto Rico.

Rev. John Edwards has begun work in the eastern part of the island.
There are few missionaries here and the opportunities for
evangelistic work are pressing. The following interesting facts were
received under recent date from Mr. Edwards: He writes from Fajardo,
eastern Porto Rico, "There are many circumstances attending the work
here that are very trying and require the greatest of patience.
Still, on the whole, there is great encouragement. I have rented a
building here at Fajardo, to occupy as the centre of missionary work
in this region. I ordered a dozen benches with backs, to be used for
public service. A little table stands at the end of the room, on
which I place the Bible and use as a pulpit. It is my intention to
develop fully the promising conditions both here at Fajardo and also
at Humacao, where I have found a warm welcome.

"I understand the best time on Sunday for public worship is in the
evening. The young men are most of them occupied during the day.
Sunday is their busy market day until three or four o'clock in the
afternoon, when the market and stores close and all are free to go
whither they like. Some of the young men told me that a number would
attend our meetings in the night, that could not come during the
day. Of course, this is a condition unfavorable to such Christian
work, and yet I hope to be able to gather considerable audiences and
reach this needy people with the living gospel of Jesus Christ. I
speak in Spanish with comparative ease. We held services Sunday
morning, at which I preached. We then sang several hymns which the
people are rapidly learning. We need hymn books to offer them for
sale, that they may be used in our meetings."

[Illustration: A STREET IN SANTURCE--A SUBURB OF SAN JUAN.]

From this letter it will be seen that work is opening hopefully
before our evangelist. As the work develops it will demand a
reinforcement of preachers capable of doing the same sort of
earnest, evangelistic work. The demand in every department of this
new island territory is pressing and imperative. Surely the churches
of our Congregational fellowship will see to it, each one of them,
that the work is fully and cordially supported.

But a very natural question remains to be answered, namely, why have
these missionaries gone to this island field? The answer is easy and
natural. In the first place, Porto Rico is the only territory that
has come under the immediate direction and control of the United
States government as a result of the war with Spain. It is
emphatically a home missionary field. The responsibility of our
American churches is immediate and direct for the spread of the
gospel among the inhabitants of this island, who are even now our
fellow citizens. The American Missionary Association follows the
flag. By the adjustment of work suggested by the churches years
ago, at which the Association surrendered its foreign field and took
the work among the Indians as a legitimate department of its home
work, it has confined its missions to the territory of the United
States. Patriotism reinforces the demands of Christianity for the
physical, intellectual and religious development of the people in
Porto Rico. The time is immediate and the command imperative. It is
the command of our country as truly as of God.

Churches, expressing their views through resolutions of local
conferences and associations, urged upon the A. M. A. to occupy this
island field. This was another reason for going.

The appeal put before the churches in behalf of this important new
work met with immediate and hopeful response. Ten thousand dollars
are still demanded in order to put the work upon a proper and
permanent foundation. Buildings should be erected for the schools,
and this immediately. Also homes for the teachers, where model
housekeeping can reinforce the instruction of the schoolroom and
industrial class. Has not some friend, who reads these messages from
Porto Rico, the ability and desire to send a check to our treasury
at once, to put one of these mission schools in permanent quarters
and thus greatly reinforce the present work and secure its
permanency?

Little by little, as the evangelistic movements progress, chapels
will be needed for the accommodation of audiences that gather for
Christian worship. Here again is a large increase upon the demands
of Christian people for this new work of the American Missionary
Association.

Surely this little band of heroic Christian missionaries and
teachers who have gone out from their homes and from our shores,
responding at once to the call of the Master to enter this important
and large field, will not be forgotten by Christian men and women in
our churches. The work must not suffer. It should be reinforced
promptly and largely. In God's providence, mysterious and
incomprehensible, this island has become a part of our country. The
call now comes to occupy the field, not with armies and military
movements, but with the peaceful influences of Christianity. The
intellectual and moral quickening of the youth and children through
the Christian institutions planted among them, and the preaching of
the simple gospel of Jesus Christ to this destitute people, create a
responsibility which our Congregational churches must meet
courageously and generously.

       *       *       *       *       *

FISK UNIVERSITY.

J. G. MERRILL, D.D., DEAN.


There was romance in its birth. Regimental bands headed the
procession; army officers, men of renown, North and South, gathered
in the hospital barracks; thousands of ex-slaves, were there. One
passion animated this dusky throng. To learn to read was the
ambition of the bright colored boy, of his sedate but none the less
eager sire, and of the veteran grandparent with white hair and with
eyes that must learn the alphabet by the aid of spectacles.

[Illustration: JUBILEE HALL.

Builded with money earned by the original Jubilee Singers.]

It was a moment of inspiration. The man to appreciate the hour and
give utterance to its meaning, was there. He had hardly surrendered
his commission as chaplain in the army. He had fought to win the
freedom of a race. To make that race true free men was a task much
more vast than to emancipate them. The parting of the ways had come.
An illiterate people must be taught. No longer should it be a crime
to instruct them. The rather was he the criminal who should deny
them an education. It was an hour for the voice of a prophet. With
the ken of a seer, Chaplain Cravath, representing the American
Missionary Association, Jan. 9th, 1866, made the proclamation, that
the founding of the school inaugurated that day was the beginning of
a great educational institution, that should give to the emancipated
race the opportunities and advantages of education which had so long
been furnished to the white race in their colleges and universities.

[Illustration: THE RAW MATERIAL.]

Gen. Fisk, the brilliant soldier and ardent philanthropist, lent
invaluable aid and consented to have the institution, so
problematical in its existence, bear his name. Governor Brownlow and
the pioneer educator of colored youth, Professor John Ogden, added
the weight of their words and helpful deeds, and Fisk had come into
being.

[Illustration: FISK'S FINISHED PRODUCT.]

ROMANCE ATTENDED THE EARLY LIFE OF THE UNIVERSITY.--Nearly four
years had passed, when the Professor of music started out with a
band of colored youth, who had been named the Jubilee Singers. That
they could sing with incomparable sweetness he knew. That the songs
they were to sing had incomparable pathos no one who heard them
doubted. But nothing short of sublimest faith could have sent forth
this band of friendless youth on their mission. They often were
penniless as they went from town to town. They arrived at Oberlin
and were permitted to sing before the National Council, then in
session at that stronghold of the colored man. The tide turned. It
rose with rapidity. Plymouth, Brooklyn, and other churches were
opened to them. The entire North gave them welcome. They crossed the
Atlantic; that gracious friend of humanity Queen Victoria, gave them
audience. Her incomparable prime minister, Gladstone, made them his
guests at Hawarden. Germany and France heard them. At the end of
seven years they returned to Nashville and laid at the feet of the
University the munificent sum of $150,000, a large part of which was
devoted to the erection of Jubilee Hall and the remainder to the
paying for the campus of thirty-five acres, once a slave plantation,
now the most commanding location in the Athens of the South, as
Nashville, the seat of four universities, is justly called.

[Illustration: A BAND OF KING'S DAUGHTERS.]

[Illustration: LIVINGSTONE HALL.

A gift mainly from Mrs. Valeria G. Stone.]

THERE HAS BEEN ROMANCE IN ALL ITS LIFE. Never for a year has the
hard work, the distasteful drudgery, the, at the time, apparently
fruitless toil been undertaken on the basis of cold calculating
judgment; from its birth to the present hour, ideals that to most
men would have seemed dreams and wild fancies, have animated the
leaders of this enterprise--such ideals as have underlain the
world's greatest achievements and have given heart to the world's
victors.

[Illustration: FISK MEMORIAL CHAPEL.

Erected with the bequest of Gen. Fisk. Seats 1,000.]

WISDOM AND PAINSTAKING ATTENTION to the material interests of the
University, that have challenged the admiration of those who have
watched its growth, have been coupled with all this romance. The
ideal has been made actual. This has not been due to one man, nor
one sex, nor one race. For a quarter of a century and more, have men
and women, white and black, worked with an unanimity rarely equaled,
with patience and self-sacrifice. As the outcome there is

  FISK OF TO-DAY.

The building of Jubilee Hall set the pace for the progress of the
institution. Thorough workmanship, good taste and belief in a large
future, have prevented the erection of buildings which could be used
only a short time and must be replaced by structures adapted to the
work. Eight substantial buildings afford the facilities now needed
and are so grouped that in the near future the Central and Music
Halls can be erected, to complete the general plan. Already the
large enrolment of pupils, coming, as they do, from more than a
score of the states of our Union, is making the proposed buildings a
necessity and affording other givers the opportunity to bless
humanity that has been so handsomely met by those large-minded
donors who have built the structures already erected.

[Illustration: THEOLOGICAL HALL.

Builded mainly by the A. M. A., a band of Jubilee Singers
assisting.]

[Illustration: THE 1899 FOOTBALL TEAM.]

THE EVERY-DAY LIFE OF THE UNIVERSITY is first of all religious. With
no cant, with the avoidance of undue emotion, with a constant appeal
to Christian manhood and womanhood, men and women loyal to Jesus,
seeking less their rights than to faithfully perform their duties,
are being reared. For nine months in a year the faculty of Fisk,
like those who in large cities man college settlements, day and
night seek in every way and by all means to arouse and perpetuate
the highest Christian ideals. Added to these are intellectual
training, musical culture and a spirit of true gentility. The
student body honors scholarship, awakens ambitions, cultivates good
manners, frowns upon untidyness of appearance, while by firmly
sustained legislation the faculty forbids any display of
extravagance in attire. Patches and darns are expected; soiled or
neglected garments the school will not permit. In a word, what one
would expect to find in a Caucasian institution, composed of pupils
of moderate means, with high ideals and gentle manners, are found at
Fisk. The choicest of the recently emancipated race are here seeking
a training. As always and everywhere, none reach the highest ideal.
Some are found who fail to aspire to it; a few are intractable, but
to one who recalls the life of the race and the treatment it has
received before and since it was freed, life at Fisk is a constant
miracle.

[Illustration: INDUSTRIAL BUILDING AND GYMNASIUM.

Erected through a legacy by Mr. Howard, of Nashville, and gift of
Dr. A. J. Burrell, of Oberlin, O.]

[Illustration: "AS GOOD AS NEW."]

THE FISK IDEA is an expression often on the lips of its alumni. It
may be summed up in this: The rudiments of learning for all, manual
training for those that are adapted to it and will use it in their
after life, the best of culture for those who are capable of
receiving and employing it. In a word, capacity not color,
Christianity not caste, is to decide the question as to the kind of
education a youth is to receive, whether he dwell in the North or
South, whether he be an Ethiopian or an Anglo-Saxon. Exceeding few
in comparison with the vast multitude of their race will be those
who receive their diploma at Fisk; but they are to be the leaders of
a people sorely needing leadership. And Fisk's determination to rear
such leaders is an abiding protest against the spirit which denies
to any human being a chance, and a declaration that the Church, like
its divine Master, is to minister especially to those who most need
help.

FISK PRODUCTS are the test of its work. Each year it publishes to
the world its list of graduates, and over against each name what he
is doing for the world. It does not hesitate to compare this list
with a like catalogue of any institution with equipment equal to its
own. It has faith to believe that the demon of prejudice will not
always hold its flaming sword to bar true manhood deserving success
at the threshold of life. It would do its part to overcome this
demon by producing self-respecting manhood, which in the eyes of
all true men commands respect.

FISK'S NEEDS are great. It needs such an endowment as shall enable
it to decline help from that truest foster mother--the A. M. A. Its
chairs professorial and for instructors should be placed upon a
permanent footing. In no other way can its fine plant be utilized.
If Northern institutions of learning must rely upon endowments to
pay from two-thirds to three-quarters of the cost of educating their
students, certainly an institution educating the youth of a race
scarcely forty years out of the house of bondage, and hence poor
beyond all expression, needs vastly more the income of an endowment
to supplement the meagre tuitions which its pupils pay. Here is an
opportunity for the man of large means to bestow a princely gift,
while the man of slender means none the less can invest in the same
undertaking.

The man or men who shall thus endow Fisk, will have ever the favor
of Him who has declared Himself the friend of the poor and needy.

[Illustration: DANIEL HAND MODEL SCHOOL.

Erected by the A. M. A. with money from the income of the Daniel
Hand bequest.]

Fisk's greatest need is an answer to the prayer of God's people for
that constant indwelling of the divine Spirit which shall keep in
stout heart those who, with personal self-sacrifice, are doing its
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHEYENNE AND ARAPAHOE INDIANS.

REV. W. M. WELLMAN, OKLAHOMA.


Christian work among the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Indians of Oklahoma
was first entered upon some ten years ago. It was begun by two
Christian Indians who labored with their own people until they were
discouraged and the work well-nigh died. Afterwards several young
men, one after another, came into the field, but though they were
individually earnest, their work did not make much impression. They
procured tables, chairs and reading matter and fitted up a room, but
nine out of ten of those to whom they were sent could neither read
nor write, and of course did not seem to be greatly drawn to current
literature. In 1893, however, Mr. and Mrs. G. W. Woodward took
charge, and did most excellent service, remaining almost a year
until they left to become missionaries in India.

[Illustration: (1) MISSION, DARLINGTON, OKLAHOMA.]

[Illustration: (2) MR. AND MRS. WELLMAN AND INDIAN WOMAN AND CHILD.]

Up to this time, for lack of funds and steady workers, the work had
been but poorly organized, and though the men who had been leading
were wise, earnest and true, yet as a force for permanent good, it
was somewhat in question.

In 1895 Rev. R. H. Harper, coming to take charge, found, he says,
one cheap two-room cottage, one pony, an old wagon and harness and
besides these a table and a few chairs. He knew that unless more
buildings could be procured, the work would amount to nothing. Upon
request, the Interior Department set aside two acres of land near
the government school for the use of the mission.

The Church-Building Society has at different times extended generous
help, as a result of which the mission finally secured a beautiful
chapel, with rooms and apartments above and below. Mr. Harper did
much excellent service throughout his stay, until 1897, when, his
wife's health giving way, he was compelled to leave the field.

[Illustration: ON THE ROAD.]

I succeeded him at once, and the work went forward, apparently
without abatement. I organized the work at the two government
schools carefully, and instituted evangelistic work in both. This
phase of the work was so successful that on the following Easter, 37
Indian young people gave their hearts to God and were baptized, and
on Children's Day, in June following, 29 others came in the same
way. A fervent religious interest prevailed in both of the
government schools, so that, at Christmas time, 35 others came into
the Church on an intelligent confession of faith. This most blessed
work could not be kept within the narrow bounds of the schoolroom.
It spread to the camp and field. The parents came to me to learn,
and I had many requests to go to them and tell them about Jesus,
till in at least two places, 18 and 20 miles distant from the
Agency, the camp Indians have asked to have a church organized and a
house built. On Easter Sunday, 1898, the climax was reached, so far
as numbers were concerned, when 67 young people, from ten to
twenty-six years of age, from both tribes, gave themselves to
Christ, and presented themselves for baptism. The interest is still
general though somewhat abated in intensity. Several times in the
last few months have smaller numbers united with the Church.

[Illustration: IN CAMP.]

A few weeks ago I returned to my work from the East, where dear
friends showed me every courtesy and sympathy possible, and while at
the Mohonk Conference of Indian Workers I met many whose hearts and
purses were open to pray for and help the helpless and abused red
man. During my visit East I found a general interest and sympathy
from churches and individuals, and money was put into my hands
sufficient to add two or three warm rooms to our parsonage, which we
have vacated and turned over to the sick and distressed Indians for
a hospital. With the rooms we have just added--work is now going
on--this parsonage hospital has one kitchen, one general work-room,
two rooms sufficient for four beds, a room for reading and study, a
laundry or general purpose room, and a bathroom; this latter,
however, we cannot finish at present for lack of money to provide
water facilities. Chairs and tables will be put in, and bead and
embroidery work, done in both silk and worsted, will be persistently
encouraged, so far as funds will allow.

There is attached to the mission a free medical dispensary, to
which a great many come. It is, however, only intended to be
supplemental to the general medical work under the direction of the
stationed Government physician, who is not only a thoroughly trained
and competent physician, but a careful and painstaking one as well.
A great many questions mingled with doubt are frequently asked us,
by those who look upon the Indian more as a curiosity than a human
being, or as a painted entity watching for an opportunity to wreak
vengeance on the white man. "Do you really think these young people
and camp Indians understand what they are doing," etc., etc.

[Illustration: IN WINTER QUARTERS.]

I say, "We certainly do, when a boy or girl, or a young man or
woman, no matter what color the skin may be, comes to us of his own
will, and says, 'I want to have a good heart and love Jesus and want
to be a Christian,' and then in the presence of both white and red
scoffers, is baptized and unites with the Church, and lives a
consistent and prayerful life, I have no reason or no right to
doubt." A few months ago there walked into the church, just as
service had begun one Sunday morning, eleven fine-looking Arapahoe
Indians. They were not richly attired, but they were clean. Only one
could even partially understand my words, but they were quiet and
attentive. After service they lingered. I said, addressing the
leader, "Coyote, what do you want?" "We Indians come 20 miles, want
to talk about Jesus. We hear you talk some days back, down on Big
River. You say, God love Indian just the same He love white man.
You say, Jesus came to help Indian be good just the same as white
man. Indian want good heart, to know how to love squaw and children.
Indian love Jesus and Indian give Jesus heart and brain and hand and
feet." "Well," I said, "let us pray and ask God." We knelt. I
prayed, Coyote prayed, and, with some hesitation, they all, in turn,
prayed fervently. I have no doubt they understood, although I have
not taken them into the Church yet.

A few weeks ago an old Indian woman with gray hair came into the
church. She could not talk much, but in their sign language I asked,
"Are you a Christian?" "Yes, yes," she replied; "I could not live if
Jesus leave me," and then making the sign as if washing on a
wash-board, and the sign for spirit (soul), pointing to my white
cuff--Jesus has washed my soul white--do they not understand? Can
we, dare we, turn one of these, His little ones, away?

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES.

BY REV. GEORGE W. MOORE.


Quite a number of students and graduates of our A. M. A. schools are
in business and professional life in northern and western cities, as
well as in the South. A growing number of colored youth from the
North attend our Southern institutions. Thus Dr. Dubois, the noted
negro scholar and writer, came from Massachusetts to Tennessee to
take his college training at Fisk University. But it is of the
Southern field, as I have seen it during the last six weeks, that I
wish to speak.

Our Chandler Institute at Lexington, Ky., is filled with earnest
students, under the direction of Miss Fanny J. Webster and her
associates. Every year well-trained young people go out from this
school to their life-work. During a gospel meeting recently held
with the Lexington Church, more than fifty of the pupils of Chandler
School avowed their faith in Christ.

The church is built upon the site of an old slave-pen, the key of
which is preserved as a relic of those dark days. The neat chapel
now stands as a symbol of light and truth to the people. The pastor,
Rev. W. L. Johnson, is a graduate of Fisk, and his wife is from Le
Moyne Institute. She has taught in our service at Memphis and
Mobile.

Some of the most representative and influential citizens are members
of our Lexington Church, among whom are the two leading physicians,
the supervising principal and several teachers of the public
schools.

A directory of the negro in business reports: four physicians, two
dentists, two lawyers, an editor, two undertaking establishments,
several groceries, a drug store and other business enterprises,
besides mechanics, farmers, etc. They support a home for orphans,
and maintain a number of benevolent organizations.

The colored people of Lexington hold an Annual Fair at the State
Fair Grounds, which is a most attractive feature of Kentucky life.
During the week of the Fair the city is crowded, and the daily
attendance numbers thousands of the best people of both races. The
Negro Fair Association is entirely under the management of colored
men, and has a paid-up capital of several thousand dollars.

The thrift and intelligence of the colored people can be seen by the
large number of neat and well-appointed homes owned by them.

Plymouth Church, at Louisville, is making hopeful progress under the
ministry of Rev. E. G. Harris. Among the members of this church are
three teachers of the Colored High School, who are Fisk graduates.
The president of the Christian Endeavor is Dr. Whipple, a physician
of note, and the superintendent of the Sunday-school is Professor
Perry, the principal of a large public school of over a thousand
pupils. Some of the most active workers are mechanics and people in
humble life.

Rev. Gilbert Walton was present at one of our meetings and gave an
interesting address on the work among the people of the mountains of
Kentucky and Tennessee.

The colored people of Louisville are also making encouraging,
material progress. Dr. Whedbee and other colored physicians have
opened a medical school under the auspices of the Colored State
College. They have also opened a free sanitarium in the central part
of the city, which is supported by the colored people.

Our school at Florence, Ala., is crowded with boys and girls who are
eager for an education. Many of them walk in from the country a
distance of several miles. Among the pupils are two men who are
preachers. Miss M. L. Corpier and Miss Nicholson are in charge of
this school. They are both graduates of Fisk University. A revival
of great spiritual power was held in connection with the Florence
church and school. Four men of mature life and heads of families
were among the converts. The church is growing in numbers and
influence under the ministry of Rev. R. J. McCann, a graduate of
Talladega College.

We visited eight families of the church who lived in the country. In
one of these country homes we held a service in which four persons
were converted, whom we baptized. Two small children were also
baptized. There was joy in that home.

One of the most unique institutions of Birmingham, Ala., is the
Penny Savings Bank, under the management of colored men. This bank
has stood the storms of several panics and has been in successful
operation for more than a decade; it has the confidence of the
entire community. Mr. B. H. Hudson, the cashier, a graduate of
Talladega College, is a leading member of our Congregational Church.

Rev. Abraham Simmons is pastor of the church. At our closing service
at Birmingham, the three principals of the public schools, and a
number of teachers who graduated at A. M. A. schools, a graduate of
Fisk and now a theological student of Oberlin, several business men,
and men and women of humble life, all testified to their loyalty to
Christ and joy in His service.

A successful revival service was also held at Knoxville, Tenn., in
which more than thirty conversions were reported. I was greatly
cheered on Thanksgiving Day by the receipt of twenty-five messages
from these young disciples of their love to Christ and desire to
serve Him.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEWS FROM ARCTIC ALASKA.

W. T. LOPP.


A letter just received from Mr. W. T. Lopp, who is missionary in
Arctic Alaska at Cape Prince of Wales, which was written under date
of October 2d, is of very great interest. It brings the latest
message from this distant mission-field, and this message is one of
great encouragement. Mr. Lopp writes:

"Now that the American Missionary Association is out of debt, we
hope you will be able to send us a missionary with a missionary wife
to be with us. It is hardly necessary for us to cite reasons for
this. He should be a minister, if possible. It would not be right to
subject children of school age to the influences of the life here.
You wrote us up last year as having 'no time for gold hunting, and
yet gold has been discovered within a few miles of the Cape.' This
brings upon us new anxiety and greater work. Should these claims
turn out well, the American Missionary Association will not be
forgotten.

"The _Bear_ has made a wonderful cruise this season. I doubt if she
ever made a longer one. She arrived here too late to look after some
whaling vessels, but considerable testimony has been secured, and if
the present captain commands the _Bear_ again next year I think
certain whalers will be seized if they do not change their ways. The
present captain has made a very conscientious commander, and has
surely exerted himself to perform his duty vigorously and honestly.
He has administered the law toward the Eskimo as well as white men,
and arrested those who were guilty of crime. He was very kind to the
natives, giving them help in coming from Cape Prince of Wales to
this point and also across the straits to Siberia. When the sea was
too rough for their skin boats he would have them hoisted up on
deck. The United States surgeon has also been exceedingly kind to
us.

"We now have 437 reindeer, and have sent an order signed by Dr.
Jackson to the station on Norton Sound for the 277 which are yet due
us. These will be driven up some time this winter. After they come
we will make an estimate of the number belonging to the Eskimo boys
and mark them. I have taken one new herder as an apprentice, and
hope to take another or two next year. We sold reindeer at thirty
dollars per head to the Bureau of Education, which furnished money
for training other apprentices. Our old apprentices can now pay
their own way, and the sale of the reindeer in the future will go
toward helping new apprentices till they can help themselves.

"The Woman's Home Missionary Association of Boston have contributed
toward the support of native workers. We received word about it and
rejoiced in their generous gifts. I will use it in helping support
Sokweena at our little mission at Mitle-tok. As I wrote last year,
we were enabled to start this mission through a small contribution
of about twenty-five dollars from the generous Endeavorers of
Westboro, Mass. Then some other friends sent in a little help that
went toward the support of Sokweena and his wife. It is not enough,
but we will try to make it do for the present. We were unable to
visit Sokweena but three times last winter. If we could only visit
him oftener and help him more he would be able to accomplish more.
But some of the children at his mission learn to spell and write a
little and to sing. We had some very good meetings. Lucy and I went
up and stayed three days. We took a lantern. Many of the old folks
had professed Christ and seemed to be earnest and sincere in their
prayers. The position for Sokweena is a hard one at times.

"Adlooat, one of our brightest boys, was typo and artist for the
_Eskimo Bulletin_. We will not be able to get the _Bulletin_ out
before November, I am afraid.

"We have just erected a building twelve by forty feet, which we have
decided to call 'Thornton House.' It is to be used as a workshop,
club-room and other purposes for the natives. The need of such a
building had occurred to Mr. Thornton and myself in 1890. Last year
Mrs. Thornton succeeded in gathering one hundred and twenty-seven
dollars, which was sufficient to purchase the lumber and pay the
freight on it. Two natives and I have put up the building. The
natives did most of the work on it, as I could not leave our house
long at a time."

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIAN ENDEAVORERS AMONG THE INDIANS.

F. B. RIGGS.


It will be ten years this February since the first Indian Christian
Endeavor Society was organized in Santee Normal Training School, at
Santee, Nebraska.

The Christian Endeavor movement was rapidly gaining everywhere, and
it was not long before other societies were started--in the Oahe
mission school, and the Presbyterian mission school at Sisseton,
South Dakota. Fourteen months later the first Indian Christian
Endeavor Society was started at Santee.

[Illustration: CHAPEL, SANTEE NORMAL SCHOOL, NEB.

Meeting-place of our Indian Endeavor Society.]

[Illustration: MAMIE DAKA ELDER,

_Pres't Santee Endeavor Soc._]

This year at Santee the young people's society includes twenty-one
of the Indian pupils with three or four of the teachers, and there
are two junior societies, one of girls and one of boys. There is a
mothers' society, which was started three or four years ago among
the women of the mission church. All these societies have an
important place in the Indian mission work.

[Illustration: ETTA R. STAMFORD,

_Sec'y Santee Endeavor Soc._]

In the young people's society many of the members remain the
same from year to year; but during the ten years one hundred and
thirty-two young people have joined. They have come from eighteen
different agencies, and in several cases from more than one village
in the agency. Out of this one-hundred and thirty-two, twenty-three
have been engaged, since leaving school, in direct missionary work,
most of them as preachers and teachers of day-schools, but a few
as the wives of such teachers, or as teachers in mission
boarding-schools or missionary helpers. Some of these have done
excellent work, and those of whom this is true are nearly always
those who were most faithful and active during their school course
in the Christian Endeavor Society. Three or four of the most
promising have died before they had any opportunity to work at their
homes, but some of these short lives were so faithful and patient
that perhaps they did more good than many longer lives.

[Illustration: SANTEE JUNIOR ENDEAVOR SOCIETY.]

Three other societies have been started among the Indians, where the
leaders were chiefly from those who had been members at Santee. But
the societies not connected with mission schools have been
transient, or intermittent in their life. Those at Santee and
Sisseton, and one at Fort Berthold mission school in North Dakota,
have lived. A society is to be started at the Omaha Agency soon.

[Illustration: DAVID P. FLYINGHAWK,

_Chair'n Lookout Committee, Santee Endeavor Society_.]

[Illustration: FRED INYANHOKJILA JOHNSON,

_Chair'n Prayer-meeting Committee, Santee Endeavor Soc._]

The young people's society at Santee has been a training school for
its members. It has broadened their feeling of Christian fellowship
with the great army of fellow Endeavorers. It has given them songs
that they enjoy very much. It has increased their interest in
missions and deepened their feeling of responsibility for service to
the Master.

The junior work at Santee has been especially encouraging among the
girls, who are rather more responsive than the boys. Of the twelve
little girls in the picture, one died last year, but eight are now
members of the senior society.

In the monthly meetings of the Mothers' Society of Christian
Endeavor many questions are asked and answered concerning the care
and training of children, and the children are remembered in prayer.

One thing, at least, these Christian Endeavor Societies have done.
They have emphasized the idea of _endeavor_ and _service_. It
expresses itself in the use of a new word, or rather the use of an
old word a thousand times where it was used once before. The name in
Dakota means "The society of those who want to work for Jesus," and
"working for Jesus" has become a more prominent thought in all their
religious life.

[Illustration: KATE WAMNIYOMNIWAJTEWIN FRUH,

_Chair'n Missionary Committee, Santee Endeavor Society_.]

[Illustration: MINNIE WANMLIWIN LAST-HORSE.

_Chair'n Flower Committee, Santee Endeavor Society_.]

Last year a Junior Endeavor Society of Indian girls gave one dollar
to the Church-Building Society, one dollar to the Education Society,
one dollar to the Dakota Native Missionary Society, and one dollar
to the American Board. A Junior Endeavor Society of Indian boys gave
one dollar to the American Missionary Association. A Senior Endeavor
Society of Indian boys and girls last year gave fourteen dollars to
the American Board and three dollars to the Woman's Missionary
Union. The Endeavor Society proves, therefore, among the Indian
boys and girls and young people just what it does everywhere else.
It gives them larger views of the kingdom of God, it stimulates them
to greater sacrifice in giving of their means to the spread of this
kingdom, and awakens within them deeper spiritual earnestness. The
life of a Christian Endeavorer, wherever that life may be spent,
cannot be a narrow, selfish life, if loyal to the great Christian
Endeavor idea. This society is an important factor in Christian
enlargement and quickening among our young people on the prairie.

[Illustration: JUNIOR ENDEAVORERS MAKING A MISSIONARY QUILT.]

       *       *       *       *       *

LINCOLN MEMORIAL SUNDAY.


Sunday, February 11th, marks this celebration in the calendars of
our Congregational Sunday-schools. A new Concert Exercise has been
prepared and will be sent to superintendents and teachers who desire
to keep this day in the interests of Christian patriotism and for
the support of the work among the needy millions represented in the
life and history of our martyred President, Abraham Lincoln. The A.
M. A. reaches by Christian education the American Highlanders, from
whom Abraham Lincoln came. It sends missionaries and teachers to the
Negroes, whom Abraham Lincoln freed. It plants its Christian work
among the Indians, for whom Abraham Lincoln spoke words of honest
sympathy. It is this great work that appeals to our Sunday-schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR OCTOBER, 1899.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for October                                    $1,340.00
                                                       ==========


NOTE.--Where no name follows that of the town, the contribution is
from the church and society of that place. Where a name follows,
it is that of the contributing church or individual. S. means
Sunday-school; C. means Church; C. E., the Young People's Society
of Christian Endeavor; S. A. means Student Aid.


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $332.01.

Cape Elizabeth, First, 5. Deer Isle, First, 5. Eastport, Central,
10.27. Ellsworth, First, 12.25. Farmington, First, 17.16. New
Sharon, 2

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. F. W. Davis, Treas., $280.33.

Auburn, W. M. S., High St. C., "In memory of Stephen and Elizabeth
Harrison, by H. H. P.," 10. Belfast, 15. Cornish, 5. Falmouth,
First, 10. Gorham, 27. Litchfield Corners, 9.15. North Belfast, 2.
Portland, State St., 50; Second Parish, 17; High St., 69.63.
Scarboro, 10. Searsport, First, 20. Searsport, Second, 8.
Waterville. 7. Yarmouth, 20.55.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $800.11--of which from Estates, $517.20.

Amherst, 10. Exeter, Isaac S. Shute, to const. MARION S. BUSH L.M.,
100. Hanover, Mrs. S. J. Kellogg, 10. Gilmanton, Iron Works, 4.
Lyme, 55. Manchester, First, S., Special, _for S. Work_, 9.34. New
Ipswich, 38th Annual Fair by children of the town, _for Negroes,
Indians and Mountain Whites_, 6. Penacook, 8.60. Peterboro, Union,
14.27. Plainfield, Mrs. S. R. Baker, 10. Rochester, First, 30.70.
Rochester, C., by H. M. Plumer, 15. Rochester, "M.," 10.

ESTATES.--Cornish. Estate of Mrs. Sarah W. Westgate, by Edwin W.
Quimby, Trustee of Cong. Soc., Windsor, Vt., 18.08. Meredith, Estate
of Mrs. Lovey A. Lang, 300. Rindge, Estate of Otis Hubbard, by
Herbert E. Wetherbee, Executor, 199.12.


VERMONT, $399.82.

Barre, 17.40. Bradford, 13.28. Chester, 16.30. East Berkshire, 9.
Fairlee, M. W. Smith, 5. Hartland, "A Friend," 5. Lower Waterford,
2.75. Newfane, First, 12.34. Roxbury, 2.35. Saint Johnsbury, Mrs. F.
H. Brooks, box Maps, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Salisbury, 6.60,
Springfield, "Two Friends," through W. H. M. A., 200. Waterford, 3.
West Brattleboro, 25.80. Weybridge, C. E., 3.32. Williamstown, 8.17.
Woodstock, 40.44. Windsor, Old South 7.47.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert Mackinnon,
Treas., $21.60.

Brattleboro, West, _for S. A., Indian M._, 3. Chelsea, _for
Schp's_, 5. Franklin, 5.60. Saint Johnsbury, North, S. Class, _for
Indian Sch'p_, 1. Westfield, S. Class, _for Schp's_, 6. Windham, Jr.
C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_, 1.


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,611.39--of which from Estates, $3,398.68.

Andover, South, _for Fisk U._, 100. Andover, South, _for Ballard
Sch., Ga._, 75. Andover, South, S., 25. Andover, Y. L. S. of
Christian Workers, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 20. Attleboro,
Second, C. E., _for Campton, Ky._, 10. Berlin, 6.

Boston, Union, C. E., 25; Park St., Summer Bible Class, _for S. S.
Work, Harriman, Tenn._, 10, "A Friend," 10. South Boston, Phillips,
57.31. Dorchester, Second, C., by Miss E. Tolman, 25; Mrs. Elbridge
Torrey, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10; Second, 71.60; "E. C.
C.," 10.

Bradford, First, 33. Braintree, First, 10.13. Bridgewater, Central
Sq., 21. Brookline, Harvard, 66.81. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim, 10.15.
Chester, Second, C., 11; C. E., 5. Danvers, Maple St., 124.87.
Douglas, First, 5. East Billerica, Mrs. Caroline E. Richardson, 25.
Edgartown, 4. Enfield, W. M. Soc., by Amanda W. Ewing, Treas., 40.
Everett, First, C. E., 10. Feeding Hills, 12.50. Framingham, "A
Friend," 17.50 _for Indian Sch'p_ and 5 _for Indian Work_. Globe
Village, "A Friend," 75 cents. Greenfield, Second, 86.29; Mrs. M. K.
Tyler, 12. Holyoke, First, 21.64. Hudson, First, 10. Ipswich, First,
20; Linebrook, 16.70. Lakeville, Precinct, 13.50, and S., 8.16
Lakeville, W. M. Soc., by Mrs. A. C. Southworth, Sec'y. _for S. A.,
Santee Indian Sch., Neb._, 11. Lancaster, Women's Aux., by Mrs. A.
J. Bancroft, Treas., 41.63. Lawrence, Samuel White, 50. Lawrence,
Lawrence St., 35; Jas. H. Eaton, 5, _for Porto Rico_. Leominster,
Mrs. G. H. Wheelock, 5. Malden, First, 81.77. Mattapoisett, 8.75.
Marlborough, Union, 82.71. Medford, Mystic, 176.25. Millbury,
Second, 39.65. Milton, First Evan., 27.56. Monson, Mrs. Esther R.
Holmes, _for McIntosh, Ga._, 30. Monson, 27.52. Newton, Eliot, 140.
Newton, Eliot, "A Friend," 5. Northampton, Edwards, 93.58.
Northampton, Mrs. S. E. Bridgman, _for S. A., Straight U._, 10.
North Dighton, H. M. Soc. of C., _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, and to
const. MRS. MARY E. HATHAWAY L.M., 40. North Hadley, Second, 30.
Newton Center, Maria B. Furber M. Soc., _for Dining Room, Tougaloo
U._, 10. Newton Highland, Home M. S. of C., by Mrs. Emily W. Hyde, 2
bbls. Goods, etc. Peabody, West, 9.58. Reading, 15. Rutland, 14.50.
Rochester Center, 8.25. Salem, Tabernacle, to const. SARAH P.
CHAMBERLAIN and CHARLES E. ADAMS L.M's, 60. Salem, C. E., United
Service of South, Tabernacle and Crombie St., 21.59. Shirley, 10.
Shrewsbury, 11. Somerville, Winter Hill, 30. South Deerfield, C.,
44.48; S., 7. South Hadley, 23. South Sudbury, L. M. Circle, bbl.
Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ South Weymouth, Mrs. Joseph Dyer,
_for S. A., Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 25.
South Weymouth, Old South, 8. Springfield, First C. of Christ, _for
Porto Rico_, 61. Springfield, Hope, 17.89. Springfield, Hope, S.,
_for Mountain White Work_, 14. Springfield, Mrs. Fred Law, _for S.
A., Tougaloo U._, 5. Springfield, Emmanuel, 2. Stoneham, 15.35.
Templeton, Trin., C., 12.43. Webster, First, 30. Wellesley, 58.37.
West Barnstable, 5. Westford, Union, Mrs. L. A. Keyes, 5. West
Springfield, Park St., L. M. Soc., by Mrs. Ethan Brooks, Treas.,
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 73. Williamsburg, Mrs. Helen E. James,
25. Wilmington, 5. Winchester, Mission Union, _for Porto Rico_, 20.
Worcester, Union, 191.45; Piedmont, quarterly 35. Worcester, Summer
St. _for Mountain White Work_, 15. Worcester, Rev. Willard Scott,
13.14. Worcester, Mr. and Mrs. Henry C. Brown, _for McIntosh, Ga._,
5. Wrentham, First, 20.35. ----, E. C., _for Mountain White Work_,
1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I.,
Miss Lizzie D. White, Treas., $300.00.

W. H. M. A., of Mass. and R. I., _for Chinese M._, 200; _for C. at
Fort Berthold, N. D._, 100.

ESTATES.--Andover, Estate of Edward Taylor, by O. B. Taylor,
Exec'r, 300. Boston, Estate of Wm. Hilton, 2,526.84. Medfield,
Estate of Miss Lydia A. Dow, by Ella T. Haynes, Executrix, 255.18.
North Adams, Estate of Ann Eliza Babbitt, by W. D. and Arthur
Robinson, Executors, 316.66.


RHODE ISLAND, $463.35.

Providence, Cent'l, 292.22; Beneficent, 92.67. Central Falls,
56.23. Newport, United, quarterly, 9.57. Tiverton Four Corners,
12.66.


CONNECTICUT, $1,104.31.

Berlin, Second, 40. Berlin, Second, S., _for Tougaloo U._, 35.
Bridgeport, South, C. E., 5.16. Bridgeport, Olivet, S., _for
Mountain White Work_, 1.25. Cheshire, 17.25. Chester, 20.34.
Danbury, First, S., _for Porto Rico_, 11.89. Easton, 15.20.
Ellington. 62.55. Greenwich, Second, C. E., _for S. A., Lincoln
Sch., Ala._, 24. Groton, "In Memory of S. P. C.," 25 Hartford, Miss
Clara Hillyer, _for Dining Room, Tougaloo U._, 100. Lyme, Grassy
Hill, 4.80. Middlefield, 61.86. New Haven, Ch. of the Redeemer,
192.82; Dwight Place, 40.26. New London, First Ch. of Christ, 46.70.
New Milford, "A Friend," 5. Noank, M. H. Giddings, 3. Northford, 13.
Norwich, "A Friend," 100. Portland, C. E., by Mrs. F. W. Goodrich,
_for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Prospect, 12. Salem, 12. Southport, Miss
Eliza A. Bulkley, 90. Thomaston, First, 8.79. Trumbull, 3.06.
Vernon, 5.52. Wallingford, 55.01. Wallingford, Mrs. B. F. Harrison,
5. Washington, Henry S. Nettleton, _for Porto Rico_, 2. Waterbury,
Second, W. M. Soc., 5. Wethersfield, C. (2 of which _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._), 38.85.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONNECTICUT, by Mrs. Geo.
Follett, Secretary, $40.00.

Bridgeport, Park St., 25. Canaan, Pilgrim, 7. Wauregan, 8.

ESTATE.--North Haven, Estate of W. T. Reynolds, by Rev. J. B.
Reynolds, Executor, 2 cases Books, _for Theo. Dept., Straight U._


NEW YORK, $564.78--of which from Estate, $83.90.

Angola, Miss A. H. Ames, 5. Bergen, First, 10.82. Binghamton, C. E.
Rally at Annual Meeting, 12; Mrs. J. E. Bacon, 10. Brooklyn, "Friend
in Central Cong. Soc.," 100. Brooklyn, Lewis Av., Cong. Bible Sch.,
_for Indian M., Santee, Neb._, and to const. MISS MARY E. C. BARDEN
and JAMES S. BRACKENRIDGE L.M's, 75. Brooklyn, MISS LYDIA BENEDICT,
to const. herself L.M., 30. Brooklyn, Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for Jos.
K. Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 30. Brooklyn, Puritan,
26.50. Brooklyn, Willoughby Av., S., _for Porto Rico_, 5.
Churchville, Rev. J. W. Norris, _for S. A., Theo. Dept., Straight
U._, 5. Corning, First, 3.52. Deansboro, C., _for freight, to
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 2.01. Lysander, 6.36. Moravia, First, 32. New
York, Forest Av., C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. New York, Bedford
Park, 9.27; Charles P. Pierce, 3.50. Oswego, 8.11. Paris, 5.25.
Syracuse, H. A. Flint, 20 cts. Warsaw, 10.59. West Groton, 19.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $46.25.

Brooklyn, Plymouth, Y. W. G., _for Singing Books, A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 10. Brooklyn, Lewis Av., C. E., balance to const.
MISS J. FRANCES WELLS, L.M., 15. Honeoye, 4. Rochester, South, 15.
Wellsville, 2.25.

ESTATE.--Sherburne, Est. of A. B. DeForest, by Chas. A. Fuller,
Exec'r, 83.90.


NEW JERSEY, $240.90.

East Orange, Trinity, 129. Elizabethport, First, 10. Paterson,
Auburn St., 20. ----, "A Friend," 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. J. H.
Denison Treas., $80.90.

Glen Ridge, Mission Band, _for Indian Boys_, 10. Newark, Belleville
Av., 13.40. Washington, D. C. First, Jr. C. E., 7.50. Westfield, 50.


PENNSYLVANIA, $7.00.

Neath, S., _for Porto Rico_, 2.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENNSYLVANIA, by Mrs. W. H. Clift,
Treas., $5.00.

Corry, C. M. Soc., 5.


OHIO, $608.12.

Akron, First, 26. Berea, Mrs. E. M. McKean, 1. Chatfield, Pietist
C., _for Indian M._, 45.17. Cleveland, Mount Zion, M. Soc., _for S.
A. Jos. K. Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 11.
Collinwood, First, 15. Columbia, 5.20. Grafton, 2.44. Greenwich,
First, 5.13. Kingsville, Mrs. S. C. Kellogg, _for Indian M., N. D._,
10. Lenox, 4.70. Litchfield, E. R. Turner, _for S. A., Grandview
Acad., Tenn._, 5. Madison, Central, 10.81. Mansfield, First, 120.19.
Medina, 148.66, to const. SHERMAN HOFF, N. P. NICHOLS, MRS. FRANCES
MAPLE, MABEL HARRINGTON and CHARLES WERTZ, L. M'S. Newton Falls,
First, 10.58. Oberlin, Mrs. E. W. Lord, 24 bbls. Goods, _for Jos. K.
Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, and 13.42 _for freight_.
Parkman, C., "A Member," 6.28. Randolph, "Friends," 6. Tallmadge,
S., _for Porto Rico_, 24.27. Windham, First, 8.50. York, 14.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas.,
$114.77.

Alexis, 3. Bellevue, 8.25. Burton, 20. Cincinnati, North Fairmont,
2.50. Clarksfield, 2.85. Cleveland, First, 15.23; Hough Ave., Jr. C.
E., 2.50; Lakeview, 2; Pilgrim, 4.50; Pilgrim, Jun. S., 5; Plymouth,
13. Columbus, Eastwood, 4; Mayflower, 5; Plymouth, 7. Kirtland,
2.72. Litchfield, Jr. C. E., 1.25. Mansfield, Mayflower, Mem., 1.50.
New London, 3.50. Norwalk, 75 cts. Toledo, Second, Jr. C. E., 2.50.
Washington St., 7.72.


ILLINOIS, $859.19.

Abingdon, C., ad'l, 70 cts. Aurora, Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Greenfield,
321.17. Beaver Creek, Joseph Pike, 2.

Chicago, Union Park, 75.21. Chicago, First, 42.53; Englewood, North
Ch., 10. Chicago, Union Park, C. E., 15; Millard Av., C. E., 13.85.
Chicago, Tabernacle, S., _for Nat. Ala._, 5. Chicago Central, C. E.,
2. Chicago, Mr. and Mrs. C. M. Freeman, for freight and bbl. Goods,
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 1.

Crystal Lake, 4.50 Danville, Mrs. A. M. Swan, _for Santee Indian
M._, 6. Farmington, Mrs. H. B. Haskell, 10. Granville, C. E., 20.
Harvey, 13.72. Hennepin, 3. Hinsdale, 18.81. Kewanee (50 of which
from H. T. Lay, _for Porto Rico_), 79.86. Lamoille, 10.81. Lockport,
7.82. Marseilles, R. N. Baughman, M. D., dec'd, 51. Marseilles,
20.68. Maywood, 8.25. Mazon, 9. Mendon, 4.63. Moline, First, S., 10;
Second, 3.11. Neponset, 6.50. Oak Park, First, S., 13.26. Ontario,
C., 5.75; C. E., 2. Princeton, Mrs. S. C. Clapp, 25. Seward,
Minooka, First, 12. Stark, 8. Waukegan, German C., 2. Waverly, 4.75.
Wyoming, 10.28.


MICHIGAN, $325.16.

Allegan, First, 3.25. Cheboygan, C. E., 1; Jr. C. E., 1. Covert,
Mrs. Abigail G. Pixley, deceased, by F. E. Rood, 94.78. Detroit,
First, 100; Brewster, S., 4.57. Dorr, 5.60. Grand Rapids, S. Class,
by J. J. Lathrop, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 8. Salem,
Second, 11.26. South Haven, 18. Union City, Mrs. Lydia Lee, 5; C.
E., 2.50; Individuals, 2.50, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Union
City, First, C. E., 2. Watervliet, Plymouth, 15.70. West Bay City,
John Bourn, _for Alaska M._, 50.


IOWA, $231.96.

Algona, A. Zahlten, to const. MISS CLARA ZAHLTEN L.M., 50. Cass,
14.60. Clinton, 18.25. Eldora, Chas. McKeen Duren, _for S. A.,
Grandview Acad., Tenn._, 20. Genoa Bluff, 2.70. Gilbert Station, W.
M. Soc., 5, by Mrs. E. B. Stewart, Sec.; C. E., 3.80, _for Porto
Rico_. Grinnell, S., 15.74. Harlan, 11.30. Iowa Falls, 5.84.
Kellogg, 2.60. Lakeside, 10. Lansing Ridge, German, 2.50. Magnolia,
5.10. Monticello, 16.30. Sheldon, 16.61. Sioux City, First, 31.62.


MINNESOTA, $103.07.

Clay Co., "Hail Insurance," 5. Duluth, Pilgrim, 70.72. Duluth, Rev.
J. Kimball, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Lake City, First, 17.85. Spring
Valley, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 4.50.


WISCONSIN, $76.79.

Beloit, First, 20. Bristol and Paris, 14.60. Delavan, 5.12. Eagle
River, 3.20. River Falls, C., 25.37; S., 5. Viroqua, C. E., 3.50.


MISSOURI, $70.78.

Lebanon, 9.30. Old Orchard, 11.48. Pleasant Hill, George M.
Kellogg, _for Teacher, Porto Rico_, 50.


KANSAS, $23.73.

Eureka, 15.73. Lenora, Miss Anna Lord, 1. Wakefield, Ladies' Miss'y
Soc., by Miss Martha A. Young, Treas., 7.


MONTANA, $13.10.

Missoula, 4. Red Lodge, 4.10.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF MONTANA, by Mrs. W. S. Bell, Treas.,
$5.00.

Helena, L. M. S., 5.


NEBRASKA, $44.83.

Curtis, 2.75. Red Cloud, 5.25. Red Cloud, Indian Creek, C., 2.63.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NEBRASKA, by Mrs. Geo. C. Hall,
Treas., $34.20.

W. H. M. U. of Nebraska, 31.20. Lincoln, First, 3.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $67.61.

Armour, 7.03. Cheyenne River, Light Bearers of Oahe School, _for
Oahe Sch._, 1.44. Sioux Falls, First, 15. Webster, 10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $34.14.

Academy, 1.25. Armour, 1.50. Belle Fourche, 1.50. Columbia, Jr. C.
E., 1.25. Deadwood, 2. Firesteel, 1. Lead, 3. Pierre, 1.75. Rapid
City, 3.75. Vermillion, 5. Wakonda, 2. Willow Lakes, _for Porto
Rico_, 5. Willow Lakes, 3. Yankton, 2.14.


ARKANSAS, $4.60.

Little Rock, Pilgrim, 4.60.


WYOMING, $40.00.

Cheyenne, First, 40.


COLORADO, $5.00.

Piceance, W. H. Violett, 5.


CALIFORNIA, $448.69.

Campbell, 25. Compton, 4. Lockeford, 6.50. Lodi, 7. Los Angeles,
Bethlehem, 3.05. Ontario, First, 48.90. Ontario, Rev. D. B. Eells,
5. San Diego, H. Sheldon, 25. Santa Barbara, Mrs. Falkner, _for S.
A., Jos. K. Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 2. San
Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see items
below), 311.09.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA, by Mrs. M. H.
Haven, Treas., $11.15.

W. H. M. U., _for Mountain Work_, 11.15.


WASHINGTON, $10.00.

Ritzville, German, Zions, 10.


MARYLAND, ESTATE, $3,000.00.

Baltimore, Estate of Mrs. Mary R. Hawley, 5,000 (less expenses, 5,
Reserve Legacy, 1,995), 3,000.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $72.70.

Washington, Mount Pleasant, C., 51.70. Lincoln Memorial, C., 21.


KENTUCKY.

Williamsburg, from Unknown Source, bbl. Goods.


NORTH CAROLINA, $2.81.

Enfield, Smith Chapel, Bapt. C., _for Jos. K. Brick A., I. and N.
Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 1.26. Haywood, Liberty Chapel, 1. Strieby,
Strieby C., 55 cts


TENNESSEE, $11.00.

Deer Lodge, Rev. George Lusty, 5. Grandview, Rev. T. W. Merritt,
_for Bell-tower, Grandview_, 5; Miss Mary Taylor, _for S. A.,
Grandview_, 1.


ALABAMA, $24.50.

Marion, First, 6. Montgomery, Miss Hattie R. Stratton, _for
Grandview Acad., Tenn._, 10. Selma, 4.50. Talladega, Cove, 4.


LOUISIANA, $6.63.

Hammond, 6.63.


TEXAS, $2.54.

Corpus Christi, First, 54 cts. Goliad, 2.


INCOME, $304.75.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 5.73. E. A. Brown Sch'p Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 7.00. De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
Talladega_ C., 34. Fisk University Theo. Fund, 56 cts. Hammond
Endowment Fund, _for Straight U._, 28.30. Howard Theo. Fund, _for
Howard U._, 188.38. LeMoyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 17.08.
Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 11.40. Seth Wadham Sch'p
Fund, _for Talladega C._, 11.40.


TUITION, $533.51.

Lexington, Ky., 51.75. Williamsburg, Ky., 23.80. Saluda, N. C.,
14.80. Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch., 135.88. Florence, Ala., 22.50.
Nat, Ala., 22.53. Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 100. Grandview, 15.75;
Public Sch. Fund, 40. Nashville, Tenn., 20. Pleasant Hill, Tenn.,
86.50.


SUMMARY FOR OCTOBER, 1899.

  Donations                                             $9,576.70
  Estates                                                6,999.78
                                                       ----------
                                                       $16,576.48
  Income                                                   304.75
  Tuition                                                  533.51
                                                       ----------
  Total for October                                    $17,414.74


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for October                                $14.23


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Sept. 1st to Oct.
20th, 1899, William Johnstone, Treas., applicable to the expenses of
the fiscal year ending Aug. 31st, 1900, $69.75.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $69.75.

Fresno. Chinese M. O., 1. Los Angeles, Chinese M. O., 3. Marysville,
Chinese M. O., 10. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 3.45. Oroville, Chinese
M. O., 1.50. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 2.20. Petaluma, Chinese M. O.,
2.50. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5.50. San Bernardino, Chinese M.
O., 6.50. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 4.25. San Francisco, Central,
Chinese M. O., 4.40. San Francisco, West, Chinese M. O., 4.35. San
Francisco, Barnes, Chinese, M. O., 1. Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O.,
5.60. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 6.50. Santa Cruz, Japanese M. O.,
7. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 1.


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, applicable to the
expenses of the fiscal year ending August 31st, 1899, $184.03.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $122.03.

Fresno, Sub's, 14.93. Marysville, Ann'y Pledges, 10. Oakland, Annual
Mem's, 13. Riverside, Ann'y Pledges, 16.60. Sacramento, Monthlies,
5.50; Annual Mem's, 22. San Francisco, Bethany, Ann'y Pledges,
10.50. San Francisco, Central Mission, Annual Mem's 14. San
Francisco, West Mission, Annual Mem's, 2. Santa Cruz, Chinese Ann'y
Pledges, 11. Ventura, Annual Mem's, 2.50.

INDIVIDUAL GIFT, $25.00:

Rev. George Moore, D.D., 25.

EASTERN FRIENDS, $37.00:

Portland, Me., The Misses Libby, 20. Newport, Vt., Mrs. Lydia H.
Pond, 2. Greenfield, Mass., Miss Helen L. Mann, 10. Auburn, Mass.,
"Friends," by Mrs. E. K. Bancroft, 5.

FOR CHINESE WOMEN AND CHILDREN, $57.31:

W. H. M. U. of California, 43.31. Vernon, Ladies' M. Soc., through
W. H. M. U. of Cal., 3. Albany, N. Y., "Friends of Chinese," 10.
Wheaton, Ill., Mrs. C. B. Kennedy, 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1899.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for November                                  $11,380.00
  Previously acknowledged                                1,340.00
                                                      -----------
                                                       $12,720.00
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $135.52.

Auburn, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Brunswick, First,
28.54. Castine, Meth. C., 12; C. E., 5; Jr. C. E., 2; Mrs. J. P.
Cushman, 1; Mrs. Partridge, 1; "Friends," bbl. Goods, _for S. A.,
McIntosh, Ga._ Lewiston, Mrs. Mathewson, 10; Miss S. Lizzie
Weymouth, 2; Harold Dinsmore, 1.08, _for S A., Brewer N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._ Mount Desert, Somesville, C., 6.70. Norridgewock,
25. Orland, Miss H. T. Buck and Friends, bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh,
Ga._ Portland, W. M. S., West C., 8; Miss A. E. Farrington, 2 bbls.
Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Searsport, Mrs. James MacDougall,
_for freight to McIntosh, Ga._, 3. South Berwick, S. Class, 1; Ethel
B. Ridley, bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ South Freeport, Jr.
C. E., 2. South West Harbor, Miss Mary C. Parker, _for S. A.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 5.50.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. F. W. Davis, Treas., $19.70.

Woodfords, L. M. S., 12.25; "Thank Offering," 6.20; bal. to const.
MRS. MARIA B. WOODBURY and MRS. E. JENNIE SPURR L.M's. Oxford Co.
Conference, 1.25.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $350.72--of which from Estate, $100.88.

Alsted Center, Ladies' M. S., _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 5.25.
Bennington, 4.63. Boscawen, First, 17.33. Candia, 6.13. Claremont,
C. E. of C., _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 4. Durham, 10.82. Exeter,
First, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 5. Hinsdale, 4.19. Hudson, 9.11.
Keene, First, 28.35. Laconia, 18. Manchester, First, 54.68.
Manchester, Franklin St., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N.
C._ Meredith, C., ad'l, 5. Meriden, Mrs. J. S. Bryant and Miss
Clayes, _for Tillotson C._, 5. Milford, First, 21. Milton, C., 6.48
C. E., 57 cts. Nashua, First, C. E., _for Mountain White Work_, 5.
Newfields, C., _for freight to Wilmington, N. C._, 1.30. North
Hampton, 26. Portsmouth, North, H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. AND HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $12.00.

Concord, First, Y. L. M., _for S. A., Marion, Ala._, 6. Milford, L.
C. Soc., 6.

ESTATE--Rindge. Estate of Otis Hubbard, by Herbert E. Wetherbee,
Exec'r, 100.88.


VERMONT, $781.42--of which from Estate, $400.00.

Ascutneyville, Mrs. Hubbard, _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1.
Brattleboro, Miss Crosby, _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 1. Brattleboro,
Center C., S., 2-1/2 bbls. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Brownington and Barton Landing, C., 26.25. Burlington, S. S.
Tinkham, 5. Cambridge, C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for S. A., Straight U._,
5. Dorset, 19. East Braintree and North Brookfield, 8.50, Franklin,
Ladies' H. M. S., bbl. Goods (val. 16.81); Rev. Levi Wild, for
freight, 1.16, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Hartford, Mrs. Eph Morris, 10;
Miss Anne Morris, 5, _for Knoxville, Tenn._ Jeffersonville, Second
Ch., Cambridge, 7.25. Orwell, 36.56. Pittsford, 68. Saint Johnsbury,
W. H. M. S., 4 and bbl. Goods; Mrs. T. M. Howard, 4, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Stowe, First, 49. Swanton, Mrs. A. M. Allen, 10.
Thetford, First, 8. Townshend, Nancy B. Batchelder, 1. Wallingford,
Ladies of Cong. Ch., bbl. Goods, 2.50 for freight, _for Saluda, N.
C._, by Miss C. M. Townsend. Westfield, A. C. Hitchcock, to const.
MAUDE E. MILLER L.M., 30. Westmore, First, "Soc. for Promotion of
Christian Giving." 5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert MacKinnon,
Treas., $74.20.

Cambridge, 10. Chester, 9.37. Glover, West. Bristol C., 3. Leyden,
Jr. C. E., _for Indian Sch'p_, 2. Manchester, 15. Saint Johnsbury,
North, 25. Stowe, S., _for Indian Sch'ps_, 4.83. Wells River, Jr. C.
E., 5.

ESTATE.--White River Junction, Estate of R. C. A. Latham, by I. K.
Hamilton, Ex'r, 400.


MASSACHUSETTS, $7,654.69--of which from ESTATES, $3,900.00.

Amesbury, Main St., S., _for S. A., Santee Indian Sch., Neb._,
32.08. Amesbury, Main St., 18. Amherst, Second, W. M. S., _for S.
A., Straight U._, 13. Andover, Free Christian, 35. Andover, South,
C. E., _for S. A., Macon, Ga._, 8. Athol, Ladies' Soc. of C., bbl.
Goods, freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Attleboro, Second, 49.95.
Baldwinsville, Ladies, Soc. of C., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for
McIntosh, Ga._

Boston, Union, 150.35; J. W. Davis, _for Artesian Well, Santee
Agency, Neb._, 100; Mrs. Charlotte Fiske, for Marshallville, Ga.,
50; Union, S., _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 30; Mrs. Woodbury, _for
Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 20; George D. Bigelow, _for Wilmington, N.
C._ 20; Shawmut, 5; "A Friend." 5. Allston, 119.21. Charlestown,
First Parish, _for Chinese Mission House, San Francisco, Cal._, 30.
Roxbury, "Friends," _for Mountain White Work_, 200. Roxbury, Walnut
Av., S., 20.09, _for Mountain White Work_, and 12.16 _for Indian
Work_. Roxbury, Immanuel, 5.

Brookline. Y. L. B. S., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Cambridgeport, S., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Colrain,
5.75. Dalton, S., 25; C. E., 10, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._ Dedham,
Allen, C. E. of Cong. Ch., _to furnish room in Tougaloo U., in
memory of Ella L. Taft_, 125. Dracut, First, 1.50. Dunstable, bbl.
Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._ East Taunton, 3. Essex, 21. Fall River,
Broadway, 4.25. Fitchburg, Rollstone, C., 52.24; S., 15;
Calvinistic, 53.25. Groton, "A Friend," _for Porto Rico_, 10.
Hamilton, Mrs. Enoch Knowlton, 1. Harvard, 7. Hatfield, 46.37.
Haverhill, West, S., to const. MISS LIZZIE H. WEBSTER L.M., 30.
Haydenville, 8.30. Holbrook, Winthrop, 45.49. Holden, 7.75. Holyoke,
S. M. Cook, 20; "A. L. H.," 2; Sec., Woman's Prayer Cir., 5.
Hubbardston, 8. Indian Orchard, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Lawrence, United, 9; South, 8.16. Lawrence, Inf.
& Prim. Depts. S., Trin. Cong. Ch., 8; L. B. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Littleton, Soc. of United Workers, by Julia S.
Conant, bbl. Goods, _for Nat, Ala._ Lowell, Miss Maria Cottle,
dec'd, by Mrs. Sarah Blanchard, _for Mount'n White Work_, 500.
Lowell, First, 49.35. Lowell, Pawtucket M. Soc., _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 25. Lynnfield Center, 28.25. Mansfield, Ladies, 5. Marlboro,
Union, Prim. Dept., S., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Middleboro,
Central, C., 28.73; S., 5; First, 17. Milford, 74.79. Mittineague,
Agawam Paper Co., 2 cases Paper, _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N.
C._ New Bedford, Trinitarian, 40.91. Newburyport, North, 24.63.
Newton, Eliot, 50. Newton, Mrs. Dr. E. H. Byington, _for Gregory
Inst., N. C._, 8. Newton Center, First, S., _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._, 24. Norfolk, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
Northampton, "A Friend," 300. Northampton, Mrs. Kneeland and S.
Class, 8; Mrs. Morgan, 2, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Northampton,
Misses Kingsley, _for Marshallville, Ga., thro' W. H. M. S._, 15.
Northampton, Ladies of Edwards Ch., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for
McIntosh, Ga._ North Attleboro, Trin. C., L. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ North Brookfield, Union, Dea. A. Spooner, 10;
Miss Gilbert, 2. North Woburn, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._,
10. Oakham, C., _for Porto Rico_, 13.65. Plympton, C., C. E., 3.
Quincy, Home Dept., Bethany C., S., 1. Reading, C., Ladies' Social
C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Richmond, Opp'y Cir., King's
D., _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 15. Salem, Crombie St., 72.36.
Sherborn, Pilgrim, 30. Shrewsbury, 13. Somerville, Highland, 29.07.
Somerville, Y. P. S., _for Marshallville, Ga._, through W. H. M. S.,
10. Somerville, Highland C., Women Workers, bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Southampton, "Friends," 5. Spencer, First C.,
Brookfield Ass'n pledge, _for Teacher, Porto Rico_, 100. Springf'd,
First, L. B. S., 16, and bbl. Goods; Mrs. Clark, 1, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ South Dartmouth, 5. South Framingham. Grace, C. E., 8;
Ladies' Assoc'n of Grace Ch., bbl. Goods, _for Gregory Inst._ South
Framingham, "A Friend," _for Meridian, Miss._, 5. South Hadley, Miss
Esther Van Deman, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 6. Stockbridge, Miss
Alice Byington, _for Thunderhawk Work, Grand River Dist., S. D._,
100. Taunton, Winslow, 75.28. Topsfield, 15. Uxbridge. First Evan.,
21.69. Walpole, "A Friend," 2. Ward Hill, Ch. of Christ, 1. Ware,
Mrs. L. G. Cutler, Patchwork, _for Meridian, Miss._ Webster, Anna L.
Perry, bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Westboro, Evan., 57.31.
Westboro, S., _for Mountain White Work_, 10. Weston, Ella H.
Burrage, _for Macon, Ga._, 5. West Boxford, 6.25. Westford, Union,
20. West Medford, 15. West Rutland, Mrs. C. E. Morehouse, bbl.
Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ West Springfield, First, S., _for
Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._, 6.68. West Springfield, Park Street
C., 6.63. Whitinsville, C., S. S., 144.30. Williamsburg, 24.28.
Worcester, Inter. Dept. Old South, Bible Sch., _for S. A., McIntosh,
Ga._, 3.63. Wrentham, C., "A Friend," ad'l, 2.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., Miss Lizzie
D. White, Treas., $225.00.

W. H. M. A., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 37; "Friends,"
_for Church at Fort Berthold, N. D._, 113. Amherst, Aux., _for
Sch'p, Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 50. Salem. Tabernacle, Y. L.
Aux., _for Sch'p, Indian Sch., Santee Agency, Neb._, 25.

ESTATES.--Leicester Estate of Mrs. Mary D. Denny, by Charles A.
Denny, Exec'r, 500. Somerville, Estate of Martha F. Wilder, 400.
Worcester, Estate of Albert Curtis, by E. B. Stoddard, for
Executors, 25,000 (less 2,500 U. S., Inheritance Tax, Reserve,
19,500), 3,000.


RHODE ISLAND, $110.00.

Central Falls, Hon. E. L. Freeman, 100. Providence, Jr. Benev.
Soc., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 10.


CONNECTICUT, $5,456.18--of which from Estates, $3,521.96.

Branford, First Cong. S., _for Porto Rico_, 50. Bridgeport, Second,
S., _for Indian M., Santee Agency, Neb._, 25. Cornwall, First,
Endeavor Soc., _for Porto Rico_, 11. East Berlin, Second C., S.,
_for King's Mountain, N. C._, 11. East Canaan, 4.74. East Hampton,
23.13. East Hampton, K. D. C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
East Hartford, First, 15.99. East Hartford, bbl. Goods, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ East Windsor, 21.33. Farmington, First, 60.75.
Hanover, 8.94. Hartford, Asylum Hill, S., _for Porto Rico_, 53.31.
Hartford, Center, S., 23.19; E. C. Stone, Treas., 5. Hartford,
Atwood Collins, _for Tougaloo U._, 20. Jewett City, H. M. Soc., _for
Porto Rico_, 16.50. Jewett City, H. M. Soc., by Mrs. Jane C. Panton,
Treas., bbl. Goods, _for Porto Rico Sufferers_. Lebanon, First, _for
Porto Rico_, 13.25. Mansfield Center, S., _for Porto Rico_, 60c.
Meriden, First, 69.50. Meriden, Guardian Sew. Cir. First C., bbl.
Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Middletown, Third, 12.18; South,
16.35; South, "A Lady," by G. A. Craig, Treas., 10. Nepaug, C., 11;
C. E., 5. Nepaug, C. and Ladies S. C., 8, and bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ New Canaan, W. H. M. Soc. of C., _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 26. New Haven, Mrs. Henry Farnam, _for Artesian
Well, Santee Agency, Neb._, 500. New Haven, Center, 202.22. New
Haven, Children of Primary Dept., United C., 2.50. Newington
Junction, C. E., _for Marshallville, Ga._, 10. Noank, 5. Oronoque,
bbl. Goods, _for Greenwood, S. C._ Plainfield, Mrs. S. B. Carter,
_for Thomasville, Ga._, 5. Plymouth, Girls' Club, 8, Willing Helpers
C. C., 8, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Poquonock, 6.42. Portland, C. E.,
by Mrs. F. W. Goodrich, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Putnam, Second,
43.92. Reading, L. M. S., box Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
Rockville, Union C., 182.52. Saybrook, Cong. C. E., 7. Saugatuck, T.
B. Hill, _for Porto Rico_, 20. Simsbury, First Ch. of Christ, 50.08.
Somers, 13. Sound Beach, First, Jr. C. E., 10. South Coventry, C.
E., 5; Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._; C. E. of
Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Wilmington, N. C._, 1.16. Suffield, bbl.
Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Southfield, 4.50. South
Manchester, C., L. B. S., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Stratford, 24.90. Stafford Springs, 20.26. Talcottville, 90.47.
Vernon Centre, C., 10. Wallingford, L. B. S. of C., _for Wilmington,
N. C._, 10. Washington, Romford Mission Sch., _for S. A., Grand View
Inst., Tenn._, 8.50. Waterbury, Second, W. B. Soc., _for Allen N.
and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 25. Waterbury, Second, Primary S.
Class, _for Children, Porto Rico_, 10. Waterbury, First, L. B. S.,
box Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Westford, 5. West Suffield, Miss
M. Webster, _for Troy, N. C._, 2. Westville, L. B. S. of Woodbridge
C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Wethersfield, S., _for Porto
Rico_, 17.15. Windsor, Miss Olive Pierson, _for Tougaloo U._, 30.
Woodbridge, Primary Classes S., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8.
Woodbury, First, 8.29.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs. George
Follett, Secretary, $56.66.

Bridgeport, South, 48.16. Danbury, Second, _for S. A., Williamsburg
Acad., Ky._, 3.50. Taftville, Jr. C. E., 5.

ESTATES.--Cornwall, Estate of S. C. Beers, 521.96. East Haddam,
Estate of Christopher Tyler, 5,000, (less tax, 493.26. Reserve,
1,506.74), by W. H. Chapman, Executor, 3,000.


NEW YORK, $4,350.55.

Albany, First, 32. Brooklyn, Church of the Pilgrims, "Anonymous
gift from a member," 2,000. Brooklyn, Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for Jos.
K. Brick A., I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 1,000. Brooklyn, Mrs.
Julia E. Brick, Furnishing, 37; _S. A._, 5, _for Jos. K. Brick, A.,
I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._ Brooklyn, Central C., S., _for A. G.
School, Moorhead, Miss._, 53; South, S., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 25;
South, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10; Mrs. Paul, _for S. A.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 3; Miss M. D. Halliday, bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ Buffalo, First, 150. Buffalo, Pilgrim, 2.50. Buffalo, Niagara
Sq. C., W. M. S., 2 bbls. Goods, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._
Cambridge, C., C. E., 5. Castile, Miss F. Bogart and Friends, bbl.
Goods (val. 20), _for McIntosh, Ga._ Clifton Springs, Mrs. F. H.
Newland, bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Clintonville, Miss Etta
Hitchcock, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 2. Cortland, Mrs. John W. Keese,
_for Chinese Mission House, San Francisco, Cal._, 5. De Ruyter,
First, 4.80. Gloversville, 86.79. Hannibal, Miss Ella Brewster, 1;
Miss S. E. Keeler, 1, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._ Jamesport, 6.
Jamestown, 157.10. Le Roy, Mr. and Mrs. Butler Ward, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 17.50. Moravia, Mrs. Carrie L. Tuthill, 40.35. New York,
"A Friend," _for Porto Rico_, 500. New York, Pilgrim, 80. New York,
Pilgrim, _for Chinese Mission House, San Francisco, Cal._, 10. New
York, Lafayette Post, G. A. R., _for Flag Pole, Wilmington, N. C._,
5. Phoenix, Cong., C. E., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for McIntosh,
Ga._ Perry Center, 7.40; Mrs. C. K. Minor, 1. Port Leyden, Port
Leyden Conf., 50 cts. Port Richmond, S. Squire, 5. Poughkeepsie,
Missionary Com., Vassar College, 2.75. Rensselaer Falls, 4.54.
Rodman, 27.80. Spencerport, First, C. and S., 15.63. Ticonderoga, W.
M. S., 2 bbls. Goods, _for Kings Mountain_. Warsaw, Miss Martha
Barber, _for S. A., Straight, U._, 5. Westmoreland, 6.75. West
Winfield, 17.14. New York State, "An Anonymous Friend," _for Chinese
Mission House, San Francisco, Cal._, 20.


NEW JERSEY, $34.00.

Jersey City, Waverly, 1. Passaic, First, L. M. S., 2 bbls. Goods,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Paterson, M. S. of Cong. C., bbl. Goods,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Trenton, Mrs. Anna C. G. Woodworth, _for
Wilmington, N. C._, 5. Westfield, Ministering Children's League, (20
of _which for Indian Schp, Fort Berthold, N. D._), 28.


PENNSYLVANIA, $205.05--of which from Estate, $200.00.

Germantown, First, 3.75. Riceville, 1.30

ESTATE.--Lander, Estate of Alfred Cowles, by M. E. Cowles,
Executor, 200.


OHIO, $204.76.

Berea, First, 8.40. Brecksville, M. Soc. of C., bbl. Goods, _for
Greenwood, S. C._ Burton, C., _for Orange Park, Fla._, 10. Chardon,
First, 12.65. Cincinnati, Walnut Hills, 28.65. Cincinnati, Storrs,
S., _for Orange Park, Fla._, 1. Cleveland, Pilgrim, quarterly, 72;
Plymouth, 14; Euclid Av., 7.01. Cleveland, Euclid Av., Ladies' Soc,,
bbl. Goods, (val. 28.55), _for Saluda, N. C._, by Mrs. A. J. Smith.
Conneaut, S., _for Orange Park, Fla._, 5. Dayton, Miss F. M.
Williams, _for Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 3.50. Elyria, Miss C.
E. Crandall, bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Geneva, First,
11.25. Hudson, 5. Huntsburg, C., K. E. Soc., 6.75. Huntsburg, Mrs.
L. P. Parsons, _for Orange Park, Fla._, 1. Lexington, 2. Marietta,
Oak Grove Miss. Soc., _for S. A., Mobile, Ala._, 8. Marietta, Oak
Grove M. Soc., Quilt, _for Macon, Ga._ Sylvania, 1.51. Twinsburg,
7.04.


INDIANA, 50 cts.

Fairland, Mrs. Robert McBeth and Daughter, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 50
cts.


ILLINOIS, $1,245.72.

Amboy, First, 14. Aurora, N. E. C., Corban Ass'n, 2 bbls. Goods,
freight paid, (val. 100), _for Fort Berthold, N. D._ Batavia, 10.
Bowmanville, 15.20. Canton, 20.04.

Chicago, Mrs. C. H. Case, _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 20. Chicago,
Union Park, 7; Rogers Park, 55 cts.; Bowmanville, C., adl., 50 cts.

Clifton, 2.50. Creston, 8.40. Crystal Lake, C. E., _for Athens,
Ala._, 2.50. Dover, 6.75. Fall Creek, 10. Forest, Jr. E. Soc., by
Jessie L. Fox, _for Indian M._, 4. Highland Park, Robert W. Patton,
50. Hinsdale, 17.25. Jacksonville, James M. Longley, 1. Melville,
9.60. Oak Park, Second, 10.50. Oneida, Cong. C. E., _for
Williamsburg, Ky._, 5. Ottawa, 8.15. Marseilles, Mrs. Harriet E.
Baughman, 600. Paxton, 85.75. Princeton, Cong. C. E., 11; Jr. C. E.,
3, _for S. A., Straight U._ Sandoval, 2. Seward, Minooka, Second, 8.
Stark, W. M. S., _for Porto Rico_, 5.75. Sterling, 25.56. Sterling,
Jr. C. E., 2. Sycamore, Mrs. Helen A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._,
5. Waukegan, First, 22.16. Wheaton, First, 23.77. Winnetka, C., (5
of which _for Porto Rico_), 48.79; S., 4.81; C. E., 64 cts.
Woodburn, 5.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Miss Bessie E. Crosby,
Treasurer, $169.05.

Alton, Ch. of the Redeemer, 16.75. Big Woods, 2.50. Chicago, Grace,
S., 1; Ravenswood, 30; Leavitt St., Primary S., 1; Lincoln Park, 1;
New England, 29; Douglas Park, 1.50. La Salle, 7.50. Mendon, 13.80.
McLean, 5. Hinsdale, Y. P. M. S., 20. Oak Park, First, 5. Princeton,
10. Rockford, Second, 13. Rollo, 5. Wilmette, 7.


MICHIGAN, $170.30.

Adrian, A. J. Hood, 5. Almont, First, 10; First, C. E., 9.65.
Belding, First, 7.90. Benzonia, Miss Sarah Bedell, _for Wilmington,
N. C._, 75 cts.; and G. A. R. Post of New York, Bunting Flag, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Detroit, First, C. E., 10, _for Pleasant Hill,
Acad._; 10 _for Tougaloo, U._ Detroit, First, _for S. A., Brewer N.
Sch., Greenwood, S. C._, 10.10. Hancock, L. M. C. of C., bbl. Goods,
_for Wilmington, N. C._ Hilliards, 5. Lansing, Pilgrim, 1.75.
Leland, Mrs. Harriet Porter, 5. Manistee, C., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Middleville, First, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 2.
Olivet, Y. W. C. A., _for S. A., Tillotson C._, 1. Owasso, 21.37.
Penfield, C. E., _for S. A., Tillotson C._, 3.78. Pinckney, C., _for
Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 5. Stockbridge, Mrs. E. W.
Woodward, 5. Union City, Ladies of C., box and bbl. Goods, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $57.00.

Allendale, 5. Benton Harbor, 2.50. Benzonia, 2. Chelsea, 5. Grand
Rapids, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn., Moorhead,
Miss., and Santee Agency, Neb._, 3. Hancock, _for Schps., Gregory
Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 16. Hancock, 9. Owasso, Jr. C. E., _for
S. A., Moorhead, Miss._, 2.50. Three Oaks, 10. Union City, 2.


IOWA, $577.97--of which from Estate, $190.00.

Algona, K. D., by Mrs. H. E. Stacey, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Bear
Grove, 4. Council Bluffs, 21.25. Creston, 30. Danville, Lee W. Mix,
5. Des Moines, Plymouth, 79.67. Lee Center, 5.80. Marshalltown, S.
P. Chase, _for Skyland Inst., N. C._, 10. Montour, 35. Newell, 11.
Okoboji, Miss Julia H. Haskell, _for Orange Park, Fla._, 10. Orient,
3.20. Polk City, Mrs. Elizabeth Kelsal, 20. Postville, C. E., _for
Meridian, Miss._, 6.50. Rockford, Mrs. Chas. Wyatt, bbl. Goods, _for
Thomasville, Ga._ Sibley, 22.60. Sioux Rapids, 5. Tabor, 19.71.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $89.24.

Alden, 10. Clay, 3.50. Cromwell, 5. Des Moines, Plymouth, 9.77; P.
R. M. S., 4. Earlville, 10. Grinnell, 6.09. Grinnell, H. M. Army,
10. Humboldt, 6. Independence, Grace Potwin's S. Class, 2.15; Miss
Morris' S. Class, 2.62; Miss Douglass' S. Class, 1.15. Lewis, 5.
McGregor, 7.05. Postville, C. E., 2.91. Victor, 3. Victor, Jr. C.
E., 1.

ESTATE.--Alden, Estate of S. T. Beard, by J. B. Bowers, Adm'r, 190.


WISCONSIN, $136.30.

Birnamwood, Eland and Norrie, S. S., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N.
C._ Clintonville, 13.50. Cooksville, 2.36. Elroy, 4.50. Endeavor,
3.10. Evansville, 23.70. Evansville, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Athens,
Ala._, 10. Kenosha, C. E., 5. Kinnie Kinnie, 7.83. Mondovi, C., 14;
S., 3. Roberts, 17.25. Whitewater, C., 3 bbls. Goods, _for
Thomasville, Ga._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $32.06.

Beloit, First, 9.20. Brandon, 17.82. Eau Claire, 5.04.


MINNESOTA, $68.75.

Detroit, Paper Supplies, _for Meridian, Miss._ Litchfield, Col. O.
C. Bissell, _for Meridian, Miss._, 10. Mazeppa, 2 bbls. Goods, _for
Marion, Ala._ Minneapolis, Rev. & Mrs. Henry Chase, _for King's
Mountain, N. C._, 40. Minneapolis, "Rodelmer." _for Porto Rico_, 3.
Northfield, First, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Red Wing, Mira P. Green,
_for Marion, Ala._, 1. Saint Anthony Park, 9.75.


MISSOURI, $80.81.

Neosha, First, 18.85. Pleasant Hill, George M. Kellogg, _for Porto
Rico_, 50. Saint Louis, Hyde Park C., 7.50; Union, 4.46.


KANSAS, $47.46.

Kerwin, 6.85. Manhattan, Wm. E. Castle, 24. Milford, 3. Topeka, Mrs.
L. Popenoe, _for Meridian, Miss._, 12. Western Park, 1.61.


NEBRASKA, $45.01.

Blair, C. (of which Jr. C. E., 55 cts.), 3.50. Exeter, 7.39.
Holdrege, 11.25. Indianola, G. A. R. Post No. 154, _for Flag Pole
for Wilmington, N. C._, 2. Irvington, 3.50. Omaha, First, 17.37.


NORTH DAKOTA, $5.00.

Glenullin, German Churches, by Rev. J. C. Schwabenland, Glenullin,
Antelope, Leipzig and New Salem, (1.25 each), 5.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $7.10.

Ipswich, 3.85. Mission Hill, 3.25.


MONTANA, $2.00.

Plains, 2.


COLORADO, $43.12.

Denver, Plymouth, S., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 6.21. Fruita, C.
E. M. Soc., _for Porto Rico_, 1.56. Greeley, Park, 11.50. Lafayette,
7.15.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF COLORADO, Mrs. Belie C. Valentine,
Treas., $16.70.

Boulder, C. E., 6. Harmon, 5. Pueblo, Pilgrim, 2.85. W. H. M. U.,
2.85.


CALIFORNIA, $272.57.

San Francisco, Receipts of the California Chinese Mission (see items
below), 272.57.


OREGON, $9.80.

Albany, 3. Hillside, 2.30. Oregon City, C. E., 2.50. Wilsonville,
Hood View C., 2.


WASHINGTON, $53.00.

Cheney, First, 8.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WASHINGTON, by Mrs. Edward B.
Burwell, Treas., $45.00.

State Juvenile Soc., "Cradle Roll," _for S. A., Moorhead, Miss._,
45.


NORTH CAROLINA, $4.70.

Dry Creek, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. C., M. E. Newton, Treas., $3.70.

Charlotte, 1. Melville, 1. Oaks, 1.70.


TENNESSEE, $121.75.

Big Creek Gap, Miss K. C. LaGrange, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 30.
Grand View, H. C. Hilleary, 2; Miss Mary E. Taylor, 75 cts., _for
Bell-tower, Grand View, Tenn._ Knoxville, L. H. Kalbfleisch, _for
Knoxville, Tenn._, 1. Nashville, Anonymous, _for S. A., Fisk U._,
80. Nashville, C. E. of Fisk U., _for Porto Rico_, 5. Post Oaks,
Miss Lucy Leslie, _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 3.


GEORGIA, $1.50.

McIntosh, Miss Eva M. Hardy, _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 1.50.


ALABAMA, $15.00.

La Pine, 5. Talladega, Miss A. E. Farrington, _for King's Mountain
N. C._, 10.


FLORIDA, $5.81.

Tampa, First, 5.81.


LOUISIANA, $25.00.

New Orleans, Alumni Assoc'n of Straight U., _for S. A., Straight
U._, 25.


MISSISSIPPI, $6.00.

Moorhead, Miss F. A. Gardner, _for A. G. School, Moorhead, Miss._,
6.


TEXAS, $1.55.

Dodd, Rev. G. H. Smith, 1.55.


ENGLAND, $15.00.

London, Mrs. R. C. Morgan, _for King's Mountain, N. C._, 15.


INCOME, $940.00.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 465. Rev. B. Foltz Endowment Fund,
6.25. Graves Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 125. Haley Sch'p Fund,
_for Fisk U._, 25. Hastings Endowment Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 18.75.
Howard Theo. Endowment F., _for Howard U._, 168.75. Howard Carter
Theo. Endowment Fund, 6.25. LeMoyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._,
37.50. Plumb Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 50. Tuthill King Endowment
Fund, _for Berea C._, 37.50.


TUITION, $5,094.07.

Cappahosic, Va., 35.37. Lexington, Ky., 171.80. Williamsburg, Ky.,
Public Sch. Fund, 144.58. Williamsburg, Ky., 35. Beaufort, N. C.,
33.70. Chapel Hill, N. C., 2.90. Enfield, N. C., 9. Hillsboro, N.
C., 25.40. King's Mountain, N. C., 25. Whittier, N. C., 16.97.
Whittier, N. C., Public Fund, 10. Wilmington, N. C., 132.90.
Charleston, S. C., 303. Greenwood, S. C., 76.37. Big Creek Gap,
Tenn., Public Fund, 100. Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 85.13. Grand View,
Tenn., 30. Grand View, Tenn., Public Fund, 40. Knoxville, Tenn.,
58.15. Memphis, Tenn., 534.55. Nashville, Tenn., 1,070.95. Pleasant
Hill, Tenn., 86.25. Albany, Ga., 118.70. Andersonville, Ga., 7.28.
Atlanta, Ga., 282.51. Macon, Ga., 401.03. Marietta, Ga., 4.
McIntosh, Ga., 14.12. Savannah, Ga., 188.20. Thomasville, Ga.,
84.04. Florence, Ala., 40.78. Marion, Ala., 95.20. Mobile, Ala.,
145.05. Nat, Ala., 40.04. New Orleans, La., 406.40. Meridian, Miss.,
60. Moorhead, Miss., 5.05. Tougaloo, Miss., 1. Martin, Fla., Public
Fund, 50. Orange Park, Fla., 46.25. Austin, Texas, 76.50.


SUMMARY FOR NOVEMBER, 1899.

  Donations                                            $13,931.77
  Estates                                                8,312.84
                                                      -----------
                                                       $22,244.60
  Income                                                   940.00
  Tuition                                                5,094.07
                                                      -----------
  Total for November                                   $28,278.68


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for November                                $8.55
  Previously acknowledged                                   14.23
                                                          -------
  Total                                                    $22.78


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                            $23,508.47
  Estates                                              $15,312.62
                                                      -----------
                                                       $38,821.09
  Income                                                 1,244.75
  Tuition                                                5,627.58
                                                      -----------
  Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30, 1899                   $45,693.42


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Oct. 20 to Nov. 16
1899, Wm. Johnstone, Treas., $78.82.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $78.82:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 3.10. Los Angeles Chinese M. O., 3.75.
Marysville, Chinese M. O., 4. Oakland, Chinese M. O., 3. Oroville,
Chinese M. O., 1.50. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 2.20. Petaluma,
Chinese M. O., 3. Riverside, Chinese M. O., 8.32. Sacramento,
Chinese M. O., 4.50. San Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 4.75. San Diego,
Chinese M. O., 10.40. San Francisco, Central, Chinese M. O., 5.75.
San Francisco, West, Chinese M. O., 3. Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O.,
6.40. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 6.15. Santa Cruz, Japanese M. O.,
7. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 2.


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Oct. 18 to Nov. 16,
1899, applicable to expenses of fiscal year 1898 to 1899, $168.75.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $85.50:

Fresno, Ann'y O., 31. Marysville. Chinese M. O., 6.50; Ann'y
Pledges, 10. Riverside, F. B. Stevenson, 1 Sacramento, Annual Mem's,
12.50. San Francisco, Central, 16. San Francisco, Bethany, 2. Santa
Cruz, Chinese Ann'y Pledges, 6.50

FROM CHURCHES, $41.00:

Alameda. Cong. Ch., 40. San Francisco, First Cong. Ch., ad'l, 1.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $42.25:

Lee, Mass., Mr. and Miss Smith, 4. Marlboro, Mass., Chinese S. S.,
by Miss Mary B. Witherbee, 28.25. Worcester, Mass., "Faithful
Friends," 10.

RECEIVED FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $25.00.

Woman's Home Missionary Union of Southern California, Mrs. Mary M.
Smith, Treas. 25

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1899.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for December                                   $1,711.66
  Previously acknowledged                               12,720.00
                                                      -----------
                                                       $14,431.66
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $1,532.96--of which from Estate, 1,000.00.

Bangor, Hammond St., C., 100. Bar Mills, 7.47. Brewer, First, S.,
15. Brewer, First, 12. Brownville, C., 6; Mrs. Lovejoy, 5; Mrs. H.
B. Nason, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Falmouth, Second, 25.
Gray, Mrs. Mary J. Haskell, 2. Groveville, 7.28. Holden, 8. Jackman,
2.50. Kennebunkport, Second, 10. Lewiston, Pine St., C., L. M. Soc.,
11; C. E., 4; Miss S. Lizzie Weymouth, 2, _for S. A., Brewer N.
Sch., N. C._ Machias, Centre St., 6.16. Madison, Union M. Soc., pkg.
Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Portland, Williston, 125; Saint
Lawrence, 15. Searsport, First C., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for
McIntosh, Ga._ South Berwick, "Friends," _Freight to Blowing Rock,
N. C._, 2. Standish, 3.25. Thomaston, Ladies' Aux., bbl. Goods,
freight paid _to McIntosh, Ga._ Vinal Haven, W. M. S., 2 bbls. Goods
and 5, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Wells, First, 4. West Newfield, _for
Mountain White Work_, 7.50. Woodfords, 67.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. H. W. Davis, Treas., $80.88.

Auburn, High St., M. B., 10. Cumberland Center, 17.50. Farmington,
12. South Freeport, 35.30. Winslow, Mrs. Lela Garland, 5; Mrs. Belle
Chaffee, 1.

ESTATE.--Wells, Estate of Barak Maxwell, by Warren S. Maxwell and
Arthur A. Maxwell, Executors, 1,000.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $841.73--of which from Estate, $314.50.

Alstead, Third, 5. Amherst, Home Missionary Soc., by Mrs. Edward
Aiken, Pres., 20. Concord, West C. (for 1898), 15. Concord, South
C., C. E., _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 30. Concord, First C., 2 bbls.
and 1 box Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ East Brentwood, 18.
Francestown, 7.86. Greenfield, 4.93. Greenland, 18.80. Gilsum, 2.
Hancock, C., _for Porto Rico_, 8.75. Hancock, Jr. C. E., _for A. G.
Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2.50. Hanover, C., at Dartmouth College 140
(of which 21.68 _for Porto Rico_ and 21.67 _for Chinese M._ in
Cal.). Haverhill, 12.30. Keene, First, S., _for Porto Rico_, 100.
Keene, Wm. J. Sewall, 5.50. Keene, Every Day Club, bbl., Goods, _for
Meridian, Miss._ Langdon, 1. Merrimac, First, 7. Nashua, Pilgrim (30
of which to const. JENNIE E. PEARSON L.M.), 82.02. Newmarket, "A
Friend," 1. Raymond, C., 10; C. E., 3. Salem, 5. Sanbornton, Ladies,
by Mrs. J. N. Perrin, bbl. Goods (val. 26.28), _for Cumberland Gap.,
Tenn._ Short Falls, Rev. J. O. Tasker, 9. Somersworth, Mrs. Sarah
and Marion Shapleigh, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 2. Sullivan, S.,
Birthday Box, 2. Temple, S., 6.57. Troy, L. M. Soc., 8.

ESTATE.--Webster, Estate of Elizabeth M. Buxton, by H. H. Gerrish,
Executor, 314.50.


VERMONT, $1,106.48--of which from Estate, $636.00.

Brookfield, Mrs. Orlando Rolf, _for Indian M._, 1. Burlington,
First, 135. Chelsea, S., _for Indian M._, 11.54. Chelsea, 9.84;
South Washington, 78 cts. Coventry, 21. East Poultney, Mrs. Jane G.
Wilcox, 10. Hartford, 14.46. Johnson, 55. Johnson, President Oscar
Atwood, box Goods, _for Straight U._ Manchester, C., W. M. S., 2
bbls. Goods and 5, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Middletown Springs, 12.75.
Newport, First, 20.61. North Craftsbury, M. Soc., bbl. Goods and 1,
freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Northfield, C. E., _for Porto
Rico_, 5.50. Norwich, 15. Peacham, Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, freight
paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Richmond, 14.25. Ricker's Mills, Mrs. A.
B. Taft, 8. Saint Johnsbury, South, 17.35; "A. W. A.," 4. Salisbury,
Frank C. Atwood, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Sharon, 6.50. Springfield,
Ladies Aid Soc., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 10. Townshend, C. (5 of
which from C. E.), 10. Vergennes, H. M. Soc., bbl. Goods (val. 25),
freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Waitsfield, 9. Wallingford, C.,
Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Waterbury, 16. West Glover,
W. H. M. S., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Westminster West, 14. West
Randolph, 13.90. Wilmington, Union C., W. M. Soc., bbl. and box of
Goods (val. 123.57), by Mrs. Esther McClellan, Vice-Pres., _for
Saluda, N. C._ Worcester, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert MacKinnon,
Treas., $19.00.

Dorset, 10. Sheldon, Jr. C. E., 2. Westminster West, Jr. C. E., 2.
Windsor, Jr. C. E., 3. Wolcott, Jr. C. E., 2.

ESTATE.--South Royalton, Estate of Susan H. Jones, 636.50 (less
exchange, 50 cts.) 636, by J. R. Woods, Executor.


MASSACHUSETTS, $4,881.09--of which from Estates, $158.57.

Acton, 8. Amherst, Amherst College C., 43. Amherst, L. M. S., _for
Tougaloo U._, 20. Amherst, Second, _for Porto Rico_, 17.45. Ashby,
12.20. Auburn, 42.09. Auburndale, 161.34. Auburndale, L. B. Soc., 2
bbls. Goods, _for Nat., Ala._ Barre, Mrs. Joseph F. Gaylord, _for S.
A., Brewer N. Sch., S. C._, 5. Barre, C. E., 3.58. Beverly,
Washington St., S., 10; C. E., 5; Miss S. D. Cleaves, 1; F. Sheldon,
bbl. Goods; Washington St., C. L. B. Soc., bbl. Goods; Mrs. H. O.
Woodbury, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._

Boston, Union C., Woman's Aux., 20; Mrs. Susan C. Warren, 200, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._; Mt. Vernon, 74.15; Shawmut, 62.60; "C. P.
H.," 15; "A Friend," _for Mountain Work_, 5; Mrs. E. M. Bryant, _for
S. A., King's Mountain, N. C._, 4.50; Union C. Home Soc., bbl.
Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Dorchester Village, 19.24;
"Unknown Friend," _for Books, etc., Robbins, Tenn._, 10. Roxbury,
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 60; Highland C., Extra-Cent-a-Day Band,
10.

Brockton, First, 27. Brockton, C. E., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2.
Brookfield, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Williamsburg, Ky._
Brookline, Harvard, 174.57: Leyden, 1. Carlisle, 4. Centerville, C.
E., 2.50. Cambridge, Pilgrim, Jr. C. E., _for Alaska, M._, 1.50.
Chelsea, Central, 23.26; Third, 7.45. Cliftondale, First, 14.64.
Dalton, E. P. Little, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 2. Danvers,
W. W. Proctor, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Dover, 13.17. Dudley,
First, 2; First, C. E., 4.40. East Bridgewater, Union, 2.99.
Easthampton, Payson, 3 of which _for Porto Rico_, to const. MRS. E.
B. JUDD and MISS LORA MARIA SCOTT L. M's, 75. East Walpole, 11.84.
Enfield, 33.76. Everett, C. E., _for Indian M._, 5; Miss Ruth
McGown, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 2. Fall River, E. A. Buck,
bbl. Papers, _for Saluda, N. C._ Florence, Mission Circle of C., 15;
S. Class, 8; S. Class, 5 and box Books, _for Tougaloo U._ Florence,
Mr. and Mrs. Steel, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 5. Framingham, "A
Friend," _for Indian M._ (of which 17.50 _for Schp._), 22.50.
Gardner, First, 42.80. Great Barrington, Mrs. J. P. Pomeroy, 5; Mrs.
Jeannette Platt, 5. _for S. A., Dorchester Academy, McIntosh, Ga._
Great Barrington, First, 23.05. Greenfield, Second, 37.14. Goshen,
2.20. Hanover, Second, 3.73. Haverhill, Mrs. C. A. Ransom, 25.
Haverhill, Seeley, C. E., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 25. Housatonic, S.,
_for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Hingham, 12.51.
Hopkinton, Rev. Geo. M. Adams, D.D., _for Tillotson C._, 5. Hyde
Park, First, 37.88. Hyde Park. Miss Perry, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._,
15. Ipswich, First, 10. Lawrence, Lawrence St., S., _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 50. Lawrence, Circle King's Daughters, bbl. Goods, _for
Williamsburg, Ky._ Lee, Samuel Hopley, 2. Lenox, 19.85. Leverett,
First, 8. Lowell, John St., 5. Lowell, First, L. S., bbl. Goods,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Lynn, Miss C. O. Downing, bbl. Goods,
freight prepaid, _for Brewer N. Sch., S. C._ Lynn, Vine St., C.,
Ladies, _for S. A., Brewer N. Sch., S. C._, 5,50. Manchester, 17.30.
Mansfield, 25.82 Medford, C., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N.
C._ Milford, Benev. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Mill
River, S., _for Marshallville, Ga._, 4.25 Monson, Miss Sarah E.
Bradford, 5. Montague, First, 13.10. Neponset, Trinity, 13.50.
Newton, Eliot. _for Indian, M., Fort Yates, N. D._, 50. Newtonville,
Central, 45.75. North Amherst, C., 54.84; S., _for Indian M._, 8.70.
North Amherst, C., 2 bbls. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._
Northampton, Edward's Ch., L. M. S., bbl. Goods; Mrs. C. M. Morgan,
box Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Northboro, Evan., 26.60. North
Chelmsford, Second, 50 cts. North Weymouth, Pilgrim, 19. North
Wilbraham, Grace Union, 4.73. North Woburn, 14; L. B. Soc., 13.
Oakham, Mrs. M. T. F. Rugg, 5. Pepperell, 18.31. Pittsfield, Mrs.
Mary E. Sears, 10. Plainfield, 9.94. Plympton, 3.70. Rehoboth, Mrs.
Albert, Peck _for Mountain White Work_, 25. Salem, South (1 of which
_for Porto Rico_), 53.40. Salem, Tabernacle, 11.70. Salem, K. D.
Circle, 2 bbls. Papers, _for Saluda, N. C._ Saundersville, Union C.,
5. Somerville, Prospect St. C., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._
South Amherst, South, 13.77. South Byfield, 10. South Egremont,
12.01. South Hadley Falls, 7.22. South Sudbury, Memorial Ch., 11.66.
South Weymouth, Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for S. A., A. N. Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._, 10. South Weymouth, South, L. A. S., 2 bbls. Goods and 8, _for
Gregory Inst,, N. C._ South Weymouth, Union C., 4 bbls. Goods, _for
Storrs Sch., Ga._ Springfield, Memorial, 16.95. Springfield, First,
L. M. S., 16 and bbl. Goods: W. H. M., 2; Mrs. Clark, 2, _for
Gregory Inst., N. C._ Sterling, 22. Stockbridge, 13.32. Sunderland,
S., by Mrs. Abbie T. Montague, 25. Tewksbury, 11.76. Townsend
Center, Mrs. G. P. Patch, 50 cts. Truro, 3.96. Wakefield, Primary
S., 5. Warren, L. A. Soc., box Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Wayland,
C. E., _for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 4. Wellesley Hills, 8. Westboro,
L. B. Soc., box Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ West Boylston, First,
15.25. Westford, Mrs. J. L. Fisk, _for Tillotson, C._ 3. West
Hawley, 3. West Medford, C., Bible Sch., 6.25. West Newbury, First,
7. West Yarmouth, 2. Weymouth Heights, First, 20.10. Whitinsville,
C., 1,041.90; Estate of William H. Whitin, deceased, by Edward
Whitin, Ex., 200. Worcester, Plymouth. 36.25. Worcester, box Books,
etc., _for Marshallville, Ga._----, "A Friend," _for Porto Rico_,
100.----, "A Friend," 2.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I., Miss
Lizzie D. White, Treas., $1,000.

W. H. M. A. of Massachusetts and R. I. _for Salaries_, 960; _for
Chinese_, 40.

ESTATES.--Enfield, Estate of J. B. Woods, 80. Greenfield, Estate of
R. W. Cook, 54.90. Lawrence, Estate of Maria T. Benson, 20.
Worcester, Estate of Harriet Wheeler Damon, 3.67.


RHODE ISLAND, $476.31.

Barrington, 30. Bristol, 29.34. Chepachet, 20. East Providence,
Newman, 20. Kingston, 51.29. Pawtucket, James Coats, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 100. Pawtucket, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., King's
Mountain, N. C._, 10. Providence, Union C., 198.68. Providence,
Beneficent, C. E., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 15.
Providence, Mrs. Henry Worrall, _for Mountain White Work_, 2.


CONNECTICUT, $1,867.81--of which from Estate, $250.00.

Andover, 14.25. Bethlehem, 2.51. Black Rock, 22.08. Bridgeport,
Thomas Calef, _for Porto Rico_, 1. Chaplin, C., to const. MRS.
CAROLINE M. HATTIN L.M., 35.50. Chester, Misses Turner, _for S. A.,
King's Mountain, N. C._, 5. Chester, S., _for Porto Rico_, 5.
Clinton, 27.90. Colchester, First, 9.28. Columbia, 25.30. Darien,
S., _for Saluda, N. C._, 25. Derby, Second, 25; First, 11.75.
Glenbrook, Union Ch., _for Mountain Work_, 10.60. Greenwich, Second,
S., 57.75. Guilford, First, 60. Haddam, First, 25. Hadlyme, R. E.
Hungerford, 25. Hadlyme, 4.87. Hartford, Windsor Ave., 153.20;
Farmington Ave., 65.04; Park, 28.98. Hartford, South, L. H. M. S.,
bbl. Goods, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Hartford, South C., Ladies'
S. Soc., bbl. Goods (val. 56.37), by Mrs. Geo. H. Little, Sec., _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Kent, First, S., _for Mountain White Work,
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10. Lebanon, Exeter, C., 9.25. Madison,
First, 14.61. Mansfield, Second, 12.50. Meriden, Center, ad'l., 25.
Middletown, First, S., _for Indian M._, 35. Middletown, First 26.15.
Milford, First, 3. Mount Carmel (7.91 of which _for Indian M._)
19.05. Mystic, 10.40. New Britain, South, Mrs. Eastman, bbl. Goods,
_for Saluda, N. C._ New Canaan, Jr. C. E., 6, _for S. A., Grand
View, Tenn._; L. M. S., 3 bbls. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._ New
Canaan, 23.43. New Fairfield, 1. New Haven, Dwight Place Bible Sch.,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 22.03. New Haven, Humphrey St., Bible
Sch., 20.92. New Haven, Dixwell Ave., 5. New Haven, Miss Olive
Baldwin, box Games, etc., _for Macon, Ga._ Newington, S., _for
Marshallsville, Ga._, 70.63. Newington, 42. New London, Miss Grace
Learned, _for Tillotson, C._, 1.22. New London, "Friend," box Toys,
_for Grand View, Tenn._, Noank, M. H. Giddings, 5. Norfolk. Y. L. M.
B., by Mary E. Seymour, _for Indian M., N. D._, 25. Norfolk, 5.
North Greenwich, 42.90. North Haven, 19. North Stonington, 7. North
Windham, 5.51. North Woodbury, North, 33.85. Norwich, Miss Ida E.
Sutherland, Goods, _for Hillsboro, N. C._ Norwich, Second, 2 bbls.
Goods, _for Athens, Ala._ Norwich, N. L. Bishop, bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville Sch., Ga._ Old Saybrook, 9.73. Plainville, S., 20.
Plymouth, 18.50. Portland, C. E., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2.
Roxbury, 15. Salisbury, 5. Stamford, W. L. Wilde, 1. Stonington, C.,
L. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._ South Norwalk,
115.06. South Norwalk, S., 25. Talcottville, Mrs. Talcott, bbl.
Goods; Bbl. Goods (val. 26.42), by Mrs. F. R. Waite. _for Grand
View, Tenn._ Thomaston, First, 7.08. Thompson, 24.05. Wallingford,
Rev. J. J. Blair, 10. Watertown, L. M. S., box Goods, _for Grand
View, Tenn._ Warren, 35. Westchester, 5.68. Whitneyville, C., bbl.
Goods, _for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Winchester, 17.25. Winsted, Miss
Mary B. Hinsdale, _for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._, 5. Winsted, C., W.
M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Woodstock, First, 11.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs. George
Follett, Sec., $151.00.

Hartford, First, "Friend," 25. Hartford, First, Primary S., 5.
Orange, 16. Plainville, 5. Pomfret, 25. South Norwalk, 25.
Wallingford, 50.

ESTATE.--Groton, Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbutt, 250.


NEW YORK, $6,118.24.

Albany, A. N. Husted, 10. Albany, Mrs. A. P. Simpson, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 1. Angola, Miss A. H. Ames, 5. Big Hollow, Nelson
Hitchcock, 5. Binghamton, S., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._
Brooklyn, Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch.,
Enfield, N. C._ (of which 470.45 _for Furnishings_ and 33.81 _for
Freight_), 3,504.26. Brooklyn, Tompkins Ave. C., 500; South, 135.29;
Beecher Memorial, 5; J. Roberts, 3. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave., C., _for
Indian M., Santee Agency, Neb._, 100.61; Mrs. C. H. Ham, _for A. G.
Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ 50; Mrs. L. W. Allen, _for Gregory Inst., N.
C._, 16; "Lend a Hand Club," by Miss Marion Libby, _for S. A., Troy,
N. C._, 8. Geo. H. Shirley, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Buffalo, Niagara
Square, People's C., 2 bbls. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._
Canandaigua, First, S., _for Santee Indian M., Neb._, 39.27.
Canandaigua, First (12.99 of which _for Santee Indian M., Neb._),
19.44. Canandaigua, bbl. Fruit, etc., _for King's Mountain, N. C._
Clifton Springs, Mrs. Andrew Peirce, 10; "Two Friends," 10.
Cortland, 37. Dryden, Rev. E. A. Mirick, _for Porto Rico_, 4.
Greenfield, Union Soc., 15 and bbl. Goods, _for S. A., Grand View,
Tenn._ Groton City, 2. Holland Patent, Welsh, 6.20. Jamesport, C.
E., by Rev. W. S. Woolworth, 4. Middle Island, Mrs. Hannah M.
Overton, 10. Mount Sinai, 8.05. Mount Vernon, First, S., 4.33.
Newburgh, Woman's M. Soc., 2.50. New Hartford, W. E. Mather, 5. New
York, Broadway Tabernacle, 856.84. New York, Homer N. Lockwood, _for
Porto Rico_, 100. New York, Puritan, 11.01. Owego, 10. Pulaski, C.,
2 bbls. Goods, _for King's Mountain_. Rensselaer City, First, 10.
Ridgewood, C. E., _for S. A., King's Mountain, N. C._, 11.
Rochester, Plymouth, 12.55. Saugerties, 14.50. Saugerties,
"Friends," Suit of Clothes, _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._
Schenectady, Evan. C., C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 5. Smyrna, C., S. M.
Soc., 5. Syracuse, Miss Woodruff, bbl. Apples, _for Marion, Ala._
Utica, Bethesda, Welsh, 10. Utica, Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge, _for Woman's
Work_, 5. Wyoming, Bapt. Ch., bbl. of Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF NEW YORK, by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $542.39.

Brooklyn, Plymouth Ch., W. H. M. S., _for Schools at King's
Mountain, N. C., and La Follett, Tenn._, 100. Brooklyn, Lewis Ave.,
80. Brooklyn, Annual Meeting Manhattan and Brooklyn Conf., _for New
Chinese Mission House, San Francisco, Cal._, 24.62. Brooklyn
Central, S. Class (one hundred and eleven), _for S. A., King's
Mountain, N. C._, 9. Buffalo, First, H. M. Soc., 20; Bancroft, Aux.,
10; First, Jr. C. E., 4. Camden, 9. Canandaigua, W. H. M. Soc., _for
Porto Rico_, 10. Cortland, W. M. S., 25; Silver Circle, 11.
Fairport, 20. Gasport, C. E. and Jr. C. E., _for Sch'p, Trinity
Sch., Ala._, 8. Homer, 1. New York, Broadway Tab., Soc. _for Woman's
Work_, 43. Niagara Falls, _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._,
18. Northville, _for Porto Rico_, 31.93. Northville, 14.32. Norwood,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._, 24. Norwood, M. S. and K. D., box Goods,
_for Gregory Inst., N. C._ Oswego, _for S. A., Lexington, Ky._, 8.
Paris Judd M. B., 7. Poughkeepsie, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 10.
Poughkeepsie, Jr. C. E., 5. Riverhead, 20.82. Seneca Falls, S., _for
Porto Rico_, 6.70. Wadham's Mills, 6. Walton, 15. ----, W. H. M. U.,
_for Chinese Mission Home, San Francisco_, 1.


NEW JERSEY, $231.05.

Bound Brook, C., L. M. Soc., 15. Montclair, C., Organ, _for
Marshallville Sch., Ga._ Newark, First, 8.85. Westfield, 207.20.


PENNSYLVANIA, $28.55.

Centreville, 8.75. Ebensburg, First, 10. Edinburg, School Children,
bbl. Goods, _for Brewer N. Sch., S. C._ Guy's Mills, W. M. Soc.,
_for Indian M._, by Mrs. D. Howell, 4.40. Guy's Mills, S. O. Fitch,
2. Philadelphia, Pilgrim, 3.40. Pittsburg, Carnegie Library, box
Books, _for Chandler Sch., Ky._


OHIO, $640.91--of which from Estate, $15.00.

Bellevue, C., Jr. C. E., _for Knoxville, Tenn._, 2. Bellevue, First,
W. M. Soc., 2 bbls. Goods (val. 47.25), _for Moorhead, Miss._
Cincinnati, Storrs S., _for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._, 1. Cleveland,
Hough Ave., 28.56; Irving St., 14.70; First, S., 7.61. Cleveland,
Euclid Ave., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Cleveland, Euclid Ave.,
Ladies' Ass'n, bbl. Goods (val. 82.99), _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
Columbus, First, 150. Columbus, C. E., _for S. A., Grand View,
Tenn._, 12. Dayton, Miss F. W. Williams, _for S. A., A. N. Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._, 7. Hicksville, E. M. Ensign, 10. Huntsburg, C.
E., 40 copies Sacred Songs, No. 1, and 1.20 for Freight, _for Orange
Park, Fla._ Jefferson, 10. Jewell, T. B. Goddard, 100. Litchfield,
C., bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Madison, Central, Ladies,
bbl. and box Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Mansfield, C., Ladies,
bbl. Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Mount Vernon, First, 29.47.
Nelson, 5. Oberlin, Second, 41.51; H. B. Hall, 5. Oberlin, First, L.
A. S., bbl. Goods, _for Nat., Ala._ Painesville, First, 18.45.
Painesville, E. E. Kintner and wife, _for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._,
5. Radnor, E. D. Jones, 5. Richfield, C., C. E., _for S. A., Brewer
N. Sch., S. C._, 6. Ruggles, 22.25. Sandusky, First, 9.74.
Springfield, First, 5. Sullivan, 5. Vermilion, 4. Wellington, Edward
West, 10. Williamsfield, C., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._

----, Cash, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. Geo. B. Brown,
Treas., $109.42.

Cleveland, Pilgrim, W. A., 20; Archwood, C. E. 2.50; Pilgrim, Int.
C. E., 2.50. Fairport, Jr. C. E., 1. Fredericksburg, C. E., 1.25.
Lorain, C. E., 1.50. Marietta. Oak Grove, M. B., 5. Medina, 13. New
London, 3.10. Oberlin, Second, S., 10, _for S. A., Blowing Rock, N.
C._, and 10 _for Indian M., Fort Yates, N. D._; Second, Jr. C. E.,
2.50. Olmsted, Second, 5. Painesville, Y. L. M. S., 6.25.
Pittsfield, 1.20. Richfield, _for S. A._, 10. Springfield, First,
Jr. C. E., 2. Toledo, Washington St., 10. West Mill Grove, C. E.,
2.62.

ESTATE.--Atwater, Estate of J. M. Alden, by Gideon Seymour,
Executor, 15.


INDIANA, $10.75.

Fort Wayne, Jr. C. E., 2.75. Orland, Woman's Aux., 3. Sparta, John
Hawkswell, 5.


ILLINOIS, $796.55.

Atkinson, 4.00. Batavia, Rev. J. E. Bissell, 5. Belvidere, Mrs. Mary
C. Foote, 5. Byron, 14.05. Cambridge, 12.60. Canton, Woman's M.
Soc., _for S. A., Emerson Inst., Ala._, 8.

Chicago, Englewood, Pilgrim, 27.72; Rev. H. W. Willard, 25; Leavitt
St., C., 3; First, 19.73.; Englewood, Union Evan., 5.21; Puritan,
2.50; Immanuel, 2; Union Park, "Friend," 2. Chicago, Mrs. Schulhof
and "Friends," _for Athens, Ala._, 4.

Crystal Lake, "Friend," _for Athens, Ala._, 2.50. Evanston, H. L.
Boltwood, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Galva, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Fisk
U._, 2.30. Hamilton, Bethel, 4.25. Healey, Bethany, 2.07. Hinsdale,
100. Kewanee, William Bassell, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Loda,
"Friend," _for Porto Rico_, 2. Lombard, 5.25. Naperville, 23. Oak
Park, First, 25. Oglesby, Mr. and Mrs. Bent, _for Tougaloo U._, 20.
Oswego, C., _for Porto Rico_, 4. Ottawa, 38.20. Peoria, First,
75.57. Quincy, First, Union, 86.46. Ravenswood, 2.75. Rock Falls,
8.05. Rockford, Jr. C. E., 1; First, 45.90. Shabbona, 25.70.
Shabbona, Miss Blanche Langford, 5; S., 5, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._ Somonauk, 8. Sterling, First, S., 8.50. Sycamore,
Mrs. Helen A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Woodstock, Pupils of
Public School, 1; Nellie Stephenson, 50 cts; Charlotte and Edward
Remick, 20 Hymn Books, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Miss Bessie E. Crosby,
Treas., $139.65.

Chicago, North C., Englewood, _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._, 15.00.

Gridley, 3.50. Jacksonville, 20. Plainfield, 5. Rockford, Second,
31. Seward, (Minooka), 15.15. Undesignated Fund, 50.


MICHIGAN, $520.58--of which from Estate, $195.00.

Alpine, S., _for Porto Rico_, 9.46. Ann Arbor, Woman's Aid Soc.,
bbl. Goods, _for Macon, Ga._ Benzonia, C. E., by W. E. Belderback,
Sec., 3. Covert, 15. Detroit, First, 35. Detroit, First, Ladies' M.
Soc., 2 bbls. Goods. Freight prepaid, _for Brewer N. Sch., S. C._
Freeport, 1.25. Galesburg, 6.35. Galesburg, S., 4. Grass Lake, 6.27.
Greenville, First, 42.33. Greenville, bbl. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._
Hopkins Station, 10.70. Kendall, 5. Lansing, Plymouth, 35. Manistee,
First, Intermediate C. E., 4, _for S. A., Gregory Inst., N. C._, and
4 _for S. A., Oahe, S. D._. Maple City, 2. Muskegon, First, ad'l, 1.
Noble, Mrs. H. Bogardus, 2. Olivet, First, 26.14. Romeo, 22.23.
Saint Joseph, First, C. E., 2. Saugatuck, Edwin House, 2 bbls.
Apples, _for Nat., Ala._ Solon First, 2. South Haven, C. Delamere, 2
bbls. Apples; Miss'y Society, bbl. Goods and bbl. Canned Fruit, _for
Marion, Ala._ Three Oaks, First, 18.50. Victor, C., C. E., _for
Books, etc., Robbins, Tenn._, 2.10. Wolverine, Miss Helen E. Eck.,
_for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._, 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $63.25.

Detroit, Brewster, 50 cts. Dundee, 25 cts. Flint, _for S. A.,
Talladega C._, 5. Grand Rapids, 50. Grand Rapids, _for S. A., A. G.
Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 7.50.

ESTATE.--Niles, Estate of Dr. James Lewis, 195.


IOWA, $395.49--of which from Estate, $46.62.

Avoca, German, 4. Clarion, 2.50. Cedar Rapids, First, W. M. Soc.,
box Goods, _for Tillotson C._ Coldwater, Rudolph Lander, 8.
Davenport, Edwards, C. E., 9.50; Bethlehem, 9. De Witt, First, 2.85.
Dickens, 4. Dubuque, First, "C," 10. Dunlap, 5.72. Earlville, 5.25.
Fairfield, 6.54. Grinnell, 103.66. Hawarden, 5. Hawarden,
"Individual," 1. Mason City, ad'l, 29.71. McGregor, First, 81.07.
Miles, 4.55. New Hampton, C. E., _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 5.
Newton, Mrs. G. Zollinger, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 6.
Prairie City, First, 4.30. Riceville, C. E., _for Tougaloo U._, 5.
Sloan, C., Ladies, bbl. Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $36.22.

Davenport, Edwards, 1.75. Grinnell, 9.81. Muscatine, 4.25.
Shenandoah, 10. Sloan, 8.46. Sloan, Mrs. Hosmer's S. Class, 1.95.

ESTATE.--Burlington, Estate of Mercy Lewis, by Newton R. Derby,
Executor, 46.62.


MINNESOTA, $428.97.

Cannon Falls, First, 11.13. Litchfield, Mrs. De Coster, 7.50; Mrs.
M. Weeks, 2; Mrs. Greenleaf, 50 cts., _for Meridian, Miss._
Marshall, 7. Minneapolis, Plymouth 138.69; W. H. Norris, quarterly,
10. Minneapolis, Rodelmer, _for Porto Rico_, 2.50. Northfield,
First, to const. WILLIAM P. HOPPIN and FREMONT E. WEEKS L. M's.,
65.30 Racine, Carrie Buckhardt, _for Indian M., N. D._, 5.
Robbinsdale, 2. Saint Paul, Olivet, 20.83; Pacific, 8.99; Plymouth
8.59.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MINNESOTA, by Mrs. M. W. Skinner,
Treas., 143.94, less expenses, 5, $138.94.

Austin, 6.06. Claremont, 2.50. Duluth, Morley, _for Mountain White
Work_, 2.70. Duluth, Pilgrim, 3. Detroit, 1. Excelsior, 4. Glyndon,
1. Hawley, 1.25. Little Falls, 4.66. Minneapolis, Lyndale, 2;
Lyndale, S., 18.77; First, 3; Plymouth, 10. Mantorville, 1.
Montevideo, _for S. A., Skyland Inst._, 10. New Ulm, 5. Northfield,
_for S. A., Fisk U._, 50, and to const. MRS. FLORENCE M. HUNT L. M.
Northfield, S., _for McLeansville, N. C._, 5. Rochester, C. E.,
1.25. Saint Paul, Plymouth, 5; Bethany, 1; Park, 4.50; University
Ave., 1.25.


WISCONSIN, $148.51.

Appleton, 13.04. Baraboo, 20. Beloit, First, ad'l, 2.55. Birnamwood,
8. Eau Claire, First, 42. Eland, 1.15. Evansville, ad'l, 4.50.
Evansville, Jr. C. E., _for Athens, Ala._, 1. Hartford, Mrs. Truman,
2 bbls. Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._, Hayward, C., to const. REV. L.
W. WINSLOW L.M., 36.77. Janesville, K. D. Sch. _for Blind, for
Gregory Inst., N. C._, 5.50. Madison, Jr. C. E., _for Athens, Ala._,
4. Norrie, 2. Ripon, "Friend," 5. Tomah, 3.


MISSOURI, $162.47.

Amity, 1.35. Kansas City, Clyde C. 10; C. E., 5. Kansas City, Mrs.
S. O. Brien, _for Meridian, Miss._, 1. Kidder, 6.62. Madison, Jr. C.
E., _for Athens, Ala._, 4. Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg, _for
Porto Rico_, 50. Pleasant Hill, George M. Kellogg, _for Kodak for
Porto Rico_, 18. Saint Louis, Pilgrim, 60.50. Saint Louis, Mrs. J.
I. Swan, _for Alaska M._, 6.


KANSAS, $28.41.

Buffalo Park, 60 cts. Collyer, 75 cts. Lawrence, Barker C. E. Soc.,
2.25. Maple Hill, Mrs. Crouch, bbl. Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._
Seneca, 7.31. Topeka, First, Primary S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 4.
Wakefield, 13.50.


NEBRASKA, $143.30.

Aurora, 22. Crete, 28.10. Dodge, Dr. E. Perron, 1. Fairmont, 7.70.
Franklin, L. B. Wood, 3. Friend, "A Friend," _for Porto Rico_, 45.
Harvard, "A Friend," 3. Indianola, S., _for Gregory Inst., N. C._,
14.50. Cramer, German, 4. Pawnee City, C. R. Miles, _for Porto
Rico_, 10. Steele City, 3. Wisner, 2.


NORTH DAKOTA, $5.50.

Michigan, 5.50.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $17.70.

Cheyenne River, 4.76. Little Moreau, 2.65. Meckling, 3. Moreau
River, 1.23. Oahe, 2.13. Parkston, German, 2. Virgin Creek, 1.93.


IDAHO, $2.00.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF IDAHO, by Lettice H. Johnston, Treas.,
$2.00. Challis, 2.


ARIZONA, $1.00.

Tempe, Mrs. E. C. Woodmansee, _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._, 1.


COLORADO, $69.26.

White Water, 4.25. Rico, 5. Denver, Third, 11.75. Denver, Plymouth,
48.26.


CALIFORNIA, $133.35.

Bakersfield, First, 3. National City, Mrs. M. A. Burgess, 1. Niles,
26. Redlands, First, 60.35. Redlands, Miss R. H. Smiley, 5.
Saratoga, C., 21.48; S., 1.52; C. E., 1. Tulare, 4. Whittier,
Pilgrim, 10.


OREGON, $15.40.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OREGON, by Mrs. C. F. Clapp,
Treas., $15.40. W. H. M. U., of Oregon, 15.40.


WASHINGTON, $21.85.

Edmonds, 5. Everett, E. U. Judd, 3. Pleasant Prairie, 8.50.
Skokomish, C., 1; Rev. M. Eells, D.D., 2. Snohomish, First, 2.35.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $92.00.

Washington, First, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 50.
Washington, First, 42.


MARYLAND, $2.00.

Baltimore, Second, 2.


VIRGINIA, $6.75.

Bridges, Mrs. M. S. Allen, half doz. Towels, _for Cappahosic, Va._
Hampton, Miss M. J. Sherman, 1 copy Holy Lands Bible, _for
Gloucester Sch._ Kilmarnock, Calvary Baptist S., _for Gloucester
Sch., Cappahosic, Va._, 1.25. Newport News, Mrs. L. B. Craig, _for
S. A., Brewer N. Sch., S. C._, 5.50.


KENTUCKY, $10.00.

Lexington, Teachers and Pupils Chandler Sch., _for Porto Rico_, 10.


NORTH CAROLINA, $32.17.

Blowing Rock, Mrs. E. R. Dorsett, 5; Miss L. Fitch, 10; Mrs. W. M.
Palmer, 5; "Unknown Friend," 8.67, _for Skyland Inst., N. C._
Whittier, Patrons of Sch., _for Whittier, N. C._, 3.50.


TENNESSEE, $19.50.

Knoxville, L. H. Kalbfleisch, _for Knoxville_, 4.50. Postoaks, Miss
Lucy Leslie, _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 15.


ALABAMA, $2.14.

Florence, C., _for Talladega C._, 2.14.


LOUISIANA, $12.05.

Abbeville, Saint Mary C., _for Straight U._, 5. Hammond, 7.05.


FLORIDA, $48.00.

Jacksonville, W. W. Cummer, _for Laundry Bld'g, Orange Park, Fla._,
30. Tallahassee, Prof. T. W. Talley, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 18.


GEORGIA, $5.00.

McIntosh, Thanksgiving Col., Cong C., 5.


MISSISSIPPI, $8.30.

Meridian, First, 2.30. Meridian, Rev. Mr. Carter, Set of Portfolio
Maps, _for Meridian, Miss._ Moorhead, Miss Fannie Gardner, _for A.
G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 6.


UNKNOWN SOURCE, $1.00.


INCOME, $2,475.45.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 1,068.25. E. A Brown Sch'p Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 17.50. De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair,
Talladega C._, 210.27. C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._, 50. Fisk
University Theo. Fund, 1.25. General Endowment Fund, 50. Hammond
Fund, _for Straight U._, 100. Hastings Sch'p Fund, _for Atlanta U._,
6.25. Howard Theo. Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._, 612.43. Le Moyne
Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 137.50. Lincoln Sch'p Fund, _for
Talladega C._, 25. Luke Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._, 9. Stone
Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 22.50. Straight University Sch'p
Fund, 58. Tuthill King End. Fund, _for Berea, Ky._, 57.50. S.
Wadham's Theo. Endowment Fund, _for Talladega C._, 25. J. and L. H.
Wood Theo. End. Fund, _for Talladega C._, 25.


TUITION, $4,792.72.

Cappahosic, Va., 41.75. Lexington, Ky., 119.55. Williamsburg, Ky.,
76.63. Beaufort, N. C., 26.35. Blowing Rock, N. C., 19. Chapel Hill,
N. C., 6.60. Enfield, N. C., 21.50. Hillsboro, N. C., 21.96. King's
Mountain, N. C., 36. Saluda, N. C., 25. Troy, N. C., 50 cts.
Whittier, N. C., 11.85. Wilmington, N. C., 144.85. Charleston, S.
C., 283.50. Greenwood, S. C., 122.30. Grand View, Tenn., 9.75.
Knoxville, Tenn., 57.55. Memphis, Tenn., 632.20. Nashville, Tenn.,
685.59. Pleasant Hill, Tenn., 105.90. Albany, Ga., 95.45.
Andersonville, Ga., 14. Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch., 265.63. Macon,
Ga., 314.01. McIntosh, Ga., 78.43. Savannah, Ga., 198.37.
Thomasville, Ga., 77.71. Athens, Ala., 93.80. Florence, Ala., 37.55.
Marion, Ala., 104.71. Mobile, Ala., 148. Nat., Ala., 44.33.
Meridian, Miss., 84. Moorhead, Miss., 24.10. Tougaloo, Miss.,
155.65. New Orleans, La., 418.60. Orange Park, Fla., 66.75. Austin,
Tex., 123.30.


SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER, 1899.

  Donations                                            $18,249.44
  Estates                                                2,615.69
                                                      -----------
                                                       $20,865.13
  Income                                                 2,475.45
  Tuition                                                4,792.72
                                                      -----------
  Total for December                                   $28,133.30


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for December                               $32.23
  Previously acknowledged                                   22.78
                                                          -------
                                                           $55.01


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Av. and Twenty-Second St.
  New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.

  President--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury, Woodfords.
  Secretary--Mrs. S. W. Chapin, Deer Isle.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. W. Davis, Cumberland Center.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT. INST'N AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. D. Knapp, Somersworth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 3 Liberty St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. L. Smith, Burlington.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Robert Mackinnon, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 107 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Lizzie D. White, 107 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Miss Anne W. Moore, 15 Columbia Street, Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Av., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 513 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 153 Decatur St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Clark, Fourth and College Sts., N. W.,
    Washington, D. C.
  Secretary, Miss Julia M. Pond, 607 T St., N. E., Washington, D. C.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. A. L. Merryfield, Falls Church, Va.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Ridgway.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. F. Chamberlain, Cambridge Springs.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. H. Clift, 386 Walnut St., Meadville.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. W. Carroll, 48 Brookfield St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Arra H. Williams, 46 Knox St., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. E. Hall, Alexandria.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Anna D. Davis, 1608 Bellefontaine St., Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Oak Park.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Whitcomb, 463 Irving Ave., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary S. Booth, 34 S. Wood St., Chicago, Ill.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. H. Patton, 3707 Westminster Place, St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. S. Cobb, 4415 W. Morgan St., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. J. Steele, 2825 Washington Ave., Kansas City.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, West Grand Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Platt Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. N. Thorne, 212 S. Union St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. E. Smith, 140 Gorham St., Madison.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 E. 9th St., St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. R. Shepard, 2931 Portland Ave., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. L. Maile, Fargo.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. M. Jenney, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. M. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Brown, Rapid City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S. Cushman, Deadwood.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Q St., Lincoln
  Treasurer--Mrs. Charlotte C. Hall, 1318 C St., Lincoln.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Guild, 1336 Dillon St., Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. H. Jaquith, Cripple Creek, Col.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Wilkinson, Ottawa.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. R. Drake, 2739 Lafayette Street, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Charles Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. B. C. Valentine, Highlands.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  Acting President--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. L. Whipple, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Kevan, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Victor F. Clark, Livingston.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. J. Miller, Livingston.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. S. Bell, Helena.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. E. Mason, Mountain Home.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Johnston, Challis.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A. J. Bailey, 1614 Second Ave., Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 So. K St., Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. B. Burwell, 323 Seventh Ave., Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. D. Clarke, 447 N. E. Twelfth St., Portland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Forest Grove.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, Saratoga.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 1383 Franklin St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison St. Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 949 S. Hill St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. G. Robertson, Mentone.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. T. Hemphill, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Hall, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Miss Anna Baker, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. H. Ashmun, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. McCluskey, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. Faduma, Troy.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A. E. Farrington, 108 Newbury St.,
    Portland, Me.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Mertie L. Graham, Savannah.
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Curtis, McIntosh.
  Treasurer--Miss Mattie Turner, Athens.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Spencer Snell, Talladega.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENN., KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. E. Smith, Chattanooga, Tenn.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. C. Napier, 514 Capitol Square, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th St., Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, 2436 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda W. Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary L. Rogers, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. I. Scofield, Dallas.


[Footnote A: While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]


       *       *       *       *       *

SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S WORK.


  VERMONT              Mrs. G. W. Patterson, East St. Johnsbury.

  MASS. & R. I.        Miss Bertha M. Shepard, 607 Cong'l House, Boston.

  NEW YORK             Mrs. H. A. Flint, 604 Willis Ave., Syracuse.

  OHIO                 Miss M. C. Smith, 853 Doan St., Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS             Mrs. J. T. Blanchard, 218 Walnut St., Aurora.

  MISSOURI             Miss Katherine Jones, 4337 Washington Ave.,
                         St. Louis.

  IOWA                 Mrs. Charles McAllister, Spencer.

  MICHIGAN             Mrs. W. J. Gregory, 459 Third St., Manistee.

  MINNESOTA, Young Ladies' Work, Mrs. B. W. Smith, 600 West Thirty-second
  St., Minneapolis.

  MINNESOTA, Christian Endeavor Work, Miss Bertha Hanneman, 1816 Portland
  Ave., Minneapolis.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. E. S. Shaw, Cooperstown.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. Grace Burleigh, Mitchell.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. J. N. Hyder, 1520 U St., Lincoln.

  KANSAS               Mrs. C. E. Read, Parsons.

  COLORADO             Mrs. A. D. Blakeslee, 145 South Lincoln St., Denver.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. C. Arnold, 621 Spruce St., Helena.

  WASHINGTON           Mrs. W. C. Davie, 423 North N St., Tacoma.

  OREGON               Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 443 West Park St., Portland.

  CALIFORNIA           Miss Caroline A. Potter, 600 17th St., Oakland.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Phebe Mayhew, 355 Alvarado St., Los Angeles.


SECRETARIES OF CHILDREN'S WORK.

  OHIO                 Mrs. Effie Morgan, 3880 Euclid Ave., East Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS             Miss Hattie Kline, 713 E. 63d St., Chicago.

  IOWA                 Mrs. M. Rew, Grinnell.

  MICHIGAN             Mrs. C. R. Wilson, 65 Frederick Ave., Detroit.

  MINNESOTA            Mrs. H. S. Baker, 2268 Blake Ave., St. Anthony Park.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. O. J. Wakefield, Wahpeton.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. I. Crane, Waubay.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. H. D. Neely, 4371 Hamilton St., Omaha.

  KANSAS               Miss Hattie Booth, Newton.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. B. Segur, Billings.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Emily M. Peck, 920 W. 8th St., Los Angeles.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 54, NO. 01, JANUARY, 1900 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.