Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections.)







The American Missionary

(QUARTERLY)

  APRIL }
  MAY   } 1900
  JUNE  }

  VOL. LIV.
  No. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S. C.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

THE CONGREGATIONAL ROOMS,

FOURTH AVENUE AND TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as Second-Class mail
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                                    PAGE

  FINANCIAL--SIX MONTHS                                               49

  A WORD AS TO THE MAGAZINE                                           49

  FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING                                         51

  TILLOTSON COLLEGE, AUSTIN, TEXAS (Illustrated)                      52

  AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S. C. (Illustrated)             61

  SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES                                                67

  BITS OF EXPERIENCE IN THE INDIAN COUNTRY                            69

  CHRISTIAN ENDEAVORS OF A HIGHLAND SCHOOL AND VILLAGE (Illustrated)  72

  OBITUARIES--MRS. MARY T. CHASE                                      74

              MISS SUSIE T. CATHCART                                  75

  A SUGGESTIVE SUBSCRIPTION                                           75

  RECEIPTS                                                            76

  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS                                         94

  SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S AND CHILDREN'S WORK                   96

       *       *       *       *       *

THE 54th ANNUAL MEETING

OF THE

American Missionary Association

WILL BE HELD IN

SPRINGFIELD, MASS.

October 23-25, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

The AMERICAN MISSIONARY presents new form, fresh material and
generous illustrations for 1900. This magazine is published by the
American Missionary Association quarterly. Subscription rate fifty
cents per year.

Many wonderful missionary developments in our own country during
this stirring period of national enlargement are recorded in the
columns of this magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. LIV.     APRIL, 1900.     No. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCIAL--SIX MONTHS.


The first six months of the present fiscal year of the American
Missionary Association closed March 31st. The receipts are
$18,961.74 more than for the same period last year. The increase in
donations is $10,699, and in estates $6,433.24, exclusive of the
reserve legacy account. The tuition and similar receipts are
$1,829.49 more than last year. This is a favorable and encouraging
showing. We gratefully acknowledge the generosity of the friends of
the great missionary work carried on by this Association, as evident
in their increased donations.

The payments during this period have been $17,595 more than for the
same months last year. The net balance, exclusive of the reserve
legacy account, is $1,366.74 more favorable than that for the first
six months of last year. The increase in current receipts has been
expended in the mission fields which have been so greatly crippled
by the enforced retrenchments during recent years.

The Association rejoices in its freedom from debt and in the
favorable showing for these first six months. The next six months
include the summer season, in which missionary gifts are often
greatly reduced and the income suffers. We would again remind the
pastors, Sunday-school superintendents, officers of Endeavor
Societies and Woman's Missionary Circles of the great and pressing
need upon the Association, both in old and new fields, among the
many millions for whom our faithful missionaries labor. Porto Rico
demands increased gifts. The field is opening with great hopefulness
both in educational and evangelistic lines. Word comes from
missionaries there urging reinforcements, which means more
consecrated money to meet this pressing necessity.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WORD AS TO THE MAGAZINE.


Letters frequently come to the editor of this magazine expressing
regret that it does not reach the subscriber regularly each month.
No one can regret this fact more than the editor. It must be
remembered that the magazine is no longer a monthly, but a
quarterly. This reduction in the frequency of the issue of our
periodical was found necessary by the Executive Committee during the
hard financial conditions through which we have recently passed. In
order to economize in the expenditures, the four numbers per year
were decided upon. The economy was necessary. The disadvantages,
however, are very apparent. Large space in each magazine is
necessarily occupied by the statistical report of receipts. This is
essential. It is an important financial safeguard and an evidence of
the thorough business administration of the Association.

However, less space is left for general matter. Partially on account
of this restriction of space the magazine has taken a slightly
different complexion. It is our desire to present as complete as
possible the nature and conditions of the missionary work in our
various fields. The discussion of incidental or even fundamental
problems connected with the work of this Association is not often
possible. Those who contribute to this work either money or prayers
have a right to know what is being accomplished. Nothing can present
it so clearly as illustrated articles, prepared by those who are in
these mission fields. In the current issue two important schools are
presented in this way.

In the Department of Christian Endeavor the development of work
among the young people of the Highlands is interestingly presented.
During the current year we plan to present our secondary
institutions as the higher institutions were presented--through
illustrated articles during the last year.

We acknowledge with gratitude the pleasant words spoken concerning
the AMERICAN MISSIONARY in various periodicals. The cordial notices
in missionary cotemporaries of other denominations, and those of our
own mission schools, is especially appreciated.

A commission consisting of two members of the Executive Committee
have recently visited the mission field. Rev. E. S. Tead, of Boston,
and President T. J. Backus, of Brooklyn, were selected by the
committee for this special service. They were accompanied by the
senior secretary, Rev. A. F. Beard, and through a part of the field
by Sec. G. H. Gutterson, of the New England District. They carefully
inspected several of the schools of the Association, and their visit
was of great value. The testimony they bear to the efficiency of the
work and to the interests of the field is pronounced and emphatic.
In a future issue of this magazine we hope to present articles from
members of this commission which will be of great interest to our
readers. The testimony of an experienced pastor and prominent
educator must have great weight.

Strong testimony to the value of the educational work among the
negroes is found in _Harpers' Weekly_ for February 10th. In an able
editorial on "Negro Education," we find the following: "The storm
and stress period of the South is still upon it. The curse of
slavery has not yet been removed. But it is clear that the schools
are sending the light into the dark places, and that everything that
shuts off or reduces the brilliancy of the light is inimical not
only to the negro, but to the whites themselves, to the South, and
to the whole country." No truer word than this could be spoken. The
education of the negro is not a question of sectional or local
importance alone. It is fundamental to the safety and development of
our country. There are in the Southern public schools 27,445
teachers employed in teaching negroes. Twenty-six per cent. of the
average attendance of school children in the Southern States,
including the District of Columbia, are negroes. The total
enrollment of the blacks constitute, however, only 52 per cent. of
the children of that race of school age. This fact again emphasizes
the necessity of such schools as the American Missionary Association
plants among these black people. The high grade and exceptional
character of these schools are certainly worthy of commendation. The
report of our commissioners based upon facts personally and
independently gathered by each will present the conditions as they
are. The years of heroic and sacrificial service on the part of a
body of missionaries and teachers, unsurpassed in any field, are
bringing their legitimate and noble fruitage.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING.


Springfield, Mass., has set the doors of its hospitality wide open
in its welcome to the Fifty-fourth Annual Meeting of the American
Missionary Association. This city occupies an ideal position for
such a convention. It is the center of many railroad lines, both
steam and electric. A large population are resident in the towns and
cities and countryside, easily accessible through these lines of
transportation. It is so located geographically that many of our
most populous states are within easy distance. Add to this the
cordial enthusiasm of the churches and citizens who invite the
Association, and we have every element of a great and inspiring
meeting. Already committees are organized and arrangements are being
perfected for this meeting.

Full particulars will be given in a future number of the MISSIONARY,
and in our Congregational papers. Rev. Philip S. Moxom, D.D.,
Springfield, Mass., is the chairman of the general committee, and
will receive and pass over to the proper sub-committee any
correspondence which may reach him.

       *       *       *       *       *

TILLOTSON COLLEGE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

M. R. GAINES, PRESIDENT.


[Illustration: ALLEN HALL, TILLOTSON COLLEGE]

January 17, 1881, witnessed the opening of this institution. It was
christened "Tillotson Institute." The age of "romance" in the
education of the negro was well-nigh passed. The matter-of-fact
brain of the late Rev. George J. Tillotson, of Wethersfield, Conn.,
formulated the plan, and his generous heart enabled him, with the
aid of individual contributors and the American Missionary
Association, to carry his plan into execution. His purpose was to
give the negroes of this far-away Southwest opportunities for
securing an education equal to those of any other portion of our
fair land. With this end in view he visited Austin and secured an
ideal site for the coming college, destined to become the "Yale of
the Southwest." Austin contains the magnificent Capitol, the State
University, St. Edward's College and other schools, public and
private, besides the state institutions for the insane, the blind,
the deaf, the aged soldier and the orphan. Within the limits of the
city, and yet removed from its din and dust, commanding views of
many of these buildings, and of the far-reaching valley of the
Colorado and the wooded hills beyond, our campus of twenty acres is
a delight to the eye. Undulating, well suited for drainage, well
stocked with shade trees and a profusion of wild flowers in their
season, it is at once beautiful, healthful and inspiring.

[Illustration: CARPENTER SHOP, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

The first building erected on this lot was Allen Hall. It stands on
a hill of easy ascent, and is a substantial structure of stone and
brick, five stories in height. While it was approaching completion,
as story after story was added, the ambitious and intelligent young
colored people watched its growth, eagerly anticipating the time
when they would "enter its basement and ascend story by story, till
they should step out upon the roof full-fledged college graduates."

Money for the purchase of the lot came mostly from Mr. Tillotson's
own purse. His efforts in soliciting funds were largely instrumental
in securing the means for erecting and furnishing the building. The
list of contributors to this part of the undertaking included the
names of men well known for their literary works, philanthropy,
patriotism and fidelity to the Saviour of Men. Most of those early
donors have passed from earth, but they are still an inspiration to
all engaged in the work, and we of this generation can clasp hands
with them in the purpose and effort to make real their intentions.
Though dead "their works do follow them."

For fourteen years Allen Hall afforded all the space available for
dormitories for teachers and students of both sexes, dining-room,
study-room, recitation rooms, chapel and church services. A series
of partitions divided each floor, from basement to attic, into east
and west halls. A small addition in the rear served for kitchen.

[Illustration: BOYS IN CARPENTER SHOP, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

At the opening of the school there was no charge for tuition. The
aspirants for an education "without money and without price" carried
the enrollment to a point never since reached in the history of the
school.

In 1888 the carpenters' shop was built and industrial training was
introduced. An appropriation of $900 from the Slater Fund aided in
meeting the additional expense. A marked evidence of the
appreciation of this advance is shown in the record of attendance,
which increased nearly eighty per cent., and reached the highest
figures it has ever done under a charge for tuition.

A material enlargement to the accommodations for teachers and
students came in 1894, in the new Girls' Hall, that was occupied for
the first time in the autumn of that year. This was erected with
funds provided by the American Missionary Association, and is a
beautiful and convenient structure. The main part is three and a
half stories in height, with wing and rear extension two and a half
stories in height. It contains kitchen, dormitories and
sitting-rooms for teachers and girls, and a spacious, airy and
attractive dining hall for all.

The same year a new charter was obtained and the name changed to
"Tillotson College."

[Illustration: DINING ROOM, GIRLS' HALL, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

The Tillotson Church of Christ in Austin was organized January 4,
1885. Rev. J. E. Roy, D.D., Rev. Jeremiah Porter, D.D., and Rev. J.
H. Parr, conducted the services. Twelve members were received by
letter and seven on profession. While a large majority of the
students are members of churches at entrance, comparatively few have
joined the church of the school. The entire enrollment of active
members has been one hundred and eleven. This, by no means, gives a
fair indication of the Christian spirit and activity of the school.
In the religious meetings there is never any reference to
denominational or sectarian differences.

On the 1st of February, 1899, the church adopted the "Mt. Holyoke
Plan" of a "Wayside Covenant," and thirty-five teachers and students
have signed that and entered into fellowship with us, while
retaining membership in their own churches.

Porter Chapel, erected for outside missionary work in a needy part
of the city, has had a checkered but useful experience. Once it was
burned. It was rebuilt in 1890. Here Miss Martha J. Adams was wont
to meet people, young and old, and dispense aid and comfort along
many lines. Here, too, have been held for many years Sunday-school
services, and preaching services from time to time, as strength and
opportunity allowed.

[Illustration: MECHANICAL DRAUGHTING CLASS, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

In the early years there were a few students, mostly children of
teachers, in college courses, and a still smaller number in
theology. The aim from the first has been to give instruction in the
elements of a good common school education, and to provide advanced
work for such as could complete a high school course, or were
preparing to teach, or to continue their studies in higher
professional schools elsewhere. The list of graduates is still a
short one. The motto, "QUALITY NOT QUANTITY," finds its illustration
here as in all the rest of the work of the school. The standard of
scholarship has always been high and is steadily advancing. Many who
have never graduated have done excellent work as teachers in the
public schools of the state. "Tillotson" students are in demand and
are known and respected for their honesty and reliability. Of the
graduates, some are in responsible positions in this state, while
others are pursuing courses of study in higher institutions at the
North, or have already entered upon professional work. The great
work of such a school is in its "leveling up." Who shall measure
this? When a boy on retiring at night folds and carefully lays away
the sheets and pillow slips from his bed, to "keep them clean," or
when he thinks, on entering the dining-room, that he has "reached
heaven," evidently there is room for such work.

Teachers and students together strive to make Tillotson a place of
refined and Christian culture. The chapel bell calls all to morning
prayers, on school days, and to Sunday-school, church services and
Christian Endeavor, on Sundays. Each evening the family gathers
about the Word at its altar in the dining-room. Bible-study is a
part of the regular course through all the grades.

[Illustration: SEWING CLASS, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

Twenty years is a short time for estimating the harvest from such
sowing as this. The beginning was small. The annals are meagre. Here
have labored earnest and consecrated men and women from the best
institutions of the North. The citizens of Austin have always been
sympathetic and helpful. Several of the most prominent of them have
served on the board of trustees. Many of them have contributed
towards the equipment of the industrial departments of the school.

A small blacksmith shop on the place was a gift of the business men
of Austin. The colored patrons of the school, in all sections of the
state, have always been most cordial and enthusiastic in their
commendation and confidence. It is little wonder that, with the
passing of the years, the school has grown steadily in the
estimation and affection of all classes. In the early days, the hall
at commencement was occupied largely by white people. In these later
years the audiences are composed largely of intelligent and
appreciative colored people.

When one considers the scanty equipment of the school he can but be
surprised that it has accomplished so much.

[Illustration: CLASS GROUP, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

Endowment, aside from land and buildings, it has none. For income it
has always depended upon grants by the American Missionary
Association from its own funds and the Daniel Hand estate, the
direct contributions of individuals, and payments by the students
for board and tuition. The intention is to make the expenses for
students as light as possible. After the first session the charges
for tuition were fixed for the grammar department at $2.00 per
month; for the normal department at $2.50 per month; for board and
tuition together $12.00 per month. In 1887 the tuition for the
grammar department was dropped to $1.00 per month. The other charges
remained in force for ten years, when the tuition was made the same
for all, $1.00 per month. To meet the necessities of the case we are
forced to allow our students to work out at least half of these very
moderate charges. Nearly all the manual labor about the institution
is done by students. Thus, in a very practical way, they help
themselves pecuniarily and acquire knowledge of housekeeping in its
manifold lines.

To train the hand as well as the head the boys receive instruction
in carpentry and industrial draughting, and the girls have regular
lessons in needlework, dress-making and kindred subjects.

[Illustration: GIRLS' HALL, TILLOTSON COLLEGE.]

Tillotson has always done good work. She has made a name for
herself. Standing, as she does, for thoroughgoing, non-sectarian,
Christian education, for true manhood and womanhood, with mutual
co-operation and helpfulness, with so many from all parts of this
great State of Texas looking to her for light and leadership, her
opportunities for usefulness are out of all proportion to her means.
To properly meet these demands she sorely needs many things. A full
list of imperative needs would call for too much space. A few must
suffice.

A reasonable sum of money for endowment of professorships.

A great addition to apparatus and appliances for experiment and
instruction.

Refurnishing of present buildings from top to bottom.

Sanitary drainage and plumbing.

A neat and pleasant chapel. A library and reading-room, with funds
to purchase new books.

An extension to complete girl's hall, on the present plan, affording
needed rooms for girls and teachers.

Music rooms removed from study and recitation rooms.

A building, with power, for metal working, tinsmithing, etc.

A plant for typesetting and printing.

Additional teachers should be employed, and the courses of study
extended, so that men fully equipped for the demands of the new
century can be furnished here.

Tillotson thus sends forth her plea to Christian men and women all
over our land to be used as the means of untold blessing to needy
thousands. Her usefulness has been great. It can be indefinitely
increased with comparatively small outlay. Here are grand
opportunities for investment in "futures" that will yield large
returns. Just after the death of the late Dr. Joseph Hardy Neesima,
of Japan, who had been so generously aided by Hon. Alpheus Hardy, of
Boston, who had also died not long before, a Christian friend
wrote:--"I wonder what Mr. Hardy thinks now of his investment in
Joseph Hardy Neesima." They both can now realize so much more fully
the meaning of the Master's words: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto ME."

[Illustration: GROUP OF STUDENTS ON STEPS OF ALLEN HALL, TILLOTSON
COLLEGE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S. C.

M. A. HOLMES, PRINCIPAL.


More than ordinary interest attaches to this institution for the
education of colored youth and the training of colored teachers,
located as it is in the very cradle of secession, and near the spot
from which was fired the first gun in the long war waged for their
perpetual enslavement; and in a city situated in the heart of the
cotton and rice-fields of the Southland.

[Illustration: AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S. C.]

Scarcely had the smoke of the long conflict cleared away or civil
authority been fully restored in this long-besieged city, when
General Saxton, then Assistant Commissioner of the Freedmen's
Bureau, opened a school in the Memminger building on St. Philip
Street, built for and since used for the education of white
children. Here, on the first day of October, 1865, were gathered a
thousand children eager for the education so long denied to their
race. So great was the pressure to gain admission to this school
that one hundred children were seated in the great dome that
surmounts the edifice.

The studies during the first year embraced the entire range of
elementary branches, from the primer to the Latin grammar. About
three-fourths of those who attended this first school were children
of freedmen; the others, making up the advanced classes, were born
free and constituted an aristocracy of color, a distinction which,
after a lapse of more than a third of a century, still exists.

The closing examinations of this first year were attended by a large
audience of both white and colored. There were present ladies and
gentlemen, missionaries and teachers, civil and military
dignitaries, and the leading representatives of both races. It was a
novel and moving sight, one that the wildest imagination could not
have foreseen or deemed possible five years before.

[Illustration: PROF. M. A. HOLMES, PRINCIPAL.]

In its second year the school, then known as the Saxton School, held
its sessions in the Military Hall on Wentworth Street, where with a
slightly reduced enrollment, it remained until removed to its
present quarters, May 1, 1865. The large and handsome building which
it now occupies was erected by the American Missionary Association
through the Freedmen's Bureau. Rev. Charles Avery, of Pittsburg,
Pa., had given a large sum for the education of the colored people,
and ten thousand dollars of his bequest were appropriated to the
institution, and in honor of this noble philanthropist the name was
changed to Avery Normal Institute. Here the enrollment was
necessarily reduced and the normal character of its work made more
prominent, a feature that had been contemplated from the beginning.

In any survey of the work of Avery, three principals should receive
special recognition for their thorough, enduring and Christian labor
in this needy field. They are the Rev. F. S. Cardozo, by whom the
school was first organized in the Memminger building, Prof. M. A.
Warren, who succeeded him and graduated the first class in 1872, and
Prof. Amos W. Farnham, now of the Oswego Normal School. Each of
these men was distinguished for unusual teaching skill, for great
administrative ability, and for complete consecration to the work to
which he was specially called. These worthy educators are still
remembered here with affection and gratitude, but the full fruition
of their labors will be known only in the great day when the books
shall be opened.

For over thirty years about four hundred colored students have
annually gathered here for the training which was to fit them for
life's work. For many years all grades, from the primary to the high
school and normal course, were maintained, but in later years the
primary and intermediate pupils have been excluded, their
instruction being amply provided for in the public and numerous
private schools of the city, thus leaving the Institute free to
devote itself to higher grades and normal work, in which Avery has
been from the first conspicuous and eminently successful. Its
graduates now number nearly four hundred and are found in almost
every department of human activity. Some are distinguished in
professional life, others in trade, or in business. Among them are
doctors, skilled and eminent in their chosen fields of labor,
clergymen of acknowledged ability, and teachers of long and
successful experience. About two-thirds of all its graduates choose
teaching as their special vocation; and nearly all prove their skill
and ability in the schoolroom, and have reflected great credit on
their alma mater and have been a blessing to their race. There has
been for the last ten years a steady and growing demand for colored
teachers of ability and with special training for their work; and
there is not a county in the state to which our graduates do not go
as teachers, and in the lower counties and along this malarial coast
nearly all the schools for colored children are taught by Avery
graduates. In many places conditions are such that no one can
undertake this work without jeopardizing health or risking life
itself. But there are not wanting those whom zeal and devotion lead
into these dangerous fields. Names might be given of those who have
even given up life itself at work in these malarial districts,
proving their zeal and the missionary spirit which actuated them.

Avery has cost large sums of money; to maintain such an institution
by charity through a third of a century is no small undertaking,
requiring faith and consecration. But it has repaid more than a
hundred-fold all that has ever been expended. Here in this historic
city, surrounded by lowlands of rice and cotton, the negro was found
in overwhelming numbers, and after emancipation, in utter ignorance
of book lore or a pure gospel. To this people the American
Missionary Association, through the Avery Institute and its
consecrated workers, has brought the light of knowledge and a pure
gospel, and awakened aspiration and hope of a better life. The
beneficial effects of this work upon such a people, and indirectly
upon the city and state, are incalculable. Intelligent Christianity
and Christian education has ever been the motto of Avery, and
faithfully has it been realized in the lives of its graduates, and
exemplified by them in all the relations that affect good
citizenship and true manhood. Race conflicts in this city have been
unknown since the days of reconstruction, and it is not too much to
claim that this better condition of things here is largely due to
the influence exerted by Avery.

[Illustration: NORMAL CLASS OF 1900, IN CHAPEL.]

Although it is in the strictest sense a school, in which all studies
in every department are prosecuted under a high pressure, which
knows no relaxation, yet religious teaching has ever been a
prominent feature, and the Bible is considered the best text book in
the school. It has never been sectarian, but always Christian in its
teaching and influence. No year passes without numerous conversions
among its pupils, and every church in the city has been blessed in
some measure by accessions to its membership from the students of
Avery.

The blessings which this school has brought to this people, and
indirectly to a far wider constituency, are not wholly a free gift
to them. A monthly tuition fee has always been required and
collected from all in attendance, except in special cases, in which
its collection would impose great hardship or compel the withdrawal
of worthy pupils from the school. But in spite of this monthly
charge and the sacrifices made to meet it and keep their children in
school, these people, out of their meagre earnings, which in so many
cases make accumulations impossible, have kept their children in
school, and to the end of a twelve years' course, in numbers that
would shame many a more prosperous community in more favored
sections of our land, where schools and books are entirely free. In
1895 twenty-four successfully completed its course and graduated
with honor; in 1896 twenty were added to the alumni roll; in 1897
twenty-eight; in 1898 thirty-one; in 1899 twenty-four; and at this
writing twenty-four are taking final examinations for graduation in
June. And from these large classes there is not one that is not an
honor to the community, scarcely one that has not found a position
as a teacher or in some useful calling or industry, while a few are
taking higher courses in other institutions. Are not these facts
sufficient answer to the charge so often made, that the colored
people are losing their interest in education, or that higher
education does not benefit them?

Our work has been mainly academic; that is the purpose for which
Avery was called into existence, to educate and train colored
teachers, and to fit them for honorable positions in trade or
business.

The dignity of labor has always been faithfully inculcated, and
opportunities for it have not been wanting. Nearly all the normal
students and many in the lower classes go from school to some useful
occupation, learning trades, or engaging in other remunerative
employment. Large numbers not only maintain themselves but are
necessary helpers to the bread-winners of their respective families.

But in keeping with the tendencies of the times and of the newer
education, and with the traditions and practice of the American
Missionary Association, an industrial department has been added to
Avery, and it has aroused no little enthusiasm among students and
patrons. Needlework for the girls has been introduced, and under an
accomplished and efficient instructor it has been from the first a
great success. The girls from the lower grades as well as from the
normal classes are being systematically trained to do their own
sewing, and will in time be taught to make their own garments. Our
purpose is to add to this, cooking and other departments of domestic
science, as the resources of the Association will permit. Steps have
been taken to establish a printing department.

In 1892 Avery Normal Institute was incorporated under the laws of
the state, though the control of the school has been kept in the
same hands as before, a majority of the trustees being in the
executive committee or the administrative force of the American
Missionary Association. The purpose of the incorporation was to
secure for its graduates the advantages which the laws of the state
confer upon graduates of all incorporated institutions.

[Illustration: SEWING CLASS, SIXTH GRADE.]

An article of this nature would be incomplete without some reference
to charges so frequently made, and in high places too, that
education, and especially the higher education, does the negro more
harm than good, and that the educated classes furnish the larger
part of the criminals. That there are educated criminals is not
doubted, but they are not confined to one race, nor do they come
from the students of the American Missionary Association schools. Of
the nearly four hundred living graduates of Avery, not one is a
criminal nor has one ever been accused of crime, and the writer has
yet to learn of more than two who have proved unworthy of the
training they have received, or dishonored their alma mater by
immoral lives. These fell under a stress of circumstances that would
have ruined almost any young person. On the contrary, the graduates
of this and other schools under the auspices of the Association are
conspicuous for worthy and upright character, for thrift, for
industry and good citizenship.

And this is true not only of those who complete our course and
receive their diplomas, but of hundreds of others who do not go
beyond the grammar grades. Such invariably make better citizens. It
is a rare thing to learn that one of the students from any class of
our school has become a criminal. The criminal classes are not
recruited from the pupils in missionary schools.


OUR NEEDS.

We need large contributions of money or materials that will enable
us to enlarge and develop our industrial department. A promising
beginning has been made, but it is only a beginning, and we desire
to extend it in many lines, giving the widest possible scope to
individual talent or proclivities, without lowering in any degree
the present standard of scholastic attainment.

We need contributions of money and books to enlarge our library and
give to our students advantages which they cannot now find in the
city. A good library is absolutely indispensable in all educational
work. We have a few hundred well worn volumes, the merest apology
for a library, but it is the only one in the city to which colored
people have access.

We appeal to individuals, to Sunday-schools, to Christian Endeavor
societies and to churches for the establishment of scholarships for
worthy and capable pupils. We have many such, on whom the burdens
press so heavily that continuance in school to the end of the course
is an impossibility. We wish to help such after they have reached
the normal department. A small sum expended in keeping these worthy
students in the school may bring rich rewards when the harvests of
life are all finally gathered.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES.

GEORGE W. MOORE, FIELD MISSIONARY.


Early in the school year the teachers of Trinity School, Athens,
Alabama, made their annual visitation to the country people. They
carried with them the good cheer of the holiday season in the
distribution of odds and ends from barrels from Northern friends.
Gifts were distributed to a hundred persons, old and young. One old
lady, fearing that she had been overlooked, exclaimed: "Wat you
gwine to gib me?" and she was made happy by the gift of a bandanna
handkerchief. Trinity School fills a large place in that community,
as it is the only school for colored pupils in a radius of several
miles of Athens.

A revival followed the week of prayer service at Talladega College.
The school is full, and all are happy in the work.

Secretary Beard's trip through the Southern field was a delight to
the workers and students. His sermons and addresses and wise counsel
were helpful to all. Porto Rico was made very real by his graphic
descriptions of the country and people.

Our church at Shelby Iron Works, Ala., is flourishing under the
labors of Rev. E. E. Scott. Mr. Scott, with his rich tenor voice,
leads the people in the singing of the old spirituals, and the choir
in anthems and song.

Rev. T. J. Bell and his people are doing good service at Selma.

Miss M. L. Phillips and her associates are happy in their work at
Marion, Ala. A deep religious interest was awakened both at Marion,
Ala., and at our Lincoln School at Meridian, Miss. Rev. M. Jones, a
graduate of Tougaloo University, is pastor at Meridian, and Rev. C.
L. Harris, the former minister, is now at Mobile.

The Emerson Institute at Mobile is doing excellent work, under the
direction of Dr. Burnell and his teachers.

The meeting of the Louisiana Association was held with the Central
Church, New Orleans. The attendance was good, and the reports of the
churches, addresses and papers were full of interest.

The Woman's Missionary Union, Christian Endeavor and Sunday-school
Association also held interesting meetings.

The Straight University has a large attendance; the school is making
good progress in its various departments of literary and industrial
work.

After the meeting of the Louisiana Association, I visited the work
at Thibodeaux, Schriever, Chacahoula, Abbeville, Lake Charles and
New Iberia. At several places a deep religious interest was
awakened, and a large number avowed their faith in the Saviour.

A new church has been organized at Lake Charles, La., with thirty
members. It gives promise of growth and fruitful service. Rev. S. J.
Wood, a graduate of Straight University, is pastor. The people
bought a lot, and the Church-Building Society aided them in buying a
meeting-house which has been removed to their lot.

Three miles from Fort Davis Station, on the Georgia and Alabama
Railroad, and forty miles from Montgomery, is our Cotton Valley
School, which is located in the heart of the Black Belt of Alabama.
This country school is the one bright spot in the lives of the
large population of poor black people of Cotton Valley. It is in
charge of four young women, graduates of Fisk University--Miss
Carrie Alexander, Principal, and Misses Pearl Binford, Lelia Haynie
and Lizzie B. Moore. Besides the school work, the teachers visit the
people in their cabin homes, hold mothers' meetings, Sunday-school,
Christian Endeavor and Junior Endeavor meetings, sewing classes, a
literary society and singing-school. It is a veritable social
settlement. The people look to these young women for advice,
medicine and help in all kinds of ways. They have won the love and
confidence of the people, and gladly help them in all ways. The
school is under the management of the American Missionary
Association, and is supported by the Woman's Missionary Union of
Massachusetts. The school is located in a most needy field for
mission work. A teachers' home is greatly needed. The teachers
occupy the log cabin home built by the first missionary teacher,
Mrs. Lillian V. Courtney, _nee_ Davis. This cabin home has done good
service; but a larger home is needed for the teachers, with
facilities for industrial training for girls.

       *       *       *       *       *

BITS OF EXPERIENCE IN THE INDIAN COUNTRY.

MISS M. P. LORD.


Little-Dog was very sick, they said. We thought of the beautiful
two-year-old boy whom he had loved with all a father's tenderness,
and of the day when he had come and told us of the child's death;
and how his eyes were still inflamed with weeping; and how grateful
he was for the little food, and for the words of comfort we had
tried to give him.

His home was ten or fifteen miles up the winding river, with two
fording-places between. We found at the first a broad, swift stream,
swollen by a recent rain. We were glad we had made preparations
before starting in, for the water flowed six inches deep over the
buggy floor. At the village beyond, Cross-Bear advised us to return
by another road, as the river was still rising. Long-Feather, with
whose family we also stopped to shake hands, gave the same advice,
saying that he would see us safely over the next crossing, but that
he was just starting on a long drive in the opposite direction.
Good-Boy, who lived near the fording-place, would help, he said. So,
following directions, Good-Boy was found. His pony was quickly
saddled, and galloping on ahead he piloted us not only to the
river-crossing, but all the way to Little Dog's, some miles beyond.

Mrs. Little-Dog and ten-year-old Martin greeted us at the door, and
inside the house we were cordially welcomed by the blind and almost
helpless sufferer. The wife said, "I wanted to go and get medicine
for him, but there was no one to take care of him while I was gone."
They were miles from the nearest neighbor. And the sick man added,
"I didn't like to have our little boy go so far alone." When the
physical pain and needs were relieved so far as possible, I asked if
there was a Bible. In answer the sick man turned and reached under
the pillow at the farther corner of the bed, from which he drew out
a little bag, and from that he carefully--almost tenderly, it
seemed--took his Dakota Bible and handed me. Such times of drawing
near to God, in the homes of sick or sorrowing ones, mean quite as
much of added strength and cheer to the white visitor as to those
who are visited, and we always come away feeling so glad that we
went. Tears were in the woman's eyes as the good-byes were said; and
the little boy, with his pony saddled, watched us out of sight, to
be sure that we were started on the right road home, as we had been
directed.

On another day we heard that our good old friend
Afraid-of-the-Clouds had been thrown from his wagon and badly hurt.
We found the tall figure, which we had always been accustomed to see
so erect and soldierly in bearing, stretched on the ground in his
tent, silent and motionless. With evident pain and effort the dear
old man tried to explain how it happened. He did not complain and
spoke very gently, but the expression of suffering on the wrinkled
face made me fear he would never get up again, and my own sorrow at
the thought was hard to conceal. He was only (?) an "old Indian,"
one of those "old Indians" who are often so lightly spoken of as of
no account; but whose dignity and strength of character, and gentle,
gracious courtesy, command the respect of those who really know
them. And he had been a loyal friend and faithful helper in the
years that we had been neighbors. And though he still clung to his
old faith, he seemed as grateful for the reading of God's Word and
prayer as for the material help we tried to give.

Time passed, and by-and-by he was up and about again, and wanted to
be given some work to do. One day he came into the house and seated
himself in the deliberate way which told that he had something on
his mind, which would demand my undivided attention, and said: "You
are a white woman. I am a Dakota. But when I was sick your heart was
sad. I hold it in my heart." That was all; that and the silent
hand-grasp as he went out. But somehow I felt as if what the old man
felt in his heart was very secure there.

One bright Sabbath morning, with our deacon, One-Thunder, we visited
a neighboring church eight or ten miles up the river. The regular
native teacher was away, attending the great annual mission meeting;
but two other young men had been appointed to take charge of the
service together--Anselm Kill-the-Crow and Clinton High-Horse. The
latter took for his text, "Ye are the salt of the earth." Retaining
the figurative form of the verse, the young preacher made clear its
spiritual teaching, and by his direct and forceful application
revealed the thoughtfulness and earnestness of his own heart. The
remarks of the other alluded to the name chosen for the little
church. "The Church of the Messiah;" and he urged upon those present
that it be not in name only, but in deed and in truth, _His_ church.
The after-service greetings to the visitors were cordial, as
usual--even the babies being encouraged to hold out tiny brown
hands, with their mothers' injunctions to "nape yuza" (shake hands).

Hole-in-his-Tooth, who is always eager to take orders during the
plum season, consented to postpone business transactions until the
next day. The Woman's Missionary Society had five dollars to hand
over, to be forwarded to the "Wotanin Waste;" that is, far
missionary work. Everybody seemed wide awake and happy; and as we
drove away, the Y. M. C. A. were about to hold their services.

Next to their interest in church affairs, is that in the school; for
since the Grand River (Government) Boarding School has demonstrated
in their midst what faithful teachers can do for the children, the
whole community are ready to show their appreciation, from good old
Chief Grindstone to the wee little folk who carry flowers to their
white friends in the school; and every little circle of influence
widens.

The blizzard was fiercely raging outside, lashing the little house
in its fury. I had given up trying to warm more than one room, and
that was darkened by the snow piled against the windows, and the
panes above were so thick with frost that nothing could be seen.

The storm was so severe--so bitterly cold, with blinding snow and
wind--that I thought no one could possibly get out with safety to
come that day; when, to my surprise, there was a knock at the door,
and there was Maza--faithful Maza--smiling as usual, through the
frost and snow.

Glad, as well as surprised, I was to see him. "They told me not to
come," he said. "They said I would get lost or freeze to death;
but," he added, "I told them I was coming." So the big drift was
tunneled to the stable door, horses fed and watered, and all needed
help given.

By these little homely incidents I have only tried to introduce a
few of the many friends on the Reservation, of whom it is sometimes
asked, "Can Indians ever be really civilized?" "Do you see any real
results?" "Do you find them very treacherous?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Department of Christian Endeavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIAN ENDEAVORERS OF A HIGHLAND SCHOOL AND VILLAGE.


[Illustration: CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, WILLIAMSBURG, KY.]

Miss Ella M. Andrews, one of the teachers at Williamsburg Academy,
which is one of the interesting schools among our American
Highlanders, has been an efficient leader in the Christian Endeavor
movement in that school and village. She writes under recent date of
the Senior Endeavor Society, as follows:

"The Y. P. S. C. E. of Main Street Congregational Church of
Williamsburg, Ky., was organized in 1887 with about a dozen charter
members. From this beginning has grown our present flourishing
society of about fifty members, many of whom are our students. The
good it has done these young people cannot be estimated. Many of the
students organize C. E. societies in their home towns and in the
places where they teach. The Tri-State Union was organized in 1893.
The organization was made for the purpose of promoting the C. E.
work in the adjacent counties of Kentucky, Virginia and Tennessee.
By bringing together the members of the societies in this section,
much has been accomplished in the way of strengthening the weak
societies and in the way of organizing and sustaining societies in
places where none existed. All societies in the Union have been
stimulated by its annual conventions."

The Junior Endeavorers in this field are under the especial care of
Miss M. A. Packard, also a teacher in this academy. Under her wise
supervision the Juniors have done much interesting and valuable
work. She writes as follows:

"The Junior Endeavor Society, a company of 76 bright, happy boys and
girls, representing two departments (the active members and the
trial members), is under the direction of the superintendent and two
assistants. The meetings are held every Sunday afternoon, led by one
of the members. We use the 'Junior Endeavor Songs,' and the Juniors'
voices are tuned to sing praise to Him who took little children in
His arms and blessed them. It is an inspiration to attend the
meetings, to hear the recital of the Pledge, the reading of the
Scripture verses and the precious season of prayer, when, with bowed
head, sentence prayers are offered, often two and three at a time.
During the past year the growth of the society has been marked, in
the Juniors learning to pray--God seems so near. Many precious
petitions have been made for self and others.

[Illustration: A MOUNTAIN HOME.]

"The Juniors are enthusiastic in bringing in their pennies, many
earning them. They purchase all their literature. Last April they
were very happy to donate to the church the sum of $12.34, the
result of an entertainment given by them ('The Junior Endeavor
Garden').

"This year we have taken up the prison work; sending the pennies to
purchase Testaments, and writing letters to the prisoners. Services
are held at the jail, and at the homes of the aged and sick, the
Juniors taking an active part.

"Thanksgiving Day, nineteen homes were gladdened by baskets of
eatables, carried by the Juniors, and other gifts. At Christmas many
hearts are made happy by their kind remembrances. During the last
three years twelve have graduated. All are active members in senior
societies. The trial department is under the direction of the
assistants, who are graduates. The society is most promising. The
Juniors are preparing not only to take places in the senior society,
but in the church and as citizens."

       *       *       *       *       *

Obituaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. MARY T. CHASE.


Mrs. Mary Tuttle Chase, wife of Prof. T. N. Chase, of Atlanta
University, Atlanta, Georgia, died in the home of her daughter, Mrs.
Dr. Kirkland, Bellows Falls, Vermont, Friday, March 23d. Funeral
services were held in the church in which she worshiped in her
childhood in Acton, Mass. The president of the University, together
with the pastors of this church conducted the service. Some
graduates of Atlanta University sang some of the pathetic old negro
hymns. Mrs. Chase came of heroic New England stock. She was
graduated at Abbott Academy, Andover, Mass., and at once entered
upon the work of teaching. She was married to Prof. Chase in 1862.
Two years later they went to Washington, D. C. In 1869, with her
husband, she went to Atlanta, Georgia, and entered upon the great
work of her life in Atlanta University.

Mrs. Chase was a ready and able writer, and frequently contributed
articles to the AMERICAN MISSIONARY magazine. Her heart was quick in
its sympathies for those who were depressed and needy, and the
heroic courage of her ancestors ran in her veins. She was always
ready to defend the weak. She loved the work, and sought earnestly
the interests of the people to whom she gave the larger service of
her life. Her loss will be sorely felt in the ranks of faithful
Christian workers, of whom she was one. A large circle of friends
sympathize with Prof. Chase and the family in this hour of their
bereavement.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS SUSIE T. CATHCART.


Word has just come as we go to press that Miss Susie T. Cathcart
passed away at King's Mountain, N. C., on Monday morning, April 9th.
Miss Cathcart has been a teacher at Lincoln Academy, of which her
sister is principal, for several years. At the beginning of this
year her health was so delicate that she did not feel that she could
accept reappointment. She still hoped to be strong again, however,
and looked forward to future service among the people whom she so
sincerely loved. Her work has been always distinguished by ability
and great personal sacrifice, and almost an abandon of devotion to
those to whom she ministered. Even in her sickness she did not for a
moment forget them. Her sister, Miss Lillian Cathcart, Principal of
Lincoln Academy, writes of her as follows: "In her sickness she has
been very patient, never other than cheerful, and always trying to
spare others any unnecessary work. She has been able to take an
interest in what was going on almost all the time, and to send out
messages and to pray for the scholars." And so another earnest and
devoted life has gone out from earth, but its influence will
continue and cannot be measured by the passing years.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SUGGESTIVE SUBSCRIPTION.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY received a subscription the other day which
illustrates several things. The subscription read as follows: "Mr.
Frederick Raeder, Jurjev--Dorpat--Livonia, Russia." This illustrates
the wide circulation of a journal especially devoted to home
missions. Not a numerous foreign subscription list does it enjoy,
but at least one copy reaches this remote region. Another thing
illustrated is the close connection between the home and foreign
fields of missions. A few years ago the Indians and Alaskans were
counted in the foreign missionary field. Now the American Missionary
Association conducts work in these fields. Porto Rico has just come
into the responsibility of our home work. And so in the progress of
these great missionary movements the emphasis is increasingly upon
_missions_, and not upon any artificial distinctions. It is the
coming of the Kingdom of God which the providences make important.

       *       *       *       *       *

If any reader of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY has a copy of the Annual
Report of the American Missionary Association for 1849, he will
confer a favor by dropping a note to the editor of this magazine.
This volume is desired for one of our theological libraries.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JANUARY, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for January                                   $10,013.75
  Previously acknowledged                               14,431.66
                                                      -----------
                                                       $24,445.41
                                                      ===========

NOTE.--Where no name follows that of the town, the contribution is
from the church and society of that place. Where a name follows, it
is that of the contributing church or individual. S. means
Sunday-school; C. means Church; C. E., the Young People's Society of
Christian Endeavor; S. A. means Student Aid.


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $627.31.

Bangor, First, 50; Central, 32.20. Bath, Central, 22.38. Bucksport,
S., _for S. A., Williamsburg, Ky._, 10. Bucksport, Elm St. C., 9.19.
East Machias, First, 10. Cumberland Mills, Warren C., 114.32.
Fryeburg, 3.41. Hallowell, H. K. Baker, 5. Hampden, S., _for
Santurce, Porto Rico_, 12.22. Islesboro, "Friends," box Goods, Miss
L. E. Pendleton, freight 40 cents, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh,
Ga._ Lewiston, Miss S. L. Weymouth, 2; Pine St. C., bbl. Goods,
freight prepaid, _for B. N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Orland, H. T.
and S. E. Buck, 20. Patten, 5. Portland, High St. C., 128.25; State
St. C., 50. Portland, "Friends," _for Fisk U._, 51. Richmond, 1.05.
Saco, First Parish, 11. Scarboro, J. F. Small, 20. Skowhegan,
Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, 1.57 for freight, _for B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._ South Berwick, S., _for Mountain White Work in
Tenn._, 1.57. Warren, Second, 7. Woodfords, "Little Twigs," 5; Miss
Clay's S. Class, 1.75. York, Second, 7.50.

Blue Hill, L. M. Soc., bbl. Goods; Brunswick, bbl. Goods; Machias,
bbl. Goods; Skowhegan, bbl. Goods; Woodfords, bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. Helen W. Davis, Treas.,
$45.50.

Bath, Winter St., 40. Bridgton, 2.50. Limerick, 3.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $745.83.

Amherst, Geo. W. Bosworth, 10. Auburn, 5. Bath, 5. Chester, 12; Miss
Emily J. Hazeltine, 50 cents. Claremont, Jr. C. E., bbl. Goods, _for
Knoxville, Tenn._ Colebrook, Dea. E. C. Wilder, 50 cts. Concord,
South, 276.53. Deerfield Center, 5.25. Dunbarton, 12.90. Durham,
"Rainbow Mission Band," _for S. A., King's Mountain, N. C._, 17.20,
East Barrington, Eva F. Chesley, _for S. A., Macon, Ga._, 4. Exeter,
Phillips Christmas bbl., _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Hanover Center, C.
E., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._, 7.80. Hill, C., _for Indian M._, 72
cts. Keene, First, 35. Lebanon, First, Mr. And Mrs. Geo. Amsden, 6.
Londonderry, Charles S. Pillsbury, 1. Nashua, First, 12. Nashua, C.,
King's Daughters' Circle, _for S. A., B. N. Sch., Greenwood. S. C._,
11. Newfields, L. M. S. of C., three bbls. Goods, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ Newport, Ladies' Aid Soc., 25. Sanbornton, 13.10.
Somersworth, First, 7. Tilton, 35. Webster, Ladies, M. Soc. of C.,
_for S. A._, 5, also bbl. Goods, freight prepaid, _for B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._ West Lebanon, C., two bbls. Goods, _for Knoxville,
Tenn._ West Rindge, Deacon Herbert E. Wetherbee, 100. Wilmot, 1.
Winchester, C. (of which 5 from Primary Dept. and 5 from Home Dept.
of S.), 37.33.

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. and HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $100.00:

New Hampshire F. C. I. and H. M. U., 100.


VERMONT, $3,690.49--of which from Estates, $2,650.00.

Barnet, 41.08. Bennington, Second, 27.96. Bennington County, "A
Friend," 5. Brattleboro, Mrs. Mary L. Hadley, 25; "Friend," 250.
Burlington, College St. C., 40.61. Charlotte, M. E. Wing, box Goods,
_for Williamsburg, Ky._ Charlotte, Ladies' M. Soc., two bbls. Goods,
3.50 _for freight, for B. N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Chester, S.,
bal. to const. DEA. A. D. L. HERRICK, L.M., 16.35. East Hardwick, C.
and S., 27.72 Hartford, "C., by J. G. S.," 25. Hartland, 3. Jamaica,
6.80. Jeffersonville, "A Friend," _for Straight U._, 50.
Londonderry, 1. Middlebury, 17.72. Morgan, Miss Lucy Little, 50 cts.
North Thetford, 16. Rutland, C., Sunshine Circle, 2.25; C., bbl.
Goods, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._ Saint Johnsbury, North, 36;
South, 20; S. of South C., 22. Saint Johnsbury, Miss Edna Herbert,
_for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. West Brattleboro, 30.
Westford, C. E., _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 3. Wilder, Extra
Cent-a-Day Band, by Mrs. Chas. D. Hazen, 13. Wilmington, 8.50.

By Prof. Fred. W. Foster, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._:

Barton Landing, W. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, 1.25 _for freight_; Berlin,
L. B. Soc., bbl. Goods, 1.50 _for freight_; Cambridge, W. H. M. S.,
2 _for freight_; Chelsea, S. P. B. Benev. Soc., bbl. Goods; Jr.
Benev. Soc., _for S. A._, 5; Colchester, L. M. Soc., bbl. Goods, 2
_for freight_; Glover, "Friends," bbl. Goods and freight;
Montpelier, Mrs. J. V. Babcock, bbl. Goods and freight; Newport, W.
M. S. of C., bbl. Goods; Peacham, W. H. M. S. _for S. A._, 5;
Waitsfield, H. C. M. S, bbl. Goods, 2 _for freight_; West Glover, W.
H. M. S., bbl. Goods; West Brattleboro, Ladies of C., two bbls.
Goods.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Mary Mackinnon,
Treas., $328.75.

Barre, Jr. C. E., _for Schp's_, 5. Barton, 5. Brownington, Jr. C.
E., _for Schp's_, 4.50. Burlington, College St. C., 10. East
Berkshire, Jr. C. E., _for Sch'p_, 3. Franklin, 5.10. Jericho
Center, 6. Jonesville, Lend-a-Hand Circle, 5. Ludlow, 6. Peacham,
7.50. Peacham, Jr. C. E., _for Schp's_, 2. Peru, C. E., 5. Saint
Johnsbury, East, Jr. C. E., 5. Saint Johnsbury, North C., Mrs. C.
Stanley's S. Class, 65 cents. Springfield, "Two Friends," 250.
Vergennes, "M. J. Q.", 50 cts. Waterbury, 8.50.

ESTATES.--Springfield, Estate of Frederick Parks, 1,650. Burlington,
Estate of Mrs. Mary T. Hill, by H. O. Wheeler, Exec'r, 1,000.


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,846.70--of which from Estates, $42.33

Amherst, First, 42.91. Andover, South, _balance for a Teacher,
Macon, Ga._, 150. Andover, South. 131.21; Free, 20; Miss Amy Stork,
2.25, and box Goods. Andover, West C., 30.61; A Member of West C.,
1. Arlington, 72.20. Ashburnham, First, 7.29. Athol, 49.70.
Auburndale, 55. Ayer, Mr. and Mrs. William McLean, 2. Beverly,
Washington St. C., 10. Billerica, C., 50 cts.; Mrs. P. S. Tyler,
1.50; Ladies' Circle of C., bbl. Goods, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._

Boston, Shawmut, 100; Boston, Mrs. Charlotte Fiske, 50, and Miss
Elizabeth Fiske, 50, _for Marshallville, Ga._; "T. G.," 30; J. A.
Brown, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 25; B. F. Dewing, 25;
Union C., Woman's Aux., _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 20;
Berkeley Temple, 18.70; Mt. Vernon C., 15; Mrs. L. H. Kendall, _for
Marshallville, Ga._, 6; Mrs. Layman, 5; Miss Lee, box Books _for
Meridian, Miss._ Allston, S., 7. Campello, South, 75. Charlestown,
Winthrop, 55.89. Dorchester, Second, 103.24. Dorchester, Mrs.
Elbridge Torry, _for S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 20. Dorchester,
"A Friend," 3. Dorchester, Rev. H. Houston, 2 _for freight_; Harvard
C., two bbls. Goods, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._ Neponset,
Trinity, C. E., 3.09. Roslindale, S., 10. Roxbury, Walnut Av. (of
which Rev. Mr. Wellman 6, Miss Dawson 1), 107.39.

Bedford, Soc. of United Workers, bbl. Goods, _for Straight U._
Braintree, First, 3.47. Brimfield, bbl. Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._
Brockton, Porter Evan, 94.47; Mrs. Thos. C. Perkins, 1.50.
Brookfield, Mrs. R. B. Montague, 5.50. Brookline, Leyden, 129.45;
Harvard, 86.76; Harvard, S., 25. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim, 12.36.
Charlton, 10.95. Chelsea, Central, 31.03; First, bal. 7.02.
Chicopee, Third C., 22.70. Conway, Mary A. Hunt, _for S. A., Fort
Berthold, N. D._, 2.65. Dalton, Mrs. Mary E. Crane, 100; Miss Mollie
Crane, 100; Mrs. Z. M. Crane, 150; Miss Clara L. Crane, 100; Zenas
Crane, 100; W. Murray Crane, 100. Dennis, Miss Emma G. Hall, _for A.
G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 3. Deerfield, C. E. of C., 1.75. East
Douglas, 18.10. Fall River, Central (50 of which _for Remington
Station, Indian M., S. D._), 374.28. Fall River, First, 48.92. Fall
River, C. E. in Central C., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 20. Fitchburg,
Rollstone, 24.65. Framingham, Plymouth, 37. Framingham, "A Friend,"
_for Indian M., Fort Yates, Neb._, 10. Framingham, Schneider Band,
bbl. Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Franklin, 23.91. Freetown,
3.20. Foxboro, Mrs. Mary N. Phelps, to const. MRS. MARY GIBBS L.M.,
50. Foxboro, Mrs. S. Ellen Jewett's S. Class, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Globe Village, Evan. Free, 20.41. Gloucester,
Trinity C., bal., 93.91. Great Barrington, First, 12. Hadley, S.,
15; First, 14.60. Haverhill, Class No. 1., West C., _for Porto
Rico_, 25.46. Haverhill, West C., S., 14.59; C. E., 3.30. Haverhill,
Chas. Coffin, _for Porto Rico_, 4.50. Heath, C., bbl. Goods, _for L.
N. Sch., Marion, Ala._ Holyoke, "Friends," _for Fisk U._, 75.
Housatonic, Prim. Class, S., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., McIntosh,
Ga._, 2. Huntington, 14. Hyannis, 11.55. Ipswich, South, 33.
Lawrence, Lawrence St. C., 66.96; South, 27. Lawrence, Trinity C.,
Prim. Dept., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Leicester, 34.79.
Leicester, C. E. of C., _for Porto Rico_, 5. Lexington, Hancock,
132.23. Lowell, Kirk St. C., 100.75; Pawtucket C., 10. Ludlow, "A.
C. C.," 10. Ludlow Center, First, 3.52. Lynn, Central, 20. Marion,
S., 2.29. Medway Village, 13. Millbury, First, 29.60. Millis, 10.
Mittineague, Southworth Paper Co., box Paper, _for Meridian, Miss._
Monson, 20.10. Natick, First, 50. New Bedford, "A Friend," _for S.
A., Allen Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 1. Newbury, "Friends," _for Fisk
U._, 15.64. Newbury, First, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 9.14. Newbury,
First, 3. Newburyport, Prospect St. C., 12.45. Newton, Eliot (12 of
which _for Indian M._), 250.95. Newton, First, 80.52. Newton, Eliot
C., two bbls. Goods, freight prepaid, _for B. N. Sch., Greenwood,
S. C._ Newton Center, Extra Cent-a-Day Band, 13. Newton Highlands,
"A Friend," _for Marshallville, Ga._, 10. North Adams, 79.22.
Northampton, Prim. S. in Edwards C., _for Lamson Sch., Marshallville,
Ga._, 6.43. Northampton and South Hadley, S., Singing Books,
_for Meridian, Miss._ North Andover Depot. Mabel S. Robinson's
Class, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 1. North Brookfield, First, _for
Porto Rico_, 15.50. North Dighton, King's Daughters of First
C., _for S. A., Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 10. North Falmouth, 10. North
Reading, Union, 2.50. North Somerville, "A Friend," _for Mountain
White Work_, 1. Norwood, First (of which 5.36 _for Chinese Mission
Bldg., San Francisco, Cal._), 70.09. Pittsfield, First Ch. of
Christ, 116; South, S., 20. Pittsfield, S. of Pilgrim Memorial C.,
_for Porto Rico_, 3.50. Plymouth, Ch. of the Pilgrimage, 15.
Reading, 30. Rockland, First, 25. Rowley, Miss M. D. Holzinger, _for
Tillotson C._ (5 of which _for S. A._), 10. Royalston, First, 2.25.
Royalston, D. P. White, _for Mountain Work_, 5. Salem, Crombie St.
C., S., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Salem, "A Friend," _for Mountain
White Work_, 5. Saxonville, Edwards, 11.25. Somerville, Highland, C.
E., _for S. A., Wilmington, N. C._, 5. Somerville, "A Friend," _for
Marshallville, Ga._, 5. Southbridge, 16.26. South Deerfield, Ladies'
M. Soc., _for S. A._, 7, and bbl. Goods, freight prepaid, _for B. N.
Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ South Hadley Falls, 50. South Hadley Falls,
Ladies' M. Soc., _for Straight U._, 10. Southampton, "The Sunshine
Band" and Friends, two bbls. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._
South Weymouth, Union, 31. South Weymouth, Mrs. William Dyer, _for
Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 25. South
Weymouth, Old South, 15. South Weymouth, Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for Allen
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 15. South Weymouth, Union C., bbl. Goods,
_for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._ Springfield, First Ch. of Christ,
125.84; South, 62.34; South, S., 25. Sutton, E. L. Snow, 30.
Taunton, West, 14.33; "A Friend," 2. Three Rivers, Union Evan.,
23.29. Townsend, 9.87. Upton, First, 4.89. Wakefield, 45.25.
Waltham, Trin., 24.06. Ware, East, S., 33.34. Ware, First, S., _for
Porto Rico_, 6. Ware. Miss Ruth Tucker, _for S. A., Lexington, Ky._,
5. Ware, S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 3.60. Wavorly, L. M. Soc., 5.
Webster, First, 19.18. Webster, Anna L. Perry bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._ Wendell, 1. Westbrook, "Friend," _for Fisk U._,
25. West Brookfield, C., 6; S., 7.44. West Newton, Second, Woman's
Guild, by Mrs. W. A. Young (50 of which _for Sch'p, Fisk U._) 74.34.
Westport, 11.50. Weymouth and Braintree, C. E., 2.50; Mrs. Snyder's
S. Class, 1, _for S. A., for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._
Whately, 25. Whitinsville, Mrs. J. J. Abbott, box Goods and 5, _for
S. A., Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Williamsburg, First, 9.80.
Williamstown, First, 76.56. Winchester, First, 86.34. Woburn, First,
123.42. Woburn, Mrs. S. D. Greenough, 5; Montvale C., 1. Worcester,
Central, 236.63. Union C., 93.13; Union, C. E., 5; Piedmont,
quarterly, 60. Worcester, Fred. M. Barnard, _for Porto Rico_, 25
cts. Worcester, Immanuel C., Christmas Goods, _for Straight U._
Yarmouth, 20.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I., Miss
Lizzie D. White, Treas., $575.00.

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., _for Salaries_, 480; _for Chinese_,
20. Boston, Old South, _for Sch'p, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 75.

ESTATES.--Boston, Estate of Elizabeth C. Parkhurst, 15. Northampton,
Estate of Numan Clark, by Miss C. M. Clark, 15. Worcester, Estate of
Harriet Wheeler Damon, 12.33.


RHODE ISLAND, $337.28.

Little Compton, United, 22.56. Newport United, quarterly, 11.02.
Newport, Capt. Asa Walker and Mrs. Belle G. Walker, _for Tillotson
C._, 5. Pawtucket, 110; Central Falls, 36.14; Park Place, 26.51.
Providence, Pilgrim, 116.35; North, C. E., 4.70. Providence, E. B.
Hale, Paper, _for Acad., McIntosh, Ga._ Providence, Jr. Benev. Soc.,
Christmas Box, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Westerly, L. M. Soc., _for
Tillotson C._, 5.


CONNECTICUT, $8,074.95--of which from Estate, $1,500.00.

Bantam, Mrs. Ella Grannis, 6. Barkhamsted, 3.23. Bethel, First,
29.77. Bloomfield, 2.67. Bristol, First, 58.67. Bridgeport, Park St.
C., 84.50. Bridgeport, C. E. of C., _for S. A., B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._, 10. Bridgewater, L. M. S., box Goods, _for Grand
View, Tenn._ Broad Brook, 9.41. Clinton, C., ad'l, 2.25. Colchester,
Ladies' Ben. Soc., two boxes Goods, _for Strieby, N. C._ Cornwall,
First (25 of which _for Porto Rico_), 75. Cornwall, Second, 44.
Cornwall, First, S., 17.36 _for Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, and 17.36
_for Sch., Fort Berthold, N. D._ Cromwell, 80.77. Danbury, Great
Plain District, L. M. S., pkg. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._
Danielson, Westfield C., 26.02. Darien, C. E., by Miss A. L.
Waterbury, 10. Deep River, 12.62. East Hartford, Ladies' M. Soc.,
bbl. Goods, freight prepaid, _for B. N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._
Enfield, First, 25. Farmington, "A Friend," 100. Fairfield, Mrs. M.
W. Lyon, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. Fair Haven, Second, 14.75.
Greenfield Hill, C. E., by A. Maria Wakeman, Chairman of M. C.,
8.72. Greenwich, C. E., bbl. Goods, _for Marion, Ala._ Groton, S.,
16.03. Hartford, Asylum Hill C., 264.77: First, 225.53. Hartford,
Mrs. Lucy A. Seymour, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Hartford, Farm.
Ave. Cong., S., _for Rosebud Indian M._, by Edward B. Cook, Treas.,
33.87. Hartford, Warburton Chapel, S., 21.72. Hartford, Center C.,
box Pictures, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Kensington, 33.05. Ledyard,
Newell Soc. of C., bbl. Goods, _for Cappahosic, Va._ Meriden, First,
39.32; First, "Member," 5. Middletown, South, 10. Monroe, 7.75.
Naugatuck, C., _for Porto Rico_, 25. New Britain, South, S., 30 _for
Tougaloo U._ and 14 _for Porto Rico_. New Britain, L. M. S., two
boxes and bbl. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ New Canaan, S.,
_for Indian Sch., Santee, Neb._, 50. New Haven, Rev. Charles Ray
Palmer, D.D., In memory of Mrs. Mary Barnes Palmer, _for Porto
Rico_, 1,000. New Haven, Davenport C., 28.90; Plymouth, S., 20;
Plymouth, 5.88; Miss Mary J. Yale, 1. New Haven, Welcome Hall S. of
Ch. of the Redeemer, _for Porto Rico_, 18.60. New Haven, United C.,
C. E., 15; Charles Wissert, Ten Bibles, _for S. A., Macon, Ga._ New
London, First Ch. of Christ, 46.89. New Milford, Mrs. George Hine,
10. Newtown, 8. North Guilford, 8. North Stonington, S., 7. Norwalk,
First, 68.46. Norwich, First, 52.43; Second, to cont. DEA. JOSEPH D.
HAVILAND L.M., 48.23; Greenville C., 10; Greenville S., 7.70.
Norwich, Miss Ida Sutherland, _for Hillsboro, N. C._, 1.14. Norwich,
Park C., H. M. S., two pkgs. Christmas Goods, _for Grand View,
Tenn._ Norwich, Park C., two pkgs. Books, etc., _for Allen Sch.,
Thomasville, Ga._ Norwich Town, Miss Grace McClellan, deceased,
7,500 (Reserve account, 4,500), 3,000. Old Lyme, First, 47.65.
Plantsville, 16.05. Plymouth, Mrs. Julia Gordon, _for Wilmington, N.
C._, 2. Pomfret Center, W. M. Soc., two bbls. Goods, _for Little's
Mills, N. C._ Portland, C. E., _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 2. Preston
City, 15. Salisbury, 5.93. Saybrook, S., _for Porto Rico_, 11.
Saybrook, Mrs. Caroline I. McCall, two pkgs. Christmas Goods, _for
Grand View, Tenn._ Shelton, S., 10. Stonington, L. S. of First C.,
_for Wilmington, N. C._, 9.50. Stonington, M. H. Giddings, 5.
Stoughton, ----, box Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Sound Beach,
Plymouth, bbl. Goods, _for Childersburg, Ala._ South Britain, 13.52.
Southington, First, 30.71. South Manchester, Center, S., 11.05.
South Windsor, 21.23. Suffield, First, to const. MISS LIZZIE M.
ADAMS L.M., 30. Thomaston, First, 8.26. Wallingford, 96.70.
Waterbury, First, 134.68; Mrs. W. H. Camp, 100. Waterbury, Mrs. G.
C. Hill, _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Waterbury C., three bbls.
Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Washington, H. S. Nettleton, 4
_for Sch'p, Talladega C._, and 4 _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N.
C._ Weathersfield, ----, box Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ West
Hartford, First Ch. of Christ (5 of which _for Indian M._), bal. to
constitute CLARA FRANCES MALLORY and CLARENCE COLTON SCARBOROUGH
L.M's., 57.49. West Haven, First, 25.95. West Torrington, C. E., by
Miss Grace V. Sanford, Treas., 14.15. West Torrington, L. H. M. S.,
_for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Westport, Saugatuck C., 23.27. Wolcott,
C., 4; C. E., 6. Woodbridge, S., _for Porto Rico_, 7. Woodbury,
First, 10. Yantic, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONNECTICUT, by Mrs. Geo.
Follett, Secretary, $43.44.

Bridgeport, Park Street, 25. Danbury, 1.41. Thompson, 17.03.

ESTATE.--Torrington, Est. of Lauren Wetmore, 1,500.


NEW YORK, $798.43.

Antwerp, First, 5.50, Binghamton, First, Bible Sch., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 50. Binghamton, Mrs. LaFayette Safford, Organ, _for
Martin, Fla._ Brooklyn, Willoughby Ave., S., branch of Clinton Ave.
C., 75; "A Friend," 10; Bushwick Ave. C., 7.37; Mrs. Rufus Chase, 2;
Immanuel C., W. M. Soc., 1. Brooklyn, Miss M. D. Halliday, two bbls.
Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Brooklyn, Puritan. M. Bd. and Jr. C.
E., bbl. Goods, Jr. C. E., Christmas Pkg.; Immanuel C., bbl.
Christmas Goods; New Eng., L. M. S., two bbls. Goods, _for King's
Mountain, N. C._ Brooklyn, The Lend-a-Hand Club, by Miss Marion
Libby, Church Organ, _for Troy, N. C._ Brooklyn, Jr. C. E., by Mrs.
Ellen Lewis, pkg. Christmas Goods, _for Hillsboro, N. C._
Canandaigua, Ladies, bbl. C., _for King's Mountain, N. C._
Chateaugay, Joseph Shaw, 5. Chittenango, Mrs. Amelia L. Brown, 5.
Clifton Springs, "Friends," by Mrs. C. C. Thayer, _for S. A., King's
Mountain, N. C._, 6.18. Coventryville, Primary S. Class, _for Fisk
U._, 2.50. Durham, Presb. C., box Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._
East Bloomfield, Mrs. Eliza S. Goodwin, 5. Elbridge, First, 15.20.
Elizabethtown, 14.36. Gloversville, Mrs. Mary G. Kingsley, for
Tillotson C., 30 cts. Jamaica, Rev. E. A. Mirick, _for Porto Rico_,
3. Jefferson, Mrs. Clemon Nichols, 4.50. Lockport, First, S., _for
S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Newark Valley, Mrs. M. Ella Davidge, _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 50. New York, "Friend," 50; Z. Stiles Ely, 50;
Pilgrim, 30; Dr. H. C. Houghton, 25; C. Irving Fisher, M.D., 10; R.
Turner, Jr., 5. New York, Broadway Tabernacle, S., _for Chinese
Mission Bldg., San Francisco, Cal._, 25. New York, C. E. of Pilgrim
C., _for Porto Rico_, 15. New York, J. Weidenfeld, _for Organ,
Meridian, Miss._, 5. New York, Broadway Tabernacle Soc. Woman's
Work, _for Porto Rico_, 3. New York, Mt. Hope C., two bbls.
Magazines, etc., _for King's Mountain, N. C._ New York, by Miss
Emily Huntington, Cooking Garden Text-Book and Lesson Leaves, _for
Porto Rico_. New York, M. E. Brown, box Goods, _for Andersonville,
Ga._ Northfield, Union C., 11.72. Olean, First, 2.52. Oxford, 20.
Fairport, A. M. Loomis, 10. Sayville, 30. Sherburne, C. E., 20;
"Friend." 20, _for Fisk U._ Sherburne, Mrs. J. C. Harrington, 5.
Sing Sing, Mrs. C. S. Arnold, "In memory of her mother, Mrs. Harriet
M. Cole," 15. Syracuse, Chas. F. Robinson, 1. Ticonderoga, Mrs. D.
A. Higgins' S. Class, _for S. A._, 1, and two bbls. Goods, _for
King's Mountain, N. C._ Triangle, C. E., by Miss F. R. Morse,
Pres't, _for Mountain White Work_, 2. Walton, First, S., 12.28.
Warsaw, L. M. S. of C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Wellsville, C. E. of First, _for Santurce Sch., Porto Rico_, 4.
Woodville, S., _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 11.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $143.00.

Brooklyn, Lewis Av., C. E., 45, to constitute GEORGE DAY L.M.; E. M.
Circle, 24. Buffalo, Niagara Sq. C., 9. New York, Broadway
Tabernacle, Soc. _for Woman's Work_, 60. Oxford, C. E., 5.


NEW JERSEY, $256.94.

East Orange, Mrs. J. A. Halskamper, 20. (10 _of which for Indian
M._). Chester, Jacob H. Cramer, 25. Newark, Girl's Union of First
C., _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 5. Newark, Belleville Av. C., 2
bbls. Goods, (val. 50), _for Strieby, N. C._ Montclair, First, 25.
Montclair, C., Y. L. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Knoxville, Tenn._ Mount
Holly, Mrs. Walter Robbins, 5. Little Ferry, Evan., 1.60. Upper
Montclair, Christian Union C., 170.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N., by Mrs. G. A. L.
Merrifield, Treas., $5.34.

Philadelphia, Central, 5.34.


PENNSYLVANIA, $322.00.

Kane, 6. Le Raysville, 4. Pittsburg, "Cash," 200. Philadelphia, W.
Graham Tyler, 25. Philadelphia, Park, S., _for Porto Rico_, 38.
Philadelphia, Central, Goodell Bible Class, _for Porto Rico_, 15.
Pittsburg, Miss Sarah L. Oller, 25; Mrs. F. W. Dayton, _for S. A.,
Mobile, Ala._, 5. Scranton, Providence Welsh C., 4.


OHIO, $447.38.

Akron, West S., 14.62. Austinburg, C., bbl. Goods, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._ Bellevue, 23.81, Lyme C., 10.61. Brecksville, 11.
Brighton, First, 2. Chardon, Ladies' M. Soc., _for B. N. Sch.,
Greenwood, S. C._, Bbl. Goods Cincinnati, Storrs C., S., _for S. A.,
Orange Park, Fla._, 1. Cleveland, Euclid Av. C., ad'l, 19.75; First,
15.75; Lake View 11.50; Olivet 2.10. Cleveland, Miss Carrie Rost, 6;
Euclid Ave., bbl. Goods, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._
Cleveland, Euclid Ave. Christmas Box, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
Cleveland, Pilgrim bbl, Goods, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Columbus,
Plymouth Ladies' M. S., bbl. Goods, and 50 Hymn Books, _for Grand
View, Tenn._ Creston, Jackson Presb. C., "Friends," 4.15, S. Class,
3.50, Miss May Crane, _for freight_, 2, Rev. A. W. Knowlton, 2; W.
H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._ Dover,
Mrs. A. Weston, Bible _for Tougaloo U._ Geneva, Mrs. Harriet A.
Wood, 1. Geneva, King's Daughters, bbl. Goods, _for Tougaloo U._
Harbor, Second, 10. Huntsburg, Jr. C. E., _for Orange Park, Fla._,
2.50. Jefferson, C., M. Soc., 2 bbls. Goods, _for Tougaloo U._
Lenox, L. M. A. Soc., bbl. Goods. _for Tougaloo U._ Lorain, First,
(2 of which _for Porto Rico_), 26.81. Madison, S. of Central C.,
4.50. Mallet Creek, L. M. S., bbl. Apples, _for King's Mt., N. C._
Marblehead, 3.60. Marietta, Mrs. J. G. Barker, box Goods, _for
Mobile, Ala._ Marysville, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._ Monroeville, Miss Hattie Keeler, _for L. N.
Sch., Marion, Ala._, 1. New Milford, Mrs. E. G. Prindle, 1.50. North
Benton, Simon Hartzell, 30. Oberlin, First, 41.06; First Mrs. M. A.
Keep, 25; Second, 20.26. Oberlin, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Ravenna, S., 10. Richfield, Christine, Betts,
Jeanette and Scott Wheatley, _for S. A. Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Rock
Creek, S., _for Porto Rico_, 2.25. Saybrook, Mission Band of C.,
3.35. South New Lyme, King's Daughters, bbl. Goods, _for King's Mt.,
N. C._ Steubenville, First, 9.45. Twinsburg, S., 10. Wellington,
First, 36.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas.,
$77.81.

Alexis, 1. Bellevue. 4. Cleveland, Euclid Ave., 20; First, 7.35.
Hudson, 5. Ironton, 2.40. Lafayette, 1. Mansfield, Central N. Conf.,
C. E., 5.16. North Fairfield, W. M. S., 2.50. North Fairfield, C.
E., 1. Oberlin, Second, C. E., 10. Steubenville, 2.40. Toledo,
Second, Jr. C. E., 1. West Mill Grove, "Personal," 5. Willoughby,
Miss Mary P. Hastings, 10.


INDIANA, $30.50.

Indianapolis, Mayflower C., 10. Terre Haute, First, 20; S. W. Noyes,
50 cts.


ILLINOIS, $715.28.

Alton, Rev. Chas. Phinney, 20; Mrs. E. L. Drury, 1. Amboy, Miss
Sophia Bell, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Aurora, New
England C., Corban Assoc., _for freight, Indian M., Fort Berthold,
N. D._, 3. Avon, C., _for Porto Rico_, 4. Canton, Miss. Soc., by
Miss Anna Allen, box Goods, _for Mobile, Ala._

Chicago, South; 69.15; New England, 28.27; Pilgrim, 15; Waveland
Ave. C., 6. Chicago, Mrs. C. H. Case, _for S. A., King's Mt., N.
C._, 10. Chicago, Union Park, "A Friend," _for Porto Rico_, 2.
Chicago, Tabernacle, S., _for S. A., Nat, Ala._, 1.25. Chicago, "A
Friend," Memory of Miss Farrand, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._,
1. Chicago, Mrs. R. I. Fish, _for Indian M., Fort Berthold. N. D._,
1.

Delavan, R. Hoghton, 10, Dover, S., 5. Elgin, First, 6.62. Evanston,
First, ad'l, 1. Geneseo. C., 32.26; Mrs. P. Huntington, 10; Mrs. R.
B. Paul, 5. Geneseo. W. M. S., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Godfrey, S.,
2.95 _for Mountain White Work_, and 2.60 _for Porto Rico_,
Griggsville, Miss Abby V. Green, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._,
1. Harvey, Thomas McFarlane, 5 boxes Books, freight paid, _Tougaloo
U._ Hinsdale, 18.81. Lagrange, Mrs. A. G. Morey, 20 cts. Moline, L.
M. Soc., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 3.50. Moline, "A Vermont Sister,"
_for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Naperville, C., ad'l, 1. Oak
Park, First, 90.22. Ottawa, S., _for Chinese Mission Building, San
Francisco, Cal._, 16.52. Peoria, Rev. A. A. Stevens, 3. Polo, Ind.
Presb., W. M. S., 8.48. Princeton, "Some Friends," 4. Princeton,
bbl. Goods, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Roscoe, 6.85. Somonauk, C. E.,
2.75. Stillman Valley, 16.19. Sycamore, Mrs. Helen A. Carnes, _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Watseka, L. C. Joiner, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Wheaton College, Ch. of Christ, 33.85.
Winnebago, L. Soc. of C., bbl. and box of Christmas Goods, _for A.
G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ Winnetka, 2. Woodstock, S., 4; Mildred and
Earl Young, 3; Presb. S., box Christmas Goods; Jr. C. E., of Cong.
C., bbl. and box Goods, _for L. N. Sch., Marion, Ala._ Yorkville, C.
E., 7.50; C., 5.10; S., 3.45.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Miss Bessie E. Crosby,
Treas., $227.76.

Albion, First, Jr. C. E., 3.50 Champaign, 6.50. Chicago, Union Park,
5. Chicago, Covenant, 5. Chicago, New England, 4.50. Decatur, 5.
Dundee, 4. Galesburg, East Main, 2.50. Griggsville, 5. Hinsdale, S.,
2. Jacksonville, 5. Jacksonville, C. E., 10. McLean, 5. Moline,
First, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 21.50. Naperville, S., 10.86. Oak Park,
First, 66.90. Odell, 15. Odell, C. E., 10.50. Rockford, First, 20;
W. H. M. U., undesignated, 20.


MICHIGAN, $1,420.92--of which from Estate, $999.00.

Alamo, Julius Hackley, 39.90. Allegan, "A Friend," 100. Ann Arbor,
from Mite Boxes, by Miss Gertrude T. Breed, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Ann
Arbor, Mrs. M. V. Torrans, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 25
cts. Chelsea, First, 1.30. Detroit, Brewster C. (5 of which _for
Porto Rico_), 20.73. Dexter, Dennis Warner, 20. Flint, Ladies' M.
S., bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Lake Linden, 17.11.
Ludington, 25.80. Ludington, Ladies' M. Soc., bbl. Goods, freight
prepaid, _for B. N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Old Mission, 1. Romeo,
L. M. S. of C., bbl. Goods; Mrs. Dr. Greenshields, bbl. Goods, _for
Wilmington, N. C._ Saginaw, First, 20. Saint Joseph, S., 5.04. ----
"Michigan," 40.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICH., by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $125.79.

Benton Harbor, 50 cts. Cheboygan, 5. Detroit, First, _for S. A._,
36.63. Detroit, First, S., _for S. A., Santee, Neb._, 4.86. Grand
Rapids Park, Y. L. M. S., 25, _for S. A., Santee, Neb._; "Willing
Workers," 2.50; April Band, 1. Grass Lake, 4. Greenville, 2.
Harrison, 50 cts. Hopkins Station, 75 cts. Jackson, First, 8.
Jackson, Plymouth, 15 cts. Leslie, First, 15 cts.; Second, 15 cts.
Michigan Center, 15 cts. Muskegon, First, 5. Napoleon, 15 cts.
Olivet, 21. Pinckney, 15 cts. Saint Clair, S., 5. Salem, Second, 1,
Sandstone, 15 cents. Victor, 2.

ESTATE.--Eaton Rapids, Estate of Allen C. Dutton, 1,000 (less 1
exchange), 999, by Fred. Z. Hamilton, Executor.


IOWA, $322.71.

Alden. Mrs. Ella V. Patterson and daughter, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 1.50. Cedar Rapids, Mrs. E. A. Berry, _for
Wilmington, N. C._, 2.50. Cedar Rapids, C. E. of Bethany C., 2.
Charles City, Mrs. C. D. Ellis, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._,
5. Emmetsburg, First, 11.85; C. E. of First, 2.46; H. M. Army, 2; L.
M. S., 5. Eldora, 52. Eldora, Chas. McKeen Duren, _for Grand View,
Tenn._, 20. Des Moines, Byron C. Ward, _for Straight U._, 24.
Grinnell, S., 18.77. Grinnell, Mrs. M. N. Darnell, _for A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Grinnell, "Friends," 2 bbls. Goods, _for King's
Mt., N. C._ Ionia, C. E., _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 5. Lansing, Rev.
Andrew Kern, 2. Mason City, C. E., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 10.
Moville, C., 2; C. E., 3. Nashua, C. E., _for S. A., Tougaloo U._,
5. Nashua, C., 4.24. Osceola, Miss Jennie M. Baird, _for Porto
Rico_, 5. Quasqueton, 6.50. Rockwell, 20. Salem, S., 5. Stacyville,
6. Waterloo, 45.27.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $55.62.

Alpha, 5. Cedar Falls, C. E., 5. Cedar Rapids, First, 5.20. Central
City, 2. Chester Center, 1.54. Corning, 6.50. Des Moines, Plymouth,
4.63. Dubuque, First, 3.25. Eldora, 10. Fort Dodge, 10. Newtonville,
Union S., 2.50.


MINNESOTA, $314.89.--of which from Estate, $100.00.

Austin, First, 25.04. Duluth, L. U. of Pilgrim C., by Mrs. R. A.
Webster, _for S. A., Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._, 10. Elgin,
Marjorie Sawyer, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 50 cts. Elk
River, Union C., 5.14. Hawley, 5. Litchfield, bbl. Goods, _for
Meridian, Miss._ Mantorville, First, _for Porto Rico_, 10.
Minneapolis, Pilgrim, 17.28; Dr. E. J. Brown, 5; Vine, 4.35.
Minneapolis, Rev. and Mrs. Henry Chase, of Plym. C., _for
enlargement of building, King's Mt., N. C._, 60. Owatona, 5.91. Red
Wing, D. C. Hill, 5. Rochester, 29.17. Silver Lake, C. E. of
Bohemian Free Reformed C., 5. Saint Paul, Atlantic C., bbl. Goods,
_for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._ Winona, First, 27.50.

ESTATE.--Saint Paul, Estate of Rev. Edmund Gale, by T. B. Clement,
Executor, 100.


WISCONSIN, $380.05.

Brodhead, 13.25. Dartford, 4.75. Delavan, 8.59. Clinton, C., ad'l,
2. Hartford, Mrs. Freeman, _for freight, Meridian, Miss._, 3.50.
Janesville, First, 25. Lake Geneva, First, 6.33. Menasha, 35.
Menomonie, First, 9.55. Milton, C., _for Straight U._, 5. Prescott,
115, to const. REV. HERMAN OBERHAUS, R. B. MAC LEAN and MATTHEW T.
DILL L.M's. Sheboygan, S., _for S. Work, Porto Rico_, 53.50. Travor,
Liberty C., 2.40. Union Grove, 13.19; Mrs. Clara Smith, 5.
Wauwatosa, W. M. S. of C., 8. Waukesha, M. Band and S., bbl. Goods,
_for King's Mountain, N. C._ Whitewater, 29.94.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $40.05.

Arena, First, 1.95. Beloit, First C., W. M. S., 7.60. Elkhorn, _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 25. Platteville, 50 cts. Wauwatosa, 5.


MISSOURI, $192.98.

Cole Camp, 5. Ironton, Fanny M. Markham, 1. Kansas City, First,
121.77; Beacon Hill C., 7.95. Kidder, box Books, _for Meridian,
Miss._ Pleasant Hill, George M. Kellogg, _for Porto Rico_, 50.
Webster Grove, First, 7.26.


KANSAS, $80.60.

Centralia, box Goods, _for Meridian, Miss._ Diamond Springs, Mrs. E.
A. Hedgespeth, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Eureka, Clark
Nye, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 50 cents. Leavenworth, First
(25 of which _for Mountain White Work_), 50. Louisville, 1.
Manhattan, First, 6.25. Manhattan, Mrs. Mary Robinson, bbl. Goods,
_for Mobile, Ala._ Newton, 4.05. Orchard, D. W. Feemster, 5.
Pauline, S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 2.55. Wabaunsee, Mrs. S. St.
John, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF KANSAS, by Mrs. M. B. Markham,
Vice-Pres., $7.00.

Cora, 2. Twelve Mile, 5.


NEBRASKA, $139.43.

Arborville, 5.63. Ashland, 20.41. Franklin, Linton B. Wood, _for A.
G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Fontanelle, Mrs. H. M. Bisbee, _for
A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Grafton, 3.60. Grand Island, First,
6. Lincoln, First, to const. REV. W. H. MANSS L.M., 52.17. Norfolk,
Mrs. Ellis B. Kenyon, _for Mountain White Work_, 5. Oberon, C., to
const. REV. EBEN E. SAUNDERS L.M., 41. Petersburg, 2.62.


NORTH DAKOTA, $6.30.

Jamestown, 6.30.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $64.58.

Erwin, 4. Yankton, S., _for S. A., Santee Agency, Neb._, 7.65.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $52.93.

Academy, C. E., 2. Badger Lake, 7. Canova, 2.50. Clark, 5. Columbia,
1.55. Huron, 5. Lead, 3. Lead, C. E., 1.50. Mitchell, 2.75. Moreau
River, C., I. W. M. S., 5. Pierre, C. E., 1.13. Sioux Falls, 10.
Spear Fish, 75 cts. Virgin Creek, C., I. W. M. S., 3. Wakonda, 1.
Webster, 1.75.


COLORADO, $81.17.

Buena Vista, Geo. Wallace and family, _for Dorchester Acad.,
McIntosh, Ga._, 27. Buena Vista, 1. Colorado Springs, First, 39.87.
Highlandlake, Mrs. M. L. Mead, 20 cts. Manitou, C. E., _for Alaska
M._, 10. Manitou, C., 3.10.


CALIFORNIA, $428.55.

California, "A Friend," 12. Cloverdale, C., _for Chinese M._, 4.
Poway, 8. San Francisco, receipts of the California Chinese Mission
(see items below), 367.09. Santa Ana, First, 4.50. Santa Rosa,
Kingdom Extension Soc. of First, _for Chinese M._, 2. Stockton, Rev.
J. C. Holbrook, D.D., 17.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, by Mrs. Mary
Montague Smith, Treas., $13.46.

Riverside, S. of First C., _for Mountain White Work_, 13.46.


OREGON, $27.00.

Portland, Hassalo St. C., 24. Willsburg, _for Porto Rico_, 3.


WASHINGTON, $15.78.

Coupersville, First, 5. Deer Park, 5. Everett, First, 90 cts.; S.,
93 cts.; C. E., 1.50. Seattle, University C., 2.45.


INDIAN TERRITORY, $5.00.

Muscogee, Miss Edith Taylor, _for S. A., Tillotson C._, 5.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $34.00.

Washington, "A Friend," _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._, 30.
Washington, Jr. C. E. of University Park Temple, 4.


MARYLAND, $23.50.

Baltimore, First, 23.50.


VIRGINIA, $8.25.

Falls Church, First, 8.25.


KENTUCKY, $29.46.

Berea, "Church of Christ at Berea," 12.71. Berea, W. C. Ass'n, by
Mrs. E. L. Hanson, Treas., _for Porto Rico_, 3.25. Campton, Rev. J.
W. Doane, 3. Lexington, C. E., 1. Lexington, Proceeds Silver Medal
Contest at Chandler Normal School, 9.50.


TENNESSEE, $35.50.

Bon Air, 1. Deer Lodge, Union S., 2; Rev. Geo. Lusty, 1. Grand View,
Mary E. Taylor, _for S. A., Grand View, Tenn._, 1.50. Nashville,
Prof. F. A. Chase, _for Fisk U._, 30.


GEORGIA, $1.00.

Cypress Slash, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 1.


FLORIDA, $7.26.

Melbourne, First, 7.26.


ALABAMA, $17.00.

Childersburg, 4. Marion, "A Friend," _for L. N. Sch., Marion, Ala._,
10. Talladega, "Little Helpers of Talladega C.", _for Porto Rico_,
3.


MISSISSIPPI, $2.00.

Moorhead, Miss Eva Rogers, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2.


LOUISIANA, $69.95.

Jennings, C. E., by Mrs. W. F. Humphreys, Sec., _for Porto Rico_,
50. New Iberia, Saint Paul C., 5. New Orleans, Mary L. Rogers, _for
Straight U._, 4.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF LA., by Miss Mary L. Rogers,
Treas., $10.95.

Abbeville, 2. Belle Place, 4.24. New Iberia, 2.50. New Iberia, Jr.
C. E., 75 cts. Roseland, 1.46.


TEXAS, $10.00.

Palestine, First, 5. San Antonio, M. Parker, _for Tougaloo U._, 5.


ENGLAND, $30.00.

London, Mrs. R. C. Morgan, _for S. A., King's Mountain, N. C._, 30.


BULGARIA, $10.00.

Bulgaria, "W. W.," 10.


CHINA, $2.00.

Tung-cho, Rev. G. D. Wilder, 2.


PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, $20.00.

Iloilo, Mrs. W. F. Haskell, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 20.


INCOME, $562.50.

Atterbury Endowment Fund, 106.87. De Forest Fund, _for President's
Chair, Talladega C._, 202.50. Gen'l C. B. Fisk Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk
U._, 11.25. Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 112.50. Haley
Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._, 22.50. Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._,
22.50. Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._, 56.25. LeMoyne Fund, _for
Memphis, Tenn._, 22.50. Rice Memorial Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega
C._, 5.63.


TUITION, $4,303.27.

Cappahosic, Va., 39.35. Lexington, Ky., 104.65. Williamsburg, Ky.,
Public Fund, 73.05. Williamsburg, Ky., 48.40. Beaufort, N. C.,
37.99. Blowing Rock, N. C., 27.25. Chapel Hill, N. C., 8.40.
Enfield, N. C., 15.11. King's Mountain, N. C., 37. Hillsboro, N. C.,
24.30. Saluda, N. C., 24.50. Saluda, N. C., Public Fund, 30. Troy,
N. C., 1.20. Whittier, N. C., 10.95. Wilmington, N. C., 153.90.
Charleston, S. C., 244.05. Greenwood, S. C., 108.90. Grand View,
Tenn., 11.99. Grand View, Tenn., Public Fund, 40. Knoxville, Tenn.,
52.35. Memphis, Tenn., 518.30. Nashville, Tenn., 572.21. Pleasant
Hill, Tenn., 74.85. Albany, Ga., 54.85. Andersonville, Ga., 11.20.
Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch., 233.20. Macon, Ga., 236.62. McIntosh,
Ga., 143.19. Marietta, Ga., 8. Savannah, Ga., 162.26. Thomasville,
Ga., 81.40. Florence, Ala., 37.35. Marion, Ala., 79.14. Mobile,
Ala., 139.25. Nat, Ala,, 26.40. Meridian, Miss., 99.96. Moorhead,
Miss., 38. Tougaloo, Miss., 132.05. New Orleans, La., 429.60.
Austin, Tex., 59.25. Martin, Fla., 4. Orange Park, Fla., 50.25. San
Juan, P. R., 18.60.


SUMMARY FOR JANUARY, 1900.

  Donations                                            $21,381.64
  Estates                                                5,291.33
                                                      -----------
                                                       $26,672.97
  Income                                                   562.50
  Tuition                                                4,303.27
                                                      -----------
  Total for January                                    $31,538.74


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for January                                $82.58
  Previously acknowledged                                   55.01
                                                      -----------
                                                          $137.59


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Nov. 16th to Dec.
21st, 1899, $121.66, William Johnstone, Treasurer.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $121.66:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 1. Harford, Chinese M. O., 14. Los Angeles,
Chinese M. O., 14.40. Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.50. Oakland,
Chinese M. O., 6.45. Oroville. Chinese M. O., 1.75. Pasadena,
Chinese M. O., 2.20. Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 3. Riverside, Chinese
M. O., 5.16. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5. San Bernardino, Chinese
M. O., 5.90. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 2.25. San Francisco, Central,
Chinese M. O., 9.65. San Francisco, West, Chinese M. O., 3.40. Santa
Barbara, Chinese M. O., 4.80. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 7. Santa
Cruz, Japanese M. O., 7. Ventura, Chinese M. O., 1.75; Ann'y
Pledges, 15. Vernondale, Chinese M. O., 3.45; Ann'y Pledges, 1.

RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Dec. 21st, 1899, to
Jan. 16th, 1900, $245.43, William Johnstone, Treasurer.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $120.73.

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 65 cts. Los Angeles, Chinese M. O., 3.75.
Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.50. Oroville, Chinese M. O., 2.25;
Special Off., Repairs, etc., 36.30. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 3.10;
Eastern Friends, 2. Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 2.50. Riverside,
Chinese M. O., 5.75; Special Off., 3.40. Riverside, Ann'y Pldgs,
13.27. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5. San Bernardino, Chinese M. O.,
4.10. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 4.75. San Francisco, Central,
Chinese M. O., 8.55. Santa Barbara, Chinese M. O., 5.35. Santa Cruz,
Chinese M. O., 6.76. Santa Cruz, Japanese M. O., 4. Ventura, Chinese
M. O., 1.75.

CHURCHES, ETC., $45.00:

San Jose, First, Kingdom Extension Soc., 45.

INDIVIDUAL GIFTS, $59.00: Oakland, Mrs. R. E. Agard, 32. San
Francisco, Dea. S. Woo, 27.

RECEIVED FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $20.70:

Watsonville, Cal., Mrs. Martha Ellis, 5. Oakland, Cal., Mrs. Mary R.
Smith, 12. Oakland, Cal., First, S. Class Thirty-five, 3.70.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.


  Income for February                                   $4,795.54
  Previously acknowledged                               24,445.41
                                                      -----------
                                                       $29,240.95
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $134.68.

Biddeford, Second, C., bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._
Brownville, Mrs. Jessie Mason, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._
Falmouth, Ladies of Second C., bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._
Farmington, Mrs. Chas. Ballard, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 1.
Farmington, Miss C. N. Bixby, 2. Hampden, 5.50. Harrison, 2.
Houlton, First, S., Lincoln Mem,, 3. Islesboro, Miss Lucy E.
Pendleton, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. Machias, "A
Friend," 5. Madison, Woman's Soc., 2. North Bridgeton, 6. North
Bridgeton, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.43. North Bridgeton, Ladies' Circle,
bbl. Goods, _for Andersonville, Ga._ Portland, State St., C., _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 30. Princeton, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.25. Readfield
Depot, Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Mayhew, 2. South Freeport, Miss Fannie E.
Soule, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 30. Windham, 11.50. Woodfords, C. E.,
_for S. A., Talladega C._, 25.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $650.45.

Alstead, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.80. Alstead Center, Ladies' Soc. of C.,
bbl. Goods, _for Knoxville, Tenn._ Amherst, S., 5. Boscawen,
Cent-a-day Fund, by Dea. E. Raymond. 5.65. Boscawen, S., Lincoln
Mem., 1.85. Campton, 7. Concord, C., box Goods, _for Marion, Ala._
Conway, Second, "A Friend," 6.50. Conway, Second, Mite Boxes, _for
Porto Rico_, 2.25. Croydon, Mrs. Helen L. Burton and Friends, Goods,
_for McIntosh, Ga._ Exeter, Phillips, S., Lincoln Mem., 6.
Francestown, C., (12.50 of which _for Porto Rico_), 25. Greenville,
Isaiah Wheeler, 100. Hancock, S., Lincoln Mem., 8.08. Harrisville,
S., Lincoln Mem., 2.72. Hudson, Miss E. A. Warner, _for S. A.,
Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 32. Jaffrey, Miss'y Soc., bbl.
Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Keene, Mrs. J. P. Whitcomb's S. Class,
_for McIntosh, Ga._, 15. Keene, Second, S., 8. Keene, 2 bbls. Goods
_for Marion, Ala._ Kensington, S., Lincoln Mem., 4. Kingston, 13.40.
Laconia, Ladies' S., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Lisbon, C.,
_for Porto Rico_, 10. Littleton, First, C. E., _for Mountain White
Work_, 5. Littleton, "Mountain Gleaners," _for Blowing Rock, N. C._,
5. Lyme, S., 6.30. Manchester, First, 77.83; Franklin St., C.,
67.20. Newmarket, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.50. North Hampton, Mrs. Abbie
Gove, to const. MRS. CATHERINE E. DALTON, L.M., 30. North Hampton,
19.30. Somersworth, W. H. M. S., _for freight to Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._, 2.77. Somersworth, Mrs. M. M. Walker, 2. Stratham, 10.
Rindge, S., Lincoln Mem., 6. Rochester, First, S., 25. _for Alaska
M._, and 25. _for Mountain White Work_, in part Lincoln Mem.
Tamworth, 10. Washington, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.30.

NEW HAMPSHIRE FEMALE CENT. INST. AND HOME MISSIONARY UNION, by Miss
Annie A. McFarland, Treas., $100.00.

N. H. F. C. I. and H. M. U., 100.


VERMONT, $250.32.

Barton, Mrs. O. D. Owen, 20 cts. Barton, C., bbl. Goods, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Bennington, First, 29.28. Brattleboro, Central C.,
33.54. Brattleboro Center, S., Lincoln Mem., 8.03. Brattleboro, Mrs.
E. B. Rice, bbl. Goods, _for Fisk U._ Brownington, Ladies of C.,
bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Brookfield, Ladies' Soc., 2 bbls.
Goods, freight, 3, _for Saluda, N. C._ Burlington, Three S. Classes,
_for S. A., Brewer, N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._, 22.25. Cambridge, W.
H. M. S., box Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Chelsea, Mrs. P. D.
Comstock, _for freight to McIntosh, Ga._, 2. Essex, S., Lincoln
Mem., 6. Essex Junction, First, 6.01. Hartland, C., Lincoln Mem.,
1.40. Newbury, First, 26. Newfane, S., Lincoln Mem., 4.30. New
Haven, Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Newport, W. M.
S., _for freight to McIntosh, Ga._, 1.52. Norwich, Sew. Circle of
C., box Goods, freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Pittsford, S., _for
Saluda, N. C._, 2.25. Quechee, S., Lincoln Mem., 5.65. Randolph, "A
Friend," 10. Saint Johnsbury Center, S., Lincoln Mem., 2. South Hero
and Grand Isle, 5. Stockbridge, Rev. T. S. Hubbard, 5.39. Strafford,
C., 10; C. E., _for Mountain White Work_, 5. Swanton, Ladies' Soc.,
bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Waterbury, Primary Dept. S. _for S.
A., Santee Training Sch., Neb._, 1.50. West Barnet, "A Friend," 2.
West Brattleboro First _for S. A., Fisk U._, 10. West Brattleboro,
L. M. Soc., _for freight to Greenwood, S. C._, 1.25. Westminster
West, Mrs. H. P. Ranney, bbl. Goods, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Wilmington,
Ladies of C., bbl. and box Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Woodstock, C.,
Lincoln Mem., 17.82.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Mary Mackinnon,
Treas., $28.93.

Barre, Primary S., _for Schps._, 10. Brattleboro, West, Jr. C. E.,
_for Indian Schp._ 2. Brattleboro, C. E., _for Indian Schp._, 5.
Saint Albans, S., _for Schps._, 4.58. Saint Johnsbury, North C., S.,
_for Indian Schp._, 7.35.


MASSACHUSETTS, $2.506.78--of which from ESTATE, $7.84.

Adams, First, 44.08. Agawam, C., 10; S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Amesbury,
Union C., C. E., _for S. A., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 4.08. Amherst,
South, 10.82. Andover, C. E., of South C., _for Macon, Ga._, 20.
Arlington S., Lincoln Mem., 6.96. Ashburnham, Marshall Wetherbee, 5.
Barre, C., _for Porto Rico_, 21.45. Barre, S., 1.92. Belmont,
Plymouth, 5.66. Beverly, Mrs. R. R. Endicott, 2 bbls. Goods, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Blackstone, C., 10; S., 3; C. E., 3.50; Jr. C. E., 2.

Boston, Union C., C. E., 25. Boston, Mrs. C. E. Clapp, _for freight
to Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, 9.27; Union C., Nellie McQueston, 2; Y. W.
C. A., bbl. Goods, _for Marshallville, Ga._; Miss K. Adams, bbl. and
box Goods, _for Marion, Ala._ South Boston, Phillips C., 2 bbls.
Goods, _for Marshallville, Ga._ Dorchester, Second, Mrs. E. Torrey,
50; Second, S., 15. Roxbury, Wm. P. N. Livermore, _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 50; Miss Edith C. Norcross, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda,
N. C._

Boxboro, 5.50. Boylston Center, Mrs. Geo. Shattuck, bbl. Goods, _for
Andersonville, Ga._, Braintree, C., "A Member," 7. Brockton, C. E.,
_for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1. Chicopee, First, 7. Cohasset Second,
13.14. Colraine, 4. Dalton, P. E. Little, _for Marion, Ala._, 2.
Easthampton, First, S., _for Porto Rico_, 10. Easthampton, H. M.
Band, bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ East Longmeadow, First,
6.55. Enfield, S., _for Porto Rico_, Lincoln Mem., 10.80. Erving,
10. Fall River, First, _for Porto Rico_, 17. Florence, Miss Clarke,
_for Tougaloo U._, 10. Framingham, Ladies' Plymouth C., 2 bbls.
Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Gardner, First, C. E., 10.
Georgetown, First, S., 5. Gilbertville, S., _for S. A., Fisk U._,
50. Globe Village, Evan. Free, 10. Grafton, S., (1.60 of which
Lincoln Mem.), 10.60. Great Barrington, C. E., _for S. A. Dorchester
Acad., Ga._, 5. Great Barrington, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.82.
Greenwich, L. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Hanover,
Second, 4. Haverhill, W. M. S., Center C., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 50.
Haverhill, West, C., 8. Haverhill, Union, C., S., Lincoln Mem.,
2.27. Holbrook, Frank G. Morse, 5. Holyoke, "A Friend," _for Fisk
U._, 5. Ipswich, First, C. E., 2. Lancaster, 8.35. Lancaster, S., 5.
Lawrence, Lawrence St. C., L. B. Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Fisk U._
Leominster, 18.68. Lowell, First Trin. C., 45.04; Pawtucket, C.,
17.04; S., 12.18; John St. C., 28.77. Lowell, "A Friend," _for
Moorhead, Miss._, 1.50. Malden, Chas. Heath. Lot of Goods left at
_Straight U._ some years ago, (valued by donor, 1,600.) Marlboro,
Union C., 17.29. Melrose, 112. Methuen, First Parish S., _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 25. Middleboro, Central, C. E., _for Alaska M._, 10. New
Boston, C. and S., Lincoln Mem., 1.50. Newbury, First, 13.10.
Newburyport, Miss Martha W. Tilton, 5. Newton Center, First, Extra
Cent-a-day Band, 15. Newton Center, Mrs. O. S. Kimball, _for
Hillsboro, N. C._, 1. Northampton, "W," 300. Northampton, Ladies'
Soc. of Edwards C., _for Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N. C._, 50.
Northampton, Miss J. B. Kingsley, _for Marshallville, Ga._, 25.
Northampton, Edwards C., C. E., _for Indian M._, 5. Northampton,
Mrs. C. M. Morgan, box Christmas Gifts, _for Wilmington, N. C._
Northboro, S., _for Porto Rico_, 6.12. Northbridge, Rockdale C.,
10.71. North Leominster, C., 11.66; C. E., 2. North Wilbraham,
Reuben Sikes, 2. Oakham, Mrs. S. F. Fairbanks, _for Pleasant Hill,
Tenn._, 5. Oxford, C., to const. MRS. F. G. DANIELS, L.M., 40.
Pepperell, S., Lincoln Mem., 7. Pepperell, Mrs. J. E. B. Jewett,
bbl. Goods, _for Greenwood, S. C._ Pittsfield, First, S., Class
Five, 8.73. Rockland, Mrs. Betsy A. Hicks, 4. Salem, Tabernacle, S.,
to const. WM. A. KIRKPATRICK, L.M., 30. Salem, South, S., Lincoln
Mem., 5. Salem, Jr. Soc., _for S. A., Meridian, Miss._, 3.50. Salem,
Miss Adelaide S. Warner, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._, 2. Shelburne
Falls, C., 26.60; C. E., 3.40. Shrewsbury, S., Lincoln Mem., 5.
Shrewsbury, L. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, freight 2.57, _for McIntosh,
Ga._ Somerville, Prospect Hill C., Intermediate S., box Goods, _for
Saluda, N. C._ Southampton, Sunshine Mission Band, _for King's
Mountain, N. C._, 10. South Byfield, 5. South Framingham, Grace,
66.12. South Medford, Union, 20.67. South Natic, John Eliot, C., C.
E., _for Porto Rico_, 2. South Weymouth, Union C., C. E., _for
Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._, 4.70. Spencer, First, 140. Springfield,
North S., Lincoln Mem., 13.20. Springfield, Ladies' Soc. First C.,
bbl. Goods; King's Daughters, Park C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington,
N. C._ Taunton, Linda Richards, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 6. Upton,
First, S., Lincoln Mem., 8.20. Wakefield, Ladies of C., 2 bbls.
Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Walpole, Second, 17.36. Waltham, Mrs. E.
R. Cutler, bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Ward Hill, S., Lincoln
Mem., 2.55. Warren, C., (2 of which _Mountain White Work_), 61.05.
Warren, S., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 30. West Boylston,
First, 3.50. West Medford, C. E., _for Lincoln Sch., Marion, Ala._,
8. West Medway, Second, S., Lincoln Mem., 5.02. West Springfield,
First, 7.50. Winchester, First, 34.21. Winchester, C., Ladies, bbl.
Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Wood's Holl, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.25.
Worcester, Piedmont, 51.45; "A Friend," 10. Worcester, C. E., Park
C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASS. AND R. I., Miss Lizzie
D. White, Treas., $520.00.

W. H. M. A. of Mass. and R. I., 480, _for Salaries_, 20 _for Chinese
M._ Brighton, C., Bible Sch., _for Oahe Indian Sch., S. D._, 15.
Roxbury, Walnut Ave. Primary S., Lincoln Mem., 5.

ESTATE.--Worcester, Estate of Harriet Wheeler Damon. 7.84.


CONNECTICUT, $2,902.43--of which from Estates, $1,581.19.

Ansonia, German C., "Friends of Missions," 1.25. Bridgeport, Olivet,
C. and S., Lincoln Mem., 29. Bristol, "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._,
70. Brookfield Center, S., Lincoln Mem., 5.20. Buckingham, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 16. Canaan, Pilgrim C., S., _for McIntosh, Ga._,
12.60. Canterbury, 10.75. Chaplin, Ladies' Society Cong. C.,
half-bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Chester, 23. Cornwall, S.,
_for Marion, Ala._, 11. Darien, S., box Literature, _for Saluda, N.
C._ East Canaan, Pupils of Miss Mary E. Stevens, bbl. Goods, freight
paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ East Woodstock, Ladies' Soc., two bbls.
Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Fairfield, S., _for Porto Rico_, 20.
Hampton, L. M. Soc., _for freight to Greenwood, S. C._, 1.31.
Hartford, Mrs. Mary A. Williams, 20; Fourth, 6.80. Hartford, Talcott
St. S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Hartford, Asylum Hill C., "A Friend," _for
Tougaloo U._, 5. Hartford, Miss E. G. Olmsted, _for Porto Rico_, 2.
Hartford, Ladies' Soc. Fourth C., bbl. Goods, _for Wilmington, N.
C._ Greenfield Hill, Jr. C. E., _for Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._,
5. Kensington, H. Boordman, C. E. S., _for Tougaloo U._, 35.
Killingworth, S., Lincoln Mem., 3. Lakeville, Mrs. G. B. Burrall's
S. Class, _for Thomasville, Ga._, 1.50. Lebanon, Miss H. E. Leach,
_for S. A., A. N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 1. Madison, Fellow
Workers, bbl. Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._ Mansfield, First,
Lincoln Mem., 2.75. Meriden, First C., _for Tougaloo U._, 25.
Meriden, "N. F.," First, 10. Middlefield, S., Lincoln Mem., 33.09.
Morris, S., Lincoln Mem., 3. Mystic, Primary S., by Miss E. J.
Wilcox, box Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Naugatuck, C., to const. MRS.
WILLIAM T. RODENBACK, MRS. HOWARD B. TUTTLE, MRS. F. W. HANCOCK,
MRS. E. B. GOODYEAR and MRS. E. C. BARNUM L.M's., 150. New Britain,
First Ch. of Christ, to const. MRS. J. A. LEWIS L.M., 30. New
Britain, Primary S., two bbls. and box Goods, _for King's Mountain,
N. C._ New Haven, United C., 260; Howard Ave. C., 15.07; United C.,
C. E. P. Sanford, 10. New Haven, C., bbl. S. S. Supplies, _for
Marion, Ala._ Newington, S., Lincoln Mem., 9.44. North Woodbury, S.,
Lincoln Mem., _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 10. Norwalk,
First, S., Lincoln Mem., 10. Pomfret, First, 36.55. Portland, C. E.,
4, and bbl. Goods, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Putnam, 2 bbls. Goods,
_for Savannah, Ga._ Saugatuck, Mrs. Israel B. Waterman, bbl. and box
Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Seymour, C., bbl. Goods, _for Saluda, N.
C._ Saybrook, Mrs. Geo. Dibble, 10. Somersville, Jr. C. E., Quilt,
by Miss Flora Pendleton, _for Hillsboro, N. C._ South Glastonbury,
C. and S., 12.85. Thomaston, First, 7.70. Trumbull, 9. Vernon
Center, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.44. Wallingford, B. B. Brown, 20. West
Avon, S., 3. Westbrook, "A Friend," 5. West Hartford, S., 10.56;
North End, S., 3, Lincoln Mem. West Hartford, First C., Ladies, bbl.
Goods, _for Fisk U._ West Haven, First, S., 5 _for Florence, Ala._,
and 5 _for Indian M._ Westminster, 5.41. West Suffield, S., Lincoln
Mem., 5. West Winsted, Misses Isabel and Martha Holmes' S. Classes,
_for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 17. Wilton, 23.31. Wilton, S., Lincoln
Mem., 10.02. Winsted, Bible Class of Miss Mary P. Hinsdale, _for S.
A., Orange Park, Fla._, 20. Woodbridge, 15.25. Yantic, L. M. Soc.,
_for freight to Greenwood, S. C._, 1.39.

WOMAN'S CONGREGATIONAL HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs.
George Follett, Sec., $236.00.

Danbury, Second, 4. Hartford, First, 100 _for Two Sch'ps,
Thomasville, Ga., and Grand View., Tenn._ Hartford, South, Second,
_for Porto Rico_, 25: _for Chinese Women_, 25. Norfolk, 30. South
Canaan, 5. South Manchester, First, 22. Trumbull, 25.

ESTATES.--Ellington, Estate of Mrs. Harriet H. Talcott, by John G.
Talcott, Adm'r, 12. Groton, Estate of Mrs. B. N. Hurlbut, 228.
Mansfield Center, Estate of Mrs. Martha G. Swift, 1,021.47. Norwich
Town, Estate of Rev. Nathaniel Beach, by O. S. Smith, Adm'r, 319.72.
Norwich Town, Estate of Miss Grace McClellan, 4 bbls. Goods, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, by Miss Sarah H. Perkins.


NEW YORK, $1,375.46.

Altmar, S., Lincoln Mem., 1. Aquebogue, 6.50. Black Creek, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 2.80. Brooklyn. Park C., S., Lincoln Mem., 24.75; Park
C., 20.57; "M. L. R.," _for Alaska M._, 20; E. F. Carrington, 5;
Frederic Condit, _for S. Work_, 5; Mrs. Julia E. Brick, half-doz.
Mirrors, and bbl. Domestic, _for Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch.,
Enfield, N. C._ Canandaigua, First, 49.04. Canandaigua, bbl. Goods,
_for King's Mountain, N. C._ Clifton Springs, bbl. Goods, _for
King's Mountain, N. C._ Columbus, 2.35. Cortlandt, First, 50.
Cortlandt, bbl. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ Eldred, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 5.25. Elmira, St. Luke's C., Lincoln Mem., 4.
Flushing, First, 41.93; "E. W. G.," 10. Franklin, 33.82. Gasport,
Ladies' S., bbl. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._ Hannibal, Jr. C. E., _for
S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. Hamilton, 12. Lockport, East Av.
C., Bible Sch., 7. Maine, Albert B. Dayton (30 of which to const.
METTA C. LE FEVRE L.M.), 500. Middletown, First, 2.44. New Lebanon,
Ellen C. Kendall, 4. New York, "A Friend," 100; "Friends," 50; "A
Friend," 25; Mrs. A. B. Woodford, 25, _for S. A., Fisk U._ New York,
Stewart Warring & Co.; _for freight to Meridian, Miss._, 2.36. New
York, W. M. A. of Mount Hope C., bbl. Goods, _for King's Mountain,
N. C._ Poughkeepsie, First, 35.53. Poughkeepsie, Ladies' Soc., large
box Goods, _for Saluda, N. C._ Richford, C., Lincoln Mem., 10.
Rochester, bbl. Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._ Saratoga
Springs, L. A. Soc. of N. E. C., bbl. Goods, _for Enfield, N. C._
South Hartford, C., Lincoln Mem., 1.45. Syracuse, Plymouth, 79.33.
Syracuse, Good Will C., 14.26; Good Will, S., 5.09, Lincoln Mem.
Syracuse, South Ave. C., 1.25. Walton, First, 63.73. Woodville, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 3.18.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
Treas., $146.83.

Barryville, 3. Brooklyn, Clinton Ave., _for Porto Rico_, 15.46.
Candor, 10. Flushing, S., 6.37. Middleton, First, Ladies' Guild, to
const. MRS. FRANK HARDING L.M., 30. New York, Pilgrim, 27.
Poughkeepsie, 25. Poughkeepsie, Y. L. M. S., Special, _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 25. Wadham's Mills, 5.


NEW JERSEY, $309.28.

Arlington, Mrs. G. Overacre, _for S. A., Moorhead Sch., Miss._, 15.
Closter, C., 7.54. Colt's Neck, Reformed C., 4. Glen Ridge, 76.
Little Ferry, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.13. Newark, Belleville Ave. C.,
102.45. Orange Valley, 58.06. Passaic, 25. Upper Montclair, "A
Friend," 1. Vineland, Ch. of the Pilgrims, C., 7; S., 12.10.


PENNSYLVANIA, $215.72--of which from Estate, $200.00.

Edwardsville, Welsh C., 6. Forest City, Welsh C., Lincoln Mem.,
2.13. Guy's Mills, Mrs. F. M. Guy, 1. Mount Carmel, First, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 6.59.

ESTATE.--Lander, Estate of Alfred Cowles, by M. E. Cowles, Executor,
200.


OHIO, $225.58.

Akron, West C., S., Lincoln Mem., 11.13. Bellevue, Jr. C. E., _for
Knoxville, Tenn._, 2. Bellevue, First, W. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for
Moorhead, Miss._ Brecksville, L. M. Soc., 10; Mrs. Ben Coates, 10,
_for S. A., Brewer N. Sch., Greenwood, S. C._ Chardon, S., Lincoln
Mem., 4.50. Chatham, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Cincinnati, Storrs C., S.,
_for S. A., Orange Park, Fla._, 2. Cleveland, Pilgrim, 54.49.
Cleveland, Mount Zion C., W. M. S., 4.25, _for S. A., Talladega C._;
S., 3; C., 4.78. Cleveland, Kindergarten of Pilgrim C., box Toys,
etc., freight 3.50, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Cleveland, Jr. C. E. of
Pilgrim C., box Toys, freight paid, _for McIntosh, Ga._ Dayton, Miss
F. M. Williams, _for S. A., A. N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 7.
Eagleville, S., 83 cts. East Greenville, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.71.
Mansfield, First, _for Port Rico_, 25. Marietta, W. C. T. U., box
Goods, _for Macon, Ga._ Newark, Plymouth, Lincoln Mem., 3.25.
Oberlin, Mrs. L. G. B. Hills, 10. Oberlin, Mrs. H. B. Kennedy, bbl.
Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Saybrook, 4.50. Saybrook, "A Friend,"
_for Moorhead, Miss._, 35 cts. South Salem, Daniel S. Pricer, 2.50.
Strongsville, First, 10. Thompson, C., 9.37; C. E., 63 cts. Toledo,
Central, 14.62. Toledo, W. H. M. U., _for S. A., Emerson Inst.,
Mobile, Ala._, 10. Vermillion, Jr. C. E., 1.56. Wauseon, C. E., _for
Alaska M._, 4.50. Weymouth, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.11.

----, Cash, 2.


INDIANA, $26.10.

Anderson, Hope, 5. Indianapolis, S., Lincoln Mem., 85 cts. Terre
Haute, Second, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.25.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF INDIANA, by Mrs. Anna D. Davis,
Treas., $18.00.

Terre Haute, First, 18.


ILLINOIS, $502.93.

Albion, 1. Amboy, C., Inf. Class, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 2.75.
Atkinson, C., 4; S., 3.25, Lincoln Mem. Aurora. First, 44.
Brimfield, 10. Bunker Hill, C., 27.65; S., 2. Carpentersville, 15.

Chicago, Union Park, C. E., 10; Miss Julia H. Thayer, 1; Mrs. L. A.
Dunn, 50 cents, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Chicago, Mrs. Hooker, _for
Marshallville, Ga._, 5. Chicago, Miss M. Kucera, _for S. A., A. N.
Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 2.

Des Plains, "A Friend," _for Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Downer's Grove,
First C., C. E., _for Wilmington, N. C._, 8. Evanston, First, by E.
F. Carpenter, 100. Galena, Miss Alice Chamberlain, _for Moorhead,
Miss._, 1. Griggsville, Ill. M. Union, box Literature, _for
Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Ivanhoe, C., Lincoln Mem., 8. La Harpe, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 6. Le Moille, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.88. Moline, Mrs. Ann
E. Keyes, 5 boxes and 1 bbl. Household Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._
Naperville, H. C. Smith, 5. Rantoul, First, 5.43. Saint Charles,
Mrs. S. W. Daig, box Papers, _for Fisk U._ Shabbona, Primary S.,
_for Moorhead, Miss._, 5.15. Summerdale, 9.05. Sycamore, Mrs. Helen
A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5.

----, Illinois Home M. Soc., _for Indian M., Oklahoma_, 17.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. Mary S. Booth,
Treas., $200.77.

Atkinson, _for Mountain White Work_, 5; _for Fisk U._, 5. Blue
Island, Jr. C. E., 1. Buda, 3.50. Chicago, Grace, 10; Union Park,
10; California Ave., 5; Douglass Park, 1; New England, 1. Evanston,
First, 9. Geneva, C. E., _for Fisk U._, 5. Mendon, 5. Rantoul, 4.
Rockford, First, 29.27. Rockford, Second, 15. Rogers Park, 3.
Plainfield, 15. Sterling, 35. Streator, First, 2. Summerdale, 5.
Undesignated Funds, 32.


MICHIGAN, $168.83.

Bay City, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.52. Benzonia, C., Jr. C. E.,
_for Wilmington, N. C._, 9.50. Central Lake, 2. Chelsea, First,
Lincoln Mem., 18.68. Chippewa Lake, 1.69. Detroit, Mrs. B. B.
Hudson, 5. Detroit, First C., 2 bbls. Goods, _Athens, Ala._ Detroit,
Ladies' M. Soc. of Woodward Ave. C., bbl. Goods, _for Greenwood, S.
C._ Eaton Rapids, C., 2.25; S., 1.08. Garden, 1. Grand Junction. Jr.
C. E., 2.53; Sen. C. E., 3.61, _for Marion, Ala._ Grand Ledge, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 4.35. Grand Rapids, First (Park), M. Soc., 18. Grand
Rapids, Ladies' M. Soc., Park C., bbl. Goods, _for Greenwood, S. C._
Grass Lake, S., Lincoln Mem., 4.67. Imlay City, First, C., 7.73; S.,
6.52. Laingsburg, 6.70. Lansing, Pilgrim, 1.16. Mancelona, C.,
19.17; S., 4.36. Manistee, Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Greenwood,
S. C._ Milford, Mrs. William A. Arms, Thank-offering, 5. Port Huron,
S., Lincoln Mem., 10. Potterville, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.04. Ransom,
S., Lincoln Mem., 4.36. South Haven, S., Class of Girls, _for
Marion, Ala._, 1. Stanton, W. M. S., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for
McIntosh, Ga._ Suttons Bay, S., Lincoln Mem., 91 cts. Three Oaks,
S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Victor, 4. West Bangor, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $11.00.

Ann Arbor, C. E., _for S. A., Santee Training Sch., Neb._, 6.
Chelsea, 5.


IOWA, $240.62--of which from Estate, $7.08.

Alden, L. M. S., _for Moorhead, Miss._, 2.25. Cedar Rapids, Mrs. E.
A. Berry, box Goods, _for Wilmington, N. C._ Charles City, Mrs.
Chas. Ellis, pkg. Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Corning, 6.15.
Davenport, Edwards C., 25.40. Des Moines, Frank, Howard, Carroll and
Helen Cowles, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 75 cents. Des Moines, bbl.
Goods, _for Savannah, Ga._ Doon, First, 5. Fayette, 11.25. Galt, 2.
Grand View, Miss Ruth Higley, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Green
Mountain, bbl. Goods, _for Savannah, Ga._ Grinnell, C. E., 1.74.
Lansing Ridge, Rev. Andrew Kern, 2. Nashua, S., Primary Dept., _for
Moorhead, Miss._, 1.05. Red Oak, First, 38.65. Tabor, S., 10.
Waterloo, Rev. M. K. Cross, 10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $115.30.

Algona, 2.50. Anita, Jr. C. E., 1. Atlantic, Presb., C. E., _for
Porto Rico_, 1.33. Cedar Rapids, First, C. E., 2. Cromwell, 1.
Davenport, Edwards, Mrs. J. L. Davis, 2. Des Moines, Plymouth, 3.42.
Dubuque, First, 5. Farragut, 10. Grinnell, 12.18. Grinnell, H. M.
Army, 10. Independence, W. M. S., (of which 3 _for Porto Rico_), 11;
C. E., 1. McGregor, 34.52. Manchester, 10. Old Man's Creek, 3.35.
Ottumwa, 5.

ESTATE.--Fontanelle, Estate of Alex. M. Gow, 7.08.


MINNESOTA, $102.30.

Austin, W. M. S., bbl. Goods, _for Fisk U._ Austin, Ladies' M. Soc.,
bbl. Goods, _for Marion, Ala._ Detroit, First, 4.40. Dodge Center,
S., Lincoln Mem., 3.10. Duluth, Pilgrim, 15. Fairmont, W. M. S., box
Papers, _for Fisk U._ Litchfield, Col. O. C. Bissell, _for Meridian,
Miss._, 10. Minneapolis, Plymouth, 32.40; W. H. Norris, quarterly,
10. Moorhead, First, 3.40. Silver Lake, Bohemian Free Reformed C.,
10. Winthrop, 2. Worthington, 12.


WISCONSIN, $215.99.

Beloit, Second, 23.03. Berlin, S., Lincoln Mem., 6.19. Bloomer,
First, 3.85. Clinton, ----, bbl. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._ Columbus,
----, 2 bbls. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._ Elroy, C., 3.75; S., 3.30.
Hammond, 1.50. Hayward, ----, bbl. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._
Madison, 107.06. Madison, Primary S., _for Athens, Ala._, 10.
Milwaukee, Pilgrim, Jr. C. E., box Toys, _for Athens, Ala._ Oak
Center, Mrs. S. B. Howard, 1. Plattville, ----, box Toys, _for
Athens, Ala._ Racine, C., 26.37; Jr. C. E., 5. to const. REV. H. L.
RICHARDSON, L.M. Ripon, ----, box Toys, _for Athens, Ala._
Rosendale, C., Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Athens, Ala._ Stevens
Point, Mission S., _for S. A., Fisk U._, 2. Sturgeon Bay, Int. C.
E., _for Porto Rico_, 1.10. Union Grove, ----, bbl. Goods, _for
Athens, Ala._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN, by Mrs. L. E. Smith,
Treas., $21.84.

Appleton, 10. Beloit, First, G. L. 1.84. Menomonie, 10.


MISSOURI, $238.77.

Amity, "A Friend," _for S. A., McIntosh, Ga._, 1. Kansas City, Rev.
S. Penfield, 10. Maplewood, S., 4. Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg,
_for Porto Rico_, 50. Saint Joseph, Tabernacle C., C. E., 8.19.
Saint Louis, First, 165.58.


KANSAS, $67.30.

Anthony, 3.75. Athol, S., 2. Centralia, Mr. Oberndorf, _for freight
to Meridian, Miss._, 4.05. Eureka, 25. Leavenworth, Mrs. Ruth Hall,
box Goods, _for Fisk U._ Paola, Jr. C. E. of C., bbl. Goods, _for
King's Mountain, N. C._ Wabaunsee Co., Pupils of School in District
Seven, _for Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Wakefield, "A Friend," 30; Mrs. I.
L. Gardiner, 1.50.


NEBRASKA, $34.79.

Farnham, S., Lincoln Mem., 70 cts. Freemont, Jr. C. E., _for S. A.,
A. N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 1. Nickerson, Miss A. Slothower, _for
S. A., A. N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._, 2. Riverton, S., Lincoln Mem.,
3. Santee, Pilgrim, Lincoln Mem., 18.49. Waverly, 8.60. Waverly, "A
Friend," _for Moorhead, Miss._, 1.


NORTH DAKOTA, $46.10.

Antelope, 3. Elbowood, C., Lincoln Mem., 16. Fort Berthold, Rev. and
Mrs. C. L. Hall, _for Training Sch., Santee, Neb._, 10. Fort
Berthold, C., Lincoln Mem., 9. Fort Yates, Standing Rock C., Lincoln
Mem., 5. Oriska, 3.10.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $10.91.

Pierre, 6.91. Tyndall, German C., 4.


ARKANSAS, $6.31.

Little Rock, C. and S., Lincoln Mem., 6.31.


OKLAHOMA, $1.85.

Guthrie, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.85.


CALIFORNIA, $26.65.

Belmont, Mrs. Elizabeth L. Reed (5 of which _for Porto Rico_,) 10.
Petaluma, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Santa Barbara, S., Lincoln Mem.,
8.65. San Bernardino, First, Members, 3.


OREGON, $20.00.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OREGON, by Mrs. C. F. Clapp,
Treas., $20.00.

W. H. M. U. of Oregon, 20.


WASHINGTON, $85.17.

Seattle, Plymouth, 36.45. Tacoma, First, 47.72. ----, "A Friend,"
_for Moorhead, Miss._, 1.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $7.00.

Washington, Lincoln Memorial, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Washington, Miss
Huntington, _for Troy, N. C._, 2.


MARYLAND, $10.97.

Baltimore, First, 10.97.


VIRGINIA, $10.00.

Hampton, Miss Elizabeth Upton, _for Indian M._, 10.


WEST VIRGINIA, $1.00.

Huntington, First, 1.


KENTUCKY, $8.16.

Centralia, S., _for Meridian, Miss._, 3.50. Lexington, C., Lincoln
Mem., 2. Lexington, Mrs. A. E. Clark, box Preserved Fruit, _for
Teachers' Home_. Williamsburg, Jesse Worley, 2.66.


TENNESSEE, $34.40.

Bon Air, Coal Company, 1. Grand View, C., Lincoln Mem., 14.
Knoxville, S. and C. E. of Second C., and Jr. C. E. of Slater Sch.,
Lincoln Mem., 4.40. Pomona, Mrs. Zoe Leland, for S. A., 5; _for
Bell-tower Fund_, 5, _Grand View, Tenn._ Robbins, 5.


NORTH CAROLINA, $32.51.

Beaufort, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Bethel, S., Lincoln Mem., 50
cts. Dudley, C., 6; S., 1; K. D. and Sons, 1, Lincoln Mem. Enfield,
J. K. Brick A. I. and N. Sch., Lincoln Mem., 2.85. Enfield, Chapel
Col., 2. Haywood, 2. High Point, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.41. King's
Mountain, C., 2. Saluda, S. and C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 1.
Wilmington, Christ's C., C. and S., Lincoln Mem., 6.75.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $6.50.

Charleston, Avery Normal Inst., Lincoln Mem., 6.50.


GEORGIA, $5.00.

Macon, M. E. Messick, _for Macon, Ga._, 1. Thomasville, Allen Normal
Sch., Lincoln Mem., 4.


FLORIDA, $11.64.

Martin, Fessenden Academy, Lincoln Mem., 11.64.


ALABAMA, $12.00.

Birmingham, C. and S., 5. Florence, C., Lincoln Mem., 4. La Pine,
C., 1. Marion, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.


MISSISSIPPI, $4.61.

Meridian, C., Lincoln Mem., 2.61. Moorhead, "A Friend," _for
Moorhead_, 1. Tougaloo, Alumni Tougaloo U., 1.


LOUISIANA, $26.14.

Hammond, 6.62. New Orleans, University Ch. 10.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF LA., by Miss Mary L. Rogers, Treas.,
$9.52.

Hammond, _for Mountain White Work_, 9.52.


TEXAS, $10.00.

----, Miss M. Parker, _for Tougaloo U._, 10.


SOUTH AMERICA, $37.50.

Barranquilla, Mrs. Sarah K. Yeatman, _for Bell-tower Fund, Grand
View, Tenn._, 37.50.


CANADA, $5.00.

Sherbrooke, Mrs. H. J. Morey, 5.


INCOME, $270.00.

Atterbury Endowment Fund, 5. Avery Fund, _for African M._, 57. W.
Belden Sch'p Fund, _for Talladega C._, 30. Rev. B. Foltz Endowment
Fund, 15. General Endowment Fund, 20. Howard Theo. Endowment Fund,
_for Howard U._, 60. Howard Carter Endowment Fund, 5. LeMoyne
Endowment Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._, 40. Straight Sch'p Fund, 10.
Tuthill King Endowment Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 20. Yale Library
Fund, _for Talladega C._, 8.


TUITION, $5,807.47.

Lexington, Ky., 142.75. Williamsburg, Ky., 172.55. Williamsburg,
Ky., Public Fund, 73.05. Cappahosic, Va., 48.20. Beaufort, N. C.,
36.25. Chapel Hill, N. C., 5.15. Enfield, N. C., 30. Hillsboro, N.
C., 23.80. King's Mountain, N. C., 37. Saluda, N. C., 31.75. Troy,
N. C., 3.10. Whittier, N. C., 15. Wilmington, N. C., 126.75.
Charleston, S. C., 323.55. Greenwood, S. C., 151.48. Big Creek Gap,
Tenn., Public Fund, 90.70. Big Creek Gap, Tenn., 54. Grand View,
Tenn., Public Fund, 80. Grand View, Tenn., 28.15, Knoxville, Tenn.,
63. Memphis, Tenn., 672.75. Nashville, Tenn., 971.81. Pleasant Hill,
Tenn., 111.98. Andersonville, Ga., 14.35. Atlanta, Ga., 253.22.
Macon, Ga., 208.28. McIntosh, Ga., 128.95. Marietta, Ga., 4.
Savannah, Ga., 187.30. Thomasville, Ga., 97.35. Athens, Ala., 35.16.
Florence, Ala., 31.20. Marion, Ala., 83.42. Mobile, Ala., 140. Nat,
Ala., 42.27. New Orleans, La., 520.05. Meridian, Miss., 122.
Moorhead, Miss., 44. Tougaloo, Miss., 186.25. Austin, Texas, 125.10.
Orange Park, Fla., 61.25. San Juan, Porto Rico, 140.55.


SUMMARY FOR FEBRUARY, 1900.

  Donations                                             $8,791.64
  Estates                                                1,796.11
                                                      -----------
                                                       $10,587.75
  Income                                                   270.00
  Tuition                                                5,807.47
                                                      -----------
  Total for February                                   $16,665.22


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for February                              $59.00
  Previously acknowledged                                 137.59
                                                        --------
  Total                                                  $196.59

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1900.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DANIEL HAND EDUCATIONAL FUND

For Colored People.

  Income for March                                      $1,875.78
  Previously acknowledged                               29,240.95
                                                      -----------
                                                       $31,116.73
                                                      ===========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $155.66.

Auburn, Samuel J. M. Perkins, 5. Bangor, Central, S., _for Pleasant
Hill Acad., Tenn._, 5.15. Bangor, Stearns C., K. D., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 4. Brewer, Jr. C. E., box Christmas Goods,
_for Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Brooksville, Union Chapel, S., Lincoln
Mem., 3.50. Brunswick, D. Frank Atherton, 1. Cumberland Center,
Ladies of C., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._
Gray, 3. Phillips, 14.64. South Berwick, S., 5.50. Westbrook,
40.12. West Brooksville, 2.75. Yarmouth, S., 16. York Village, 10.

MAINE WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A., by Mrs. F. W. Davis, Treas., $45.00.

Hallowell, W. S., 25. Lewiston, Pine St., 20.


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $3,242.36--of which from Estate, $3,000.00.

Barrington, Mrs. H. Locke, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._
Bath, 9. Canterbury, C, E., 5. Concord, First, 113.09. East Alstead,
4.50. East Barrington, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. East Derry, First, 3.
Epping, C., "Two Friends," 10. Exeter, First, C. E., _for Porto
Rico_, 5.75. Francestown, S., Lincoln Mem., 4, Greenville, C. E., 5.
Hanover, Miss Mary A. Downing, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 5.
Lancaster, C. and S. (10.50 of which _for Brewer N. School,
Greenwood, S. C._), 21. Littleton, First, 15.93. Pembroke, S.,
11.09. Rindge, 15. Rye, 10.

ESTATE.--Exeter, Estate of Mrs. Mary E. Shute, 10,000, by John N.
Thompson, Adm'r (Reserve Legacy, 7,000) 3,000.


VERMONT, $411.00.

Barre, L. M. S., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for Dorchester Acad.,
Ga._ Bellows Falls, First, 26.50. Benson, 3.65. Bethel, First, 1.
Burlington, S. S. Tinkham, 5. Cabot, 10.60. Cambridge, Madison
Safford, 20; S. M. Safford, _for Porto Rico_, 5. Dorset, Mrs. Marcia
B. Fuller, 5. East Saint Johnsbury, bbl. Goods, _for Savannah, Ga._
Essex Junction, First, 5.80. Fairlee, "A Friend," 33.75. Franklin,
L. H. M. S., bbl. Goods, freight 1.45, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._
Hardwick, 7.50. Jamaica, C., Lincoln Mem. (in part), 10.80.
Montpelier, Bethany, 20. Montpelier, Bethany, C. E., _for Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 10. North Bennington, 35.27. Northfield, 21.09.
Norwich, Mrs. B. B. Newton, 5; C., 1. Peacham, 24.06. Rochester, S.,
Lincoln Mem., _for Porto Rico_, 2. Rupert, 11.05. Saint Johnsbury,
Miss M. L. Graham, _for S. A., Talladega C._, 9.25. Waterbury, "A
Friend," 15. West Brattleboro, 21.37. Westminster, West, Mrs. H. P.
Ranney, freight, 1.50; Leon and Harold Powers, 3 Mats, _for
Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Whiting, Dan'l Holmes, 50. Windham, 12.50.
Worcester, Mrs. Sophia Hobart, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._,
5.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF VERMONT, by Mrs. Robert Mackinnon,
Treasurer, $30.86.

Berlin, 5. Dummerston, S., 2 Classes, _for S. A., A. G. Sch.,
Moorhead, Miss._, 2.55. McIndoe, S., 9.06. Rutland, 10. Saint
Johnsbury, North, M. B., _for S. A., Indian Training Sch., Santee,
Neb._, 1.25. West Rutland, Jr. C. E., _for S. A., Grand View,
Tenn._, 3.


MASSACHUSETTS, $8,159.20--of which from Estates, $1.600.00.

Amesbury, C. E., Union C., _for S. A., Blowing Rock, N. C._, 14.50.
Andover, Miss Amy Stork, _for S. A., Chandler Sch., Ky._, 2.50.
Bedford, 9.97. Beechwood, S., Lincoln Mem., 1. Berkley, First, 4.80.
Berlin, 8.

Boston, Union, C. E., 25 _for Mountain White Work_, 2.10 _for Porto
Rico_; "A Friend," 70 cts.; Mrs. E. H. Clapp, bbl. Goods, _for Big
Creek Gap, Tenn._; Mrs. H. A. Woodridge, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek
Gap, Tenn._ Charlestown, "A Friend," 10. Dorchester, Mrs. Elbridge
Torrey, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._, 20. Roxbury, Mrs. Susan
Parker, _for Marshallville, Ga._, 25. Roxbury, Highland,
Intermediate Dept., _for Porto Rico_, 7.92.

Bradford, Mrs. W. K. Farrar, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._
Brockton, "Cash," _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1; Mrs. M. J. Kendall, 20
cents. Brookline, Leyden C., 42.50. Buckland, C., to const. MRS.
ELIZABETH C. GUILD L.M., 34.06. Cambridgeport, Pilgrim, C. E., 10.
Cambridgeport, Mrs. Albert B. Long, bbl. Goods; Mrs. Henrietta
Hamilton, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Chelsea, Central,
14.44. Chiltonville, 10.79. Danvers, First, 23.81. Dalton, First,
209.11. Dedham, First, S., 10.32. Dennis, C. E., 7.50. Dorchester,
Second, 15. Dudley, Jr. C. E., 2.60. Dudley, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.55.
East Bridgewater, Union, 3.80. Easthampton, First, 32.81; First, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 6.80. Easton Center, 13.01. East Somerville, Franklin
St. Ortho., S., 5.47. East Walpole, S., Lincoln Mem., 2. East
Weymouth, 25. Fall River, Central C. E. _for S. A., Fisk U._, 15.
Fall River, Central C., Ladies' Soc., large box Goods, _for Fisk U._
Fitchburg, Cal. C., S., 13.72. Foxboro, Bethany, 13.48. Framingham,
Plymouth, 37.50. Framingham, "A Friend," 17.50 _for Indian Sch'p_,
and 5 _for Indian M._ Gardner, First, 65. Grafton, 32.14. Granby,
The Ch. of Christ, 15.03. Greenfield, Mrs. E. M. Russell, 25.
Hamilton, Mrs. E. F. Knowlton, 2. Haverhill, Center, 106; Union,
10.55; "H.," 1. Holbrook, Winthrop, C., 40.48; S., 10, Lincoln Mem.
Holyoke, First, 25.10. Huntington, Second, 11. Lawrence, Lawrence
St. C., S., _for S. A., Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._, 10. Lawrence,
Trin., S., Lincoln Mem., 3.74 Long Meadow, First, Benev. Ass'n,
69.67. Lowell, Highland C., S., Lincoln Mem., 3. Lowell, "F. R. C.,"
1. Ludlow Center, First, 5. Lunenberg, C. E., Lincoln Mem., 2.75.
Manchester, C. E., _for S. A., Straight U._, 15. Marlboro, Prim.
Dept. Union C., 15, and Jun. Dept. 15, _for Saluda, N. C._
Marshfield, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.25. Middleboro, Central, S.,
6.33. Middleboro, Central, Prim. S., _for Santee Training Sch.,
Santee, Neb._, 5. New Bedford, North, 21. New Bedford, First,
Lincoln Mem., 8.50. New Braintree, S., Lincoln Mem. (2 of which _for
Porto Rico_), 10. Newburyport, Belleville C., Bankers, _for S. A.,
Saluda, N. C._, 40. Newburyport, Oldtown C., S., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 4. New Marlboro, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.
Newton, First, 44.45. Newton, Miss Palfrey and "Friend," _for
Clothing for Porto Rico_, 20. Northampton, First, S., Lincoln Mem.,
6.57. North Brookfield, First (of which 5 _for Porto Rico_, and 1
_for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._) 81.02. North Carver, S., Lincoln Mem.,
2.62. North Falmouth, MRS. MARY W. DONKIN, _for Porto Rico_, and to
const. herself L.M., 30. Northfield, Rev. and Mrs. John P. Humphrey,
deceased, 1,500; Mrs. Elizabeth J. Humphrey, deceased, 1,500.
Norton, Trin. C., 104.61. Oakham, Ladies of C., bbl. Goods, _for
Pleasant Hill, Tenn._ Orleans, 8. Peabody, Second, 8.18. Peabody,
Miss C. A. Whitaker, _for S. A., Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5.
Pepperell, S., ad'l, Lincoln Mem., 16 cents. Plymouth, Pilgrimage,
16.76. Randolph, First, 45.68. Randolph, Miss Abby W. Turner, _for
Tougaloo U._, 25. Reading, C. E., _for Porto Rico_, 10. Shelburne,
C., to const. ALLEN FELLOWS and CHARLES NEWHALL L.M's., 60.
Springfield, South, 40; Park, 27.30. Springfield, Mrs. A. S.
Goulding, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Somerville,
Broadway, 13.73. Somerville, Mrs. H. H. Piper, bbl. Goods, _for Big
Creek Gap, Tenn._ South Braintree, C., bbl. Goods, freight paid,
_for Beaufort, N. C._ South Framingham, Grace, S., _for Mountain
Work_, 16.02. South Framingham, bbl. Goods, _for Evarts, Ky._
Southville, S., Lincoln Mem., 1. South Weymouth, Old South, 10.
Sturbridge, C., Lincoln Mem., 3.05. Sunderland, S., 25. Taunton,
Miss Luida Richards, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 2. Taunton,
Mrs. Mary C. Swinerton, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._
Upton, First, 23.86. Wakefield, 25.33. Wellesley Hills, 17.46.
Westboro, Mrs. S. A. House, _for S. A., Allen N. Sch., Thomasville,
Ga._, 1. West Boxford, 9.44. West Medway, Second, "Friends," Lincoln
Mem., 2. West Newton, Woman's Guild of Cong. C., 3 bbls. Goods and
Supplies of the Hospital Room, _for Fisk U._ West Springfield, C.,
_for Oak Creek, N. D._, 12.68. West Springfield, C., _for Fort
Yates, N. D._, 10. West Wareham, C. E. of East Rochester C., bbl.
Goods, _for Straight U._ Weymouth, Mrs. Snyder's S. Class. _for
Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._, 1. Weymouth and Braintree, S. S.
Class, 1. Weymouth and East Braintree, Union, 32.50. Wilmington,
7.78. Worcester, C. E., by E. W. Phillips, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 6.
Worcester, Park, S., 4. Worcester, Piedmont, 1. Worcester, Pilg.,
Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for Straight U._ Wrentham, Jr. C. E., 4.

----, "A Friend," _for Fisk U._, 1,000.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION OF MASSACHUSETTS AND R. I., Miss
Lizzie D. White, Treas., $500.00.

W. H. M. A. of Massachusetts and R. I. _for Salaries_, 480; _for
Chinese M._, 20.

ESTATES.--North Brookfield, Estate of William Duncan, by Theodore C.
Bates, Adm'r, 600. Northfield, Estate of Abigail T. Wells, by Moses
H. Wells, Ex'r, on decease of Mrs. Elizabeth J. Humphrey, 1,000.

Worcester, Estate of Albert Curtis, 25,000 (less U. S. Tax, 2,500).
22,500, by E. B. Stoddard, Ex'r (Reserve Legacy).


RHODE ISLAND, $25.68.

Drownville, Mrs. G. L. Baker, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._
Providence, North, 17.25; North, C. E., 2.43. Providence, Mrs. H. B.
Cory, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Tiverton Four Corners,
6.


CONNECTICUT, $1,913.46--of which from Estates, $1,013.40.

Bridgeport, First, 61.59. Bridgeport, C. E., box Goods, freight
prepaid, _for Greenwood, S. C._ Bristol, First, S., 18.24. Broad
Brook, S., Lincoln Mem., 6. Canaan, Pilgrim, 42.81. Durham, C. E.,
_for Porto Rico_, 11.58. East Woodstock, 12. East Woodstock, C. H.
Killam, 2 bbls. Apples, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Essex, First, 25.11.
Glastonbury, First Ch. of Christ, 16.30; S., _for Mountain Work in
Tenn._, 25. Haddam, Middlesex Conference, 4.03. Hartford, Second,
100; Park, 34.11. Hartford, E. B. Dillingham, _for S. A., Orange
Park, Fla._, 7. Ivoryton, 22.37. Kent, First, 6.60. Lebanon, Miss H.
E. Leech, _for S. A., Allen N. Sch. Thomasville, Ga._, 1. Ledyard,
5. Meriden Center, _for Tougaloo U._, 50. Middletown, First, 21.12.
Naugatuck, C., by Miss Ellen Spencer, Treas., _for Porto Rico_, 15.
New Britain, Lucy J. Pease, 25. New Britain, South, S., Lincoln
Mem., 20. New Britain, "A Friend," _for Tougaloo U._, 10. New
London, First Ch. of Christ, 45.49. New Hartford, North, 33.80. New
Haven, Fair Haven, Grand Av., 40. New Haven, Thomas P. Carleton, 1;
United C., ad'l, 1. Newington, S., ad'l for Lincoln Mem., 1.
Norwalk, First, 16.71. Old Saybrook, 10.03. Putnam, bbl. Goods, _for
Savannah, Ga._ Scitico, Mrs. C. E. Howe, _for Indian M., Elbowoods,
N. D._, 2. Sound Beach, Pilgrim, S., _for S. A., Talladega C._, 3.
South Canaan, C. E., 4. Stamford, S., Lincoln Mem., 18.47.
Stonington, First, 20.56; M. H. Giddings, 5. Stratford, S., 10.
Terryville, Allentown S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Thompson, S., _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._, 5. Torrington Center, (7.63 of which from S.,
_for Singing Books_), 51.16. Wethersfield, S., _for Tougaloo U._,
10. Whitneyville, Dorcas Soc., C., bbl. Goods, freight paid _for
Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Willimantic, Miss Jennie E. Chapin, 1.75.
Windham, C., 46.63. Windham, C., South Windham Branch, 10.
Woodstock, First, 10.60.

WOMAN'S CONG. HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF CONN., by Mrs. George
Follett, Secretary, $8.00.

South Coventry, C. E., _for Sch'p, Gregory Inst., Wilmington, N.
C._, 8.

ESTATES.--Hartford. Estate of Dea. Walter H. Cowles, by Walter G.
Cowles, Administrator, 1,000. Hebron, Estate of Benj. A. Bissell, J.
H. Jagger, Executor, 13.40.


NEW YORK, $5,210.77--of which from Estate, $2,000.00.

Brooklyn, Mrs. Julia E. Brick, _for Jos. K. Brick, A. I. and N.
Sch., Enfield, N. C._, 2,000. Brooklyn, Ch. of the Pilgrims (5 of
which _for Porto Rico_, and 5 _for Mountain Work_), 723.77.
Brooklyn, South, 34.19. Brooklyn, 4th Place Chapel, branch South
Cong. C., 15. Brooklyn Mrs. T. F. H. Lewis, bbl. Goods, _for Big
Creek Gap, Tenn._ Brooklyn, Clinton Av. C., Y. L. Guild, valuable
bbl. Goods, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Brooklyn, bbl. Goods, _for
Savannah, Ga._ Brookton, Mrs. Ellen S. Lonsbery, bbl. Goods, _for
Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Buffalo, Plym. Cong. Chapel, W. M. S., box
Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Chili Station, E. B. Johnston, _for
Cappahosic, Va._, 5. Clayton, First, Lincoln Mem., 2.46. Colton, "A
Friend of Missions," 50 cts. Glenspey, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.
Hannibal, "Some Friends," box Goods, freight paid, _for Dorchester
Acad., Ga._, Ithaca, Mrs. Isabelle Burdich, bbl. Goods, _for Big
Creek Gap, Tenn._ Jamestown, Mrs. Fannie Hazeltine, bbl. Goods,
freight paid, _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._ Lysander, First, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 4.75. Morristown, 9.12. Margaretville, Miss Mary I.
Ward, 10. New Haven, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.40. Northville, C., _for
Porto Rico_, 20.60. Patchogue, C., 2 bbls. Goods, _for Straight U._
Port Chester, First, 2.25. Port Leyden, 12.05. Rensselaer, Mrs.
Fred. Davis, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Rochester, Mrs.
B. L. Rider Andrews, from the late Ebenezer Rider and Mrs. E. M.
Rider his wife, of New Haven, Vt., 250. (of which _for King's
Mountain, N. C._, 50; _for Marshallville, Ga._, 50; _for Marion,
Ala._, 50; _for Moorhead, Miss._, 30; _for McIntosh, Ga._, 20; _for
Blowing Rock, N. C._, 50.) Saugerties, Mrs. Austin Wolvern, bbl.
Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Schenectady, Miss M. E. Johnson,
bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._, Seneca Falls, Mrs. E. A.
Curtis, bbl. Goods, _for Big Creek Gap, Tenn._ Sidney, C. E., _for
S. A., Fisk U._, 25. Taberg, Mrs. E. W. Waterman, 5. Utica, Mrs.
Christian and Daughter, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Victor, "A Friend,"
_for Talladega C._, 20. Warsaw, Mrs. Windsor Smith, _for Dorchester
Acad., Ga._, 80 cts. Wellsville, First, 34.16. West Bloomfield,
25.95. Winthrop, S., Lincoln Mem., 77 cents.

ESTATES.--Danby, Estate of Rev. O. B. Hitchcock, David Murray,
Executor, _for Normal Training Sch., Orange Park, Fla._, 1,000.
Syracuse, Estate of Esther B. Cobb, by Willis B. Burns, Executor,
and Elizabeth B. Burns, Executrix, 1,000.


NEW JERSEY, $608.97.

East Orange, First, 188.38. East Orange, First, S., (10 of which
_for Porto Rico_), 38.09. East Orange, Mrs. J. A. Hulskamper, _for
Porto Rico_, 25. Newark, Girls' Union First C., _for S. A.,
Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. Newark, Belleville Av. C., ad'l, 2.
Woodbridge, First, Lincoln Mem., 5.50.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASS'N, by Mrs. G. A. L.
Merrifield, Treas,. $345.00.

Montclair, W. H. M. S., 180. Newark, First, 15. Washington, D. C.,
First, W. H. M. S. (100 of which _for Porto Rico_), 150.


PENNSYLVANIA, $386.28--of which from Estate, $300.00.

Harford, 5.15. Philadelphia, Snyder Av. C., Lincoln Mem., 12.13.
Philadelphia, Penn. Bible Soc., Grant of Bibles and Testaments, _for
Beaufort, N. C._ Pittsburg, Mrs. S. Jarvis Adams, 25; Mr. and Mrs.
Marcellin C. Adams, 25 _for New Laundry, Orange Park, Fla._ Ridgway,
S., Class No. 6, Lincoln Mem., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 10. Slatington,
Welsh, S., 3.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF PENNSYLVANIA, by Mrs. David Howell,
Treas., $6.00.

Corry, 5. Guy's Mills, 1.

ESTATE.--Lander, Estate of Alfred Cowles by M. E. Cowles, Executor,
300.


OHIO, $547.98--of which from Estate $200.00.

Akron, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 11.60. Ashland, J. O. Jennings, 10.
Ashtabula, First, 13.44. Austenburg, C., bbl. Goods, 1.13 for
freight, _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._ Bellevue, Jr. C. E., 8
bbls. Goods, _for Knoxville, Tenn._ Berea, First, 10.40. Castalia,
C., Lincoln Mem., 2.62. Chardon, L. M. S., _for freight to
Greenwood, S. C._, 1. Cincinnati, Mrs. Thos. French, _for Indian M.,
Elbowood, N. D._, building, 10. Cleveland, Euclid Av., 48.48; Grace,
9.25; Mrs. Mary F. Willard, 5; Mr. And Mrs. A. W. Collins, 5.
Cleveland, Denison Ave. S., Lincoln Mem., 2.50. Dayton, Miss T. M.
Williams, _for S. A., Allen N. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._ 7. Delaware,
William Bevan, 5. Fredericksburg, First, 20. Grafton, First, 5.
Mallet Creek, First of York, _for S. A., Gregory Inst., Wilmington,
N. C._, 10. Medina, Miss C. B. Root, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead,
Miss._, 4. Mount Vernon, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.60. North
Fairfield, S., 2. Oberlin, First, S., 13. Oberlin, Mrs. D. H.
Manning, _for S. A. Normal Sch., Mobile, Ala._, 1. Painesville,
Union, Lincoln Mem., 1.72. Strongsville, Mrs. Strong and Mrs. Clark,
Table Linen, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Thomastown, 1. Unionville, 10.
Wauseon, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.71.

----, Cash, 1.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF OHIO, by Mrs. G. B. Brown, Treas.,
$129.53.

Aurora. C. E., 5. Cincinnati., Walnut Hills, Jr. C. E., 3. Claridon,
3. Cleveland, Park Jr. C. E., 2.50; Pilgrim, _for S. A., Pleasant
Hill, Tenn._, 10. Columbus, Eastwood, 5. Cuyahoga Falls, 2.25.
Gomer, 1.44. Huntsburg, 7. Litchfield, C. E., 5; Jr. C. E., _for
Sch'p, A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1. Lorain, 5. Madison, 9.25.
Medina, 5. Oberlin, First, L. A. S., to const. MRS. L. M. K.
MARSHALL, L.M., 30.00. Olmsted, Second, Jr. C. E., 6.50. Rootstown,
3.28. Springfield, C. E., 5. Tallmadge, Y. L., 20. Toledo, Central,
31 cts.

ESTATE.--Edinburg, Estate of Betsy E. Bingham, by B. S. Bingham,
Executor, 200.


INDIANA, $1.00.

Hamlet, "Two Children," _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 1.


ILLINOIS, $729.76--of which from Estate $50.

Albion, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Austin, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.36. Buda,
C. E., 10. Chebanse, 7.

Chicago, First, 34.78; Covenant, 12.51; Saint Paul, 2. Chicago,
Leavitt St., S., _for Black Mt. Acad., Evarts, Ky._, 14.06; New
England, S., _for Howard U._, 10; Mrs. C. H. Case, _for King's
Mountain, N. C._, 10; "Three Friends," _for Fort Berthold, N. D._,
3; Mrs. Emma Tuthill, _for Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._, 1.

Decatur, S., Lincoln Mem., 5. Dwight, 6. Elgin, Mrs. Grace
Hannaford, _for S. A. Chandler Sch., Ky._, 10. Evanston, First, S.,
_for Lares, Porto Rico_, 31.17. Farmington, 23.23. Garden Prairie,
C., 3.05; S., 96 cts. Griggsville, 12.10. Marseilles, Dr. R. N.
Baughman, deceased, 51. Millburn, 12. Millburn, Alice Dodge and Vera
Worden, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 4.36. Morris, First,
12.50. Naperville, "Friend," _for Pleasant Hill, Acad. Tenn._, 10.
Odell, 25. Payson, C., 14.91.; J. K. Scarborough, 100; H. F.
Scarborough, 10; L. K. Seymour, 5. Peru, First, 6. Quincy, C. E., 8.
Rock Falls, S., Lincoln Mem., _for Fisk U._, 5.50. Shabbona, 31.50.
Somonauk, 12.50. Springfield, First, S., _for Heatherly, Tenn._, 5.
Sterling, L. M. Soc., bbl., Goods, _for Crow Agency, Mont._
Sycamore, Mrs. Helen A. Carnes, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 5. Woodstock,
Mrs. Barrows, _for S. A. Normal Sch., Marion, Ala._, 10. Woodstock,
Mrs. L. H. S. Barrows, 10. Wyanet, C., Lincoln Mem., 8.31.
Yorkville, C. M. Soc. _for freight to Moorhead, Miss._, 2.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF ILLINOIS, Mrs. Mary S. Booth,
Treas., $127.96.

Buda, 6.50. Chicago, New England, 12.50. Chicago, Ravenswood, 5.
Chicago, Union Park, Inter. C. E., _for Talladega C._, 1. Evanston,
First, 15. Joy Prairie, 10. Oak Park, First, 27. Oak Park, Third,
14.96. Providence, Jr. C. E., 4. Rockford, Second, 15. Stillman
Valley, C. E., 5. W. H. M. U. Undesignated, 12.

ESTATE.--Bunker Hill, Estate of C. V. A. Quick, A. S. Cuthbertson,
Executor, 50.


MICHIGAN, $266.55--of which from Estate, $30.00.

Agricultural College, Prof. R. C. Kedzie, 10. Ann Arbor, First,
93.62. Calumet, 51.61, Covert, S., Lincoln Memorial, 4.80. Dundee,
C., bbl. Goods, freight paid, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Grand Haven, C.,
4.65; S., 2.60. Grosse Isle, "Friends," box Christmas Goods, freight
paid, _for Beaufort, N. C._ Harrison, First, Lincoln Mem., 3.50.
Litchfield, First, box Goods, _for Williamsburg, Ky._ Olivet, L. B.
Soc., box Goods, _for Moorhead, Miss._ Onekama, S., Lincoln Mem.,
1.60. Rondo, S., Lincoln Mem., 1. Saginaw, Mrs. A. M. Spencer, 10.
Saugatuck, L. A. S., bbl. Goods, _for Nat, Ala._ South Haven, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 3. Wheatland, 15. Ypsilanti, 11.30. Ypsilanti, Mrs.
Wood, S. Papers, _for Beaufort, N. C._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF MICHIGAN, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill,
Treas., $23.87.

Cheboygan, S., Lincoln Mem., _for S. A., Santee Indian Training
Sch._, 3.62. Muskegon, First, C. E., 10. Portland, 5. South Haven,
C. E., _for S. A., A. G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, 5. Webster, 25
cents.

ESTATE.--Benzonia, Estate of Amasa Waters, by L. P. Judson, Adm'r,
30.


IOWA, $304.06.

Burlington, 31.50 to const. REV. ROBERT L. MARSH, L.M. Charles City,
C. E., _for Macon, Ga._, 10. Chester Center, 4.36. Clay, S.,
Lincoln mem., 1.50. Clear Lake, 14.08. Decorah, 31.46. Des Moines,
Byron C. Ward, _for S. A., Straight U._, 24. Gilbert Station, 5.
Gilbert Station, bbl. Goods, _for Savannah, Ga._ Grinnell, Mrs.
Madison Rew, _for Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._, 1. Hiteman, C.,
Lincoln Mem., 4. Humboldt, L. Soc., Cong. C., _for Girls' Hall,
Dorchester Acad., Ga._, 5. Keokuk, box Books, _for Savannah, Ga._
Maquoketa, First, 13.40. Marshalltown, 15.13. Muscatine, First,
26.97. Rockford, Mrs. O. J. Greene, 20. Victor, 5. Waterloo, Mrs.
Harriet Clark, 5. Waucoma, W. M. S., 10. Waucoma, C., 3.22.
Winthrop, 5.70.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF IOWA, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
Treas., $67.74.

Anita, 7.40. Cedar Rapids, First, S., 2.11. Eldora, C. E., 15.
Grinnell, 5.88. Humboldt, 10. Magnolia, Mrs. Mary L. Hillas, 5.
Manchester, C. E., 6.20. Tabor, 4.50. Traer, S., 8.65. Waterloo, 3.


WISCONSIN, $570.77--of which from Estate, $400.00.

Bloomer, 2.15. Fond du Lac, Mrs. J. A. Bryan, 2 _for Alaska M._, and
1 _for Mountain Work_. Fulton, 7.18. Janesville, "A Friend," _for
Porto Rico_, 58.33. Madison, C., Ladies' Soc., bbl. Goods, _for
Straight U._ Milwaukee, Grand Av. C., bbl. Goods, _for Straight U._
Rosendale, C. E., _for Mountain White Work_, 3.35. Shullsburg, 5.75.
South Milwaukee, First, 6.30. Sturgeon Bay, Hope, 26.88. Sun
Prairie, C., Ladies' Soc., 2 bbls. Goods, _for Straight U._

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF WISCONSIN by Mrs. L. E. Smith
Treas., $57.83.

Milwaukee, Pilgrim, 16. Fond du Lac, 10. Rochester, 10.23.
Wauwatosa, 5. La Crosse, 5. Delavan, 5.10. Eau Claire, 1.50.
Windsor, 5.

ESTATE.--Beloit, Estate of Mrs. E. B. French, by A. P. Waterman,
Executor, 400.


MINNESOTA, $239.92.

Belgrade, W. M. S., _for Indian M., Elbowoods N. D._, freight, 2.25.
Claremont, S., Lincoln Mem. 2.85. Detroit, pkg. Papers, etc., _for
S., Meridian, Miss._ Edgerton, S., Lincoln Mem., 2.30. Freeborn, 3.
Madison Lake, 2. Minneapolis, Park Ave., 88.55. Minneapolis,
Plymouth, 57.33. Minneapolis, Vine, 22.83. Minneapolis, Pilgrim,
2.50. New Ulm, 7.51. Northfield, Carleton College, Huntington S.
Class, _for S. A., Fisk U._, 7. Saint Charles, 4. Saint Paul,
Pacific, 11.30. Spring Valley, 26.50.


MISSOURI, $82.42.

Kansas City, Beacon Hill, S., Lincoln Mem., 6.72. Kidder, 23.95.
Pleasant Hill, Geo. M. Kellogg, _for Porto Rico_, 50. Saint Louis,
Mrs. Webb, _for S. A._, 1; Pilgrim Ch., H. M. S., 24 yards Carpet,
freight, 75 cts., _for Dorchester Acad., Ga._


KANSAS, $112.00.

Clay Centre, 5. Council Grove, 10. Dover, pkg. Papers, _for S.,
Meridian, Miss._ Lyons, Mr. and Mrs. B. D. Conkling, 5. Manhattan,
Mrs. Mary Robinson, _for S. A., Normal Sch., Mobile, Ala._, 2.50.
McPherson, 10.60. National Military Home, Cora A. Hull, _for S. A.,
Fisk U._, 25. Newton, 7.43. Oneida, 1.61. Parsons, W. H. M. U., _for
Porto Rico_, 3. Partridge, 16.86. Wichita, Mrs. Douglas Putnam, 25.


NEBRASKA, $78.90.

Fremont, S., Lincoln Mem., 15. Graf, Mrs. Mary M. Hillman, 1.
Lincoln, Vine St. C., 19.30. Weeping Water, 43.60.


NORTH DAKOTA, $166.23.

Elbowoods, Miss M. E. Field, _for S. A._, 75. Miss H. B. Ilsley,
_for Chapel_, 5; J. R. Finney, 15, _for Indian M., Elbowoods, N. D._
Elbowoods, Indian Woman's S., 2.50. Inkster, 5. Kulm, Nazareth C.,
10. Niagara, 3.70. Oak Creek, Indians, 47.03. Williston, 3.


SOUTH DAKOTA, $33.83.

Canova, 4. Dover, 1. Huron, 6. Oahe, Dora B. Dodge, _for Oahe Indian
Sch._, 9.83. Pierre, James Stevens, _for Oahe Indian Sch., S. D._,
10.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTH DAKOTA, by Mrs. Adda M.
Wilcox, Treas., $3.00.

W. H. M. U., 3.


MONTANA, $11.00.

Livingston, Holbrook, 11.


ARKANSAS, $17.65.

----, A. Brewer, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 17.65.


UTAH, $3.40.

Salt Lake City, S. S. Class, First C., _for S. A., Dorchester Acad.,
Ga._, 3.40.


ARIZONA, $5.00.

Jerome, 5.


OKLAHOMA, $2.00.

Darlington, Indian S., 2.


COLORADO, $21.35.

Beulah, Geo. Johnson, 2.50. Crested Butte, 3. Highlandlake, M. Soc.,
5.45; S., 40 cents. Pueblo, Pilgrim, 5. Ward, C., Lincoln Mem., 5.


CALIFORNIA, $870.76.

Redlands, First, S., Lincoln Mem., 15.60. Redwood City, S., Lincoln
Mem., 1.60. San Francisco. Receipts of the California Chinese
Mission (see items below), 811.32. Ventura, First, 24.30.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF SOUTHERN CAL., by Mrs. Catharine D.
Barnes, $17.94.

W. H. M. U., 17.94.


OREGON, $22.80.

Ashland, C. E., by Susie W. Holmes, 1.50. Astoria, First, 10. Salem,
First, 11.30.


WASHINGTON, $10.00.

Ritzville, First German, 10.


MARYLAND.

ESTATE.--Baltimore, Estate of Mrs. Mary R. Hawley, 3,032.01 (less
expenses 151.60), 2,880.41 (Reserve Legacy).


VIRGINIA, $3.00.

Cappahosic, S., Lincoln Mem., 3.


KENTUCKY, $14.30.

Campton, Rev. J. W. Doane, 4. Lexington, Chandler Sch., Proceeds of
Medal Contest, 9.30. Woodbine, 1.


TENNESSEE, $53.43.

Bon Air, First, Lincoln Mem., 2. Deer Lodge, Rev. Geo. Lusty, 25.
Grand View, Mary Taylor, _for S. A._, 1; W. H. Clark, _for Bell
Tower_, 8.38, _for Grand View, Tenn._ Knoxville, Miss I. F. Hubbard,
1.35. Memphis, Second, 5.70. Pleasant Hill, Hattie Wells, _for
Pleasant Hill Acad._, 10.


NORTH CAROLINA, $48.48.

Enfield, Teachers, Friends and Students, _for Funeral Expenses of a
Student in Jos. K. Brick A. I. and N. School_, 27.92. Enfield,
Chapel, Col., 2.06. Little Mills, C., Lincoln Mem., 2. Lowell, S.,
Lincoln Mem., 5.25. Nalls, S., Lincoln Mem., 1.21. Raleigh, First,
4. Strieby, C., Lincoln Mem., 1.64. Troy, S., Lincoln Mem., 4.40.


SOUTH CAROLINA, $1.20.

Charleston, Avery Inst., ad'l Lincoln Mem., 1.20.


GEORGIA, $19.31.

Atlanta, First, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._, 6. McIntosh, C.,
Lincoln Mem., 8.71. Macon, "A Friend," 3.50; Julia E. Blanchard, 50
cts. _for S. A., Ballard N. Inst._ Savannah, Beach Inst., S.,
Lincoln Mem., 60 cents.


ALABAMA, $22.60.

Fort Davis, Cotton Valley S., Lincoln Mem., 1.60. Mobile, A. T.
Burnell, 4; Miss M. F. Snyder, 4; _for S. A., Normal Sch., Mobile,
Ala._ Montgomery, First, Lincoln Mem., 8.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF ALA., by Mrs. R. W. Jackson, President,
$5.00.

Brewton, 5.


LOUISIANA, $5.35.

Abbeville, Saint Mary, Lincoln Mem., 1.35. Schriever, Saint Mark,
Lincoln Mem., 4.


MISSISSIPPI, $6.50.

Meridian, Students, by Mrs. H. I. Miller, _Special for Meridian_,
5.50. Tougaloo, Miss Haskell, _for S. A., Tougaloo U._, 1.


TEXAS, $1.35.

Davis, C., Lincoln Mem., 1.35.


INCOME, $1,706.20.

Avery Fund, _for African M._, 170.40. Erwin Fund, _for Talladega
C._, 1,500. Howard Theo. End. Fund, _for Howard U._, 13.32. Seymour
Straight, End. Fund, _for Straight U._, 6.48. Tuthill King, End.
Fund, _for Atlanta U._, 12.80; _for Berea C._, 3.20.


TUITION, $4,835.79.

Cappahosic, Va., 37.10. Lexington, Ky., 144.85. Williamsburg, Ky.,
126.06. Williamsburg, Ky., Public Fund, 73.05. Beaufort, N. C.,
35.66. Chapel Hill, N. C., 5. Enfield, N. C., 25.23. Hillsboro, N.
C., 20.60. Kings Mountain, N. C., 29. Saluda, N. C., 25.25.
Whittier, N. C. 12.10. Charleston, S. C., 270.85. Greenwood, S. C.,
143.03. Grand View, Tenn., 28.35. Knoxville, Tenn., 50.70. Memphis,
Tenn., 609.20. Nashville, Tenn., 690.35. Pleasant Hill, Tenn.,
68.80. Albany, Ga., 83.50. Andersonville, Ga., 14. Atlanta, Ga.,
227.58. McIntosh, Ga., 85.41. Macon, Ga., 265.98. Marietta, Ga., 4.
Marshallville, Ga., Public Sch. Fund, 60. Savannah, Ga., 173.12.
Thomasville, Ga., 85.85. Athens, Ala., 38.34. Florence, Ala., 30.10.
Marion, Ala., 75. Mobile, Ala., 133.05. Nat, Ala., 37.45. Talladega,
Ala., 58.03. New Orleans, La., 496.40. Orange Park, Fla., 49.25.
Meridian, Miss., 124.70. Moorhead, Miss., 41. Tougaloo, Miss.,
123.75. Austin, Texas, 99.40. Porto Rico, Lares, 42.30. Porto Rico,
Santurce, 92.40.


SUMMARY FOR MARCH, 1900.

  Donations                                            $15,792.88
  Estates                                                8,593.40
                                                      -----------
                                                       $24,386.28
  Income                                                 1,706.20
  Tuition                                                4,835.79
                                                      -----------
  Total for March                                      $30,928.27


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                            $87,724.07
  Estates                                               33,609.15
                                                     ------------
                                                      $121,333.22
  Income                                                 6,258.90
  Tuition                                               25,366.83
                                                     ------------
  Total from Oct. 1 to March. 31, 1900                $152,958.95


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for March                                  $32.30
  Previously acknowledged                                  196.59
                                                         --------
                                                          $228.89


RESERVE LEGACY ACCOUNT.

  From Oct. 1, to March 31, 1900                       $59,882.15


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Jan. 16 to Feb. 16,
1900, Wm. Johnstone, Treas., $163.00.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $118.00:

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 3.30. Los Angeles, Chinese M. O., 4.60.
Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.50. Oakland, First, S., 15. Oroville,
Chinese M. O., 1.85. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 3.25. Petaluma,
Chinese M. O., 2.75. Riverside, Chinese M. O., 5.45; S. C. Evans, 5;
New Years Offs., 6.45. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5; Annual Members,
12. San Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 4.05. San Diego, Chinese M. O.,
1.75; Annual Members, 2. San Francisco, Central, Assn. and Miss'y
Soc., 10. San Francisco, West, Chinese M. O., 3. Santa Barbara,
Chinese M. O., 6.30. Santa Cruz, 7.05. Ventura, 50 cts.

FROM CHURCHES, $89.41:

Alameda, First Cong. Ch., 89.41.

PERSONAL GIFTS, $260.50:

Balfour, Guthrie & Co., 250. Mrs. Mary M. Bevens, 5.50. Rev. Joseph
Rowell, 5.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $15.00:

Greenfield, Mass., Mrs. H. A. Washburn, 10. Glencoe, Ill., Arthur H.
Day, 5.

FOR CHINESE WOMEN AND CHILDREN, $107.00:

Worcester, Mass., "Steadfast Friends," 10. Stratford, Conn., Miss
Cordelia Sterling, 15. Albany, N. Y., "Friends of Chinese," through
Miss Janet McNaughton, 70. Southern California Woman's Home
Missionary Union, 12.


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, from Feb. 16 to March
21, 1900, William Johnston, Treas., $648.32.

FROM LOCAL MISSIONS, $176.41.

Fresno, Chinese M. O., 1.05. Los Angeles, Chinese M. O., 15.55.
Marysville, Chinese M. O., 7.50. Oakland, First C., 55. Oroville,
Chinese M. O., 1.65. Pasadena, Chinese M. O., 3.10; Anniversary
Offs., 7.02. Petaluma, Chinese M. O., 2.50. Riverside, Chinese M.
O., 5.59; Anniversary Offs., 9. Sacramento, Chinese M. O., 5.50. San
Bernardino, Chinese M. O., 5.05; Anniversary Offs., 5.97; Mrs.
Bellows, 1. San Diego, Chinese M. O., 1.05; Anniversary Offs.,
23.03. San Francisco, Central, Chinese M. O., 9.65; Annual Members,
2. San Francisco, West, Chinese M. O., 7.70. Santa Barbara, Chinese
M. O., 7.70; Cong. Ch., C. E., 5. Santa Cruz, Chinese M. O., 5.
Ventura, Chinese M. O., 1.

FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $25.00:

Bangor, Maine, Central C., 5. Newburyport, Mass. Mrs. Sophia C.
Hale, 20.

FOR CHINESE MOTHERS AND CHILDREN, $20.00.

Portland, Maine, Mrs. W. H. Ferris' S. S. Class, 10. Farmington,
Ill., Mrs. H. B. Haskell, 10.


  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
  Congregational Rooms,
  Fourth Av. and Twenty-Second St.,
  New York, N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A. M. A.

  President--Mrs. Geo. F. Peaslee, 42 Goff St., Auburn.
  Secretary--Mrs. S. W. Chapin, Deer Isle.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Helen W. Davis, Woodfords.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT. INST'N AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. D. Knapp, Somersworth.
  Secretary--Mrs. N. W. Nims, 3 Liberty St., Concord.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. L. Smith, Burlington.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Robert Mackinnon, St. Johnsbury.


MASS. AND R. I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C. L. Goodell, 9 Shailer St., Brookline, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 107 Congregational House, Boston
  Treasurer--Miss Lizzie D. White, 107 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Miss Anne W. Moore, 15 Columbia Street, Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Av., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 513 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. J. Pearsall, 153 Decatur St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N. J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Clark, Fourth and College Sts., N. W.,
    Washington, D. C.
  Secretary--Miss Julia M. Pond, 607 T St., N. E., Washington, D. C.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. A. L. Merryfield, Falls Church, Va.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. F. Yennie, Wilcox.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Waid, Ridgway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. David Howells, Kane.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. W. Carroll, 48 Brookfield St., Cleveland.
  Secretary--Mrs. Arra H. Williams, 46 Knox St., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G. B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

  President--Mrs. W. A. Bell, 223 Broadway, Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. E. Hall, Alexandria.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Anna D. Davis, 1608 Bellefontaine St., Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Oak Park.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Whitcomb, 463 Irving Ave., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary S. Booth, 34 S. Wood St., Chicago, Ill.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. H. Patton, 3707 Westminster Place, St. Louis.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. S. Cobb, 4415 W. Morgan St., St. Louis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. J. Steele, 2825 Washington Ave., St. Louis.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--
  Secretary--Mrs. H. H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, West Grand Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Platt Powell, 76 Jefferson Ave., Grand Rapids.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. N. Thorne, 212 S. Union St., Grand Rapids.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A. O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. E. Smith, 140 Gorham St., Madison.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 E. 9th St., St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. E. R. Shepard, 2931 Portland Ave., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. H. Stickney, Fargo.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. E. Corry, Columbia.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. M. Jenney, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A. M. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. W. Brown, Rapid City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. S. Cushman, Deadwood.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. D. B. Perry, Crete.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Bross, 2904 Q St., Lincoln.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Charlotte C. Hall, 1318 C St., Lincoln.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Guild, 1336 Dillon St., Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. M. H. Jaquith, Cripple Creek, Col.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Wilkinson, Ottawa.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Dr. E. F. A. Drake, 518 Mack Block, Denver.
  Secretary--Mrs. Addison Blanchard, 3023 Downing Ave., Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F. N. Thomas, Eaton.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  Acting President--Mrs. J. A. Riner, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. W. L. Whipple, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. H. Kevan, Rock Springs.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Victor F. Clark, Livingston.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Mrs. W. S. Bell, Helena.


IDAHO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. R. B. Wright, Boise.
  Secretary--Mrs. C. E. Mason, Mountain Home.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Johnston, Challis.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, 424 So. K St., Tacoma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Herbert S. Gregory, Spanaway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. B. Burwell, 323 Seventh Ave., Seattle.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F. Eggert, The Hill, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. D. D. Clarke, 447 N. E. Twelfth St., Portland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C. F. Clapp, Forest Grove.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. S. Williams, Saratoga.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. M. Howard, 1383 Franklin St., Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. M. Haven, 1329 Harrison St., Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Warren F. Day, 949 S. Hill St., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. K. G. Robertson, Mentone.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


UTAH (including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C. T. Hemphill, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Hall, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Treasurer--Miss Anna Baker, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E. H. Ashmun, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. F. A. Burlingame, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M. McCluskey, Albuquerque.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J. H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L. E. Kimball, Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L. S. Childs, Choctaw City.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R. M. Swain, Vinita.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O. Faduma, Troy.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss May E. Newton, King's Mountain.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Mertie L. Graham, Savannah.
  Secretary--Miss Jennie Curtis, McIntosh.
  Treasurer--Miss Mattie Turner, Athens.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S. F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W. D. Brown, Interlachen.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. M. A. Dillard, Selma.
  Secretary--Mrs. Spencer Snell, Talladega.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E. C. Silsby, Talladega.


TENN., KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G. W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. J. E. Smith, Chattanooga, Tenn.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J. C. Napier, 514 Capitol Square, Nashville.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  Treasurer--Mrs. L. H. Turner, 3012 12th St., Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock, 2436 Canal St., New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda W. Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary L. Rogers, Straight Univ., New Orleans.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Eunice Heflin, Sherman.
  Secretary--Mrs. Donald Hinckley, Sanger Ave., Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Arthur Geen, Dallas.


[Footnote A: While the W. H. M. A. appears in this list as a State
body for Mass. and R. I., it has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SECRETARIES OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S WORK.

  VERMONT              Mrs. G. W. Patterson, East St. Johnsbury.

  MASS. & R. I.        Miss Bertha M. Shepard, 607 Cong'l House, Boston.

  NEW YORK             Mrs. H. A. Flint, 604 Willis Ave., Syracuse.

  OHIO                 Miss M. C. Smith, 853 Doan St., Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS             Mrs. J. T. Blanchard, 218 Walnut St., Aurora.

  MISSOURI             Miss Katherine Jones, 4337 Washington Ave.,
                         St. Louis.

  IOWA                 Mrs. Charles McAllister, Spencer.

  MICHIGAN             Mrs. W. J. Gregory, 459 Third St., Manistee.

  MINNESOTA, Young Ladies' Work, Mrs. B. W. Smith, 600 West
                         Thirty-second St., Minneapolis.

  MINNESOTA, Christian Endeavor Work, Miss Bertha Hanneman, 1816
                         Portland Ave., Minneapolis.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. E. S. Shaw, Cooperstown.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. Grace Burleigh, Mitchell.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. J. N. Hyder, 1520 U St., Lincoln.

  KANSAS               Mrs. C. E. Read, Parsons.

  COLORADO             Mrs. Olive R. Barker, Greeley.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. C. Arnold, 621 Spruce St., Helena.

  WASHINGTON           Mrs. W. C. Davie, 423 North N St., Tacoma.

  OREGON               Mrs. W. D. Palmer, 443 West Park St., Portland.

  CALIFORNIA           Miss Caroline A. Potter, 600 17th St., Oakland.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Phebe Mayhew, 355 Alvarado St., Los Angeles.


SECRETARIES OF CHILDREN'S WORK.

  OHIO                 Mrs. Effie Morgan, 3880 Euclid Ave., East Cleveland.

  ILLINOIS             Miss Hattie Kline, 713 E. 63rd St., Chicago.

  IOWA                 Mrs. M. Rew, Grinnell.

  MICHIGAN             Mrs. C. R. Wilson, 65 Frederick Ave., Detroit.

  MINNESOTA            Mrs. H. S. Baker, 2268 Blake Ave., St. Anthony Park.

  NORTH DAKOTA         Mrs. O. J. Wakefield, Wahpeton.

  SOUTH DAKOTA         Mrs. I. Crane, Waubay.

  NEBRASKA             Mrs. H. D. Neely, 4371 Hamilton St., Omaha.

  KANSAS               Miss Hattie Booth, Newton.

  MONTANA              Mrs. H. B. Segur, Billings.

  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA  Miss Emily M. Peck, 920 W. 8th St., Los Angeles.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 54, NO. 02, APRIL, 1900 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.