Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary

FEBRUARY, 1885.

  VOL. XXXIX.
  NO. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE.
EDITORIAL.

  THE FIGURES                                                      35
  HARD TIMES--OUR ROLL OF HONOR                                    36
  THE FREEDMAN'S CASE IN EQUITY                                    37
  PARAGRAPHS--A SANITARY VIEW OF INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION              38
  BENEFACTIONS                                                     39
  THE A. M. A. AT THE NEW ORLEANS EXPOSITION                       40


THE SOUTH.

  LIST OF MISSIONARIES AND TEACHERS                                41
  THANKSGIVING ADDRESS AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY                       49
  INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION: WHAT THE A. M. A. IS DOING                 51


THE CHINESE.

  THE OUTLOOK                                                      53
  CLASS OF CHINESE GIRLS (cut)                                     55


CHILDREN'S PAGE.

  LETTER FROM AN INDIAN BOY                                        56


RECEIPTS                                                           57

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


_Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  W. H. ROGERS,
  PETER McCARTEE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.
  LYMAN ABBOTT.
  A. S. BARNES.
  J. R. DANFORTH.
  CLINTON B. FISK.
  S. B. HALLIDAY.
  SAMUEL HOLMES.
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
  CHARLES L. MEAD.
  E. B. MONROE.
  J. E. RANKIN.
  Wm. H. WARD.
  J. L. WITHROW.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _Memorial Hall, Hartford_.
  Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON, _112 West Washington Street, Chicago_.


_Field Officers._

  Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _Field Superintendent._
  Prof. ALBERT SALISBURY, _Superintendent of Education_.


_Bureau of Woman's Work._

  _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields, to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the "American
Missionary," to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

May be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
'American Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to
its charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by
three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Advertisements._

       *       *       *       *       *

For Instant Use

    As a reliable remedy, in cases of Croup, Whooping Cough, or
    sudden Colds, and for the prompt relief and cure of throat and
    lung diseases, Ayer's Cherry Pectoral is invaluable. Mrs. E. G.
    Edgerly, Council Bluffs, Iowa, writes: "I consider Ayer's Cherry
    Pectoral a most important remedy for home use. I have tested its
    curative power, in my family, many times during the past thirty
    years, and have never known it to fail. It will relieve the most
    serious affections of the throat and lungs, whether in children
    or adults." John H. Stoddard, Petersburg, Va., writes: "I have
    never found a medicine equal to

    AYER'S
    Cherry Pectoral

    for the prompt relief of throat and lung diseases peculiar to
    children. I consider it an absolute cure for all such affections,
    and am never without it in the house." Mrs. L. E. Herman, 187
    Mercer St., Jersey City, writes: "I have always found Ayer's
    Cherry Pectoral useful in my family." B. T. Johnson, Mt. Savage,
    Md., writes: "For the speedy cure of sudden Colds, and for the
    relief of children afflicted with Croup, I have never found
    anything equal to Ayer's Cherry Pectoral. It is the most potent
    of all the remedies I have ever used." W. H. Stickler, Terre
    Haute, Ind., writes: "Ayer's Cherry Pectoral cured my wife of a
    severe lung affection, supposed to be Quick Consumption. We now
    regard the Pectoral as a household necessity." E. M.
    Breckenridge, Brainerd, Minn., writes: "I am subject to
    Bronchitis, and, wherever I go, am always sure to have a bottle
    of

    Ayer's Cherry Pectoral

    with me. It is without a rival for the cure of bronchial
    affections."

PREPARED BY

DR. J. C. AYER & CO., Lowell, Mass.

For sale by all Druggists.


INDIGESTION

    To strengthen the stomach, create an appetite, and remove the
    horrible depression and despondency which result from
    Indigestion, there is nothing so effective as Ayer's Pills. These
    Pills contain no calomel or other poisonous drug, act directly on
    the digestive and assimilative organs, and restore health and
    strength to the entire system. T. P. Bonner, Chester, Pa.,
    writes: "I have used Ayer's Pills for the past 30 years, and am
    satisfied I should not have been alive to-day, if it had not been
    for them. They

    Cured

    me of Dyspepsia when all other remedies failed, and their
    occasional use has kept me in a healthy condition ever since." L.
    N. Smith, Utica, N. Y., writes: "I have used Ayer's Pills, for
    Liver troubles and Indigestion, a good many years, and have
    always found them prompt and efficient in their action." Richard
    Norris, Lynn, Mass., writes: "After much suffering, I have been
    cured of Dyspepsia and Liver troubles

    By Using

    Ayer's Pills. They have done me more good than any other medicine
    I have ever taken." John Burdett, Troy, Iowa, writes: "For nearly
    two years my life was rendered miserable by the horrors of
    Dyspepsia. Medical treatment afforded me only temporary relief,
    and I became reduced in flesh, and very much debilitated. A
    friend of mine, who had been similarly afflicted, advised me to
    try Ayer's Pills. I did so, and with the happiest results. My
    food soon ceased to distress me, my appetite returned, and I
    became as strong and well as ever."

Ayer's Pills,

PREPARED BY

DR. J. C. AYER & CO., Lowell, Mass.

For sale by all Druggists.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  FRANK LESLIE'S
  ILLUSTRATED
  SUNDAY
  MAGAZINE

  A Journal of Refined, Useful and Interesting Literature.]

  THE
  Great Family Magazine
  FOR THE PASTOR,
  THE TEACHER, THE PARENT.

  Pure, Wholesome and Entertaining.

  T. De WITT TALMAGE, D.D.,
  Editor.


FRANK LESLIE'S SUNDAY MAGAZINE is the only publication of its kind in
the country. Its position is both strong and unique. It offers to
every member of every family a large variety of pure, wholesome and
elevating reading, free from any sectarian or proselyting tendencies.
Stories, Sketches, Poems, by the best writers, and Sermons and
Lectures by its distinguished and eloquent Editor, make up in each
issue a table of contents of unsurpassed richness and variety.

    THE SUNDAY MAGAZINE is now publishing a series of valuable and
    interesting articles upon

    REPRESENTATIVE RELIGIOUS JOURNALS AND JOURNALISTS,

    In which will appear, among others, Portraits and Descriptive
    Sketches of

    Rev. DR. PRIME, of "The Observer." Rev. DR. GRAY, of "The
    Interior." Rev. DR. ERRETT, of "The Standard." Rev. DR. CONRAD,
    of "The Lutheran Observer" Rev. DR. FIELD, of "The Evangelist."

AGENTS ARE WANTED at every post-office, and liberal commission will
be paid to those who expend time and effort in increasing the
circulation of THE SUNDAY MAGAZINE.

[Illustration: finger pointing right] ANY PASTOR or SUNDAY-SCHOOL
SUPERINTENDENT, sending the address of a person likely, in his
judgment, to make a good agent for THE SUNDAY MAGAZINE, will receive
a sample copy of the Magazine free of charge. _Women are often the
must successful agents._

[Illustration: finger pointing right]
NOW IS THE TIME TO SUBSCRIBE!
[Illustration: finger pointing left]

Price, postpaid, $2.50 per year. Specimen Copies, 10 cents each.

[Illustration: finger pointing right] Specimen Copies of all the
Frank Leslie Publications, postpaid--three weeklies and four
monthlies--30 cents. Address

  _MRS. FRANK LESLIE_, _Publisher_,
  53-55-57 PARK PLACE, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. XXXIX.     February, 1885.     NO. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

$365,000

NEEDED FOR THE CURRENT YEAR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your Committee are convinced that not less than a THOUSAND DOLLARS a
day are imperatively demanded to perfect the admirably organized
plans of the Association, even for the present, to say nothing of the
pressing needs of the early future.--

[FINANCE COMMITTEE'S REPORT ADOPTED BY ANNUAL MEETING AT SALEM.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIGURES.

        _Receipts._        Col. and Don.       Estates.        Total.

  Oct. 1 to Dec. 31, 1884     $43,627.90      $7,714.00      $51,341.90
   "   1    "    31, 1883      48,299.79       4,536.51       52,836.30
                              ----------     ----------      ----------
                      Decrease $4,671.89 Inc. $3,177.49  Dec. $1,494.40

       *       *       *       *       *

The receipts published in this number bring us to the end of the
first three months of our fiscal year. The summary given above shows
how we stand as compared with last year. Total compared with total,
we are behind. May we not, however, hope that the turning-point will
soon be reached, and that all through the rest of the year it shall
be our privilege to chronicle a steady increase? We are out in the
current of our work. We cannot turn back. The thirteen thousand
dollar deficit from the last year adds to our solicitude. We ask our
friends to keep their eyes upon the figures as we publish them from
month to month. They will prove to be very suggestive teachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The papers are having a good deal to say these days about "hard
times." Capital is sensitive and seeks cover at the slightest alarm.
People hesitate about investing when they feel uncertain as to
security. Benevolent societies are the first to feel the depression
of business reverse. This fact is a storm signal whose significance
we should sacredly heed. It proclaims danger, yet a danger that, with
thought and prudence, can be averted. There are many whose gifts have
come to us from an overflowing abundance. Suppose, now, that they
should join the grand army of self-sacrificing givers that, at such a
stress as hard times produce, is in sore need of recruits; suppose,
farther, that by personal effort new contributors are secured, and
then suppose some of the capital that may be withdrawn from
investment for fear of loss, instead of being hidden away or placed
under lock and key, should be sent out into the active service of the
Lord, and be converted into redeemed souls and regenerated manhood.
Just let these suppositions be realized, and the danger threatened
will never be encountered. If the readers of the MISSIONARY will
think, pray, talk and preach along such lines as the above
suppositions mark out, we are confident that we shall be brought
safely and triumphantly through. What if the record should show
larger gifts in the treasury of the Lord than were ever known in
times of acknowledged business prosperity! From the Christian
stand-point, why not?

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR ROLL OF HONOR.


We publish this month the names of our missionaries and the stations
at which they are located. These names constitute our Roll of Honor.
We are proud of them. Some of them are the names of old and
long-tried veterans, the story of whose experience is full of romance
and thrilling interest. All of them are the names of men and women
who have made themselves of no reputation because of the work in
which they are engaged. And what is that work? The salvation of the
lost. The enlightenment of the ignorant. The elevation of the
degraded.

It is surely very strange that opposition should be encountered in
such work. It would seem as if it ought to have the benedictions of
the good and the well wishes even of the bad. And yet the fact is,
the good names of these missionaries are evilly spoken of; many times
their personal safety has been imperilled, and they have been, and
still are, made social outlaws because of their work.

This is not as it ought to be. It is not as it will be. Truth is
steadily pushing for the light. Right is constantly asserting its
claim for recognition. Old prejudices and false customs die hard;
but their doom is written, and die they must. Problems will demand
solution, in whose clearing up will vanish many a cherished folly.
Here is such a problem for our Southern friends to solve. That most
excellent Christian scholar and divine, Rev. Atticus G. Haygood,
D.D., of Georgia, states it thus: "If, on other grounds, the teacher
is entitled to personal and social recognition, the fact of his
teaching a negro school should be no bar. Think, for example, of
people admiring David Livingstone, and then turning up their noses at
a teacher, not because he is bad, or ignorant, or ill-bred, nor yet
even because he is a negro, but, forsooth, because he teaches a negro
school! There is a very large intimation of 'sham' in this
distinction without a difference. It is utterly absurd. May it not
also be sinful?" We commend this problem to the good Christian people
among whom our missionaries dwell, for solution. They will be sure to
come out where Dr. Haygood leads them. And when they see the
absurdity of their attitude in regard to our missionaries, we believe
they will soon see the farther conclusion, namely, that it is sinful.

Meanwhile, our missionaries will keep on faithfully doing what they
believe to be right, accomplishing thus two things at once:
Witnessing for the truth and helping the needy. All honor to this
noble band of self-denying, principle-maintaining men and women. They
are standard-bearers of our advancing Christianity. They are where,
as standard-bearers, they ought to be, at the front, the post of
sacrifice and danger, but they are leading in a cause that is sure to
win.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FREEDMAN'S CASE IN EQUITY.


This is the title of a most thorough and refreshingly candid paper
from the pen of Geo. W. Cable, published in the January _Century_.
His opening sentence, "The greatest social problem before the
American people to-day is, as it has been for a hundred years, the
presence among us of the negro," indicates his estimate of the
importance of the subject. From beginning to end the paper bears the
marks of carefulest thought, profound conviction, and loyalty to
truth. Mr. Cable is a native of Louisiana, an ex-Confederate soldier,
the son and grandson of slave-holders. He has a right to be heard. He
knows the subject. He knows the American people. He evidently
believes that nothing is ever settled that is not settled right. He
does not believe that the freedman's case has as yet been thus
settled. Moral questions will not be suppressed. If ignored in the
domain of private morals, they "spring up and expand once more into
questions of public equity; neglected as matters of public equity,
they blossom into questions of national interest; and despised in
that guise, presently yield the red fruits of revolution." On the
basis of such a principle, he argues that there will be no quiet to
the agitation until the freedman is a free man in all respects. And
he is right. We commend our readers to secure this article if
possible and read it. They will be amply repaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

We hope none of our readers will fail to read Prof. Crogman's
address, published in this number of the MISSIONARY. Prof. Crogman is
a graduate of our Atlanta University, and is now a Professor in the
Clark University, a school for colored youth in Atlanta sustained by
Methodists. The splendid tribute he pays the teachers who went South
to teach the colored people is very handsomely done--and it is just.

       *       *       *       *       *

And still the votes are coming in. Subscriptions for THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY last month number nearly one-half the total subscriptions
of the preceding year. Most heartily do we thank our friends. There
are thousands yet to be heard from. We know fifty cents is not a very
convenient sum to send, but we beg our readers to remember that a
dollar answers for two years. _Vote early and often._ In politics,
this is not a commendable motto. In the peculiar election we are just
now trying to carry through, we put special emphasis on the _vote
early_, and yet do not object to the vote often--that is, if the
voters feel like it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SANITARY VIEW OF INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION.


From the time when it was made manifest that man by the sweat of his
brow must provide his bread, there has been occasion for industrial
education. Its ameliorating consequences is a good reason for it.
Indirectly, at least, it has the example of the Carpenter's Son for
its authority; His mighty works were for the most part in relief of
physical wants. An industrial education serving such ends has an
unquestionable warrant.

In the August number of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY we gave statistics of
mortality of colored people in several Southern cities. For the last
week in May the number of deaths per 1,000 among the blacks in
Atlanta was 49, in Charleston 39, and in Richmond 50; while the death
rate among the whites in those cities was 19, 18 and 19,
respectively--less than one-half. This showing was not on account of
the negro's inaptitude for the climate; that is especially favorable
for him. It was in consequence of his ignorance of hygienic laws on
the one hand, and his inability or indisposition to observe them on
the other.

On several occasions, a few years since, colored missionaries for
Africa were submitted to a thorough medical examination, when it was
found that among the females but few were sound in body. Different
physicians informed us repeatedly that most negro women in this
country were in like unhealthy condition, for which ignorance,
poverty, neglect and wrong were chargeable. To avert such evils from
the coming generation is a part of the work of this Association. The
negro will never be at his best either for this country or Africa
until his physical condition is improved.

Looking at an industrial education simply from this point, much will
be found to emphasize its urgency. The colored people have been
limited to a very meagre variety of food. Pork with corn-bread
improperly prepared has been the chief staple of a majority of them.
In our different boarding institutions and in our schools for cookery
we teach that suitable food should be used and how it should be
prepared. The blacks are apt students in this department; they have
ability as cooks. The Southern country is capable of producing a
large variety of crops, and we seek to encourage such agricultural
industries as will be most helpful. At Berea a fruit-canning
establishment has been put in operation. At Tougaloo, truck is raised
for the Northern market. At Atlanta, experiments with a variety of
crops have been abundant and successful, so that by these simple
household and agricultural industries a good variety for invalids,
young children and others is being furnished. We are rendering great
service also by teaching our students to have care for the protection
of their persons. They need good houses; we teach them carpentry.
Their clothing has been limited and unsuitable. They are often
ignorant of what is required for health, and when and how to wear
their garments. We instruct them in their proper use, and how
clothing should be made. Exposure to wet and cold, over-exertion and
improper indulgences--these account largely for the diseases among
the females to which we have referred. We aim to remedy these evils.
Lady missionaries, lady physicians, ladies in charge of industrial
schools, one and all are mindful for the health of those to whom they
minister, and not a little of their work consists in urging the
observance of sanitary laws; and we believe that however weighty
other considerations for an industrial education are, none appeal
more powerfully to the Christian heart than those mentioned, and that
the death-rate to which we have alluded indicates that human pity, as
well as Christianity, renders such work not only timely but
imperative.

       *       *       *       *       *

BENEFACTIONS.


Hon. S. A. Smith has given $50,000 to McGill University, Montreal,
for separate higher instruction for women.

Dr. Taylor, late President, has presented to Wooster, O., University
an additional gift of property, valued at $5,000.

E. A. Goodnow, of Worcester, has pledged the sum of $10,000 to the
Huguenot Seminary of South Africa, on the same terms as his recent
gift to Iowa College.

The $6,000 given by Mrs. Knowles for an industrial building at
Atlanta University, has provided a neat and suitable building for the
institution.

A Northern gentleman interested in the Slater work, has given $25,000
to Emory College, and other friends have pledged $30,000, for a
School of Technology in the college.

The children of the late Caleb Van Husan, of Detroit, give $6,000 to
Kalamazoo College, $2,000 to the Chicago Baptist Theological
Seminary, and $500 to the Clinton Avenue Baptist Church, It having
been their father's intention to make such gifts himself.

_The $365,000 required by the A. M. A. ought to be expended in
aggressive missionary work, and its institutions should be speedily
endowed in order that the Society may have the funds to do so._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE A. M. A. AT THE NEW ORLEANS EXPOSITION.


As a matter of interest to many of our readers, we here quote,
slightly abbreviated, a report of our exhibit in New Orleans, given
in the _Daily Picayune_ of that city:

     The American Missionary Association display closes the
     educational exhibits in the east gallery. It occupies large
     space and is gayly decorated with pale-blue and white draperies.
     In this display will be found a complete report for eye and mind
     of the progress made by the colored school children and by the
     Indians during the past years. Upon long tables are ranged for
     examination books in use, neatly bound, copy-books and
     innumerable specimens of drawing, fancy work, knitting and plain
     sewing, also agricultural and blacksmithing specimens from
     various training schools.

     Straight University, which has nearly 600 pupils, sends
     examination pamphlets, a number of pictures and silk embroidery.

     It is curious to note what most interests visitors in certain
     departments. Straight University sends large numbers of
     imaginary letters written by pupils from various parts of the
     world. The visiting public read these letters with as much
     avidity as if the innocent epistles were real letters, and the
     neat manuscripts are already well thumbed. One of the best
     letters, all things considered, is from a pupil from Honduras,
     who has only been studying English two years. His letter, signed
     Emilio Mazien, is first rate.

     The display from the Indian School at Santee, Neb., consists of
     school books printed in the Sioux Indian language, and these are
     a first, second and third reader, a moderately advanced
     geography, a hymn-book, and "Dakota Wowapi Wakan," or Bible in
     the Sioux tongue. A little oblong crocheted tidy is made of
     parti-colored stripes, each one the work of a young Pocahontas,
     who has added her name, age and tribe to which she belongs. In
     fact all the Indian work is thus marked--the young red men and
     maidens seeming particularly careful to give their tribe. This
     school also exhibits shoes, harness, tin cans, step ladders and
     models of household furniture. The girls have sent long linen
     bands full of buttonholes, aprons and undergarments finely
     hemmed.

     The Atlanta University sends silk-worms, cocoons, a neatly drawn
     map of the city, and fine examples of free-hand drawings applied
     with colors.

     The kindergarten exhibits from Storrs Atlanta school are very
     cunning, and the photograph of the ebony kindergarteners, taken
     while at their tasks, is like a picture. The work of the
     children, braided wraps, embroidered animals and paper
     contrivances, will compare favorably with any kindergarten in
     the country.

     The exhibit from the Hampton Institute, Virginia, is placed upon
     a pedestal. This school is properly a State Agricultural
     University for the negro race in Virginia and for such Indians
     as may be sent to it by the National Government. It has 600
     members, and these have sent some very fine harness, woolen work
     and carpentry work.

     A curious display from the Gregory Institute, Wilmington, N. C.,
     teaches quite a lesson in domestic economy. The girls have sent
     specimens of "stocking darning" and of that still more
     economical and homely employment known as "re-footing old
     stockings." A patchwork quilt made by the boys, forms a part of
     this display. Looking over the exhibits made under the American
     Missionary Association, the writer is pleasantly impressed with
     the excellent care with which the colored and Indian pupils all
     over the country are being instructed in trades. As cooks,
     carpenters, blacksmiths, farmers, brick-makers they are being
     practically instructed, as well as being given good collegiate
     educations.

     The display of drawings from the Le Moyne Institute, of Memphis,
     is exceedingly beautiful and attracts universal admiration, as
     being most artistic and complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIELD.

1884-1885.


The following list presents the names and post-office addresses of
those who are employed in the Churches, Institutions and Schools
aided by the American Missionary Association.

  REV. J. E. ROY, D.D., Field Superintendent.
  PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, Supt. of Education.


THE SOUTH.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

WASHINGTON.

  THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

  Rev. W. W. Patton, D.D.,                  Washington, D. C.
   "   J. G. Craighead, D.D.,                    "       "
   "   E. Whittlesey,                            "       "
   "   John G. Butler, D.D.,                     "       "

  LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH.

  _Pastor._
  Rev. G. W. Moore,                          Nashville, Tenn.

  _Missionary._
  Mrs. G. W. Moore,                          Nashville, Tenn.


VIRGINIA.

HAMPTON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. H. B. Frissell,                       Hampton, Va.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WILMINGTON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. D. D. Dodge,                          Nashua, N. H.

  GREGORY INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._
  Mr. Geo. A. Woodard,                       Weymouth, Mass.

  _Assistants._
  Miss Nellie A. Vinton,                     Southbridge, Mass.
   "   H. L. Fitts,                          Candia, N. H.
   "   E. A. Warner,                         Lowell, Mass.
   "   Elizabeth F. Thayer,                  Lexington, Mass.
   "   Mary E. Lapham,                       Dorchester, Mass.
   "   Mary D. Hyde,                         Zumbrota, Minn.
   "   R. G. Jillson,                        Providence, R. I.
  Mrs. Janet Dodge,                          Nashua, N. H.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss A. E. Farrington,                     Portland, Me.

RALEIGH.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Geo. S. Smith,                        Raleigh, N. C.

DUDLEY.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. J. E. B. Jewett,                      Pepperell, Mass.
  Mrs. J. E. B. Jewett,                         "        "

KITTRELL.

  _Teacher._
  Miss P. M. Lee,                            Oxford, Mass.

McLEANSVILLE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Alfred Connel,                        Solsberry, Ind.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. Julius W. Brown,                       Leicester, Mass.

OAKS.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. J. N. Ray,                            Oaks, N. C.
  Miss E. W. Douglas,                        Decorah, Iowa.

HILLSBORO.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Jas. Walker,                          Charleston, S. C.

  _Teacher._
  Miss M. B. Curtiss,                        Atlanta, Ga.

CEDAR CLIFF.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. Sandy Paris,                           Cedar Cliff, N. C.

BEAUFORT.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. Michael Jerkins,                      Beaufort, N. C.
  Miss Lydia Hatch,                             "       "

STRIEBY.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Z. Simmons,                           Dudley, N. C.

  _Teacher._
  Mrs. Islay Walden,                         Strieby, N. C.

TROY.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. Wm. H. Ellis,                         Southfield, Mass.

PEKIN.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. James E. Smith,                       Pekin, N. C.


SOUTH CAROLINA.

CHARLESTON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. E. T. Hooker,                         Castleton, Vt.

  AVERY INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._
  Prof. Wm. M. Bristoll,                     Minneapolis, Minn.

  _Assistants._
  Mrs. A. A. F. Sprague,                     Georgiaville, R. I.
  Miss E. F. Marsh,                          Worcester, Mass.
   "   Anna F. Condict,                      Adrian, Mich.
   "   Anna M. Nicholas,                     Toledo, Ohio.
   "   Katherine T. Plant,                   Minneapolis, Minn.
   "   Anna Hammond,                         Charleston, S. C.
  Mr. K. A. Lawrence,                        Charleston, S. C.
  Miss C. A. Wallace,                        Charleston, S. C.
  Mr. E. A. Ransome,                         Charleston, S. C.
  Miss Emma Rand,                            Whitewater, Wis.

ORANGEBURG.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. L. Grice,                          Orangeburg, S. C.

GREENWOOD.

  BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.

  Mr. J. D. Backenstose,                     Geneva, N. Y.
   "  W. C. McLester,                        Greenwood, S. C.

LADIES' ISLAND.

  Miss M. H. Clary,                          Conway, Mass.


GEORGIA.

ATLANTA.

  _Ministers._
  Rev. Evarts Kent,                          Chicago, Ill.
   "   C. W. Francis,                        Atlanta, Ga.

  ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. Edmund A. Ware,                      Atlanta, Ga.
  Prof. Thomas N. Chase,                        "      "
  Rev. Cyrus W. Francis,                        "      "
   "   Horace Bumstead, D.D.,                   "      "
  Mr. Horace M. Sessions,                    Wilbraham, Mass.
   "  Charles P Sinnott,                     Marshfield, Mass.
   "  C. C. Tucker,                          Fitchburg, Mass.
  Miss Emma G. Ware,                         Norfolk, Mass.
   "   Ella W. Moore,                        Chicago, Ill.
   "   Rebecca Massey,                       Oberlin, O.
   "   Margaret Neel,                        Livonia, N. Y.
   "   Sarah E. Marsh,                       Lake Forest, Ill.
  Mrs. Lucy E. Case,                         Millbury, Mass.
   "   M. N. Chapman,                        Boston, Mass.
   "   H. W. Chase,                          West Randolph, Vt.
   "   L. H. Kendall,                        Wellesley, Mass.
  Miss Olive A. Thompson,                    Durham, N. H.
   "   Fannie M. Andrews,                    Milltown, N. B.
   "   E. H. Merrill,                        Boston, Mass.

  STORRS SCHOOL (104 Houston St.).

  _Principal._
  Miss Amy Williams,                         Livonia Sta., N. Y.

  _Assistants._
  Miss Anna L. Colman,                       Whitewater, Wis.
   "   Julia A. Goodwin,                     Mason, N. H.
   "   Amelia L. Ferris,                     Oneida, Ill.
  Mrs. C. G. Ball,                           Palermo, N. Y.
  Miss Emma F. Woods,                        Grand River, Ia.
   "   Anna M. Bartlett,                     Chicago, Ill.
   "   A. H. Levering,                       Philadelphia, Pa.
   "   Carrie J. Parrey,                     Chicago, Ill.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss Lizzie Stevenson,                     Bellefontaine, O.

MACON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. S. E. Lathrop,                        New London, Wis.

  LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.

  _Principal._
  Mr. W. A. Hodge,                           W. Rosendale, Wis.

  _Assistants._
  Mr. Aug. J. Burger,                        New London, Wis.
  Miss Susie A. Jeffris,                     Janesville, Wis.
   "   Gertrude F. Yard,                     Dakota City, Ia.
   "   Naomi Pinch,                          West Rosendale, Wis.
   "   Alice White,                          Newburyport, Mass.
   "   Clara E. Tonnesen,                    Oshkosh, Wis.
  Mrs. S. E. Lathrop,                        New London, Wis.
   "   W. A. Hodge,                          W. Rosendale, Wis.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss H. M. Beard,                          Chicago, Ill.

MARIETTA.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. E. J. Penney,                         Marietta, Ga.

AUGUSTA.

  _Teacher._
  Miss S. A. Hosmer,                         Ashley, Mass.

THOMASVILLE.

  _Teacher._
  ----                                       ----

ALBANY.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. W. C. Greene,                          Albany, Ga.

CUTHBERT.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. F. H. Henderson,                       Cuthbert, Ga.

ATHENS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Geo. V. Clark,                        Atlanta, Ga.

  _Teachers._
  Mr. O. A. Combs,                           Athens, Ga.
  Miss Lizzie McComb,                           "     "
  Miss Laura L. Holbrook,                       "     "

BYRON.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. N. B. James,                          New Orleans, La.

SAVANNAH.

  _Minister and Superintendent of Missions._
  Rev. Dana Sherrill,                        Forrest, Ill.

  BEACH INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._
  Miss E. D. Santley,                        Wellington, O.

  _Assistants._
  Miss Mary F. Lord,                         Fredonia, N. Y.
   "   Annie E. Gillette,                    Atlanta, Ga.
   "   M. M. Foote,                          Norwich, N. Y.
   "   Josephine Marcy,                      East Springfield, Pa.
   "   Georgiana Hunter,                     Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Mrs. Dana Sherrill,                        Forrest, Ill.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss J. S. Hardy,                          Shelburne, Mass.

WOODVILLE.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke,                  Savannah, Ga.

MILLER'S STATION.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. Wilson Callen,                        Selma, Ala.

LOUISVILLE AND BELMONT.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Wilson Callen,                        Selma, Ala.

M'INTOSH, LIBERTY CO.

  THE GROVE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Floyd Snelson,                        McIntosh, Ga.

  _Teachers._
  Miss Elizabeth Plimpton,                   Walpole, Mass.
    "  Helen L. Grimes,                      Mansfield, Ohio.
    "  Bertha Robertson,                     Richibucto, N. B.

CYPRESS SLASH.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. Geo. C. Rowe,                         Cypress Slash, Ga.


FLORIDA.

ST. AUGUSTINE.

  _Teachers._
  Miss Emma R. Caughey,                      Kingsville, O.
   "   Helen D. Barton,                      Terre Haute, Ind.

ORANGE PARK.

  _Minister._
  Rev. W. A. Benedict,                       Orange Park, Fla.


ALABAMA.

TALLADEGA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Mason Noble,                          Roxbury, Mass.

  TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. H. S. DeForest, D.D.,               Muscatine, Iowa.
  Rev. G. W. Andrews,                        Collinsville, Ct.
  Rev. Mason Noble,                          Roxbury, Mass.
  Prof. Geo. H. Howe,                        Orwell, Pa.
  Mr. C. B. Rice,                            W. Brattleboro, Vt.
   "  John Orr,                              Clinton, Mass.
   "  E. A. Bishop,                          Arnold's Mills, R. I.
  Miss Mary H. Jefferds,                     Windham, Vt.
   "   L. F. Partridge,                      Holliston, Mass.
   "   Maud S. Wheeler,                      Salem, Mass.
   "   May L. Phillips,                      Canonsburg, Pa.
  Mrs. Clara O. Rindge,                      Homer, N. Y.
   "   Mary P. Bloss,                        Oshkosh, Wis.
  Miss O. E. Goodridge,                      Saratoga, N. Y.
  Mrs. John Orr,                             Clinton, Mass.
  Miss Carrie L. Gasser,                     Oberlin, O.
   "   Nellie E. Blood,                      Pepperell, Mass.
   "   Frances Yeomans,                      Danville, Ill.
   "   Julia C. Andrews,                     Milltown, N. B.
   "   Kate DeJarnette,                      Talladega, Ala.
  Mrs. H. S. De Forest,                      Muscatine, Iowa.
   "   G. W. Andrews,                        Collinsville, Ct.
   "   Mason Noble,                          Roxbury, Mass.
   "   C. B. Rice,                           W. Brattleboro, Vt.

KYMULGA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Spencer Snell,                        Talladega, Ala.

SHELBY IRON WORKS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. R. Sims,                           Talladega, Ala.

CHILDERSBURG.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. R. Sims,                           Talladega, Ala.

BIRMINGHAM.

  _Minister._
  Rev. A. J. Headen,                         Talladega, Ala.

MOBILE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. F. G. Ragland,                        Mobile, Ala.

  EMERSON INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._
  Rev. M. E. Churchill,                      Galesburg, Ill.

  _Assistants._
  Miss Marietta Lay,                         Kewanee, Ill.
   "   Isadore M. Caughey,                   Kingsville, Ohio.
   "   Carrie E. Ferris,                     Passaic, N. J.
   "   Nellie S. Donnell,                    Bath, Me.
   "   H. M. Hegeman,                        Island City, N. Y.
   "   Gertrude Wyckoff,                     Galesburg, Ill.
  Mrs. M. E. Churchill,                          "       "

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss Lizzie A. Pingree,                    Denmark, Me.

MONTGOMERY (P. O. BOX 62).

  _Minister._
  Rev. R. C. Bedford,                        Watertown, Wis.

SELMA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. C. B. Curtis,                         Burlington, Wis.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss Mary K. Lunt,                         New Gloucester, Me.

MARION.

  _Minister._
  Rev. A. W. Curtis,                         Crete, Neb.

ANNISTON.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. H. W. Conley,                         Talladega, Ala.

LAWSONVILLE AND COVE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. L. B. Cunningham,                     Talladega, Ala.

JENIFER AND IRONIA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. B. Grant,                          Talladega, Ala.

TECUMSEH.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. Milus Harris,                         Talladega, Ala.

ATHENS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. H. S. Williams,                       Wetumpka, Ala.

  TRINITY SCHOOL.

  _Teachers._
  Miss M. F. Wells,                          Ann Arbor, Mich.
   "   Mary E. Cull,                         Salem, Wis.
   "   Louise Denton,                        Hempstead, L. I.
   "   Belle J. Ferris,                      Sound Beach, Ct.

FLORENCE.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. J. M. Shippen,                        Washington, D. C.
  Miss L. A. Wilson,                         Florence, Ala.


TENNESSEE.

NASHVILLE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Henry S. Bennett,                     Nashville, Tenn.

  FISK UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. E. M. Cravath,                       Nashville, Tenn.
  Rev. A. K. Spence,                             "       "
   "   H. S. Bennett,                            "       "
   "   F. A. Chase,                              "       "
  Prof. H. H. Wright,                        Oberlin, O.
  Rev. E. C. Stickel,                           "     "
  Miss Helen C. Morgan,                      Cleveland, O.
   "   Anna M. Cahill,                       Nashville, Tenn.
   "   Laura A. Parmelee,                    Toledo, O.
   "   Gert. L. Bridgeman,                   So. Amherst, Mass.
   "   Mary E. Edwards,                      Westhampton, Mass.
   "   Henrietta Matson,                     N. Bloomfield, O.
   "   Martha A. Perry,                      Holden, Mass.
   "   Alice Younglove,                      Rochester, Minn.
   "   Nora Thayer,                          Garrettsville, O.
   "   Anna Whelan,                          Minneapolis, Minn.
   "   Harriet E. Cushman,                   Mattoon, Ill.
  Mrs. E. C. Stickel,                        Oberlin, O.
   "   Sara La Moure,                           "     "
  Miss Helen B. Spelman,                     Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Mrs. Lucy R. Greene,                       N. Amherst, Mass.
   "   H. S. Woodruff,                       Berea, Ky.
  Mr. William R. Morris,                     Nashville, Tenn.
  Mrs. A. K. Spence,                             "       "
   "   E. M. Cravath,                            "       "

  HOWARD CHURCH.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Alfred Jones,                         Childersburg, Ala.

  THIRD CHURCH.

  _Minister._
  Rev. A. J. De Hart,                        Nashville, Tenn.

JONESBORO.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. M. Hall,                           Jonesboro, Tenn.

  _Teachers._
  Mrs. Julia B. Nelson,                      Red Wing, Minn.
  Miss Julia L. Phelps,                      Racine, Wis.
   "   Hattie Fay,                           Bowling Green, O.

KNOXVILLE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. S. P. Smith,                          Knoxville, Tenn.

CHATTANOOGA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Jos. E. Smith,                        Atlanta, Ga.

  _Special Missionary._
  Mrs. A. S. Steele,                         Revere, Mass.

MEMPHIS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. B. A. Imes,                           Oberlin, O.

  LE MOYNE SCHOOL.

  _Principal._
  Prof. A. J. Steele,                        Whitewater, Wis.

  _Assistants._
  Rev. B. A. Imes,                           Oberlin, O.
  Miss Esther A. Barnes,                     Tallmadge, O.
   "   Mary Logan,                           Grinnell, Iowa.
   "   Ruth E. Stinson,                      Woolwich, Me.
   "   M. A. C. Stewart,                     Wilmot, N. S.
  Miss C. S. Goldsmith,                      Chester, N. H.
   "   Rebecca M. Green,                     Hamlet, N. Y.
   "   M. A. Kinney,                         Whitewater, Wis.
   "   Florence A. Beard,                    Eldora, Iowa.
   "   Fannie A. McCullough,                 Memphis, Tenn.
  Mrs. B. A. Imes,                           Oberlin, O.

WHITESIDE.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. G. W. Jackson,                         Tougaloo, Miss.

GRAND VIEW.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. E. A. Palmer,                          Grand View, Tenn.

PLEASANT HILL.

  _Pastor and Teacher._
  Rev. Benj. Dodge,                          Centre Lebanon, Me.
  Mrs. Hannah A. Lord,                          "      "     "

POMONA.

  _Teacher._
  Miss Almeda Marston,                       Oberlin, O.

JELLICO.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. Geo. Lawrence,                         Williamsburg, Ky.

ROBBINS.

  _Pastor._
  Rev. Rufus M. Taft,                        Worcester, Mass.


KENTUCKY.

LEXINGTON.

  NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Instructors._
  Rev. Azel Hatch,                           Oberlin, O.
  Miss Cora J. Seward,                       Guilford, Conn.
   "   Luella Miner,                         Glencoe, Wis.
  Mrs. Azel Hatch,                           Oberlin, O.

LOUISVILLE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. D. Smith,                          Louisville, Ky.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss S. S. Evans,                          Fryeburg, Me.

WILLIAMSBURG.

  _Ministers._
  Rev. A. A. Myers,                          Williamsburg, Ky.
   "   Jas. T. Ford,                         Lake Bluff, Ill.

  _Teachers._
  Mr. W. E. Wheeler,                         Marshfield, Wis.
  Mrs. W. E. Wheeler,                            "        "
  Miss Mary Glassburn,                       ----, Ohio.
   "   Alice E. Lathrop,                     Richmond, Mich.

  _Special Missionary._
  Mrs. A. A. Myers,                          Williamsburg, Ky.

CLOVER BOTTOM.

  _Teachers._
  Miss Mary H. Lamson,                       Amboy, Ill.
   "   Flora M. Cone,                        Worthington, Minn.

WOODBINE.

  _Teacher._
  Miss Clara Stedman,                        Millburn, Ill.

DOWLAIS.

  _Teacher._
  Mrs. Geo. Lawrence,                        Williamsburg, Ky.

SAXTON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. E. H. Bullock,                        Saxton, Ky.


KANSAS.

  TOPEKA.
  _Minister._
  Rev. R. F. Markham,                        Twelve Mile, Kan.

  _Missionary._
  Mrs. Mary Halbert,                         Twelve Mile, Kan.

  LAWRENCE.
  _Minister._
  Rev. Welborn Wright,                       Lawrence, Kan.

  EUREKA.
  _Minister._
  Rev. W. W. Weir,                           Eureka, Kan.


ARKANSAS.

  LITTLE ROCK.
  _Minister._
  Rev. Y. B. Sims,                           Talladega, Ala.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss Elizabeth M. Keyes,                   Unionville, Ct.

  FAYETTEVILLE.
  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. W. R. Polk,                           New Iberia, La.
  Mrs. W. R. Polk,                                "       "


MISSISSIPPI.

TOUGALOO.

  _Minister._
  Rev. G. S. Pope,                           Tougaloo, Miss.

  TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. G. S. Pope,                          Tougaloo, Miss.
  Prof. W. H. Thrall,                        Derby, Ct.
  Mr. Henry P. Kennedy,                      Jackson, Mich.
   "  Wm. D. Hitchcock,                         "      "
   "  W. H. Bishop,                          Amherst, Mass.
   "  J. C. Klein,                           Stockbridge, Mich.
  M. L. Mitchell, M.D.,                      Baltimore, Md.
  Miss Josephine Kellogg,                    Clyde, O.
  Miss Jessie M. Leonard,                    Oberlin, O.
  Mrs. W. H. Thrall,                         Derby, Ct.
  Miss Frances Dodge,                        Wilkinsonville, Mass.
   "   Nellie L. Ruddock,                    Hancock, Minn.
  Mrs. G. S. Pope,                           Tougaloo, Miss.
   "   H. P. Kennedy,                        Jackson, Mich.
  Miss S. L. Emerson,                        Hallowell, Me.
   "   Anna Coffin,                          Haverhill, Mass.
  Mrs. Florence E. Green,                    Rochester, N. Y.

CALEDONIA AND NEW RUHAMAH.

  _Minister._
  Rev. M. J. Witherspoon,                    Caledonia, Miss.

MERIDIAN.

  _Minister._
  ----                                       ----

  _Teacher and Missionary._
  Miss M. E. Green,                          Constant, Kan.

JACKSON.

  _Minister._
  Rev. C. L. Harris,                         Jackson, Miss.


LOUISIANA.

NEW ORLEANS.

  _Ministers._
  Rev. G. W. Bothwell,                       Portland, Mich.
   "   Isaac H. Hall,                        New Orleans, La.
   "   Henry Ruffin,                              "        "

  STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. R. C. Hitchcock,                     Thompsonville, Ct.
  Prof. W. J. McMurtry,                      Wayne, Mich.
  Rev. G. W. Bothwell,                       Portland, Mich.
  Mr. Henry H. Swain,                        Beloit, Wis.
  Miss Florence L. Sperry,                   Topeka, Kan.
   "   E. E. Stevenson,                      Andes, N. Y.
   "   Mira L. Olmstead,                     Norwalk, Ohio.
   "   Eliz. S. Dudman,                      Westfield, Mass.
   "   M. E. Atkins,                             "        "
   "   Carrie F. Platte,                     Angola, N. Y.
   "   A. A. Pease,                          Springfield, Mass.
  Mrs. Annie B. Riggs,                       Beloit, Wis.
  Miss M. F. Felt,                           Temple, N. H.
  Mrs. R. C. Hitchcock,                      Thompsonville, Ct.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss A. D. Gerrish,                        Leetonia, O.

NEW IBERIA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Byron Gunner,                         Talladega, Ala.

FAUSSE POINT AND BELLE PLACE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. William Butler,                       New Iberia, La.

ALGIERS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. James Craig,                          Algiers, La.

LAKE PEIGNEUR.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Homer Jones,                          Lake Peigneur, La.

TERREBONNE AND TERREBONNE STATION.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Daniel Clay,                          Terrebonne, La.

LITTLE PECAN.

  _Minister._
  Rev. William Frazer,                       Little Pecan, La.

NAPOLEONVILLE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. K. Jones,                          Napoleonville, La.

GRAND BAYOU.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Squire Williams,                      Grand Bayou, La.

GRETNA, HARANGVILLE AND LOCKPORT.

  _Minister._
  Rev. W. P. Ward,                           Gretna, La.

BAYOU DU LARGE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. H. Williams,                          Bayou Du Large.

CHACAHOULA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Isaac H. Hall,                        New Orleans, La.


TEXAS.

AUSTIN.

  TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. H. Parr,                           Willmette, Ill.

  _Instructors and Managers._
  Pres. W. E. Brooks,                        W. Haven, Ct.
  Prof. W. L. Gordon,                        Austin, Tex.
   "    Samuel H. Dean,                      High Bridge, N. J.
  Rev. J. H. Parr,                           Wilmette, Ill.
  Miss Rose M. Kinney,                       Oberlin, O.
   "   Fanny J. Webster,                     Weymouth, O.
  Mrs. J. H. Parr,                           Wilmette, Ill.
  Miss A. D. Newman,                         Middleton, Mass.
   "   Rena M. Phelps,                       Highgate Spa, Vt.
  Mrs. W. L. Gordon,                         Austin, Tex.
  Miss Jennie Fyfe,                          Lansing, Mich.

  _Special Missionary._
  Miss M. J. Adams,                          Fox Lake, Wis.

GOLIAD.

  _Minister._
  Rev. T. T. Benson,                         Goliad, Tex.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. J. R. S. Hallowell,                    New Orleans, La.

HELENA.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Mitchell Thompson,                    Helena, Tex.

CORPUS CHRISTI.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. W. Strong,                         Talladega, Ala.

FLATONIA AND LULING.

  _Minister._
  Rev. Thos. E. Hillson,                     New Orleans, La.

PARIS.

  _Minister and Teacher._
  Rev. J. R. McLean,                         Talladega, Ala.

DODD.

  _Minister._
  Mr. Jordan Carter,                         Paris, Tex.

  _Teacher._
  Mr. Isaiah A. Boyd,                        Dodd, Tex.

DALLAS.

  _Minister._
  Rev. J. W. Roberts,                        Savannah, Ga.


Berea College, Kentucky, and Hampton Institute, Virginia, are under
the care of their own Boards of Trustees, but being either founded or
fostered by this Association, and representing the general work in
which it is engaged, their teachers are added to this list.

BEREA COLLEGE.

  _Officers and Teachers._
  Miss Elizabeth M. Keyes,                   Unionville, Ct.
  Pres. E. H. Fairchild,                     Berea, Ky.
  Rev. John G. Fee, A.M.,                      "     "
  Prof. L. V. Dodge, A.M.,                     "     "
  Rev. W. E. C. Wright, A.M.                   "     "
  Rev. B. S. Hunting, A.M.,                    "     "
  Prof. P. D. Dodge, A.B.,                     "     "
  Prof. J. F. Browne,                          "     "
  Miss Lucia A. Darling,                     Akron, O.
  Miss Maria A. Muzzy,                       Romeo, Mich.
  Miss Kate Gilbert,                         N. Brookfield, Mass.
  Miss Emma F. More,                         Wattsburg, Pa.
  Miss Ida M. Clark,                         Adair, Mich.
  Miss Etta T. Bushnell,                     Johnston, O.
  Miss Caroline W. Haynes,                   Oberlin. O.
  Miss Ella R. McCollom,                     Grovestend, N. J.

HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE.

  _Officers and Teachers._
  Gen. S. C. Armstrong,                      Hampton, Va.
  Mr. F. N. Gilman,                          Boston, Mass.
   "  Geo. L. Curtis,                        Canandaigua, N. Y.
   "  Albert Howe,                           Hampton, Va.
   "  J. B. H. Goff,                            "      "
   "  F. C. Briggs,                          Boston, Mass.
   "  J. H. McDowell,                        Hampton, Va.
   "  E. F. Coolidge,                        Marlboro, Mass.
   "  C. W. Betts,                           Wilmington, Del.
   "  Geo. J. Davis,                         Hampton, Va.
   "  R. H. Hamilton,                        Hampton, Va.
   "  Dudley Talbot,                         Boston, Mass.
  Miss Mary F. Mackie,                       Newburgh, N. Y.
  Martha M. Waldron, M.D.,                   South Otselie, N. Y.
  Miss H. W. Ludlow,                         Hampton, Va.
   "   M. J. Sherman,                        Brookfield, Mass.
   "   Margaret Kenwill,                     Mechanicsville, N. Y.
   "   Anna E. Kemble,                       Camden, N. J.
   "   Mary E. Coats,                        Homer, N. Y.
   "   Elizabeth Hyde,                       Brooklyn, N. Y.
   "   Alice M. Bacon,                       New Haven, Conn.
   "   Sarah E. Wentworth,                   Danvers, Mass.
   "   Jane S. Worcester,                    Thetford, Vt.
   "   Dora Freeman,                         Wakefield, Mass.
   "   Mary A. Ford,                         Lisbon, N. H.
   "   Clarabella Gilman,                    Boston, Mass.
  Mrs. Maria J. Baldwin,                     Volney, N. Y.
   "  Francis E. Chickering,                 Washington, D. C.
   "  Jessie E. Hinds,                       Hempstead, N. Y.
   "  Helen S. Baldwin,                      Germantown, Pa.
  Mrs. Ella R. Gore,                         Sheffield, Mass.
   "   Caroline W. Reed,                     Boston, Mass.
  Miss Charlotte L. Mackie,                  Newburgh, N. Y.

  INDIAN DEPARTMENT.
  Miss Josephine E. Richards,                Litchfield, Ct.
  Mrs. Lucy A. Seymour,                      Hampton, Va.
  Miss Cora M. Folsom,                       Boston, Mass.
   "   Lovey A. Mayo,                        Raleigh, N. C.
   "   Georgia Washington,                   Norfolk, Va.
  Mrs. I. F. Stansbury,                      Washington D. C.
  Miss Caroline K. Knowles,                  Westfield, Mass.
   "   Elaine Goodale,                       S. Egremont, Mass.
   "   Harriet A. Holbrook,                  Bridgewater, Mass.
   "   Annie F. Cornell,                     White Plains, N. Y.

  NIGHT SCHOOL.
  Miss Anna G. Baldwin,                      Germantown, Pa.
  Mrs. M. A. McLeod,                         Keene, N. H.
  Miss Mary Arquit,                          Brooklyn, N. Y.
   "   Mary K. Jobs,                         Elizabeth, N. J.
   "   M. C. Benjamin,                       Sheffield, Mass.
   "   Florence Bascom,                      Madison, Wis.
   "   Kate M. Baker,                        Champlain, Ill.
  Mr. Benjamin F. Jones,                     Hampton, Va.
  Miss Martha Page,                             "      "

  INDUSTRIAL DEPARTMENT.
  Miss M. F. Galpin,                         Stockbridge, Mass.
   "   Mary A. Wheeler,                      Boston, Mass.
   "   Bessie Morgan,                        Hamburg, Conn.
  Mrs. E. F. Coolidge,                       Marlboro, Mass.
  Mr. F. G. Rathbun,                         Stockbridge, Mass.

  _Clerks._
  Miss Jessie P. Morgan,                     Hamburg, Conn.
   "   Ruth G. Tileston,                     Boston, Mass.
  Mr. Frank D. Banks,                        Hampton, Va.
   "  W. H. Daggs,                              "      "
   "  Wm. M. Reid,                              "      "
   "  Geo. G. French,                        Reading, Mass.


INDIAN MISSIONS.

SANTEE AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

  NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.
  _Superintendent and Missionary._
  A. L. Riggs, A.M., B.D.,                   Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Treasurer._
  Joseph H. Steer,                           Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Teachers._
  Mr. Clarence F. Dick,                      Dakota, Minn.
  Miss Harriet B. Ilsley,                    Newark, N. J.
  Mrs. Mary E. Wood,                         Spirit Lake, Iowa.
  Miss Helen A. Dunlap,                      Keokuk, Iowa.

  _Assistant Teachers._
  James Garvie,                              Sisseton Agency, D. T.
  Eli Abraham,                               Santee Agency, Neb.
  Daniel Cetaumani,                            "      "      "
  Dennis Mazaodidi,                            "      "      "
  James Redwing Oyemaza,                       "      "      "
  James Brown Dowanmani,                       "      "      "

  _Matrons._
  Miss Susan Webb, (Dakota Home),            Weymouth, Mass.
  Miss Harriet A. Brown (Bird's Nest),       Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Miss Jennie E. Kennedy (Young Men's Hall), Montrose, Iowa.
  Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees, (Boys' Cottage),  Rocky Hill, N. J.
  Miss Sarah A. Paddock, (Teachers' Club),   Crystal Lake, Ill.

  _Assistant Matrons._
  Miss Ellen Kitto,                          Santee Agency, Neb.
  Miss Fanny Ellis,                          Yankton, Dak.

  _Missionaries._
  Mrs. A. L. Riggs,                          Santee Agency, Neb.
  Mrs. J. H. Steer,                            "      "      "
  Miss Nettie Calhoun,                       Kenton, O.

  _Industrial Department._
  Joseph H. Steer,                           Santee Agency, Neb.
  J. Reid McKercher,                         Moscow, N. Y.
  Reuben Cash,                               Niobrara, Neb.

  _Native Pastor._
  Rev. Artemas Ehnamani,                     Santee Agency, Neb.

OAHE, DAK.

  _Superintendent._
  Rev. T. L. Riggs,                          Oahe, Dak.

  _Teachers._
  Miss Mary C. Collins,                      Oahe, Dak.
  Elias Jacobson,                            Cheyenne River.

  _Native Teachers._
  Isaac Renville,                            Cheyenne River, No. 1.
  Mrs. Nancy Renville,                           "      "     "
  Eli Spotted Bear,                          Cheyenne River, No. 2.
  Mrs. Ellen Spotted Bear,                       "      "     "
  Samuel Smiley,                             Cheyenne River, No. 3.
  Mrs. Elizabeth Winyan,                         "      "     "
  Edwin Phelps,                              Grand River Station.
  Mrs. Ellen Phelps,                           "     "      "
  Stephen Yellow Hawk,                       Oahe, Dak.
  William Lee,                               Bad River, Dak.

FORT BERTHOLD AGENCY, DAKOTA.

  _Missionary._
  Rev. C. L. Hall,                           New York, N. Y.

  _Teachers._
  Miss Ellen M. Wilkes,                      Buffalo, N. Y.
  Miss Lizzie Bechan,                        Fergus, Ont.

  _Matron._
  Miss L. H. Douglass,                       New Haven, Conn.

  FORT STEVENSON SCHOOL.
  Supported by Government.)
  _Superintendent._
  Mr. F. B. Wells,                           Rhinebeck, N. Y.

  _Teacher._
  Miss E. L. Ward,                           Appleton, Wis.

  _Matron._
  Mrs. F. B. Wells,                          Rhinebeck, N. Y.

S'KOKOMISH AGENCY, W. T.

  _Missionary._
  Rev. Myron Eells,                          S'kokomish, W. T.


NEW MEXICO.

  SANTA FE.
  _Superintendent._
  ----                                       ----

  _Matron._
  ----                                       ----

  _Teacher._
  Miss Alma Hempel,                          Whitewater, Wis.


CHINESE MISSIONS.

  Alameda--               Mrs. Geo. Morris.
  Marysville--            Miss M. A. Flint.
                          Joe Jet.
  Oakland--               Miss Gertrude H. Carleton.
                          Miss Alice Monroe.
  Oroville--              Miss Maggie A. Daniel.
                          Wong Ock.
  Petaluma--              Mrs. M. H. Colby.
                          Gin Foo King.
  Sacramento--            Miss Maria Carrington.
                          Chin Foy.
  San Francisco, Central--Jee Gam.
  San Francisco, Central--Miss Jessie S. Worley.
                          Miss Anna L. Snook.
  San Francisco, Barnes-- Mrs. H. W. Lamant.
                          Chung Moi.
  San Francisco, Bethany--Mrs. J. C. Snook.
  San Francisco, West--   Miss F. M. Worley.
                          Miss M. G. Worley.
  San Francisco, North--  J. J. Mason.
                          Sing Lan.
  Santa Barbara--         Mrs. B. B. Williams.
                          Hong Sing.
  Santa Cruz--            Mrs. A. L. Willett.

       *       *       *       *       *

THANKSGIVING ADDRESS AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

BY. PROF. W. A. CROGMAN.


If I were asked to-day what one thing since the close of the war has
contributed most to the permanent prosperity of the South, I should
unhesitatingly answer, Christian charity--that charity which has
exhibited itself not only in the giving of gifts, not only in the
lavish expenditure of immense sums for the elevation of the degraded
masses; but by its prayers, by its sentiments promptly and fearlessly
expressed against wrong, by its patient endurance, and by its
individual sacrifices made in a field which could promise but little
more to the laborer than the reward of conscience for having served
at a critical period his country and his kind. It is just nineteen
years since the surrender at Appomattox, nineteen short years. But
what events have crowded into that brief period! What stupendous
changes have been wrought within that time in American society,
especially in Southern society!--changes as radical in their nature
as they will be far-reaching in their consequences. It is true that
these changes have not always been accompanied by peace and quiet and
good feeling. This was hardly to be expected. There have been
bloodshed and murders. There have been individual sufferings.
Thousands have perished by violence and privation. But what, after
all, are the sufferings of the thousands compared with the freedom of
the millions, and all the possibilities which that freedom grants?
And whatever may have been the sufferings, it is safe, I think, to
say that they would have been multiplied many times, had it not been
for the tireless energies of the Christian churches.

The victories of peace are more glorious than those of war, it is
said. I believe it; for they are generally more difficult to achieve.
It is easier by far to kill a man than to change his opinions. It is
easier by far to overrun a country than to root out of the hearts of
its inhabitants their long cherished hatreds and prejudices. This
requires time. This requires patience. This requires sacrifice. This
requires forbearance and love. Hence it has ever been the lot of
Christianity to follow in the track of armies, and reconquer that
which was said to be conquered. Cæsar with invincible legions may
carry Roman eagles into the very heart of Britain; but the proper
subjugation of that island dates from the time when Pope Gregory the
First sent St. Augustine and forty monks to preach the gospel to
those fierce, wild, uncouth barbarians. And so, when the victorious
army of the North was passing in review before President Johnson in
the streets of Washington, another army vastly inferior in numbers,
imbued with a different spirit, and armed with no other weapons than
the Bible and the spelling book, was marching under the eye of God
down into this very field from which Grant and Sherman had but
recently withdrawn. Silently came they into the field. There was no
heralding of their approach, no display. Hopefully came they into the
field, notwithstanding they knew that to the majority of the people
their presence would be obnoxious. They came with faith in God and
love for man. They came impelled by Christian duty and patriotism to
wage a new war against the more deadly enemies of the
republic--ignorance and vice.

It is not necessary; nor is it desirable to dwell here on the state
of the South at that time. It could but present a picture dark and
confused at the best. It is not necessary to remind you here of the
bitter opposition which existed then to negro education, an
opposition which only too often manifested itself in acts of violence
and brutality. Nor need I remind you here of the hatred and contempt
that was heaped upon the so called "nigger teacher." This is history,
known and read of all men. Pleasanter by far will it be, and
certainly appropriate on this good Thanksgiving Day, to revert for a
few moments to the splendid achievements, under God, of these
faithful, Christian workers.

Their work, as we have said, was begun in confusion; but out of chaos
they have brought order, out of darkness light. Previous to the
emancipation not more than 30,000 colored persons in all these United
States could read and write. To-day, according to the statement of
Commissioner Orr, of this State, a statement verified by statistics,
fully 1,000,000 colored children are in the schools. I say, previous
to the emancipation, not more than 30,000 colored persons could read
and write. To-day, according to the last report of the society under
whose auspices I have been laboring for many years, that society
alone has given instruction to 80,000 persons, and these in turn to
tens of thousands more. This number could, of course, be greatly
swelled by the figures which could be shown by the
Congregationalists, Baptists and Presbyterians, who for these many
years have been laboring with equal patience, zeal and love, for the
advancement of mankind.

There are some, however, who think that there has not been enough
accomplished in these years, for the time, the money and the energy
spent. Well, perhaps there has not. But suppose these various
societies had accomplished, up to this time, nothing more than the
teaching of these thousands simply how to read and write, who could
estimate the value of the achievement? Who could measure the scope of
its influence and tell where that influence will end! When you have
once taught a man to read you have placed in his hands the key with
which he may--if he be industrious--unlock all the stores of
knowledge in his own language. When you have once taught a man to
read you have opened up to him unlimited possibilities, and laid the
foundations for a broad and liberal culture. When you have once
taught a man to read you have introduced him into the best society of
all the ages; you have made him the companion of Shakespeare, Milton
and Bunyan; of Bacon and of Burke; of Tennyson, Longfellow, Bryant
and Emerson; and you have quite unfitted him for slavery. When years
ago a kind mistress, in the State of Maryland, undertook to teach a
little slave boy to read, little did she think that she was awakening
aspirations never again to be quenched; little did she dream that she
was unchaining extraordinary powers, and kindling the first fires of
eloquence in the soul of a Douglass. The alphabet was made for
freemen. It is the weapon most dreaded by tyrants. When Martin Luther
would break most effectually and for all time the papal yoke from the
neck of Germany, he translated the Bible and set the people to
reading. I am thankful to-day for the pen of Lincoln and for the
sword of Grant; but more thankful by far for the patient "school
ma'am" who taught the negro his letters, and set a million of us to
reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION. III.--WHAT THE A. M. A. IS DOING.

BY SUPT. ALBERT SALISBURY.


In two previous articles (Oct. and Nov., 1884) I have set forth the
general aspects of Industrial Education and its relations to a
missionary work like that of the American Missionary Association. I
wish now to set forth, briefly, the practical possibilities and the
present undertakings of the Association in this line.

Among all the industrial schools of this continent, Hampton Institute
stands easily first in the amount of invested capital, or plant, and
in the variety and extent of its operations. It is, moreover, unique;
there is nothing else like it, and perhaps never will be, either in
its scope or in the genius which marks its administration. To give
any adequate account of the work in actual operation there would
occupy all the space at my command.

The A. M. A. can not attempt to duplicate Hampton Institute; it has
neither the means nor the man for such an undertaking.

I therefore pass to the consideration of what it is possible for us
to do on our wider field in the present and near future. The
industrial training which can be given by the A. M. A. schools is
necessarily limited, both by financial and other considerations, not
only in extent but also in variety. The ways in which we can wisely
make effort seem to be as follows: 1. _Agriculture_, which is to be,
after all, the occupation of the great majority of the people for
whom we are laboring. In this, we may well give somewhat of
theoretical instruction through lectures and even text-books; but
more important than this, and not incompatible with it, is that
effective teaching which comes by working out the practical object
lesson of a thoroughly well tilled farm, as is done at Hampton, and
to a less degree, as yet, at Tougaloo and Talladega. In this a
two-fold purpose is served. Employment is given to needy students,
and practical education is at the same time given, with but partial
interruption of the progress of intellectual training.

But the idea of running school farms simply for the first-named end,
the giving of employment to students, was long ago abandoned. Student
labor is too costly, simply as service. It must be made thoroughly
educational in order to be justified. Fortunately, the style of
farming which is most truly educational is also most nearly
remunerative. Good tools, good live stock, and good tillage are the
indispensable factors in this sort of object lesson.

2. _Wood-working_, of which the principal branch is
carpentry--turning and carving occupying a minor place. This has an
advantage over agriculture, and also over the other trades, in the
greater ease with which it may be made a matter of class instruction.
Much can be accomplished in teaching the use and care of tools
without entering at all upon processes of manufacture. Thus, classes
numbering as high as twenty or twenty-five were taught during the
past year at Atlanta University. Classes are also under instruction
at Talladega College, Tougaloo University, and Lewis Institute
(Macon). Repairs and additions to the various buildings of the
several institutions furnish opportunity for practical application of
the instruction given at the benches of the class-room; and in the
course of time some lines of manufacture may also be found
practicable, varying in kind with the locality. Along with
wood-working, instruction in glazing would seem to be feasible, and
even in that most useful art, soldering.

3. _Blacksmithing._--There are many good blacksmiths among the older
colored men; and there is no reason, except lack of opportunity for
learning, why there should not be more among the rising generation.
In school shops it is possible to teach this trade successfully to
classes. One teacher can instruct from six to ten pupils at as many
forges, but the expense is greater than in teaching the use of
wood-working tools. There is an inevitable consumption of coal and of
metal--a serious loss unless some market can be found for simple
articles of handiwork. Instruction in this branch is quite limited,
though something is being done at Tougaloo, and more at the Santee
Indian school.

Wheelwrighting is fast becoming an obsolete art in the North. The
great factories have pushed the hand-made wagon out of the market. In
the South, however, there is still much need of capable wheelwrights
for the extensive repairs necessitated by the horrible roads--or
rather lack of roads.

4. _Tinning._--This is also limited in its possibilities. A market is
necessary for the disposal of products. Even a few pupils under a
competent instructor can turn off an inconvenient amount of tin-ware,
if storage proves to be its fate rather than sale; and schools are
always at a disadvantage in the market. A fair beginning has been
made in this branch at Tougaloo University.

5. _Printing._--If I were to name yet another branch of handiwork
which it is possible to carry on as an educational accessory, it
would be "the art preservative." The experience of A. M. A.
institutions in sundry attempts hitherto is not at all of an
encouraging sort; but this is very likely because they were not
managed as educational agencies, under careful and skillful
supervision. A start under the new method is being made at Fisk
University, with many points in favor of its success.

The reader is perhaps surprised that I have not named _shoe-making_
as one of the practicable branches, since it has so often been
incorporated into the industrial organization of various reformatory
institutions; but it no longer seems a feasible undertaking for an
industrial school of the modern type. The shoe-maker's occupation is
gone, except as he becomes a part of the mechanism of a great
factory, not making _shoes_, but confining himself to the simplest
elements of a shoe, cutting uppers or scraping soles. Moreover, there
is such competition and such depression in the shoe business as make
this trade too unprofitable for prosecution in connection with school
work.

6. _Drawing._--So far, I have been considering only manual training
for boys. But there is one branch of a true industrial training which
knows no sex. It is suitable and, when rightly considered, essential
for boys and girls alike. While visiting the St. Louis Manual
Training School two years ago, I said to Prof. Woodward, "What can we
of the missionary schools, with our financial limitations, do best in
this line of manual training?" He answered, "There is one thing that
you can do in any school: it costs little, needs no special
appliances or plant, and is the fundamental part of any industrial
training, _drawing_." And he was right so far as the utility of the
study is concerned. Drawing, not as a matter of picture-making, but
as a means of systematic training for eye and hand, a training to
accuracy and method, and as a vital help toward foremanship in any
trade, ought everywhere to be held as a necessary element of
industrial education. Some beginning in industrial drawing has been
made in all our institutions. But, in a work like ours, the lack of
special preparation on the part of most teachers, their insufficient
appreciation of and faith in the study, and the lack of close direct
supervision, are serious hindrances to complete success.

The range of industrial work for girls is less wide than that for
boys, and lies chiefly in the zone of home making and keeping.

1. _Sewing_ is the first subject of instruction. The generation of
women who came out of slavery knew nothing, and still know nothing,
of needle-work. And so in all our schools, even the day schools,
classes in plain sewing have long found a place; though of late the
work has been taken up more systematically, all the girls of certain
grades being held to the sewing classes as strictly as to reading or
writing. After plain sewing comes the cutting and making of garments,
the various forms of seductive "fancy work" being almost wholly
ignored.

In our exhibit at the Madison meeting of the National Educational
Association last summer were numbers of aprons, dresses, shirts,
etc., made by pupils, often of the primary grades; and one of the
most noticed specimens was a neatly darned stocking. Even darning
must be taught to these girls in school; there is no instructor at
home.

2. _Cooking_ is much more widely understood by the colored mothers.
Indeed, there is a sort of illusory tradition abroad that the negroes
are a race of cooks; though, according to my observation, nothing
could be farther from the truth. And cooking is only one part of
_domestic economy_. Of this art as a whole, the colored women are
densely ignorant. They know nothing of orderly housekeeping, of
marketing, or of economy in any true sense of the word.

In several of our schools--notably Le Moyne Institute at
Memphis--instruction in domestic economy, including cooking, is now
well systematized as a part of the course of study for girls. At
Atlanta University, a class of young women each year is inducted into
a full and careful knowledge of good housekeeping by what is called
the cottage plan, the girls doing their own housekeeping through the
year under the training of a cultivated house-mother.

Nor should it be forgotten that in every boarding school of the A. M.
A. the regular ongoing of the domestic work of the institution,
nearly all of which except the cooking and washing is done by the
students, furnishes no insignificant or ineffectual training in the
art of housekeeping.

8. _Nursing_ and the general care of the sick is also a branch in
which instruction and training are sadly needed by the colored women.
Few things are more pitiful than the condition of the sick among any
half-civilized people, with their caprices, their superstitions and
their irregularities. In this direction, Fisk University takes a
prominent place among our institutions, employing a professionally
trained woman who gives her whole time to the hygiene of the school
and the training of the students in health-preserving and
health-restoring.

It would have been easy to double the length of this article by going
more into details with respect to the industrial features in process
of incorporation into the work of all our leading institutions, and
their industrial influence, the "unconscious tuition" of industry
which they have come more and more to exert. Suffice it to add,
without hyperbole, that it is easy to _track_ these missionary
schools, to trace their influence by their results upon the home life
and domestic ambitions of the young people who have gone out from
them to the work of the world. And this influence is yet in its
beginnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OUTLOOK.

REV. W. C. POND.


With the beginning of a new fiscal year there came to me a deep sense
of dissatisfaction with the present status of our work--a sadness
which almost touched the borders of discouragement at the decrease in
attendance on our schools, and the lack of eager outreaching and
aggressive endeavor on the part of us all--Superintendent, Teachers
and Chinese helpers,--all alike. The methods, which had been so
strikingly efficient in years past, seemed to be failing us now. We
were settled down into them, as ruts; and, no matter how slow or hard
or fruitless our movements along the old line, it seemed impossible
to see what else to do, or how we could strike out into new paths, or
plan any material change in the ordering of our campaign.

Sometimes the question would arise; Is our work done? Has the
Restriction Act, which for the present diminishes so greatly the
incoming of fresh recruits for our schools, rung the knell of our
missionary success? But to this question only one answer was
possible. Even if, looking out from a stand-point of consummate
Calvinism, we should venture to decide that the Lord's elect among
the Chinese in California had all been gathered in, there were,
nevertheless, these little flocks of Christ's own sheep and lambs
already gathered that must not be left without a shepherd's care.
Surely there is a duty that we owe to these, and to leave them
untended in this wilderness would be to count ourselves in among the
goats on the left hand of the Judge.

But no Calvinism of any sort--and certainly not of our sort--gives us
any basis for such an unchristian decision. We cannot shelter behind
it, and think to retire with honor when we have as yet only
skirmished on the edges of the field. For the Chinese heathenism of
California remains to-day, so far as we can see, substantially a
solid mass, without any fissure, though not without a scar. Many
chips have been struck off from it, and for these we bless God; but
the rock-like hardness of the Chinese heart remains substantially
unbroken. Say that all our missions have reached, in the aggregate,
5,000 of these souls--there remain 65,000 virtually untouched.
Suppose that we could count 1,000 born of God in all the missions
(and this would be a large estimate) there remain 69,000 that are
still aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the
covenants of promise, without God and without hope in the world. To
penetrate, somehow, this Chinese wall of prejudice, conceit and
superstition, and pierce, with the sword of the spirit, the hearts
intrenched behind it--to reach, somehow, the myriads not reached, and
to bring them forth from the darkness that they love into the saving
light that now they hate--this was the problem. You can look at it. I
_have_ looked at it--till the sense of helplessness and uselessness
threw me down upon my knees with my heart next door to despair. But
there the still small voice was heard again, the voice of an
_infinite_ Saviour saying, "Be not afraid, only believe." "If ye have
faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say even to _this_
mountain, Remove hence, and it _shall remove_."

But with fresh courage, born of faith, came a conviction that some
change of method,--not as abandoning by any means our schools, but as
introducing new methods, breaking in upon an old and worn routine,
was indispensable. What it should be I could not tell. One could
conceive of several plans of operation, which would be beyond our
reach for lack of means, but to find the work and then the workers,
and still keep inside the line of safe expenditure--this called for a
wisdom which could come to _me_, at any rate, only from above. We
have been seeking this guidance. I say, "we," for I believe that
teachers and helpers have prayed with me for it. We expect it to
come. We venture to hope that we see it coming.

One token is the opening of new fields, especially at San Diego and
Tulare--experiments yet, but hopeful ones. Another token is that in
one, at least, of our helpers evangelistic power seems to appear. Not
without anxiety did I see him brought within the fascination of the
"Holiness Band" and the "Salvation Army," and my fears were not
groundless, as some minor symptoms in his spiritual life clearly
disclosed. But I believe that his Master and ours knew what was going
on and will bring him forth out of it all, unscathed and better
fitted for high service than he has ever been hitherto. At present
he is in Oroville. After being there less than a week he wrote, "God
has given me three souls--one of them at the meeting last night." And
later, Rev. Joseph Adams, pastor of our church there, wrote as
follows: "There is a very blessed work going on among the Chinese
here. After conference with Wong Ock I invited him to bring to my
house all the boys he thought were Christians. I fixed an evening
about ten days ago, and invited my church clerk and Dr. Read to be
present. Wong Ock came with eight boys. We were occupied with them
until nearly midnight. It was one of the most blessed meetings I have
had in this county. I examined them, through Wong Ock, as
interpreter, in relation to their conversion, how it was brought
about, and what was their present experience. Two professed to find
peace with God during the meeting. Their child-like faith and ready
acceptance of the statements and promises of the gospel were simply
delightful. Considering their former training, and the small
advantages of Christian knowledge, it was truly wonderful. My
brethren agreed with me, that beyond all dispute they exhibited a
glorious work of the spirit of God."

[Illustration: Class of Chinese girls]

A third token of approaching answers to our prayer I see in the
coming among us of Rev. D. D. Jones, who has been connected with our
South China Mission, under Rev. C. R. Hager of Hong Kong. The French
war has so disturbed the people among whom he was laboring, and, for
the present, so closed the doors to missionary service, that he has
seized the opportunity for a visit to us. He is well fitted for
street preaching, and seems to have the evangelistic spirit. By way
of experiment I have asked him to labor with us in this city for a
month or two--hoping, if the Lord accepts our endeavor, to have him
visit Sacramento, Marysville and other points. The beginnings of his
work are encouraging, and we venture to hope that fruit already
appears. We ask the readers of the _Missionary_ to add their requests
to ours, that these tokens may be what the cloud was, big as a man's
hand--precursor of glad out-pourings such as those in which Elijah
left the mount of conflict and of prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHILDREN'S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM AN INDIAN BOY.


The letter given below was written by a Sioux Indian boy, whose
entire education has been gained in the three years he has now been
at Hampton Institute. It was written in acknowledgment of a Christmas
gift of ten dollars for the purchase of books for himself, sent by a
Sabbath-school class of boys in New York city.


     HAMPTON, Va. Dec. 18th, 1884.

     DEAR FRIENDS: It is impossible for me to write a few lines. I am
     glad that I will try to say a few words Of my people. We were
     just like a little baby. When Columbus discovered America, Until
     now To-day, we are different from what we were at that time. It
     is hard for us to leave our own old Indian ways at once. You
     know how hard it is for a crazy man get better from his crazy.
     It is just so with the Indians, it is hard for us. When I was at
     home, I was the youngest, But I try to do my best. So my parents
     wanted me to be kept there, As long as I could. But some of my
     friends think it will better for me to get a little education,
     and them some more to help them. It seem to me come to schools,
     And now I am school in this institution, and it is hard for me
     to do right. But I try to do my best as well as possible. And I
     learn little bits of English language or composition and also
     some history, Ever since I been here about over three years ago.
     So I am anxious to tell you something about my people, but as I
     say I have been here three years, I did not know how they
     getting along--But I think they are become like as civilized
     now, As some of them try very hard to do as the white people's.
     But there are some white men in our agencies, are good but only
     few of them, And there are most of all bad ones. Those bad ones
     who are try hard to pull us down. So hoping you will help and
     pray for us. We may stand against these bad temptation. And
     finally we shall be risen very slowly, from the lowest to the
     highest civilization. Some of the white man those who opposed
     the Indian they said--"The Indians can never be civilized are
     dead Indian not lives Indians but dead, them are unsuccessful
     and good for anything." It may be very true. But if some always
     good people will help us to do right, We shall be civilized as
     well as any other nation. my friends I wish I could do more, but
     the language which I am using is rather and difficult for me and
     keeps me back. Therefore I cannot express of my desire but as I
     say again We shall not be civilized at once, but we shall in the
     future. I thank you for money very much.

     I am most sincerely an Indian friend.


     BENJ. OHITIKA.


The attempt of the writer of the letter to quote the inhuman
sentiment so often uttered by bad white men: "There is no good Indian
but a dead Indian," illustrates the extreme difficulty an Indian has
in acquiring our language. The penmanship of this boy would bear
favorable comparison with that of young men of his age as they
graduate from our public schools. It is an interesting fact that the
Indian under education uniformly excels in penmanship.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1884.


MAINE, $1,461.02.

  Alfred. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 15.25, and Sab. Sch., 10     $25.25
  Andover. Mrs. N. J. P. Dame, _for Woman's Work_            4.00
  Augusta. Mrs. Skeeles' S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            1.00
  Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl. (6.60 of which
    _for Indian M._)                                        54.60
  Bangor. Central Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._            40.00
  Bluehill. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        16.60
  Brewer. M. Hardy, 50, to const. MRS. MARY A.
    CHAMBERLAIN L.M.; First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10          60.00
  Bridgton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         6.20
  Brunswick. Hon. A. H. Merrill, to const. REV. JOHN H.
    HIGGINS, REV. F. W. TOWLE and DEA. S. A. SMITH L.M's   100.00
  Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 3.50; "A Friend,"
    5                                                        8.50
  Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       6.00
  Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard                                5.00
  Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                          4.01
  Hallowell. "Friends," _Freight_                            3.00
  Hermon. "F. B. S. S.," by J. M. Taylor                     2.00
  Limington. "A. B"                                          2.50
  North Anson. "A Friend"                                   10.00
  North Norway. Mrs. M. K. Frost                              .50
  Norridgewock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          40.00
  Portland. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad'l                 16.50
  Searsport. First Cong. Ch., ad'l                          15.00
  South Berwick. Dea. I. P. Yeaton, to const, himself
    and REV. GEO. LEWIS L. M's                             100.00
  Windham. Rev. L. Wiswall                                  14.00
  Woolwich. Cong. Ch.                                       14.50
  Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        18.01
  York. First Cong Ch. and Soc.                             33.00
  Ladies of Maine, _for Selma, Ala._ Hiram, Ladies, 50;
    Auburn, Ladies of High St. Ch., 24.25; Lewiston,
    Ladies of Pine St. Ch., 23.50; Auburn, Ladies of
    Sixth St. Ch., 1.10; ----, "Friends," 2                100.85
                                                       ----------
                                                          $701.02

  LEGACY.

  Castine. Estate of Mrs. Lucy S. Adams, by Rev.
    Geo. M. Adams, Ex.                                     760.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $1,461.02


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $681.15.

  Bennington. Katherine P. Heald                            $5.00
  Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.32
  Colebrook. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        10.00
  Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
    ARTHUR G. STEVENS, MRS. ENOCH GERRISH and MRS. JOHN
    C. THORNE, L.M's                                       100.00
  Concord. Miss Alma J. Herbert 30, to const. herself
    L.M.; "A Friend" 1                                      31.00
  Dover. Mrs. S. H. Foye and Mrs. A. Fairbanks, _for
    Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
  Exeter. "A Friend," 32; Second Cong. Ch., 24; By
    Miss Mary Gordon (one share), 20; Ladies' Sew.
    Circle of Second Cong. Ch., _freight_, 3                79.00
  Gilmanton. Centre Cong. Ch.                                5.00
  Hanover. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._   20.00
  Harrisville. Cong. Ch.                                     8.76
  Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              12.35
  Keene. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          21.33
  Lyme. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     10.00
  Manchester. First Cong. Ch., 10; Mrs. M. Gilbert,
    5.50; "Friends," 55c., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       16.05
  Marlboro. Ladies' Freedmen Soc.                           10.00
  Merrimac. First Cong. Ch.                                 13.70
  Milford. First Cong. Ch. to const. MRS. J. J. SAVAGE,
    MINNIE L. CONVERSE and CHARLES J. WILSON L.M's         106.14
  Mount Vernon. J. A. Starrett                               5.00
  Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         120.00
  Nelson. Cong. Ch.                                         11.24
  Pelham. Cong. Ch.                                         41.54
  Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           1.50
  Stratham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              21.22
  Tilton. A. H. Colby                                        6.00
  Walpole. First Cong. Ch.                                  11.00
  Webster. "A Friend"                                        3.00


VERMONT, $509.55.

  Bellows Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         29.96
  Burlington. Winooski Av. Cong. Ch. and Soc.               95.16
  Cabot. Cong. Ch.                                          20.00
  Chelsea. Cong. Ch.                                        17.50
  East Hardwick. Miss Carrie M. Bell                         1.50
  East Townsend. Mrs. Harvey P. Holbrook                     2.50
  Essex. "H. D. B."                                          1.50
  Hartford. Second Cong. Ch.                                46.55
  Jamaica. Cong. Ch.                                         8.60
  Lyndon. Cong. Ch.                                         26.00
  Pittsford. Mrs. Nancy P. Humphrey                         10.00
  Peacham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               21.08
  St. Albans. "A Widow's Mite"                               2.00
  Saint Johnsbury. "New Year's Offering, In Memoriam,
     from O. W. H." _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._         50.00
  Stowe. Cong. Ch.                                          42.50
  West Brattleborough. Ladies, by Mrs. Anna L. Grout,
     Two Bbls. C.; 4 _for freight, for McIntosh, Ga._        4.00
  Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.00
  By Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, _for McIntosh, Ga._;
    Burlington, Ladies of Winooski Av. Cong. Ch., 31.65;
    Chester, Ladies, 22.05; Derby Centre, Ladies, by Mrs.
    David Hopkinson, 5; Newport, Ladies, 36; Dr. T. D.
    Hoskins, 2; Mrs. C. F. Ranny, 1                         97.70
                                                         --------
                                                          $488.55

  LEGACY.

  Jericho. Estate of Hosea Spaulding, C. M. Spaulding,
    10; A. C. Spaulding, 5; Nellie M. Percival, 3;
    E. J. Spaulding, 3                                      21.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $509.55


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,138.85.

  Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 16.25
  Amherst. First Ch., 55; South Cong. and Soc., 5.29        60.29
  Andover. Rev. C. M. Mead, D.D.                             6.00
  Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      21.00
  Athol Centre. Mrs. Emily Eaton                             2.00
  Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           253.73
  Boston. Un. Ch. and Soc., 312.14; "A Friend," 100;
    "A Friend," 50; Ginn, Heath & Co., Pkg. Books; _for
    Macon, Ga._; Boston Highlands, Mrs. Livermore, 2;
    Brookline, "A Friend," 50; Brookline, "Donation,"
    50c.; Cambridgeport, Pilgrim Ch., 8.53; Chelsea,
    Third Cong. Ch. and Soc., 18.55; Chelsea, Ladies'
    Union Home M. Band, _for Missionary, Chattanooga,
    Tenn._, 199.87; Dorchester, Second Cong. Ch. and
    Soc., 108.18; Dorchester, Member of Second Ch.,
    _for Hampton N. and A. Inst._, 1; Dorchester, Rev.
    Chas. Nichols, to const. MRS. L. D. DYER, L.M., 30;
    Jamaica Plain, Central Ch. and Soc. 112; Cong Pub.
    Soc. 8 Cases, Libraries                                992.77
  Braintree. "A Friend"                                     10.00
  Brockton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc. to const. MRS.
    KATE M. JONES, L.M.                                     41.54
  Clinton. "A Friend"                                      100.00
  Cohasset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.36
  Easthampton. Payson Ch.                                  297.09
  East Longmeadow. "A Friend"                                 .50
  Dalton. Mrs. Zenas M. Crane                              100.00
  Danvers. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. JOHN D.
    PHILBRICK, LUCIUS A. MUDGE, HANNA HUTCHINSON and
    HORACE G. PUTNAM, L.M's                                123.58
  Dracut. Center Ch.                                        16.00
  Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.08
  Globe Village. Evan. Free Ch. to const. LUCIEN W.
    CURTIS, M.D., L.M.                                      40.00
  Gloucester. Evan. Cong. S. S., _for S. S. Work,
    Woman's Bureau_                                         15.00
  Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         88.28
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., 37.19; First Cong. Ch.
    and Soc., 13                                            50.19
  Great Barrington. "Member Cong. Ch."                       1.00
  Groton. "Mother and Daughter" (of which 10 _for Mountain
    white work_, 10 _for Chinese_ and 10 _for Indian M._),
    to const. MILES SPAULDING, M.D., L.M.                   35.00
  Harwich. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.75
  Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           15.00
  Holliston. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 125.30; "Bible Christians
    of District No. 4." 25                                 150.30
  Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl.                       29.89
  Lakeville. "A Friend"                                      2.50
  Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           18.89
  Lincoln. Cong. Sab. Sch., 20; "A Friend," 2: _for
    Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                22.00
  Lowell. Geo. F. Willey, 10; Eliot Ch., 12.50; Rodolphus
    Stevens, 20                                             42.50
  Lynn. First Ch. of Christ                                  4.11
  Ludlow. Children's Soc., by Miss M. E. Jones, Bbl. of C.
    and Cash, 4; _for Macon, Ga._                            4.00
  Malden. First Cong. Church and Soc.                       47.12
  Massachusetts. "A Friend"                                 20.00
  Medfield. Mrs. S. D. Shaw                                  1.50
  Medfield. Mary B. Lovell, _freight_                        2.00
  Melrose. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                  5.77
  Methuen. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
  Middleboro. Cen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       26.36
  Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad'l.                       3.00
  Newton. Mrs. Winthrop Sargent, _for Indian M., Dakota_    10.00
  Newton. Miss Annie L. Boyden, Bbl. Books, etc., _for
    Macon, Ga._
  Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   50.00
  North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    55.65
  Northampton. Miss M. A. Williams                           1.00
  North Brookfield. Miss Abbie W. Johnson, 5, _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._, and 2 _for Woman's Work_                  7.00
  North Weymouth. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                       9.06
  North Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           9.43
  Oakham. Miss Louise Ayres                                  5.00
  Orange. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           13.29
  Paxton. First. Cong. Ch.                                   8.00
  Peabody. "A Member So. Ch."                               10.00
  Pittsfield. South Ch. and Parish                          30.71
  Randolph. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad'l.                 21.00
  Reading. "A Friend"                                        3.00
  Sandwich. Mrs. Wm. Farrington                              1.00
  Somerville. Lower Lights Soc. of Prospect Hill Ch., _for
    Missionary, Wilmington, N. C._                          18.00
  South Braintree. Rev. J. B. Sewall                         4.00
  South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    12.00
  South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
    DWIGHT B. ROGERS and SAMUEL BATES L.M's                 51.00
  Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.61
  Sturbridge. By Mrs. Melvin Haynes, _for freight_           2.00
  Sudbury. Union Evan. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const. REV.
    D. W. GOODALE L.M.                                       3.00
  Sutton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                35.00
  Templeton. Rev. T. O. Rice.                               10.00
  Templeton. Elizabeth C. D. Shattuck, _for freight_         1.00
  Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.70
  Upton. Ladies' Sewing Circle of First Cong. Ch., _for
    freight_                                                 2.00
  Ware. C. C. Hitchcock, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         25.00
  Warren. Cong. Ch.                                         25.00
  Warren. Home M. Soc., 2 Bbls. of C., _for Straight U._
  Watertown. Phillips Mission Band, _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                            50.00
  Webster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.36
  Wendell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                4.57
  West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   74.75
  Westfield. Harry Northan, _for Student Aid, Straight U._   2.00
  Westminster. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing room,
    Williamsburg, Ky._                                      15.00
  Westport. Pacific Union Ch., to const. REV. S. W.
    CLARKE, L.M.                                            30.00
  West Roxbury. So. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                      29.95
  West Roxbury. South Evan. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                25.00
  Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         951.79
  Wilbraham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Atlanta U._              10.00
  Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             19.05
  Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     106.45
  Wollaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              8.00
  Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. (20 of which _for Orange
    Park Ch._)                                             200.82
  Worcester. Infant Class Piedmont Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
  Worcester. Salem St. Sab. Sch., _for Missionary,
    Savannah, Ga._                                          22.24
  Yarmouth. Ladies' Circle of Cong. Ch., _freight_           1.00
  By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Assn.:
    Springfield, North, 53.39; East Longmeadow, 41;
    West Springfield, Park st., (8 of which _for Tougaloo
    U._), 31; Feeding Hills, 11; Monson, 6; Chicopee,
    Third, 2.10                                            144.49
  By C. B. Rice, Treas. Talladega C.: _For Student
    Aid_--Fall River, Pastoral Aid Soc. Cong. Ch., 70;
    Haverhill, A. Nichols, 100; Leicester, "A Friend,"
    1.25; Milford, Mrs. John Daniels, 5; _For other
    purposes_--Clinton, Ladies' Missy. Soc., Bbl. of C;
    Clinton, Cong. C., 4, incorrectly ack. in Jan. number
    from Andover; North Cambridge, Isabel Blake, 2 Bbls.
    of C.                                                  176.25
  By E. C. Stickel, Treas. Fisk U.: _For Student
    Aid_--Buckland, Cong. Ch., 11.33; Newburyport, North
    Ch., Miss M. S. Blake's S. S. Class 1: North
    Brookfield, First Cong. S. S., 35; Peabody, Mrs.
    M. F. Fenderson, 1; Taunton, Broadway Ch. Sab. Sch.,
    50; _For other purposes_--Greenfield, Mrs. Geo.
    Washburn, Bbl of C.; Newton Highlands, Young Ladies'
    Sew. Soc., Bbl. of C.; North Brookfield, Young
    Ladies' Sew. Soc., Bbl. of C.                           98.33
                                                       ----------
                                                        $5,135.85

  LEGACIES.

  Freetown. Estate of Louisa W. Winslow, by Thomas
    G. Winslow, Ex.                                      1,000.00
  Medway. Estate of Samuel D. Force, bal. Legacy,
    by M. M. Fisher, Ex.                                     3.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $6,138.85

  CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE; MAINE,
    Hallowell, "Friends." 3 Bbls.: NEW HAMPSHIRE,
    Derry, First Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl., _for McIntosh,
    Ga._; Goffstown, Rev. S. L. Gerould, 2 Bbls.,
    _for Marion, Ala._; Exeter, Ladies' Sewing Circle,
    of Second Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. Christmas Goods, val.
    150, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._; VERMONT,
    Newbury, Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. and Box, _for
    Atlanta, U._; MASSACHUSETTS, Boston, Francis T.
    Kimball, 500 Leaflets; Brookline, Mrs. Moses
    Withington, 2 Bbls., _for Huguenot, Va._;
    Haverhill, Industrial Soc. of North Ch., 1 Bbl.,
    _for Tougaloo, Miss._; Medfield, 1 Bbl., by Mary
    B. Lovell; Newbury, First Parish, 2 Bbls., val.
    40, _for Tougaloo, Miss._; Newburyport, Harriet O.
    Haskell, 1 Bbl S. S. papers, etc., _for Newman,
    Ga._; North Brookfield, Miss A. W. Johnson, 1 Bbl.
    _for Savannah, Ga._; Oxford, "Friends," 2 Bbls.,
    _for Kitrell, N. C._; Randolph, Ladies' Benev.
    Soc. of First. Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl., val. 42;
    Somerville, Mrs. E. W. Haynes, 1 Bbl., _for
    Kittrell, N. C._; "Lower Lights" Soc. of Prospect
    Hill Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Wilmington, N. C._;
    Saxonville, Mrs. G. W. Webster, 1 Bbl., _for
    Kitrell, N. C._; West Somerville, Young People's
    Mission Band of Day St. Ch., 2 Bbls. and 1 Box of
    Christmas Goods, val. 86, _for Marietta, Ga._;
    Sturbridge, by Mrs. Melvin Haynes, Bbl. and Box,
    _for Kittrell, N. C._; Upton, Ladies' Sewing
    Circle of First Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Emerson
    Inst._; Watertown, Phillips Mission Band, 2 Bbls.
    Christmas Goods, _for Ladies' Island, S. C._;
    Westborough, Ladies of F. M. Soc., 1 Bbl., val.
    32, _for Savannah, Ga._; West Roxbury, Mrs. Mary
    F. Allen, 1 Bbl.; Yarmouth, Ladies' Soc. of Cong.
    Ch., 1 Bbl., _for Savannah Ga._; RHODE ISLAND,
    Little Compton, Ladies' Sociable of Cong. Ch., 1
    Bbl.


RHODE ISLAND, $196.75.

  East Providence. Samuel Belden, to const. MRS.
    CATHARINE M. CONE and MRS. EVA S. BABCOCK L.M's         60.00
  Little Compton. Ladies' Sociable of Cong. Ch., _freight_    .25
  Newport. United Cong. Ch.                                 85.00
  Providence. Central Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           50.00
  Westerly. Mrs. Mary T. Babcock                             1.50


CONNECTICUT, $2,294.17.

  Bantam. Cornelia Bradley                                   3.00
  Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  12.37
  Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                     12.84
  Bridgeport. Park Sab. Sch., _for Scholarship,
    Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              30.00
  Bridgeport. Park St. Ch. and Soc.                         11.34
  Canaan. First Cong. Ch.                                    7.45
  Canton Center. Mrs. Sarah B. Hallock, _for Woman's
    Work_                                                    4.00
  Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. SIDNEY P.
    SMITH L.M.                                              37.60
  Columbia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.27
  Cornwall Bridge. Geo. H. Swift                            10.00
  Coventry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        21.52
  Danbury. First Cong. Ch. (30 of which to const.
    ALEXANDER PINE L.M.)                                   130.00
  Deep River. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN T. STRICKLAND
    L.M.                                                    31.00
  East Haddam. Millington Ch.                                5.25
  East Hampton. First Cong. Ch and Soc., bal. to const.
    DEA. JOHN WATROUS, L.M.                                 16.00
  East Hartford. First Ch.                                  20.00
  Falls Village. Cong. Ch.                                   3.68
  Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    8.38
  Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. WALTER W. WILCOX
    L.M.                                                    30.00
  Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford, 50; Cong. Ch., 4.50            54.50
  Hartford. Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., 30, to const. DR.
    G. W. AVERY L.M.; Mrs. M. C. Bemis, 20; Wethersfield
    Av. Cong. Ch., 9.66                                     59.66
  Kensington. "A Friend"                                     4.50
  Kent. Cong. Ch.                                            9.00
  Lakeville. Mrs. S. P. Robbins                              5.00
  Long Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                      3.00
  Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         7.35
  Meriden. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Atlanta U._      20.00
  Meriden. R. P. Rand                                        3.00
  Nepaug. Cong. Ch.                                          4.50
  New Britain. First Ch. of Christ                          51.02
  New Haven. Humphrey St. Cong. Sab. Sch. to const.
    WILLIAM ATWATER, MRS. O. S. WRIGHT and MISS ALICE
    HUBBARD L.M's, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._         175.00
  Newington. Cong. Ch.                                      37.61
  New London. Ch. of Christ                                 57.00
  New Milford. First Cong. Ch.                             101.11
  New Preston. Mrs. Betsey Averill, _for Indian M._         10.00
  North Greenwich. Cong. Ch. to const. WILLIAM W.
    BROWN L.M.                                              53.97
  North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett                            21.00
  North Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                17.00
  Norwalk. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
  Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad'l, 51.04; Broadway
    Cong. Ch., 10                                           61.04
  Norwich. Broadway Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Memorial Window,
    Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              50.00
  Poquonock. "A Friend," _for Building Fund, Tillotson C.
    and N. Inst._                                          100.00
  Rockville. Second Cong. Ch. _for Tillotson C. and N.
    Inst._                                                  89.54
  Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                   11.52
  Saybrook. Rev. A. S. Chesebrough                           4.00
  Sharon. Mrs. B. Sears, 1; Emilie C. Sears, 1               2.00
  Somers. Cong. Ch.                                         14.10
  South Norwalk. Mrs. Rebecca Pennell, _for Woman's Work_    5.00
  Talcottville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         122.45
  Thomaston. Cong Ch.                                       52.48
  Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.12
  Thompsonville. T. I. Pease, _for Student Aid, Straight
    U._                                                     25.00
  Vernon. "The King's Daughters," by Hattie L. Skinner,
    Sec., _for Woman's Work_                                10.00
  Washington. F. A. Frisbie                                  1.00
  Watertown. Dr. John De Forest                            100.00
  Westbrook. Cong. Ch.                                      30.00
  Westchester. Cong. Ch.                                    22.00
  Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch.                             33.65
  Wethersfield. Cong Ch. 86.53; Griswoldville Sab. Sch.
    51.47, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                 138.00
  Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                         8.40
  Woodbury. First Cong. Ch., 19.50; North Cong. Ch., 17;
    Mrs. C. P. Churchill, 50c.                              37.00
  Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. & Soc.                         22.50

  By C. B. Rice. Treas. Talladega C. Kensington, Cong.
    Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid_, 25; Rockville, Mrs. E. E.
    Wilson's Sab. Sch. Class 5, _for Girl's R. Room_;
    South Britain, South Ch. Sab. Sch., Box Tools           30.00
  By Rev. W. C. Brooks, _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._;
    Norfolk Cong. Ch. 33.45; Southington Cong. Ch., 15;
    West Winsted, W. L. Camp, 5; Derby, Miss Sarah A.
    Hotchkiss, 5; L. De Forest, 1; Bridgeport, Edward
    Sterling, 5; Hebron, J. & Mary C. Porter, 2, _For
    New Hall_; West Winsted, Miss Jennie L. Griswold, 10;
    Plainville, Dea. A. N. Clark, 10                        86.45
                                                       ----------
                                                        $2,194.17

  New London. Estate of Lucretia Latimer, by John G.
    Crump, Admr.                                           100.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $2,294.17


NEW YORK, $635.59.

  Alfred Centre. Mrs. I. F. Kenyon                           5.00
  Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
  Black Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
  Brentwood. E. F. Richardson, _for Berea C._               15.00
  Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 162.04; "A Friend" 5; "A
    Friend," 1                                             168.04
  Camden. "A Friend"                                         1.00
  Chauteaugay. Joseph Shaw                                   4.50
  Chittenango. Miss E. D. Starr                               .50
  Eden. Mrs. H. McNett                                       2.00
  Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                     9.00
  Flushing. Cong. Ch., Case of C., _for Atlanta, Ga.,
    Storrs Sch._
  Galway. Delia C. Davis                                     5.00
  Gilbertsville. Rev. A. Wood                                5.00
  Homer. Cong. Ch., 95.57; Mrs. Augusta Arnold, 5; F. F.
    Pratt, 2                                               102.57
  Livonia. Mrs. Wm. Calvert                                  5.00
  Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                  8.00
  Madrid. Cong. Ch.                                          3.43
  Mexico. Geo. G. French                                    10.00
  New Lebanon. By Mrs. C. W. Bacon, Bbl. and Box of C.
  New York. J. S. Holt                                      20.00
  New York. Pilgrim Ch., bal. to const. DR. S. AUGDEN
    HILLS, JOSEPH SILLIMAN and MRS. EMMA E. NESTELL L.M's,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         44.25
  New York. Mrs. H. B. Spelman, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
    U._                                                     25.00
  New York, N. Y. Women's Home Miss'y Union, by Mrs. L. H.
    Cobb, Treas., _for Missionary, Tougaloo, Miss._         15.00
  New York. Funk & Wagnalls, Pkg. Books, _for Macon, Ga._;
    C. L. Mead, Trunk of C., _for Talladega Ala._
  North Pitcher. Cong. Ch.                                   2.54
  Oriskany. Mrs. Lovina Halsey                              10.00
  Pitcher. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
  Riverhead. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       13.82
  Rochester. Plymouth Ch., 38.38; A. Hubregtse, 1.50        39.88
  Sag Harbor. Chas. N. Brown, to const. HARRIET A. BROWN,
    L.M., _for Santee Agency_                               30.00
  Saratoga Springs. Mrs. Elizabeth T. Marvin                 2.50
  Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                 5.00
  Upper Aquebogue. Cong. Ch.                                 9.06
  Westmoreland. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                        3.00
  West Winfield. Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
  By C. B. Rice, Treas. Talladega C. Homer, Miss Jennie
    Stebbins, _for Student Aid_, 2.50; "Cong. Friends,"
    People's Cyclopedia, val. 14; "Cong. Friends," _for
    Student Aid_, 10; Lockport, "A Friend," Box of C.;
    Paris, Rev. Wm. E. Mather, _for Student Aid_, 1.        13.50


NEW JERSEY, $514.69.

  Asbury Park. Ralph Tyler                                   2.50
  Bernardsville. J. L. Roberts                              40.00
  Colt's Neck. Reformed Ch.                                  8.55
  Jersey City. First Cong. Ch.                              97.45
  Montclair. Mrs. Pratt's S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            6.00
  Newark. Belleville Ave. Cong. Ch., 59.89; J. H.
    Denison, 30                                             89.89
  Salem. W. Graham Tyler                                    50.00
  Upper Montclair. Christian Union Cong. Ch.               201.25
  Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch.                               19.05


PENNSYLVANIA, $59.00.

  Centre Road. J. A. Scovel                                  5.00
  Mercer. Miss Sarah Pew                                     2.00
  North East. Miss C. A. Talcott                             1.00
  Philadelphia. John Wanamaker, _for Lexington, Ky._         1.00
  Philadelphia. American Sab. Sch. Union, Box Books, _for
    Talladega C._
  Troy. Chas. C. Paine                                      50.00


OHIO, $4,839.29.

  Alliance. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                              6.00
  Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         8.29
  Belden. Cong. Ch.                                          3.43
  Bellefontaine. Mr. and Mrs. John Lindsay                  10.00
  Berea. J. S. Smedley                                       5.00
  Chatham Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 18.00
  Cincinnati. Mrs. B. E. Aydelott                            5.00
  Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., 167.93, to const. MRS.
    F. C. HOFFMAN, A. J. SMITH and WALTER KING L.M's;
    Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., 69.50; J. J. Low, 5              242.43
  Eagleville. J. W. Sperry                                   1.50
  Gambier. J. S. Sawer.                                      5.00
  Geneva. Mrs. Samuel Kingsbury, 10; Mrs. Susan Webster,
    5                                                       15.00
  Grafton. Cong. Ch.                                         3.30
  Harmar. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Talladega_     20.00
  Mansfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 278.73; Young
    People's Miss'y Circle, 30.92; Woman's Benev. Soc.,
    20.02; Children's Hour, 5; to const. MRS. HATTIE G.
    BARKER, MRS. ELIZABETH L. MARSHALL, MRS. MARIE E.
    RIDGEWAY, MRS. EMILY JENNER, MRS. MARY HURST, MRS.
    ALICE F. GADSBY, MRS. M. M. FINK, MRS. LOUISA R.
    CONSTANCE, MRS. MARY E. MCFARLAND and MRS. MARTHA H.
    SMITH, L.M's                                           334.67
  Mineral Ridge. Welsh Cong. Ch.                             5.00
  Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 50.00
  Oberlin. Mrs. Dr. Siddall, _for Lexington, Ky._            5.00
  Oberlin. Cong. Ch., Bbl of C., _for Atlanta, Ga.,
    Storrs Sch._
  Perrysburg. Rev. I. K. Deering                              .50
  South New Lyme. Mrs. J. Tuckerman, 2; "A Friend," 5        7.00
  Strongsville. E. Lyman                                    10.00
  Tallmadge. Hannah W. Carter                                1.50
  Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            2.68
  Warrensville. Mrs. Mary Walkden                           10.00
  Wellington. First Cong. Ch.                               45.84
  West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   13.15
  Willoughby. Florence A. Page, _for Tillotson C. and
    N. Inst._                                               10.00
  Zanesville. Mrs. M. A. Dunlap                              1.00
                                                       ----------
                                                          $839.29

LEGACIES.

  Austinburg. Estate of L. B. Austin                     1,000.00
  Cleveland. Estate of Sophronia Otis Lyman              3,000.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $4,839.29


ILLINOIS, $1,289.29.

  Albion. Mrs. Martha Skevington, 5; Dea. James
    Greene, 5                                               10.00
  Alton. Chas. Phinney                                      20.00
  Aurora. New Eng. Cong. Ch.                                30.80
  Barry. Lyndon Freeman                                      1.50
  Camp Point. Mrs. S. B. McKinney                           10.00
  Carthage. Mrs. Elizabeth Bernethy                         10.00
  Champaign. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
    Talladega C._
  Chicago. First Cong. Ch.                                 144.52
  Chicago. Ladies Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for
    Missionary, Macon, Ga._                                 89.00
  Chicago. Mrs. J. M. Baker and Others, N. E Ch., Bbl.
    of C., _for Macon, Ga._
  Crystal Lake. Rev. Henry Willard                          50.00
  Dover. Cong. Ch.                                          34.00
  Farmington. Phineas Chapman                               50.00
  Galva. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         7.22
  Geneseo. "Busy Workers," _for Missionary, Mobile, Ala._   15.00
  Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        13.26
  Geneseo. 3 Bbls. of C. and 2 freight, _for Talladega C._   2.00
  Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
  Hinsdale. Rev. F. Bascom                                  10.00
  Jefferson. Cong. Ch.                                      12.00
  Lake Forest. Saml. Dent                                    1.00
  La Salle. "Christmas Gift from a Friend," _for
    Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                              100.00
  Mattoon. "Morning Glories," Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
  Mendon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   14.60
  Morrison. Cong. Ch. ad'l.                                  5.00
  Oak Park. First Cong. Ch.                                188.44
  Oak Park. Ladies' Aid Soc. Bbl. & Box C. Freight,
    $4.20, _for Macon, Ga._                                  4.20
  Oak Park. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Missionary, Austin,
    Texas_                                                   1.00
  Odell. Cong. Ch.                                          53.00
  Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         12.20
  Peoria. Cong. Ch.                                        104.35
  Springfield. First Cong. Ch. to const. MRS. JENNIE POST
    L.M.                                                    34.20
  Waukegan. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00
  Western Springs. Sab. Sch., Box Books, etc., Freight 2,
    _for Macon, Ga._                                         2.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $1,089.29

  LEGACY.

  Paxton. Estate of Edwin Rice                             200.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $1,289.29


MICHIGAN, $175.47.

  Battle Creek. Mrs. Eliza Williams                          2.50
  Benzonia. Cong. Ch.                                        4.96
  Calumet. "A Friend"                                       25.00
  Detroit. Mrs. Jeremiah Porter, _for Straight U._           4.00
  Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                             10.51
  Grand Rapids. Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H. H.
    Sengstacke_                                             40.00
  Grand Rapids. Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. J. H.
    Sengstacke_                                             10.00
  Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     35.00
  Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett.                               1.50
  Milford. Mrs. Wm. A. Arms                                  5.00
  Portland. C. D. Woodbury, _for Student Aid, Straight
    U._                                                     25.00
  South Haven. C. T. Bryant                                  1.00
  Tecumseh. James Vincent                                   10.00
  Vermontville. O. P. Fay                                     .50
  Whitehall. B. Hammond                                       .50


IOWA, $234.08.

  Davenport. W. N. McCandlish                               10.00
  Des Moines. A. Y. Rawson                                  10.00
  Dubuque. Woman's Miss'y Soc.                              25.00
  Gilman. Cong. Ch.                                          3.35
  Grinnell. By Ella E. Marsh, _for Missionary, New
    Orleans, La._                                           46.00
  Hawarden. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Kingsley. A. J. Brower                                     5.00
  Maquoketa. Ladies of Cong. Ch. Bbl. C. and Box of
    Bonnets, _for Straight U._
  Miles and Preston. Cong. Chs.                              7.25
  Mitchell. Rev. and Mrs. E. W. Butler                      20.00
  Montour. Cong. Ch. to const. DEA. GEORGE BLAKE L.M.       38.58
  Newburg. Cong. Ch.                                         6.25
  Onawa. Ladies' Miss'y Soc.                                 3.00
  Oskaloosa. S. R. Pettitt                                   2.00
  Rock Rapids. Rev. C. H. Morse                              1.00
  Shenandoah. Cong. Ch.                                      9.15
  Tipton. Mrs. M. D. Clapp, 4; Mrs. J. M. L. Daniels,
    50c.                                                     4.50
  Toledo. Two Bbls. of C., _for Straight U._
  By Mrs. G. W. Reynolds Asst. Sec. _For Missionary, New
    Orleans, La._--Des Moines, Woman's Miss'y Soc. of
    Plym. Ch., 30; Iowa City, "Little Gleaners" of Cong.
    Ch., 5; Riceville, Ladies, 2; Chester Centre, Mrs.
    Edward Fisher, 1                                        38.00


WISCONSIN, $299.53.

  Appleton. Cong. Ch. Box S. S. Papers, _for Talladega C._
  Beloit. Second Cong. Ch., 43.17; First Cong. Ch., 12.74;
    Y. M. C. A. of Beloit College, 1.20                     57.11
  Berlin. Union Ch.                                          2.45
  Brandon. First Cong. Ch., 3 Boxes Books, etc., _for
    Macon, Ga._
  Delavan. Rev. S. R. Wells                                  5.00
  Evansville. Cong. Ch.                                     30.22
  Green Bay. "Friends," by F. N. Dexter, Box Papers, etc.,
    _for Macon, Ga._
  La Crosse. Cong. Ch.                                      31.75
  Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                 100.00
  Madison. W. J. Park, 1 Sewing Machine and 4 Pkgs. Books,
    etc., _for Macon, Ga._
  Monroe. Miss Frances A. Locke                              5.00
  Ripon. First Cong. Ch., 57; Mrs. O. J. Wolcolt, 3         60.00
  Superior. Mrs. I. W. Gates                                 8.00


MINNESOTA, $250.67.

  Alexandria. "A Friend"                                     3.00
  Audubon. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Austin. Cong. Union Ch.                                   23.79
  Cottage Grove. Cong. Ch.                                   8.20
  Dassel. Cong. Ch.                                           .46
  Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      26.40
  Hawley. Union Ch.                                          4.28
  Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      2.45
  Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 46.60; Woman's Miss'y Soc.
    of Vine Cong. Ch., 5                                    51.60
  Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                               93.34
  Plainview. Cong. Ch.                                       7.15
  St. Paul. Plymouth Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._  25.00


KANSAS, $22.50.

  Meriden. "A Friend"                                       12.50
  Topeka. Cong. Ch., 5; Tuition, 5                          10.00


MISSOURI, $25.00.

  Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                 25.00


COLORADO, $10.80.

  Denver. First Cong. Ch.                                    5.80
  Fort Lewis. Mrs. J. B. Irvine                              5.00


NEBRASKA, $29.00.

  Tremont. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
  Nebraska City. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of First Cong. Ch.      7.50
  "Otoe Co" ----                                            19.50


DAKOTA, $6.75.

  Huron. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for Woman's Work_             4.50
  Pierre. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for Woman's Work_            2.25


CALIFORNIA, $5.00

  Santa Barbara. Mary B. Van Winkle                          5.00


OREGON, $14.05.

  The Dalles. First Cong. Ch.                               14.05


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $1,887.51.

  Washington. United States Government, _for Santee
    Agency_                                              1,887.51


MARYLAND, $151.70.

  Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                               150.70
  Federalsburg. John Manning                                 1.00


KENTUCKY, $139.45.

  Berea. "Church at Berea"                                   8.00
  Lexington. Tuition                                        79.70
  Williamsburg. Tuition                                     51.75


TENNESSEE, $761.87.

  Jellico. Tuition                                           7.75
  Jonesborough. Tuition                                      7.00
  Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00
  Memphis. Tuition                                         282.05
  Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              445.57
  Nashville. Jackson St. Ch.                                 5.00
  Pleasant Hill. Mr. Wightman                                2.50


NORTH CAROLINA, $238.97.

  McLeansville. Cong. Ch.                                    9.32
  Wilmington. Tuition                                      219.65
  Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00


SOUTH CAROLINA, $317.00.

  Charleston. Tuition                                      317.00



GEORGIA, $724.17.

  Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                            269.10
  Macon. Tuition, 175.85; Rent, 5.80                       181.65
  Macon. Cong. Ch.                                          11.00
  McIntosh. Tuition                                         25.92
  Savannah. Tuition                                        186.50
  Savannah. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
    U._                                                     50.00


ALABAMA, $236.65.

  Mobile. Tuition                                          200.25
  Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
  Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          16.40
  Talladega. "A Friend" _for Student Aid, Talladega C._      5.00


FLORIDA, $5.00

  Hawthorne. Mrs. J. E. Chadwick                             5.00


MISSISSIPPI, $103.50

  Tougaloo. Tuition                                        103.50


LOUISIANA, $294.00.

  New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        294.00


TEXAS, $188.75.

  Austin. Tuition                                          188.75


INCOMES, $1,807.50.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               277.50
  De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair, Talladega C._    375.00
  Dike and Hammond Fund                                     50.00
  Gen'l Clinton B. Fisk, Fund, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._   30.00
  General Fund                                              50.00
  Graves Scholarship Fund                                  125.00
  Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                          125.00
  Income Fund, _for Straight U._                            20.00
  Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                       50.00
  Luke Memorial Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._        10.20
  N. M. & A. Stone Fund, _for Talladega C._                 25.00
  Theological Fund, _for Howard U._                        515.00
  Tuthill King Fund. 125 _for Atlanta U._; and 25 _for
    Berea C.                                               150.00
  Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                      4.80


CANADA, $8.00.

  Montreal. Emmanuel Ch.                                     8.00


SOUTH AFRICA, $5.00.

  Natal. Umtwalumi. Mrs. A. F. Wilder                        5.00


TURKEY AND BULGARIA, $50.00.

  Turkey and Bulgaria. Childrens Miss'y Soc., _for a
    girl, Dakota Home, Santee Agency, Neb._                 50.00
                                                      -----------

  Total for November                                   $26,611.27

  Total from Oct. 1 to Dec. 31                          51,341.90
                                                      ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for December                               299.79
  Previously acknowledged                                  102.68
                                                         --------
                                                          $402.47
                                                         ========

  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  56 Reade Street, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTS.


1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for the
new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious,
for these churches.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Advertisements._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WATERMAN'S "IDEAL" PEN

(Patented Feb. 12th and Nov. 4th, 1884.)]

Watermans "Ideal" Fountain Pen.

It is the only fountain holder that uses a gold or steel pen, and
_always writes without shaking_. It is the simplest (only four parts)
and cleanest in use or in the pocket, as well as the readiest.

It is warranted to give satisfaction, or purchase money will be
refunded. _Your favorite pen can be fitted_, and the character of
your writing preserved.

Rev. Thos. K. Beecher, D.D., Elmira, N. Y., says: "I find the
Waterman "Ideal Pen" the very best of all the Fountain Pens that have
been upon the market during the past thirty-five years."

Send for a circular with full price-list and testimonials. Agents
Wanted. _Mention this paper._

  The Ideal Pen Co., 10 Murray St., New York.

  L. E. Waterman, Manager.

The Ideal Pocket for pens and pencils of all sizes, holds from 1 to 6
securely at the same time. It fastens itself and is easily changed
from one vest pocket to another. Price, nickel-plated, 25 cents.

    _I have used the "Ideal" Pen 14 months, and have known Mr.
    Waterman four years. Both are reliable._

    _H. G. PROUT (of Atkin & Prout, Printers of the Missionary)._

       *       *       *       *       *

7 PER CENT. INTEREST.

Money loaned in sums of $400 and upward, and secured by first
mortgage on farms in Central Ohio worth at least three times the sum
loaned. Interest and principal when due collected and remitted to the
lender without any expense to him.

References: Bank of Marysville and the Farmers' Bank of Marysville,
Ohio, and the People's National Bank of Newark, Ohio.

  Address all communications to

  T. B. FULTON, Marysville, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

  For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
  For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
  And also for cheapness 'tis yet unsurpassed,
  And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

  Of all imitations 'tis well to beware;
  The half risen sun every package should bear,
  For this is the "trade mark" the MORSE BROS. use,
  And none are permitted the mark to abuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

WEBSTER

In Sheep, Russia and Turkey Bindings.

[Illustration]

Webster's Unabridged Dictionary is supplied, at a small additional
cost, with DENISON'S PATENT REFERENCE INDEX.

"The greatest improvement in book-making that has been made in a
hundred years."

THE STANDARD.

Get Webster--it has 118,000 Words, 3000 Engravings, and a New
Biographical Dictionary.

The Standard in Gov't Printing Office. 32,000 copies in Public
Schools. Sale 20 to 1 of any other series.

Best aid to make a Family intelligent. Best help for SCHOLARS,
TEACHERS and SCHOOLS.

Standard Authority with the U. S. Supreme Court. Recommended by the
State Sup'ts of Schools in 36 States, & by 50 College Pres'ts.

G. & C. MERRIAM & CO., Pub'rs, Springfield, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

$3 Printing Press

Do your Own Printing

Card & label Press $3. Larger sizes $5 to $75. For old or young.
Everything easy, printed directions. Send 2 stamps for Catalogue of
Presses, Type, Cards, &c. to the factory. Kelsey & Co., Meriden,
Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New York Sun.

An Independent Newspaper of Democratic Principles, but not Controlled
by any Set of Politicians or Manipulators; Devoted to Collecting and
Publishing all the News of the Day in the most Interesting Shape and
with the greatest possible Promptness, Accuracy and Impartiality; and
to the Promotion of Democratic Ideas and Policy in the affairs of
Government, Society and Industry.

_Rates, by Mail, Postpaid:_

  DAILY, per Year              $6.00
  DAILY, per Month               .50
  SUNDAY, per Year              1.00
  DAILY and SUNDAY per Year     7.00
  WEEKLY, per Year              1.00

_Address, THE SUN, New York City._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: This Ink has been known to the trade since 1835, as

  PAYSON'S
  INDELIBLE INK
  for Marking Linen, Silk & Cotton
  WITH A COMMON PEN
  Without a Preparation.]

FOR PLAIN OR DECORATIVE MARKING ON ANY FABRIC.

  ESTABLISHED OVER 50 YEARS
  AND STILL THE ONLY INK
  THAT ALWAYS GIVES
  SATISFACTION TO
  BUYER, SELLER AND CONSUMER.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: "For simplicity of application and indelibility."

Sold by Druggists, Stationers, News Agents and many Fancy and Dry
Goods dealers.

INQUIRE FOR

PAYSON'S COMBINATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

If you are in want of SEEDS send for Vick's Floral Guide, price 10
cents, which can be deducted from first order.

  ROCHESTER, N. Y.      JAMES VICK.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Independent,

No. 251 Broadway, New York.

    "One of the ablest weeklies in existence."--_Pall Mall Gazette,
    London._

In its thirty-sixth year of publication THE INDEPENDENT stands easily
at the head of religious and literary weekly newspapers wherever
published. Being undenominational, it has the opportunity offered it
to present to its readers discussions upon all religious questions,
many clergymen and laymen seeking its pages for a freer and fuller
discussion than any denominational paper will grant. Having
thirty-two folio pages, it has space to give all the important
religious intelligence; and to aid it in doing so, it has paid corps
of correspondents scattered all over the world. The matter of expense
is not considered in its aim to give its readers the most valuable
discussions and most trustworthy facts by the ablest and most popular
writers.

For thirty years past the design of THE INDEPENDENT has been to
publish the ablest and best family paper in the world, and it now
occupies that position. Aside from the religious element of THE
INDEPENDENT, its literary attractiveness is unequaled. A glance at
the names of our general contributors, which will be sent to any
address upon application, will convince any one that the literary
merit of THE INDEPENDENT is of the first class. Its department
devoted to book reviews is probably better and fuller than can be
found in this country, and is only equaled by that of the _Academy_
and _Athenæum_ of London.

It has altogether twenty-two different departments, nearly all of
which are edited by or contributed to by specialists. These
departments are: Editorials, Fine Arts, Music, Science, Religious
Intelligence, Missions, School and College, News of the Week, Hymn
Notes, the Sunday-school, Legal, Sanitary, Pebbles, Biblical
Research, Farm and Garden, Insurance, Weekly Market Reports,
Financial and Commercial, Dry Goods, Dry Goods Quotations,
Personalities.

THE INDEPENDENT has thirty-two pages; the other weeklies have from
twelve to, not over, twenty-four. At $3.00 per year--its subscription
price--THE INDEPENDENT costs about six cents per week, which almost
any person or family in the United States can well afford for a paper
which gives them such wonderful returns. The cost each week for
contributed articles alone ranges from $250.00 to $800.00, which is
probably two or three times as great as that expended by any similar
weekly religious paper in the country.

THE INDEPENDENT rigidly excludes from its advertising columns
advertisements of a doubtful character, or any by which, in the
opinion of its managers, subscribers might not receive an equivalent
for their money. In consequence, its advertising columns are sought
after by the very best class of advertisers, to the satisfaction both
of the advertiser and subscriber.

THE INDEPENDENT ought, because of its merit alone, to be taken by at
least 100,000 more people than now subscribe for it, and if any
person who sees this advertisement would like to make its
acquaintance, he can do so by sending a postal-card request for a
free specimen copy; or, if he prefers, he can subscribe for any
length of time from one month up to five years, as per rates below.

During the past year THE INDEPENDENT, desiring that its subscribers
should have stories by the very best living authors, has published
contributions from W. E. Norris, author of "Matrimony," "No New
Thing," etc.; J. S. of Dale, author of "Guerndale," "The Crime of
Henry Vane," etc.: Julia Schayer, author of "Tiger Lily and Other
Stories"; Sir Samuel W. Baker, the Celebrated Egyptian Explorer; Mrs.
J. H. Riddell, author of "The Senior Partner," etc.; Thomas Hardy,
author of "A Pair of Blue Eyes," "Two on a Tower," etc.; Edward
Everett Hale, author of "Ten Times One is Ten," etc.; James Payn, the
celebrated English novelist; Lucy C. Lillie, F. W. Robinson, Fred. D.
Storey, Henry W. Lucy, Harriet Prescott Spofford, Rebecca Harding
Davis, Sarah Orne Jewett, Frank R. Stockton, H. H. Boyesen, Ivan
Tourgeneff, and others.

The same general policy of providing original stories by the foremost
living authors will be maintained.

TERMS TO SUBSCRIBERS.

  Three months   $ 0.75
  Four months      1.00
  Six months       1.50
  One year         3.00
  Two years        5.00
  Five years      10.00

"TRIAL TRIP" of one month, 30 cents.

A specimen copy of THE INDEPENDENT will be sent free to any address.

No papers are sent to subscribers _after the time paid for_ has
expired.

THE INDEPENDENT'S Clubbing List will be sent free to any person
asking for it. Any one wishing to subscribe for one or more papers or
magazines, in connection with THE INDEPENDENT, can save money by
ordering from our Club List.

ADDRESS,

  P. O. Box 2787.
  THE INDEPENDENT
  New York.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 39, NO. 02, FEBRUARY, 1885 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.