E-text prepared by Delphine Lettau, Clive Pickton, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team
(http://www.pgdpcanada.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 29380-h.htm or 29380-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/29380/pg29380-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/29380/29380-h.zip)





THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY

by

MRS. MOLESWORTH

Author of 'Carrots,' 'Us,' Etc.


  'I have a boy of five years old:
   His face is fair and fresh to see.'
                             WORDSWORTH

Illustrated by Walter Crane







  [Illustration: There was Baby, seated on the grass, one arm fondly
  clasping Minet's neck, while with the other he firmly held the famous
  money-box.--P. 138.]



London
Macmillan and Co.
and New York
1895

First printed (4to) 1881
Reprinted (Globe 8vo) 1886, 1887, 1890, 1892, 1895




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.
FOUR YEARS OLD                     1

CHAPTER II.
INSIDE A TRUNK                    20

CHAPTER III.
UP IN THE MORNING EARLY           41

CHAPTER IV.
GOING AWAY                        60

CHAPTER V.
BY LAND AND SEA                   81

CHAPTER VI.
AN OLD SHOP AND AN OGRE          101

CHAPTER VII.
BABY'S SECRET                    125

CHAPTER VIII.
FOUND                            145

CHAPTER IX.
"EAST OR WEST, HAME IS BEST"     163




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"OH LOOK, LOOK, BABY'S MADE PEEPY-SNOOZLE INTO
'THE PARSON IN THE PULPIT THAT COULDN'T SAY HIS
PRAYERS,'" CRIED DENNY                                 6

HE SAT WITH ONE ARM PROPPED ON THE TABLE, AND HIS
ROUND HEAD LEANING ON HIS HAND, WHILE THE OTHER
HELD THE PIECE OF BREAD AND BUTTER--BUTTER DOWNWARDS,
OF COURSE                                             16

THERE WAS ONE TRUNK WHICH TOOK MY FANCY MORE
THAN ALL THE OTHERS                                   30

FOR A MINUTE OR TWO BABY COULD NOT MAKE OUT WHAT
HAD HAPPENED                                          50

"ZOU WILL P'OMISE, BETSY, P'OMISE CERTAIN SURE,
NEBBER TO FORGET"                                     61

POOR LITTLE BOYS, FOR, AFTER ALL, FRITZ HIMSELF
WASN'T VERY BIG! THEY STOOD TOGETHER HAND IN
HAND ON THE STATION PLATFORM, LOOKING, AND
FEELING, RATHER DESOLATE                              84

"ARE THAT JOGRAPHY?" HE SAID                          94

"OH AUNTIE," HE SAID, "P'EASE 'TOP ONE MINUTE.
HIM SEES SHINY GLASS JUGS LIKE DEAR LITTLE
MOTHER'S. OH, DO 'TOP"                               106

BABY VENTURED TO PEEP ROUND. THE LITTLE BLACK-EYED
WHITE-CAPPED MAN CAME TOWARDS THEM SMILING           121

THERE WAS BABY, SEATED ON THE GRASS, ONE ARM
FONDLY CLASPING MINET'S NECK, WHILE WITH THE
OTHER HE FIRMLY HELD THE FAMOUS MONEY-BOX            138

AUNTIE STOOD STILL A MOMENT TO LISTEN                155

FORGETTING ALL ABOUT EVERYTHING, EXCEPT THAT HER
BABY WAS FOUND, UP JUMPED MOTHER                     170




THE ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY




CHAPTER I.

FOUR YEARS OLD

  "I was four yesterday; when I'm quite old
   I'll have a cricket-ball made of pure gold;
   I'll never stand up to show that I'm grown;
   I'll go at liberty upstairs or down."


He trotted upstairs. Perhaps trotting is not quite the right word, but I
can't find a better. It wasn't at all like a horse or pony trotting, for
he went one foot at a time, right foot first, and when right foot was
safely landed on a step, up came left foot and the rest of Baby himself
after right foot. It took a good while, but Baby didn't mind. He used to
think a good deal while he was going up and down stairs, and it was not
his way to be often in a hurry. There was one thing he could _not_ bear,
and that was any one trying to carry him upstairs. Oh, that did vex
him! His face used to get quite red, right up to the roots of his curly
hair, and down to the edge of the big collar of his sailor suit, for he
had been put into sailor suits last Christmas, and, if the person who
was lifting him up didn't let go all at once, Baby would begin to wriggle.
He was really clever at wriggling; even if you knew his way it was not
easy to hold him, and with any one that didn't know his way he could get
off in half a minute.

But this time there was no one about, and Baby stumped on--yes _that_ is
a better word--Baby stumped on, or up, "wifout nobody teasing." His face
was grave, very grave, for inside the little house of which his two blue
eyes were the windows, a great deal of work was going on. He was busy
wondering about, and trying to understand, some of the strange news he
had heard downstairs in the drawing-room.

"Over the sea," he said to himself. "Him would like to see the sea.
Auntie said over the sea in a boat, a werry big boat. Him wonders how
big."

And his mind went back to the biggest boat he had ever seen, which was
in the toy-shop at Brookton, when he had gone with his mother to be
fitted for new boots. But even that wouldn't be big enough. Mother, and
auntie, and grandfather, and Celia, and Fritz, and Denny, and cook, and
Lisa, and Thomas and Jones, and the other servants, and the horses,
and--and---- Baby stopped to take breath inside, for though he had not
been speaking aloud he felt quite choked with all the names coming so
fast. "And pussy, and the calanies, and the Bully, and Fritz's dormice,
oh no, them _couldn't_ all get in." Perhaps if Baby doubled up his legs
underneath he might squeeze himself in, but that would be no good, he
couldn't go sailing, sailing all over the sea by himself, like the old
woman in "Harry's Nursery Songs," who went sailing, sailing, up in a
basket, "seventy times as high as the moon." Oh no, even that boat
wouldn't be big enough. They must have one as big as--and Baby stopped
to look round. But just then a shout from inside the nursery made him
wake up, for he had got to the last little stair before the top landing,
and again right foot and half Baby, followed by left foot and the other
half Baby, stumped on their way.

They pulled up--right foot and left foot, with Baby's solemn face top of
all--at the nursery door. It was shut. Now one of the things Baby liked
to do for himself was to open doors, and now and then he could manage it
very well. But, alas, the nursery lock was too high up for him to get a
good hold of it. He pulled, and pushed, and got quite red, all for no
use. Worse than that, the pushing and pulling were heard inside. Some
one came forward and opened the door, nearly knocking poor Baby over.

"Ach, Herr Baby, mine child, why you not say when you come?" Lisa cried
out. Lisa was Baby's nurse. Her face was rosy and round, and she looked
very kind. She would have liked to pick him up to make sure he had got
no knocks, but she knew too well that would not do. So all she could do
was to say again--

"Mine child--ach, Herr Baby!"

Baby did not take any notice.

"Zeally," he said coolly, "ganfather must do somesing to zem locks. Zem
is all most dedful 'tiff."

Lisa smiled to herself. She was used to Baby's ways.

"Herr Baby shall grow tall some day," she said. "Zen him can open
doors."

Lisa's talking was nearly as funny as Baby's, and, indeed, I rather
think that hers had made his all the funnier. But, any way, they
understood each other. He was thinking over what she had said, when a
scream from the nursery made them both turn round in a hurry.

"O Lisa, O Baby, come in quick, do. Peepy-Snoozle has got out of the
cage, and he'll be out at the door in another moment. Quick, quick, come
in and shut the door."

Lisa and Baby did not wait to be twice told. Inside the nursery there
was a great flurry. Celia, Fritz, and Denny were all there crawling over
the floor and screaming at each other.

"_I_ have him! there--oh, now that's too bad. Fritz, you frightened him
away again," called out Celia.

"_Me_ frighten him away! Why he knows me ever so much better than you
girls," said Fritz.

"He just doesn't then," said Denny with triumph, "for here he is safe in
my apron."

But she had hardly said the words when she gave a little scream. "He's
off again, oh quick, Baby, quick, catch him."

How Baby did it, I can't tell. His hands seemed too small to catch
anything, even a dormouse. But catch the truant he did, and very proud
Baby looked when he held up his two little fists, which he had made into
a "mouse-trap" _really_, for the occasion, with Peepy-Snoozle's "coxy"
little head and bright beady eyes poking out at the top.

"Oh look, look, Baby's made Peepy-Snoozle into 'the parson in the pulpit
that couldn't say his prayers,'" cried Denny, dancing about.

"All the same, he'd better go back into his cage," said Fritz, who had a
right to be heard, as he was the master and owner of the dormice. "Come
along, Baby, poke him in."

Baby was busy kissing and petting Peepy-Snoozle by this time, for,
though he did not approve of much of that sort of thing for himself, he
was very fond of petting little animals, who were not little boys. And
to tell the truth, it was not often he got a chance of petting his big
brother's dormice. It was quite pretty to see the way he kissed
Peepy-Snoozle's soft brown head, especially his nose, stroking it gently
against his own smooth cheeks and chattering to the little creature.

"Dear little darling. Sweet little denkle darling," he said. "Him would
like to have a house all full of Peepy-'noozles, zem is so sweet and
soft."

"Wouldn't you like a coat made of their skins?" said Denny. "Think how
soft that would be."

  [Illustration: "Oh look, look, Baby's made Peepy-Snoozle into
  'the parson in the pulpit that couldn't say his prayers,'" cried
  Denny.--P. 6.]

"No, sairtin him wouldn't," said Baby. "Him wouldn't pull off all their
sweet little skins and hairs to make him a coat. Denny's a c'uel girl."

"There won't be much more skin or hairs left if you go on scrubbing him
up and down with your sharp little nose like that," said Fritz.

Baby drew back his face in a fright.

"Put him in the cage then," he said, and with Fritz's help this was
safely done. Then Baby stood silent, slowly rubbing his own nose up and
down, and looking very grave.

"Him's nose _isn't_ sharp," he said at last, turning upon Denny. "Sharp
means knifes and scidders."

All the children burst out laughing. Of course they understood things
better than Baby, for even Denny, the youngest next to him, was nine,
that is twice his age, which by the by was a puzzle to Denny herself,
for Celia had teased her one day by saying that according to that when
Baby was eighty Denny would be a hundred and sixty, and nobody ever
lived to be so old, so how could it be.

But Denny, though she didn't _always_ understand everything herself, was
very quick at taking up other people if they didn't.

"Oh, you stupid little goose," she said. "Of course, Fritz didn't mean
as sharp as a knife. There's different kinds of sharps--there's
different kinds of everything."

Baby looked at her gravely. He had his own way of defending himself.

"Werry well. If him's a goose him won't talk to you, and him won't tell
you somesing _werry_ funny and dedful bootiful that him heard in the
'groind room."

All eyes were turned on Baby.

"Oh, do tell us, Baby darling, _do_ tell us," said Celia and Denny.

Fritz gave Baby a friendly pat on the back.

"You'll tell _me_, old fellow, won't you?" he said. Baby looked at him.

"Yes," he said at last; "him will tell you,'cos you let him have
Peepy-'noozle, and 'cos you doesn't call him a goose--like _girls_ does.
I'll whister in your ear, Fritz, if you'll bend down."

But Celia thought this was too bad.

"_I_ didn't call you a goose, Baby," she said. "I think you might tell
me too."

"And I'll promise never to call you a goose again if you'll tell _me_,"
said Denny.

Baby had a great soul. It was beneath him to take a mean revenge, he
felt, especially on a _girl_! So he shut his little mouth tightly, knit
his little brows, and thought it over for a moment or two. Then his
face cleared.

"Him _will_ tell you all--all you children," he said at last, "but it's
werry long and dedful wonderful, and you mustn't inrumpt him. P'omise?"

"Promise," shouted the three.

"Well then, litsen. We's all goin' away--zeally away--over the
sea--dedful far. As far as the sky, p'raps."

"In a balloon?" said Denny, whose tongue wouldn't keep still even though
she was very much interested in the news.

"No, in a boat," replied Baby, forgetting to notice that this was an
"inrumption," "in a werry 'normous boat. All's going. Him was looking
for 'tamps in mother's basket of teared letters under the little table,
and mother and ganfather and auntie didn't know him were there, and
ganfather said to mother somesing him couldn't understand--somesing
about _thit_ house, and mother said, yes, 'twould be a werry good thing
to go away 'fore the cold weather comed, and the children would be
p'eased. And auntie said she would like to tell the children, but----"

Another "inrumption." This time from Fritz.

"Baby, stop a minute," he exclaimed. "Celia, Denny--Baby's too little
to understand, but," and here Fritz's round chubby face got very red,
"don't you think we've no right to let him tell, if it's something
mother means to tell us herself? She didn't know Baby was there--he said
so."

But before Celia or Denny could answer, Baby turned upon Fritz.

"Him _tolded_ you not to inrumpt," he said, with supreme contempt. "If
you would litsen you would see. Mother _did_ know him was there at the
ending, for auntie said she'd like to tell the children--that's you, and
Denny and Celia--but him comed out from the little table and said _him_
would like to tell the children hisself. And mother were dedful
surprised, and so was ganfather and auntie. And then they all bursted
out laughing and told him lots of things--about going in the railway,
and in a 'normous boat to that other country, where there's cows to pull
the carts, and all the people talk lubbish-talk, like Lisa when she's
cross. And zen, and zen, him comed upstairs to tell you."

Baby looked round triumphantly. Celia and Fritz and Denny looked first
at him and then at each other. This was wonderful news--almost too
wonderful to be true.

"We must be going to Italy or somewhere like that," said Celia. "How
lovely! I wonder why they didn't tell us before?"

"Italy," repeated Denny, "that's the country like a boot, isn't it? I do
hope there won't be any snakes. I'd rather far stay at home than go
where there's snakes."

"_I_ wouldn't," said Fritz, grandly. "I'd like to go to India or Africa,
or any of those places where there's lots of lions and tigers and
snakes, and anything you like. Give me a good revolver and _you'd_ see."

"Don't talk nonsense, Fritz," said Celia. "You're far too little a boy
for shooting and guns and all that. It's setting a bad example to Baby
to talk that boasting way, and it's very silly too."

"Indeed, miss. Much obliged to you, miss," said Fritz. "I'd only just
like to know, miss, who it was came to my room the other night and was
sure she heard robbers, and begged Fritz to peep behind the swing-door
in the long passage. And 'oh,' said this person, 'I do so wish you had a
gun that you could point at them to frighten them away.' Fritz wasn't
such a very little boy just then."

Celia's face got rather red, and she looked as if she was going to get
angry, but at that moment, happily, Lisa appeared with the tray for the
nursery tea. She had left the room when the dormouse was caught, so she
had not heard the wonderful news, and it had all to be told over again.
She smiled and seemed pleased, but not as surprised as the children
expected.

"Why, aren't you surprised, Lisa?" said the children. "Did you know
before? Why didn't you tell us?"

Lisa shook her head and looked very wise.

"What country are we going to? Can you tell us that?" said Celia.

"Is it to your country? Is it to what you call Dutchland?" said Fritz.
"I think it's an awfully queer thing that countries can't be called by
the same names everywhere. It makes geography ever so much harder. We've
got to call the people that live in Holland Dutch, and they call
themselves--oh, I don't know what they call themselves----"

"Hollanders," said Lisa.

"Hollanders!" repeated Fritz. "Well, that's a sensible sort of name for
people that live in Holland. But _we've_ got to call them Dutch; and
then, to make it more muddled still, Lisa calls her country Dutchland,
and the people Dutch, and _we_ call them German I think it's very
stupid. If I was to make geography I wouldn't do it that way."

"What's jography?" said Baby.

"Knowing all about all the countries and all the places in the world,"
said Denny.

"Him wants to learn that," said Baby.

"Oh, you're _far_ too little!" said Denny. "_I_ only began it last year.
Oh, you're ever so much too little!"

"Him's not too little to go in the 'normous boat to _see_ all zem
countlies," said Baby, valiantly. "Him _will_ learn jography."

"That's right, Baby," said Fritz. "Stick up for yourself. You'll be a
great deal bigger than Denny some day."

Denny was getting ready an answer when Lisa, who knew pretty well the
signs of war between Fritz and Denny, called to all the children to come
to tea; and as both Fritz and Denny were great hands at bread and
butter, they forgot to quarrel, and began pulling their chairs in to the
table, and in a few minutes all four were busy at work.

What a pretty sight, and what a pleasant thing a nursery tea is! when
the children, that is to say, are sweet-faced and smiling, with clean
pinafores, and clean hands, and gentle voices; not leaning over the
table, knocking over cups, and snatching rudely at the "butteriest"
pieces of bread and butter, and making digs at the sugar when nurse is
not looking. _That_ kind of nursery tea is not to my mind, and not at
all the kind to which I am always delighted to receive an invitation,
written in very round, very black letters, on very small sheets of
paper. The nursery teas in Baby's nursery were not always _quite_ what I
like to see them, for Celia, Fritz, and Denny, and Baby too, had their
tiresome days as well as their pleasant ones, and though they meant to
be good to each other, they did not _always_ do just what they meant, or
really wished, at the bottom of their hearts. But to-day all the little
storms were forgotten in the great news, and all the faces looked bright
and eager, though just at first not much was said, for when children are
hungry of course they can't chatter quite so fast, and all the four
tongues were silent till at least one cup of tea, and perhaps three or
four slices of bread and butter each--just as a beginning, you know--had
disappeared.

Then said Celia,--

"Lisa, do tell us if you know what sort of a place we're going to."

"Cows pulls carts there," observed Baby; "and--and--what was the 'nother
thing? We'll have frogses for dinner."

"Baby!" said the others, "_what nonsense_!"

"'Tisn't nonsense. Ganfather said Thomas and Dones wouldn't go 'cos they
was fightened of frogses for dinner. _Him_ doesn't care--frogses tastes
werry good."

"How do you know? You've never tasted them," said Fritz.

"Ganfather said zem was werry good."

"Grandfather was joking," said Celia. "I've often heard him laugh at
people that way. It's just nonsense--Thomas and Jones don't know any
better. Do they eat frogs in your country, Lisa?"

"In mine country, Fräulein Célie?" said Lisa, looking rather vexed. "No
indeed. Man eats goot, most goot tings, in mine country. Say, Herr
Baby--Herr Baby knows what goot tings Lisa would give him in her
country."

"Yes," said Baby, "such good tings. Tocolate and cakes--lots--and
bootiful soup, all sweet, not like salty soup. Him would like werry much
to go to Lisa's countly."

"Do cows pull carts in your country, Lisa?" asked Denny.

"Some parts. Not where mine family lives," said Lisa. "No, Fräulein
Denny, it's not to mine country we're going. Mine country is it colt, so
colt; and your lady mamma and your lady auntie they want to go where it
is warm, so warm, and sun all winter."

"_I_ should like that too," said Celia, "I hate winter."

"That's 'cos you're a girl," said Fritz; "you crumple yourself up by the
fire and sit shivering--no wonder you're cold. You should come out
skating like Denny, and then you'd get warm."

"Denny's a girl too. You said it was because I was a girl," said Celia.

"Well, she's not as silly as some girls, any way," said Fritz, rather
"put down."

Baby was sitting silent. He had made an end of two cups of tea and five
pieces of bread and butter.

He was not, therefore, _quite_ so hungry as he had been at the
beginning, but still he was a long way off having made what was called
in the nursery a "good tea." Something was on his mind. He sat with one
arm propped on the table, and his round head leaning on his hand, while
the other held the piece of bread and butter--butter downwards, of
course--which had been on its way to his mouth when his brown study had
come over him.

  [Illustration: He sat with one arm propped on the table and his round
  head leaning on his hand, while the other held the piece of bread and
  butter--butter downwards, of course.--P. 16.]

"Herr Baby," said Lisa, "eat, mine child."

Baby took no notice.

"What has he then?" said Lisa, who was very easily frightened about her
dear Herr Baby. "Can he be ill? He eats not."

"Ill," said Celia. "No fear, Lisa. He's had ever so much bread and
butter. Don't you want any more, Baby? What are you thinking about?
We're going to have honey on our last pieces to-night, aren't we, Lisa?
For a treat, you know, because of the news of going away."

Celia wanted the honey because she was very fond of it; but besides
that, she thought it would wake Baby out of his brown study to hear
about it, for he was very fond of it too.

He did catch the word, for he turned his blue eyes gravely on Celia.

"Honey's werry good," he said, "but him's not at his last piece yet. Him
doesn't sink he'll _ever_ be at his last piece to-night; him's had to
stop eating for he's so dedful busy in him's head."

"Poor little man, have you got a pain in your head?" said his sister,
kindly. "Is that what you mean?"

"No, no," said Baby, softly shaking his head, "no pain. It's only busy
sinking."

"What about?" said all the children.

Baby sat straight up.

"Children," he said, "him zeally can't eat, sinking of what a dedful
packing there'll be. All of everysing. Him zeally sinks it would be best
to begin to-night."

At this moment the door opened. It was mother. She often came up to the
nursery at tea-time, and

   "When the children had been good;
   That is, be it understood,
   Good at meal times, good at play,"

I need hardly say, they were very, very pleased to see her. Indeed there
were times even when they were glad to see her face at the door when
they _hadn't_ been very good, for somehow she had a way of putting
things right again, and making them feel both how wrong and how _silly_
it is to be cross and quarrelsome, that nobody else had. And she would
just help the kind words out without seeming to do so, and take away
that sore, horrid feeling that one _can't_ be good, even though one is
longing so to be happy and friendly again.

But this evening there had been nothing worse than a little squabbling;
the children all greeted mother merrily, only Baby still looked rather
solemn.




CHAPTER II.

INSIDE A TRUNK

   "For girls are as silly as spoons, dears,
      And boys are as jolly as bricks.
       *       *       *       *       *
   Oh Mammy, _you_ tell us a story!--
      They won't hear a word that _I_ say."


"Mother, mother!" they all cried with one voice, and the three big ones
jumped up and ran to her, all pulling her at once.

"Mother, mother, do sit down in the rocking-chair and look comfortable,"
said Fritz.

"There's still some tea. You'll have a cup of _our_ tea, won't you,
mother?" said Celia.

"And some bread and honey," said Denny.

"It won't spoil your afternoon tea; don't say it will," said all
together, for nothing would ever make them believe that when mother came
up to the nursery at tea-time it could be allowed that she should not
have a share of whatever there was.

"Such a good thing we had honey to-night," said Celia, who was busy
cutting a very dainty piece of bread and butter. "We persuaded Lisa to
give it us _extra_, you know, mother, because of the news. And, oh,
mother, what do you think Baby says? he----"

"Baby! what is the matter with him?" interrupted mother.

They all turned to look at him. Poor Baby, he had set to work to get
down from his chair to run to mother with the others, but the chair was
high and Baby was short, and Lisa, who had gone to the cupboard for a
fresh cup and saucer for "madame," as she called the children's mother,
had not noticed the trouble Herr Baby had got himself into. One little
leg and a part of his body were stuck fast in the open space between the
bars at the back, his head had somehow got under the arm of the chair,
and could not be got out again without help. And Baby was far too proud
to call out for help as long as there was a chance of his doing without
it. But he really was in a very uncomfortable state, and it was a wonder
that the chair, which was a light wicker one, had not toppled over with
the queer way in which he was hanging. They got him out at last; his
face was very red, and I _think_ the tears had been very near coming,
but he choked them down, and looking up gravely he said to his mother,--

"Him's chair is getting too small. Him hasn't room to turn."

"Is it really?" said his mother, quite gravely too. She saw that Celia
and Fritz were ready to burst out laughing at poor Baby, and she didn't
want them to do so, for Baby had really been very brave, and now when he
was trying hard not to cry it would have been too bad to laugh at him.
"Is it really?" she said. "I must see about it, and if it is too small
we must get you another."

"Him doesn't want you to pack up _that_ chair," said Baby again, giving
himself a sort of shake, as if to make sure that his head, and his legs,
and all the rest of him, were in their proper places after being so
turned about and twisted by his struggles in the chair.

"He's quite in a fuss about packing," said Celia; "that's what I was
going to tell you, mother. He stopped in the middle of his tea to think
about it, and he said he thought we'd better begin to-night."

"Yes," said Baby. "There's such _lots_ to pack. All our toys, and the
labbits, and the mouses, and the horses, and the fireplaces, and the
tables, and the cups, and the saucers," his eyes wandering round the
room as he went on with his list. "Him thinks we'll need _lots_ of boats
to go in."

"And two or three railway trains all to ourselves," said mother.

Baby looked up at her gravely. He could not make out if mother was in
fun or earnest. His little puzzled face made mother draw him to her and
give him a kiss.

"It's a shame to talk nonsense to such a serious little man," she said.
"Don't trouble yourself about the packing, Baby dear. Don't you know
grandfather, and auntie, and I have had lots of packings to do in our
lives? Why, we had to pack up _two_ houses when we came away from India,
and that was much much farther away than where we're going now! And you
were _such_ a tiny baby then--it was very much harder, for mother was
very very sad, and she never thought you would grow to be a big strong
boy like what you are now."

"Was that when----" began thoughtless Denny, but Fritz gave her a tug.

"You _know_ it makes mother unhappy to talk about that time," he
whispered; but mother heard him.

"No, Fritz," she said; "I don't mind Denny thinking about it. I am so
glad to have all of you, dears, happy and good, that my sorrow is not so
bad as it was. And I am so glad you and Celia can remember your father.
Poor Baby--_he_ can't remember him," she said, softly stroking Baby's
face.

"'Cos he went to Heaven when him was so little," said Baby. Then he put
his arms round mother's neck. "Him and Fritz will soon grow big, and be
werry good to mother," he said. "And ganfather and auntie are werry good
to mother, isn't they?" he added.

"Yes indeed," said mother; "and to all of you too. What would we do
without grandfather and auntie?"

"Some poor little boys and girls has no mothers and ganfathers, and no
stockings and shoes, and no _nothings_," said Baby solemnly.

"There's _some_ things I shouldn't mind not having," said Fritz; "I
shouldn't mind having no lessons."

"O Fritz," said his sisters; "what a lazy boy you are!"

"No, I'm just _not_ lazy. I'm awfully fond of doing _everything_--I
don't even mind if it's a hard thing, so long as it isn't anything in
books," said Fritz, sturdily. "Some people's made one way, and some's
made another, and I'm made the way of not liking books."

"I wonder what Baby will say to books," said mother, smiling.

"Is jography in books," said Baby. "Him wants to learn jography."

"_I_ think it's awfully stupid," said Denny. "I'm sure you won't like it
once you begin. Did _you_ like lessons when you were little, mother?"

"Yes, I'm sure mother did," said Fritz. "People's fathers and mothers
were always far gooder than their children are. I've noticed that. If
ever big people tell you about when they were little, it's always about
how good they were. And they say always, 'Dear me, how happy children
should be nowadays; _we_ were never allowed to do so and so when _we_
were little.' That's the way old Mrs. Nesbitt always talks, isn't it
mother? I wonder if it's true. If people keep getting naughtier than
their fathers and mothers were, the world will get _very_ naughty some
day. _Is_ it true?"

"I think it's true that children get to be more spoilt," said Denny in a
low voice. "Just look how Baby's clambering all over mother! O Baby,
you nearly knocked over mother's cup! _I_ never was allowed to do like
that when _I_ was a little girl."

Everybody burst out laughing--even mother--but Denny had the good
quality of not minding being laughed at.

"Was the tea nice, and the bread and butter and honey?" she said
eagerly, as mother rose to put the empty cup in a place of safety.

"Very nice, thank you," said mother. "But I must go, dears. I have a
good many things to talk about with grandfather and auntie."

"Packing?" said Baby.

"How you do go on about packing!" said Denny. "Of course mother's not
going to pack to-night."

Baby's face fell.

"Him does so want to begin packing," he said dolefully. "'Appose we
forgottened somesing, and we was over the sea!"

"Well, I must talk about it all, and write down all we have to take,"
said mother. "So I must go to auntie now."

"Oh, not yet, not yet. Just five minutes more!" cried the children.
"And, mother," said Celia, "you've not answered my question. _Is_ it
true that children used to be so much better long ago? Were you never
naughty?"

"Sometimes," said mother, smiling.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said Celia. "Often, mother? I do hope you were often
naughty. Do tell us a story about something naughty you did when you
were little. You know it would be a good lesson for us. It would show us
how awfully good one may learn to be, for, you know, you're awfully good
now."

"Yes, of course you are," said Fritz and Denny.

"Mother's _dedfully_ good," said Baby, poking up his face from her knee
where he had again perched himself, to kiss her. "Do tell him one story
of when you was a little girl, mother."

Mother's face seemed for a minute rather puzzled. Then it suddenly
cleared up.

"I will tell you a very little story," she said; "it really is a very
little story, but it is as long as I have time for just now, and it may
amuse you. Baby's packing put it in my head."

"Is it about when you were a little girl, mother?" interrupted Denny.

"Yes. Well, when I was a little girl, I had no mother."

The elder children nodded their heads. But Baby, to whom it was a new
idea, shook his sadly.

"Zat was a gate pity," he said. "Poor mother to have no mother. Had you
no shoes and stockings, and nothing nice to eat?"

"You sill----" began Denny, but mother stopped her.

"Oh yes," she said, "I had shoes and stockings, and everything I wanted,
for I had a very kind father. You know how kind grandfather is? And I
had a kind sister whom you know too. But when I was a little girl, my
sister was not herself _very_ big, and she had a great deal to do _for_
a not very big girl, you know. There were our brothers, for we had
several, and though they were generally away at school there seemed
always something to do for them--letters to write to them, if there was
nothing else--and then, in the holidays, there were all their new
shirts, and stockings, and things to get to take back to school. Helen
seemed always busy. She had been at school too, before your grandfather
came back from India, for five years, bringing me with him, quite a wee
little girl of four. And Helen was so happy to be with us again, that
she begged not to go back to school, and, as she was really very well
on for her age, grandfather let her stay at home."

"There, you see," whispered Celia, nudging Fritz. "It's beginning--it
always does--you hear how awfully good auntie was."

Mother went on quietly. If she heard what Celia said she took no notice.
"Grandfather let her stay at home and have lessons there. She had a
great many lessons to learn for her age besides those that one learns
out of books. She had to learn to be very active, and very thoughtful,
and, above all, very patient. For the little sister she had to take care
of was, I am afraid, a very spoilt little girl when she first came home.
Grandfather had spoiled her without meaning it; he was so sorry for her
because she had no mother, and Helen was so sorry for her too, that it
was rather difficult for her not to spoil her as well."

Here Baby himself "inrumpted."

"Him doesn't understand," he said. "Who _were_ that little girl? Him
wants a story about mother when _her_ was a little girl;" and the
corners of his mouth went down, and his eyes grew dewy-looking, in a
very sad way.

  [Illustration: There was one trunk which took my fancy more than
  all the others.--P. 30.]

"Poor Baby," said mother. "I'll try and tell it more plainly. _I_ was
that little girl, and auntie was my sister Helen. I must get on with my
little story. I was forgetting that Baby would not quite understand.
Well, one day to my great delight, Helen told me that grandfather was
going to take her and me and the two brothers, who were then at home, to
spend Christmas with one of our aunts in London. This aunt had children
too, and though I had never seen them Helen told me they were very nice,
for she knew them well, as she used to go there for her holidays before
we came home. She told me most about a little girl called Lilly, who was
just about my age. I had never had a little friend of my own age, and I
was always talking and thinking about how nice it would be, and I was
quite vexed with Helen because she would not begin to pack up at once. I
was always teasing her to know what trunks we should take, and if all my
dolls might go, and I am sure poor Helen often wished she had not told
me anything about it till the very day before. I got in the way of going
up to the big attic where the trunks were kept, and of looking at them
and wondering which would go, and wishing Helen would let me have one
all for myself and my dolls and their things. There was one trunk which
took my fancy more than all the others. It was an old-fashioned
trunk, but it must have been a very good one, for it shut with a sort of
spring, and inside it had several divisions, some with little lids of
their own, and I used to think how nice it would be for me, I could put
all my dolls in so beautifully, and each would have a kind of house for
itself. I don't remember how I managed to get it open, perhaps it had
been a little open when I first began my visits to the attic, for the
lid was very heavy, and I was neither big nor strong for my age. But it
_was_ open, and it stayed so, for no one else ever went up to the attic
but I. The other people in the house were too busy, and no one would
have thought there was anything amusing in looking at empty trunks in a
row. But I went up to the attic day after day. I climbed up the narrow
staircase as soon as I had had my breakfast, and stayed there till I
heard my nurse calling me to get ready to go out, or to come to my
lessons, for I was beginning to learn to read, and I used to have a
little lesson every day. And at last one day I said to my sister,

"'Helen, may I have the big trunk with the little cupboards in it for
_my_ trunk?'

"Helen was busy at the time, and I don't think she heard exactly what I
said. She answered me hurriedly that she would see about it afterwards.
But I went on teasing.

"'May I begin putting Marietta and Lady Regina into the little cupboards
inside?' I said.

"'Oh yes, I daresay you can if you like,' said Helen. She told me
afterwards that when I spoke of cupboards she never thought I meant a
trunk, she thought I was speaking of some of the nursery cupboards.

"It was just bed-time then, too late for me to go to the attic, for I
knew there was no chance of my getting leave to go up there with a
candle. But I fell asleep with my head full of how nicely I could put
the dolls into the trunk, each with her clothes beside her, and the very
first thing the next morning I got them all together and I mounted up to
the attic. I had never told nurse about my going up there. Once or
twice, perhaps, she had seen me coming down the stair, but very likely
she had thought I had only been a little way up to look out of a window
there was there. I don't know why I didn't tell her, perhaps I was
afraid of her stopping my going. I waited till she was busy about her
work, fetching coals and so on, and then I trotted off with Lady Regina
under one arm and Marietta under the other, and a bundle of their
clothes tied up in my pinafore before, to make my way upstairs to the
delightful trunk. It was open as usual, and after putting my dolls and
bundles down on the floor, I managed to lift out the two top trays. One
of them was much larger than the other, and it was in what I called the
cupboards below the smaller one that I settled to put Regina and
Marietta. There were two of these little cupboards, and each had a lid.
They would just do beautifully. Under the larger tray there was just one
big space without a lid, 'just a hole,' I called it. I went on for a
little time, laying in some of the clothes first to make a nice soft
place for the dolls to lie on, but I soon got tired. It was so very far
to reach over, for the outside edges of the box were high, higher of
course than the _inside_ divisions, for the trays I had taken out, which
lay on the top of the lower spaces, were a good depth, and there had
been no division between them. It came into my head that it would be
much easier if I were to get into the box myself--I could stand in the
big hole, as I called it, and reach over to the little divisions where I
wanted to put the dolls, and it would be far less tiring than trying to
reach over from the outside. So I clambered in--it was not very
difficult--and when I found myself really inside the trunk I was so
pleased that I sat down cross-legged, like a little Turk, to take a rest
before going on with what I called my packing. But sitting still for
long was not in my way--I soon jumped up again, meaning to reach over
for Lady Regina, who was lying on the floor beside the trunk, but, how
it happened I cannot tell, I suppose I somehow caught the tapes which
fastened the lid; any way down it came! It did not hurt me much, for I
had not had time to stretch out my head, and the weight fell mostly on
my shoulders, sideways as it were, and before I knew what had happened I
found myself doubled up somehow in my hole, with the heavy lid on the
top of me, all in the dark, except a little line of light round the
edge, for the lid had not shut quite down; the hasp of the lock--as the
little sticking-out piece is called--had caught in the fall, and was
wedged into a wrong place. So, luckily for me, there was still a space
for some air to come in, and a little light, though very little. I was
dreadfully frightened at first; then I began to get over my fright a
little, and to struggle to get out. Of course my first idea was to try
to push up the lid with my head and shoulders; I remember the feeling of
it pushing back upon me--the dreadful feeling that I couldn't move it,
that I was shut up there and couldn't get out! I was too little to
understand all at once that there could be any danger, that I might
perhaps be suffocated--that means choked, Baby--for want of air; or that
I might really be hurt by being so cramped and doubled up. And really
there was not much danger; if I had been older I should have been more
frightened than there was really any reason to be. But I was big enough
to begin very quickly to get very angry and impatient. I had never in
all my life been forced to do anything I disliked; often and often my
nurse, and sometimes Helen, had begged me to try to sit still for a
minute or two, but I never would. And now the lesson of having to give
in to something much worse than sitting still in my nice little chair by
the nursery fire, or standing still for two minutes while a new frock
was tried on, had to be learnt! There was no getting rid of it; I kicked
and I pushed, it was no use; the strong heavy lid which had been to
India and back two or three times would not move the least bit. I tried
to poke out my fingers through the little space that was left, but I
could not find the lock, and it was a good thing I did not, for if I had
touched the hasp, most likely the lid would have fallen quite into its
place, crushing my poor little fingers, and shutting me in without any
air at all. At last I thought of another plan. I set to work screaming.

"'Nurse, nurse, Nelly, oh Nelly,' I cried, and at last I shouted, 'Papa,
_Papa_, PAPA,' at the top of my voice. But it was no use! Most children
would have begun screaming at the very first. But I was not a
_frightened_ child, and I was very proud. I did not want any one to find
me shut up in a box like that, besides, they would be sure to stop my
ever coming up to the attic again. So it was not till I had tired myself
out with trying to push up the lid that I set to work to screaming, and
that made it all the more provoking that my calls brought no one. At
last I got so out of patience that I set to work again kicking for no
use at all, but just because I was so angry. I kicked and screamed, and
at last I burst into tears and _roared_. Then I caught sight, through
the chink, of Lady Regina's blue dress, where the doll was lying on the
floor near the trunk.

"'Nasty Regina,' I shouted, 'nasty, ugly Regina. You are lying there as
if there was nothing the matter, and it was all for you I came up here.
I hate dolls--they never do nothing. If you were a little dog you'd go
and bark, and then somebody would come and let me out.'

"Then I went on crying and sobbing till I was perfectly tired, and then
what do you think I did? Though I was so uncomfortable, all crushed up
into a little ball, I went to sleep! I went to sleep as soundly as if I
had been in my own little bed, and afterwards I found, from what they
told me, that I must have slept quite two hours. When I woke up I could
not think where I was. I felt so stiff and sore, and when I tried to
stretch myself out I could not, and then I remembered where I was! It
seemed quite dark; I wondered if it was night, till I noticed the little
chink of light at the edge of the lid, and then I began to cry again,
but not so wildly as before. All of a sudden I thought I heard a
sound--some one was coming upstairs! and then I heard voices.

"'Fallen out of the window,' one said. 'Oh no, nurse, she _couldn't_!
She could never get through.'

"But yet the person seemed to be looking out of the window all the same,
for I heard them opening and shutting it. And then I called out again.

"'Oh Nelly, Nelly. I'se here; I'se shut up in the big box with the
cupboards.'

"They didn't hear me at first. My little voice must have sounded very
faint and squeaky from out of the trunk, besides they were not half-way
up the attic-stairs. So I went on crying--

"'Oh Nelly, Nelly! I'se up here. Oh Nelly, Nelly!'

"She heard me this time. Dear Nelly! I never have called to her in vain,
children, in all my life. And in half a minute she had dashed up the
stairs, and, guided by my voice, was kneeling down beside the trunk.

"'Little May, my poor little May,' Nelly called out; and do you know I
really think she was crying too! I was--by the time Nelly and the
servants who were with her had got the lid unhooked and raised, and had
lifted me out--I was in floods of tears. I clung to Nelly, and told her
how 'dedful' it had been, and she petted me so that I am afraid I quite
forgot it was all my own fault.

"'You might have been there for hours and hours, May,' Nelly said to me,
'if it hadn't been for nurse thinking of the window on the stair. You
must never go off by yourself to do things like that,' and when I told
her that I had asked her and she had given me leave, she said she had
not at all known what I meant, and that I must try to remember not to
tease about things once I had been told to wait. Any way I think I had
got a good lesson of patience that day, and one that I never forgot, for
it really is not at all a pleasant thing to be shut up in a big trunk."

Mother stopped.

Baby, who had been listening with solemn eyes, said slowly,

"Him will not pack by hisself. Him will wait till somebody can help him.
It would be so dedful sad if him was to get shuttened up like poor
little mother, and perhaps you'd all go away ac'oss the sea and nebber
find him."

The corners of his mouth went down at this sorrowful picture, and his
eyes looked as if they were beginning to think about crying. But mother
and Celia set to work petting and kissing him before the tears had time
to come.

"As if we would ever go across the sea without _him_," said mother.

"Why, we should never know how to do _anything_ without Herr Baby," said
Celia.

"Fritz and Baby will do all the fussy things in travelling--taking the
tickets, and counting the luggage, and all that--they're such big men,
aren't they?" said Denny, with mischief in her twinkling green eyes.

"Now you, just mind what you're about," said Fritz, gallantly. "You'll
make him cry just when mother's been comforting him up. Such stupids
girls are!" he added in a lower voice.

"I really must go now," said mother, getting up from her chair. "Auntie
will not know what has become of me. I have been up here, why a whole
half hour, instead of five minutes!"

"Auntie will think mother's got shut up in a trunk again," said Denny,
whose tongue _never_ could be still for long, and at this piece of wit
they all burst out laughing.

All but Herr Baby. He couldn't see that it was any laughing matter.
Mother's story had sunk deep into his mind. Trunks were things to be
careful of. Baby saw this clearly.




CHAPTER III.

UP IN THE MORNING EARLY

   "Sweet, eager promises bind him to this,
      Never to do so again."


He woke early next morning. He had so much to think of, you see. So much
that even his dreams were full of all he had heard yesterday.

"Him's been d'eaming him was in the big, big, 'normous boat, and zen him
d'eamed of being shuttened up in a t'unk like _poor_ little mother," he
confided to Denny.

He was forced to tell Denny a good many things, because they slept in
the same room, and, of course, everybody knows that _whatever_ mammas
and nurses say, going-to-sleep-in-bed time is _the_ time for talking.
Waking-up-in-the-morning time is rather tempting, too, particularly in
summer, when the sun comes in at the windows _so_ brightly and the birds
are _so_ lively, chattering away to each other, and all the world is up
and about, except "_us_," who _have_ to stay in bed till seven o'clock!
Ah, it _is_ a trial! On the whole, I don't think chattering in the
mornings is so much to be found fault with as chattering at night. It is
only children who are so silly as to keep themselves awake when the time
for going to sleep has come. The birds and the bees, and the little
lambs even, all know when that time has come, and go to sleep without
any worry to themselves or other people. But children are not always so
sensible. I _could_ tell you a story--only I am afraid if she were to
read it in this little book it would make her feel so ashamed that I
should really be sorry for her, so I will not tell you her name nor
where she lives--of a little girl who was promised two pounds, two whole
gold pounds--fancy! if for one month she would go quietly to sleep at
night when she was put to bed, and let her sister do the same; and she
was to lose two shillings every night she forgot or disobeyed. Well,
what do you think? at the end of two weeks the two pounds had come down
already to nineteen shillings! She had forgotten already ten times, or
ten and a half times--I don't quite understand how it had come to
nineteen, but so it had; and at the end of the month--no I don't think
I will tell you what it had come down to. Only this will show you how
much more difficult it is to get out of a bad habit than to get into a
good one, for this little girl is very sweet and good in many ways, and
I love her dearly--_only_ she had got into this bad habit, and it was
stronger, as bad habits so often are, than her real true wish to do what
her mother told her.

But I have wandered away from Herr Baby, and I am afraid you won't be
pleased. He was forced, I was saying, to tell Denny a good many things,
because he was most with her. I don't think he would have told her as
much but for that, for Denny's head was a very flighty one, and she
never cared to think or talk about the same thing for long together,
which was not _at all_ Herr Baby's way. _He_ liked to think a good deal
about everything, and one thing lasted him a good while.

"Him's been d'eaming such a lot," he said to Denny this morning.

"I think dreams are very stupid," said Denny. "What's the good of them?
If they made things come _real_ they would be some good. Like, you know,
if I was to dream somebody gave me something awfully nice, and then when
I woke up I was to see the thing on my bed, _then_ dreams would be some
good."

"But if zou d'eamed somesing dedful, like being shuttened up in a t'unk
like _poor_ little mother, _zen_ it wouldn't be nice for it to come
zeal," said Baby, who never forgot to look at things from both sides.

"No, of course it wouldn't. How stupid you are!" said Denny. "And how
your head does run on one thing. I'm quite tired of you talking about
mother being shut up in the trunk. Do talk of something else."

"Him can't talk of somesing else when him's sinking of one sing," said
Baby gravely.

"Well, then don't talk at all," said Denny sharply, "and indeed I think
we'd better be quiet, or Lisa will be coming in, and scolding us. It's
only half-past six."

Baby did not speak for a minute or two. Then he said solemnly,

"When us goes away ac'oss the sea in the 'normous boat, him _hopes_ him
won't sleep in the same zoom as you any more."

"I'm sure I hope not," said Denny snappishly. There was some excuse for
her this morning, she was really rather sleepy, and it is very tiresome
to be wakened up at half-past six, when one is quite inclined to sleep
till half-past seven.

But Baby could not go to sleep again. His mind was still running on
packing. If he could but have a _little_ box of his own to pack his own
treasures in, then he would be sure none would be forgotten. He did not
want a _big_ trunk--not one in which he could be shuttened up like
mother, but just a nice little one. If mother would give him one!
Stay--where had he seen one, just what he wanted, was it in the nursery
or in the cupboard where Fritz kept his garden-tools and his skates, and
all the big boy things which Baby too hoped to have of his own some day?
No, it was not there. It must have been--yes, it was in the pantry when
he went to ask James for a glass of water. Up on a shelf, high up it
stood, "a tiny _sweet_ little t'unk," said Herr Baby to himself,
"wouldn't mother let him have it?" He would ask her this morning as soon
as he saw her. Then he lay still and thought over to himself all the
things he would pack in the tiny sweet little t'unk; his best Bible with
his name

 "Raymond Arthur Aylmer,"

in the gold letters on the back, should have the nicest corner, of
course, and his "_scented_ purse," as he called the Russia leather purse
which grandfather had given him on his last birthday, that would go
nicely beside the Bible, and his watch that _really_ ticked as long as
you turned the key in it--all those things would fit in, nicely packed
in "totton wool," of course, and crushy paper. The thought of it all
made Baby's fingers fidget with eagerness to begin his packing. If only
mother would give him the box! It must be mother's, for if it was
James's he would keep it in his own room instead of up on the pantry
shelf among all the glasses and cups. If Baby could just see it again he
would know 'ezackly if it would do!

Baby looked about him. Everything was perfectly still, he heard no one
moving about the house--Denny had said it was only half-past six.

"Denny," said Baby softly.

No reply.

"_Denny_," a very little louder.

Still no reply; but Baby, by leaning over the edge of his cot a little,
could see that Denny's eyes were shut, and her nose was half buried in
the pillow in the way she always turned it when she went to sleep. Denny
had gone to sleep again.

"Zes," said Herr Baby to himself; "her's a'leep--her's beazing so soft."

He looked about him again; he stuck one little warm white foot out of
bed--it did feel _rather_ cold; he felt more than half inclined just to
cuddle himself up warm again and lie still till Lisa came to dress him.
But the thought of the little t'unk was too much for him.

"Him would so like just to _see_ it," he said to himself.

Then he stood right up in bed and clambered over the edge of the cot the
way he had to do to get out of it by himself. He did not make much
noise--not enough to waken Denny, and indeed he would not much have
minded if she _had_ awakened, only that perhaps she would have wanted to
go too, and Baby wished just to go down to the pantry this quiet time of
the morning before any one was there and take a good look by himself.

It was cold on the stair--just at the edge, that is to say, where the
carpet did not cover, and where he had stepped without thinking, not
being used to trotting about on bare feet, you see. But in the middle,
on the carpet, it was nice and soft and warm.

"It would be dedful to be poor boys wif no shoes and stockings," he said
to himself, "'cept on the carpet. Him would like to buy lots of lubly
soft carpets for zem poor boys."

And he pitied the poor boys still more when he got to the back passage
leading to the pantry, where there was no carpet at all, only oilcloth.
He pattered along as fast as he could; there was no sound to be heard
but the ticking of the clock, and Baby wondered that he had never
noticed before what a loud ticking clock it was; it did not come into
his head that it was very late for none of the servants to be down, for
such matters were not his concern, and if he had known the truth that
Denny had made a mistake of an hour, and that it was only half-past five
instead of half-past six, he would not have thought much about it.

He got to the pantry at last. It was darker in here than in the passage
outside, which was a disappointment. The shutters were shut, that was
the reason, and when Baby looked up at them and saw how strong and
barred they were, even _he_ felt that it would be no use to try to open
them. He climbed up on to the dresser that ran round one side of the
wall to see better. Yes, there it was--the tiny, sweet, little
t'unk--just as he had been fancying it. Not so very high up either. If
he could but give it a little poke out he could almost reach it down--it
could not be heavy, it was _such_ a tiny t'unk; and, oh, if he could
carry it out to the passage, where it was light, how beautifully he
could look at it! He stood up on tiptoe, and found he could almost reach
it. A brush with a sticking-out handle was lying beside him. Baby took
it, and found that by poking it in a little behind the box he could make
it move out, and if it were moved out a very little way he could reach
to lift it down. He moved it out enough, then he stretched up his two
hands to lift it down--it was not very heavy, but still rather heavier
than he had thought. But with the help of his curly head, which he
partly rested it on, he got it out safely enough, and was just slipping
it gently downwards to the dresser when _somehow_ the brush handle,
which he had left on the shelf, caught him or the box, he could not tell
which, and, startled by the feeling of something pushing against him,
Baby lost his balance and fell! Off the dresser right down on to the
hard floor, which had no carpet even to make it softer, he tumbled, and
the little t'unk on the top of him. What a noise it made--even in the
middle of his fright Baby could not help thinking what a tremendous
noise he and the box seemed to make. He lay still for a minute; luckily
the box, though it had come straight after him, had fallen a little to
one side, and had not hit him. He was bruised enough by the floor
already--any more bumps would have been _too_ much, would they not? But
the poor box itself was to be pitied; it had come open in the fall, and
all that was in it had naturally tumbled out. _That_ explained the noise
and clatter. The box had held--indeed it had been made on purpose to
hold them--two beautiful glass jugs, which had been sent to mother all
the way from Italy! Baby had never seen them, because they were only
used when mother and auntie wanted the dinner-table to look very nice,
and of course Baby was too little ever to come down to dinner. And,
alas, the beautiful jugs, so fine and thin that one could almost have
thought the fairies had made them, were both broken, one of them,
indeed, crushed and shivered into mere bits of glass lying about the
pantry floor, and the box itself had lost its lid, for the hinges had
been broken, too, in the fall.

  [Illustration: For a minute or two Baby could not make out what had
  happened.--P. 50.]

For a minute or two Baby could not make out what had happened. He felt a
little stupid with the fall, and sore too. But he never was ready to cry
for bumps or knocks; he would cry much more quickly if any one spoke
sharply to him than if he hurt himself. So at first he lay still,
wondering what was the matter. Then he sat up and looked about him, and
_then_, seeing the broken box and the broken glass, he understood that
he had done some harm, and he burst into piteous sobbing.

"Him didn't mean," he cried; "him didn't know there was nuffin in the
tiny t'unk. Oh, what shall him do?"

He cried and sobbed, and, being now very frightened, he cried the more
when he saw that there was blood on his little white nightgown, and that
the blood came from one of his little cold feet, which had been cut by a
piece of the broken glass. Baby was much more frightened by the sight of
blood than by anything else--when he climbed up on the nursery chest of
drawers, and Denny told him he'd be killed if he fell down, he didn't
mind a bit, but when Lisa said that he might hurt his face if he fell,
and make it _bleed_, he came down at once--and now the sight of the
blood was too much.

"Oh, him's hurt hisself, him's all bleeding!" he cried. "Oh, _what_
shall him do?"

He dared not move, for he was afraid of lifting the cut foot--he really
did not know what to do--when he heard steps coming along the passage,
pattering steps something like his own, and before he had time to think
who it could be, a second little white-night-gowned figure trotted into
the room.

"Baby, poor Baby, what's the matter?" and, looking up, Baby saw it was
Fritz.

"Him's hurt hisself, him's tumbled, and the tiny t'unk is brokened, and
somesing else is brokened. Him didn't mean," he sobbed; and Fritz sat
down on the floor beside him, having the good sense to keep out of the
way of the broken glass, and lifted the little bleeding foot gently.

"Must have some sticking-plaster," said Fritz. "There's some in mother's
pocket-book in her room. We must go to mother, Baby."

"But him can't walk," said Baby piteously. "Him's foot bleedens dedful
when him moves it."

"Then I must carry you," said Fritz, importantly.

With some difficulty he got Baby on to his back and set off with him.
Baby had often ridden on Fritz's back before, in the nursery, for fun,
and it seemed very nice and easy. But now, though he had only his
nightgown on, Fritz was surprised to find how heavy he seemed after
going a little way. He was obliged to rest after he had gone up a few
steps, and Baby began to cry worse than before when he saw how tired
poor Fritz was. I really don't know how they ever got to the door of
mother's room, and, when their knocking brought her out, it was rather
a frightening sight for her--Baby perched on Fritz's back, both little
boys looking white and miserable, and the wounded foot covered with
blood.

But mother knew better than to ask what was the matter till she had done
something to put things to rights again.

"Him's foot" was the first thing Baby said, stretching out his poor
little toes.

And the foot looked so bad that mother felt quite thankful when she had
bathed it and found that the cut was not really a very deep one after
all. And when it was nicely plastered up, and both little boys were
tucked into mother's bed to get warm again, then mother had to hear all
about it. It was not much Fritz could tell. He, too, had wakened early,
and had heard Denny and Baby talking, for he slept in a little room near
theirs. He had fallen half asleep again, and started up, fancying he
heard a noise and a cry, and, getting out of bed, had found his way to
the pantry, guided by Baby's sobs. But what Baby was doing in the
pantry, or why he had wandered off there all alone so early in the
morning, Fritz did not know.

So Baby had to tell his own story, which he did straight on in his own
way. He never thought of _not_ telling it straight on; he was afraid
mother would be sorry when she heard about the "somesing" that was
broken, but it had never entered his little head that one could help
telling mother "ezackly" all about anything. And so he told the
whole--how he had been "sinking" about trunks and packing, and
"d'eaming" about them too, how Denny had been "razer c'oss" and wouldn't
talk, and how the thought of the tiny sweet t'unk had come into his head
all of itself, and he had fancied how nice it would be to go downstairs
and look at it on the pantry shelf, and then how all the misfortunes had
come. At the end he burst into tears again when he had to tell of the
"somesing brokened," now lying about in shiny fragments on the pantry
floor.

Poor mother! She knew in a minute what it was that was broken, and I
cannot say but that she was very sorry, more sorry perhaps than Baby
could understand, for she had had the pretty jugs many years, and the
thoughts of happy days were mingled with the shining of the rainbow
glass. Baby saw the sorry look on her face, and stretched up his two
arms to clasp her neck.

"Him is so sorry, so werry sorry," he said. "Him will take all the money
of him's money-box to buy more shiny jugs for mother."

Mother kissed him, but told him that could not be.

"The jugs came from a far-away country, Baby dear," she said, "and you
could not get them here. Besides, I cared for them in a way you can't
understand. I had had them a long time, and one gets to care for things,
even if they are not very pretty in themselves, when one has had them so
long."

"Oh ses, him does understand," said Baby. "Him cares for old 'sings, far
best."

"Yes," said Fritz, "he really does, mother. He cries when Lisa says she
must put away his old shoes, and his old woolly lamb is dreadful--really
dreadful, but he _won't_ give it away."

"It _has_ such a sweet face," said Baby.

"Well I don't care; I wish it was burnt up. He mustn't take it in the
railway with us when we go away; must he, mother?"

"Couldn't it be washed?" said mother.

"I don't think so, and I don't believe Baby would like it as much if it
was. Would you, Baby?" said Fritz.

Baby would not answer directly. He seemed rather in a hurry to change
the subject.

"Mother," he said, "when we go away in the 'normous boat, won't we
p'raps go to the country where the shiny jugs is made? And if him takes
all the money in him's money-box, couldn't him buy some for you?"

"They wouldn't be the same ones," said Fritz.

Baby's face fell. Mother tried to comfort him.

"Never mind about the jugs any more just now," she said. "Some day,
perhaps, when you are a big man you will get me some others quite as
pretty, that I shall like for your sake. What will please me more than
new jugs just now, Baby, is for you to promise me not to try to do
things like that without telling any one. Just think how very badly hurt
you might have been. If only you had waited to ask me about the little
box all would have been right, and my pretty jugs would not have been
broken."

"And mother told us that last night, you know, dear," said Fritz, in his
proper big brother tone. "Don't you remember in the story about her when
she was little? It all came of her not waiting for her big sister to see
about the trunk."

Baby gave a deep sigh.

"If God hadn't put so much 'sinking into him's head, it would have been
much better," he said. "Him 'sinks and 'sinks, and zen him can't help
wanting to do 'sings zat moment minute."

"Then 'him' must learn what _patience_ means," said mother with a little
smile. "But I'll tell you what _I've_ been thinking--that if we don't
take care somebody else may be hurting themselves with the broken glass
on the pantry floor."

"P'raps the cat," said Baby, starting up, "oh _poor_ pussy, if her was
to cut her dear little foots. Shall him go downstairs again, mother, to
shut the door? Why, him's foot's still _zather_ bleedy," he added,
drawing out the wounded foot, which had a handkerchief wrapped round it
above the plaster.

"No," said his mother, "it will be better for me to tell the servants
myself," so she rang the bell, and as it was now about the time that
Denny had thought it when Baby first woke up, in a few minutes her maid
appeared, looking rather astonished. She looked still more astonished,
and a little afraid too, when she caught sight of the two curly heads,
one dark and one light, on mother's pillow.

"Is there anything wrong with the young gentlemen?" she said. "Shall I
call Lisa, my lady?"

"No, not quite yet," said mother. "I rang to tell you to warn James and
the others that there is some broken glass on the pantry floor, and they
must be careful not to tread on it, and it must be swept up."

"Broken glass, ma'am," repeated the maid, who was rather what Denny
called "'quisitive." "Was it the cat? I did think I heard a noise early
this morning."

"No, it wasn't the cat," said mother. "It was an accident. James will
see what is broken."

The light curly head had disappeared by this time under the clothes, for
Baby had ducked out of sight, feeling ashamed of its being known that
_he_ had been the cat. But as soon as the maid had left the room he came
up again to the surface like a little fish, and a warm feeling of thanks
to his mother went through his heart.

"You won't tell the servants it were him, will you?" he whispered,
stretching up for another kiss.

"No, not if 'him' promises never to try to do things like reaching down
boxes for himself. Herr Baby must ask mother about things like that,
mustn't he?" she said.

Mother often called him "Herr Baby" for fun. The name had taken her
fancy when he was a very tiny child, and Lisa had first come to be his
nurse. For Lisa was _very_ polite; she would not have thought it at all
proper to call him "Baby" all by itself.

Herr Baby kissed mother a third time, which, as he was not a very
kissing person, was a great deal in one morning.

"Ses," he said, "him will always aks mother. Mother is so sweet," he
added coaxingly.

"He calls everything he likes 'sweet,'" said Fritz. "Mother and the cat
and the tiny trunk--they're all sweet.'"

But mother smiled, so Baby didn't mind.




CHAPTER IV.

GOING AWAY

  "She did not say to the sun good-night,
   As she watched him there like a ball of light,
   For she knew he had God's time to keep
   All over the world, and never could sleep."


How, I can't tell, but, after all, _some_how the packing got done, and
everything was ready. They left a _few_ things behind that Herr Baby
would certainly have taken had he had the settling of it. They didn't
take the horses, _nor_ the fireplaces, and, of course, as the horses
weren't to go, Thomas and Jones had to be left behind too to take care
of them, which troubled Baby a good deal. And no doubt Thomas and Jones
would have been _very_ unhappy if it hadn't been for the nice way Baby
spoke to them about coming back soon, and the letters he would send them
on their birthdays, and that he would never like any other Thomases and
Joneses as much as them. It was really quite nice to hear him, and
Jones had to turn his head away a little--Baby was afraid it was to hide
that he was crying.

It was a very busy time, and Baby was the busiest of any. There was so
much to think of. The rabbits too had to be left behind, which was very
sad, for one couldn't write letters to _them_ on their birthdays;
neither Denny, whom he asked about it, nor Baby himself, could tell when
the rabbits' birthdays were, and besides, as Baby said, "what would be
the good of writing them letters if they couldn't read them?" The only
thing to do was to get the little girl at the lodge to _promise_ to take
them fresh cabbages every morning--that was one of the things Herr Baby
had to see about, himself. Lisa lost him one morning, and found him at
the lodge, after a great hunt, talking very gravely to the little girl
about it.

  [Illustration: "Zou will p'omise, Betsy, p'omise certain sure, _nebber_
  to forget."--P. 61.]

"Zou will p'omise, Betsy, p'omise certain sure, _nebber_ to forget," he
was saying, and poor Betsy looked quite frightened, Herr Baby was so
very solemn. Fritz wanted to make her kiss her mother's old Testament,
the way he had seen men do sometimes in his grandfather's study when
they came to tell about things, and to promise they would speak the
truth; but Betsy, though she was ready enough to _promise_, didn't like
the other idea at all. She might be had up to the court for such like
doings, she said, and as neither Fritz nor Baby had any idea what sort
of place the court was, though they fancied it was some kind of prison
for people who didn't keep their word, they thought it better to leave
it.

The "calanies" and the "Bully" were to go, that was a comfort, and
Peepy-Snoozle and Tim, the two dormice, also, another comfort. Baby's
own packing was a serious matter, but, on the whole, I think mother and
Lisa and everybody were rather glad he had it to do, as it gave other
people a chance of getting _theirs_ done without the little feet
pattering along the passage or up the stairs, and the little shrill
voice asking what was going to be put into _this_ trunk or into _that_
carpet-bag. He gave up thinking so much about the other packing after a
while, for he found his own took all his time and attention. Mother had
found him a box after all. Not _the_ box of course--that was left empty,
by Baby's wish, till some day when he was a big man, he should go to the
country of the fairy glass and buy mother some new jugs--but a very nice
little box, and she gave him cotton wool and crushy paper too, and
everything was as neat as possible, and the box quite packed and ready,
the first evening. But it was very queer that _every_ day after that
Herr Baby found something or other he had forgotten, or something that
Denny and he decided in their early morning talks, that it would be
silly to take. Or else it came into his head in the night that his best
Bible would be better in the _other_ corner, and the scenty purse on the
top of it instead of at one side. Any way it always happened that the
box had to be unpacked and packed again, and the very last evening there
was Herr Baby on his knees before it on the floor, giving the finishing
touches, long after he should have been in bed.

"And we have to be up so early to-morrow morning," said mother, "my dear
little boy, you really _should_ have been fast asleep by this time."

"And he wakes me _so_ early in the morning," said Denny, who was
standing before the fire giving herself little cross shakes every time
poor Lisa, who was combing out her long fair hair, came to a tuggy bit.
"_Lisa_, you're _hurting_ me; _Lisa_, do take care," she added
snappishly.

"My dear Denny, how very impatient you are!" said her mother. "I don't
know how you will bear all the little discomforts of a long journey if
you can't bear to have your hair combed."

On this, Denny, as Fritz would have said, "shut up." She could not bear
it to be thought that she was babyish or "silly." Her great, great wish
was to be considered quite a big girl. You could get her to do anything
by telling her it would be babyish not to do it, or that doing it would
be like big people, which, of course, showed that she _was_ rather
babyish in reality, as sensible children understand that they cannot be
like big people in everything, and that they wouldn't be at all nice if
they were.

Baby always felt sorry for Denny or any of them when mother found fault
with them. He jumped up from the floor--at least he _got_ up, his legs
were too short for him to spring either up or down very actively--and
trotted across to his sister.

"Poor Denny," he said, reaching up to kiss her, "him won't wake her up
so early to-mollow morning."

"But we'll _have_ to wake early to-morrow," said Denny, rather crossly
still, "it's no use you beginning good ways about not waking me now,
just when everything's changed."

Baby looked rather sad.

"Is your box quite ready now, dear?" said his mother. "Well then, let
Lisa get you ready for bed as quick as she can, and you and Denny must
go to sleep without any talking, and wake fresh in the morning."

But Baby still looked sad; his face began working and twisting, and at
last he ran to mother and hid it in her lap, bursting into tears.

"Denny makes him so unhappy," he said. "Him doesn't like everysing to be
changed like Denny says. Him is so sorry to go away and to leave him's
house and Thomas and Jones, and oh! him is _so_ sorry to leave the
labbits!"

"And him's a tired little boy. I think it's because he's so tired that
he's so sad about going away," said mother. "Think, dear, how nice it is
that we're all going _together_, not Celia or Fritz or anybody left
behind. For you know Thomas has his old mother he wouldn't like to
leave, and Jones has his wife and children. And if the rabbits could
talk, I'm quite sure they would tell you that they'd far rather stay
here in their own nice little house, with plenty of cabbages, than be
bundled into a box and taken away in the railway ever so far, without
being able to run about for ever so many days."

Baby's face cleared a little.

"Betsy has p'omised," he said to himself. Then he added, "_Him_ won't
like the railway neither if it's like that."

"But _him's_ not going to be put in a box or a basket," said mother,
laughing. "Him will have a nice little corner all to himself in a
cushioned railway carriage, only just now he really _must_ go to bed."

So she kissed him for good-night, and Denny too, who, by this time, had
recovered her good-humour in the interest of listening to the
conversation between her mother and Herr Baby, and soon both little
sister and brother were fast asleep in their cots, dreaming about the
journey before them I daresay, or perhaps forgetting all about it in the
much queerer and stranger journeys that small people are apt to fly away
upon at night, when their tired little bodies _seem_ to be lying quite
still and motionless in bed.

It was strange enough--_almost_ as strange as a dream--the next morning
when, long before it was light, they had all to get up and be dressed at
once in their going-out things--that is to say their thick boots and
gaiters, and woollen under-jackets (for it was very cold, though not yet
far on in November), while their ulsters and comforters and caps, and
the girls' sealskin coats and muffs and hats, were all laid out in four
little heaps by Lisa, so that they should be ready to put on the moment
breakfast was over.

What a funny breakfast! Candles on the table, for it was not, of course,
worth while to light the lamp, and everything looking more like a sort
of "muddley tea," Fritz said, than their usual trim nursery breakfast.

"I can't eat," said Fritz, throwing down his bread and butter; "it's no
use."

"And there's eggs!" said Denny, who was comfortably at work at hers,
looking across at Fritz as if it wouldn't be very difficult to eat up
his egg too. "I think it's very kind of cook to have got up so early and
made us eggs 'cos we were going away, and----"

"'Twasn't cook, 'twas Abigail," said Fritz. "I saw her coming up with
the eggs all in a pan with hot water, so that they shouldn't get cold,
she said to Lisa."

"Well then it was very kind of Abigail, and----" said Denny.

"'Twasn't Abigail that made the eggs," said Baby, "'twas the hens zat
laid them. Denny should say the _hens_ was werry kind."

"Oh bother," said Denny, "I wish you'd not interrupt me. I don't care
who it was. I only want to say it's very stupid of Fritz not to eat his
egg, when _somebody_ made them for us, extra you know, because we're
going away, and I think Fritz is very stupid."

"Come, Herr Fritz," said Lisa, encouragingly, "try and eat. You will be
so hungry."

"I can't," said Fritz, "I've got a horrid feeling just like when mother
took me to have that big tooth out. I feel all shaky and cruddley."

"Yes, _I_ know," said Denny, going on with _her_ breakfast all the same,
"but eating's the best thing to make it go away. I felt just that way
the day I broke grandfather's hotness measure, and mother said I must
tell him myself. I couldn't eat a bit of dinner, and I sat on the stair
all _screwged_ up, waiting for him to go to the study."

"How dedful!" said Baby, with great feeling. But neither Fritz nor Celia
seemed to think much of Denny's sufferings. No one had ever seen her
nerves disturbed, and they did not therefore much believe in her having
any.

"Grandfather's _what_ did you say?" asked Celia.

"His hotness measure--the little glass pipe thing with a blob that goes
up and down. He's got another now, you know."

"You mean his thermometer; you really should learn the proper names of
things," said Celia, "you're quite big enough."

Denny would probably not have taken this in good part, though the "quite
big enough" at the end was very much to her taste, but there was no time
_this_ morning for squabbling.

"Quick, quick, mine children," said Lisa, "the cart with the luggage is
'way, and the Herr Grandpapa is buttoning his coat."

"And Fritz hasn't eaten his egg!" said Denny, eyeing it dolefully, as
Lisa was fastening her jacket.

"I _couldn't_," said Fritz. "There'll be sandwiches or something in the
train--sure to be. Now come on; let's see what have I got to look after.
Only Tim and Peepy-Snoozle. I _couldn't_ lose my satchel, you see, for
its strapped on me. Much more sensible than _girls_, who have to carry
their bags over their arms."

And Fritz, in a new ulster, very long and rather stiff, and feeling, to
tell the truth, a little uncomfortable at first, as new things generally
do, stalked off--I don't think he _could_ have run!--with the air of a
very big man indeed.

Celia and Denny had a slight dispute as to which was which of the
bird's cages. For it had been settled that, for the journey at least,
the canaries were to be Celia's charge and the "Bully" Denny's, though,
hitherto, these three little birds had belonged to all the children
together.

"You've got my cage, Denny," said Celia, sharply.

"I haven't," said Denny, holding hers the more tightly. It was not very
easy to see, for both were covered up with dark blue stuff wrappers, to
keep the birds warm, "and to make them think it's night all the way,"
said Baby.

"I haven't," repeated Denny, "there, don't you see _two_ yellow tails in
yours? Peep through."

And Denny proved to be right, so Celia had to give in.

And at last they were off! The drive to the station safely over without
any misadventures, the luggage all locked up in the van, the children
and the dormice and the birds--far more important things, of course,
than the big people!--all comfortably settled at one end of the nice big
saloon carriage, which grandfather had had sent down on purpose from
London.

"Dear me," said Denny, jigging up and down on her seat, "so we're really
off! How nice and springy these cushions are! And this carriage is as
big as a little house. I could _never_ be tired of travelling in a
carriage like this."

"Him zought we'd _nebber_ get away," said Baby, with his usual
solemnity. "Dear, dear, what dedful lots of boxes there is! Him's box is
'aside the 'normous big straw one; did zou know, Denny?"

"Poor grandfather," said Celia, "_what_ a lot of times he said over,
'three black portmanteaux, four, no five canvas-covered, four carpet
bags, one--fourteen in all. Is _that_ right, Helen? Grandfather's
something like Baby, he thinks no one can do anything right but himself;
and there's Peters come on purpose to bother about these things."
(Peters was grandfather's own servant.) "I wish grandfather wouldn't
fuss so. I hate people to think he's a fussy old man, something like Mr.
Briggs in Punch. As if he had never travelled before!"

As may be imagined, these remarks of Celia's were made in a low voice,
for, of course, they were intended for the nursery party alone. Fritz
flew up in grandfather's defence.

"Very fine, Miss Celia," he said. "You may laugh at grandfather for
fussing, but _suppose_ he didn't, and _suppose_ that when we get to--oh,
bother, I can't say those French names--wherever it is we're going to,
_suppose_ that Madamazelle Celia's trunk was lost, and Madamazelle Celia
hadn't any best frocks or flounces, or Sunday hats, how would
Madamazelle Celia look _then_? Perhaps she'd wish then that grandfather
had fussed a little."

Celia turned to look for her bag, and having found it, she took out the
book which she had brought with her to read on the way.

"You're too silly to speak to, Fritz," she said; "I'm going to read."

"So am I," said Denny, who had likewise armed herself with a book,
though she was rather a dunce for her age, and couldn't read "runningly"
as French people say. But _big_ people always had books to read in the
railway--that was enough for Denny, of course, to try to do so too.

"_I'm_ going to take a nap, then," said Fritz, who was really looking
rather white and tired. He had been wakened out of a very sound sleep
this morning, and had not been able to eat any breakfast. Lisa thought
that taking a nap was the best thing he could do, so she got down a
bundle of the rugs to make him a pillow, and helped him to tuck up his
legs comfortably, and Fritz settled himself for his little sleep, making
Lisa promise to waken him when they came to a big station.

So everybody seemed inclined to be quiet. Herr Baby's corner was by the
window. He looked about him. Celia and Denny were buried in their books,
Fritz seemed asleep already; of the big people at the other end,
grandfather's face was quite hidden in his newspaper, which he had kept
over from last night on purpose to have something to read in the train,
knowing that they would start before the postman came in the morning,
and mother and auntie were talking together, softly, not to disturb him.

"Should you like the window more open?" said grandfather, suddenly
looking up.

"No, thank you," said auntie. "I think that little chink is enough. It
is really very cold this morning."

"How good the children are!" said mother. She spoke in a lower voice
than auntie; but Baby heard her, for he had quick ears. "One could
almost fancy they were all asleep."

"Yes," said auntie, "if it would last all the way to Santino, or even to
Paris!"

"Or even to London!" said mother. "But they'll all be jumping about like
grasshoppers before long."

Then they went on talking softly again about other things; and Baby
didn't hear, and didn't care to hear. Besides, he had already been
taught a lesson that boys and girls cannot learn too young, which is,
that to listen to things you are not meant to hear is a _sort_ of
cheating, for it is like taking something not meant for you. Of course,
while auntie and mother were talking in a louder voice he could not help
hearing, and it was no harm to listen, as if they had minded his hearing
they would have spoken more in a whisper.

Baby turned to his window to amuse himself by looking out. First he
tried to count the telegraph wires, but he could never be sure if there
were eight or nine--he had not yet learnt to count higher than ten--for
the top ones were so tiresome, they danced away out of sight, and all of
a sudden danced down again, and sometimes they seemed to join together,
so that he could not tell if they were one or two. He wondered what made
them wave up and down so; whether there were men down in the ground
that pulled them, and what they did it for; he had heard of "sending
telegrams," and Denny had told him it meant sending messages on wires,
but he did not know that these were the wires used for that. He fancied
these wires must have something to do with the railway; perhaps they
were to show the people living in the fields that the trains were
coming, so that they shouldn't get in the way and be "runned over."
This made Baby begin to think of the people living in the fields; they
were just then passing a little cottage standing all by itself. It
looked a nice cottage, and it had a sort of little garden round it, and
some cocks and hens were picking about. Baby looked back at the little
cottage as long as he could see it; he wondered who lived in it, if
there were any little boys and girls, and what they did all day. He
wondered if they went to school, or if perhaps they sometimes went
messages for their mother, and if they weren't frightened if they had
to pass through the wood, which by this time the train was running
along the edge of. Could this be Red Riding Hood's wood, perhaps? Baby
shuddered as this idea came into his mind. Or it might be the wood that
Hop-o'-my-thumb and his six brothers had to make their way through,
where the birds _would_ pick the crumbs they dropped to show the path.
It would be very "dedful" for seven little boys to be lost in a wood
like that, and still worse for one little boy all alone. Baby was very
glad that when little boys had to go through woods _now_ it was in nice
railway carriages with mothers and aunties and everybodies with them.
But even in this way the wood made him feel a _very_ little frightened;
just then it got so much darker. He looked up to see if they were all
still reading or asleep; he _almost_ thought he would ask Lisa to take
him on her knee a little, when, all of a sudden, the "railway," as he
called it, screamed out something very sharp and loud, the rattle and
the noise got "bummier" and yet sharper; Baby could see no trees, no
fields, "no nothing." What could it be? It was worse than the wood.

"Oh, Lisa," cried poor Herr Baby, "the railway horses must have runned
the wrong way. We's going down into the cellars of the world."

Lisa caught him up in her arms and comforted him as well as she could.
It was only a tunnel, she told him, and she explained to him what a
tunnel was, just a sort of passage through a hill, and that there was
nothing to be frightened at. And she persuaded him to look up and see
what a nice little lamp there was at the top of the carriage, on purpose
to light them up while they were in the dark. Baby was quite pleased
when he saw the little lamp.

"Who put it 'zere?" he said. "Were it God?"

He was rather disappointed when Lisa told him that it was the railway
men who put it up, but then he thought again that it was very kind of
the railway men, and that it must have been God who taught them to be
so kind, which Lisa quite agreed in. But even though the little lamp
was very nice, Baby was very pleased to get out of the tunnel, and out
of the rumbly, rattly noise, into the open daylight again, with the
beautiful sun shining down at them out of the sky. For the day was
growing brighter as it went on, and the air was a little frosty, which
made everything look clear and fresh.

"Nice sun," said Baby, glancing up at his old friend in the sky, "that's
the bestest lamp of all, isn't it? and it _were_ God put it up there."

After that he must, I think, have taken a little nap in Lisa's arms
almost without knowing it, for he didn't seem to hear anything more or
to think where he was or anything, till all of a sudden he heard
mother's voice speaking.

"Won't Baby have a sandwich, Lisa? And Denny, why, have you been asleep
too, Denny?"

And sitting up on Lisa's knee, all rosy and dimpled with sleeping, his
fair curls in a pretty tumble about his eyes, Baby saw Denny, looking
very sleepy too, but trying hard to hide it.

"Oh," she said, smoothing down her hair and sitting up very straight,
"I've been reading such a long time that my eyes got quite tired; that
was why I shut them."

"Oh indeed!" said mother, but Baby could see that she was smiling at
Denny, though she didn't laugh right out like Fritz and Celia.

They were all very happy, however, with their sandwiches and buns, and
after they had eaten as much as they wanted, auntie taught them a sort
of guessing game, which helped to pass the time, for already Denny and
Fritz were beginning to think even the big saloon carriage rather a
small room to spend a whole day in.

They passed two or three big stations, and then they were allowed to get
out and walk up and down the platform a little, which was a nice change.
But Baby was so dreadfully afraid of any of them being left behind that
he could hardly be persuaded to get out at all, and once when he and
Lisa were waiting alone in the carriage while the others walked about,
and the train moved on a little way to another part, he screamed so
loudly--

"Oh, mother, oh, auntie, oh, ganfather, and Celia, and Fritz, and Denny!
All, all is left behind!"--that there was quite a commotion in the
station, and when the train moved back again, and they all got in, he
was obliged to kiss and hug each one separately, several times over,
before he could feel quite sure he had them all safe and sound, and
that "not nobody" was missing.

It seemed a long time after it got dark, even though the little lamp was
still lighted. But it was not light enough to see to read, and "the big
lamp up in the sky," as Baby said, "was _kite_ goned away." It puzzled
him very much how the sun could go away every night and come back every
morning, and the queerest thing of all was what Celia had told him--that
"away there," in the far-off country where they were going, there would
still be the same sun, the _very_ same sun, that they had seen every
morning peeping up behind the kitchen-garden wall, and whose red face
they had said good-night to on the winter evenings, as he slipped away
to bed down below the old elms in the avenue, where the rooks had their
nests. Somehow as Baby sat in his corner, staring out now and then at
the darkness through which they were whizzing, blinking up sometimes at
the little lamp shining faintly in the roof, there came before his mind
the pictures of all they had left behind; he seemed to see the garden
and the trees _so_ plain, and he thought how very, very quiet and lonely
it must seem there now, and Baby's little heart grew sad. He felt so
sorry for all the things they had left--the rabbits and the pussy most
of all, of course, but even for the dear old trees, and the sweet,
"denkle" flowers in the garden; even for the tables and chairs in the
house he felt sorry.

"Him's poor little bed will be so cold and lonely," he said to himself.
"Him sinks going away is _werry_ sad."




CHAPTER V.

BY LAND AND SEA

   "So the wind blew softly,
      And the sun shone bright."


Grandfather had fixed that it would be best to go straight through at
once to the seaport, where, the next morning, they would find the
'normous boat waiting to take them over the sea. They had to pass
through London on the way, and, by the time they got to the big London
station, Baby was very tired--so white and quiet that mother was a
little frightened.

"I almost wish," she said, "that we had fixed to stay all night in
London. Baby has never had a long railway journey before, since he was a
_real_ Baby, you know, and he is not very strong."

She was speaking to auntie. It was just when they were getting near the
big London station. Auntie looked at Baby. He was lying on Lisa's knee
with his eyes shut, as if he were asleep, but he wasn't. He heard what
they said, and he was rather pleased at them talking about him. In
_some_ ways he was very fond of being made a fuss about.

"He does look a little white shrimp," said auntie. "But then you know,
May, he is so fair. He looks more quickly white if he is tired than
other children. And he has been such a good little man all day--not one
bit of trouble. He is really a capital traveller--_ever_ so much quieter
than the others."

She said these last few words in a low tone, not caring for the other
children to hear; but if she had spoken quite loud I don't think they
would have heard, and, indeed, it seemed as if they wanted to show that
auntie's words were true; for just at that moment there came such a
scream from Denny that everybody started up in a fright.

What _could_ be the matter? everybody asked.

"It's all Denny," said Fritz, in a great fuss.

"It's not; it's all Fritz and Celia," said Denny.

"It's both of them," said Celia. "Mother, I wish you wouldn't let them
be near each other. Denny put her hand into the dormice's cage when
Fritz wasn't looking, and she poked out Tim, who was just beginning to
come awake for the night, and she as nearly as _could_ be got his tail
pulled off, and then, when Fritz caught her, she screamed."

"Fritz snipped my hand in the little door of the cage," sobbed Denny.
"And Celia always takes Fritz's part."

Celia was beginning; to "answer back," when auntie stopped her by a
look--the children were sometimes rather afraid of auntie's "looks."

"Dear me, young people," said grandfather from his end of the carriage,
"you might be peaceable for five minutes, and then we shall be in
London, and you shall have a good tea before we go on again."

The children all grew quiet. They were glad to hear of tea, and they
were a little ashamed of themselves. Auntie moved over to their end of
the carriage.

"Him would like some tea too, p'ease," said Baby, as she passed him, and
auntie patted his head.

"They are all tired, I suppose," said mother; "but it really is too
silly, the way they quarrel about nothing."

"Auntie," said Celia softly, "I think it was partly my fault. Denny and
Fritz asked me to tell them a story, and I wouldn't. It would have kept
them quiet."

"Well, never mind now," said auntie. "You must all try and be very good
to-morrow. This is only the first day, you know. You can't be expected
to be very clever travellers yet. And the very first lesson to learn in
travelling is--do you know what?"

"Not to lose your things?" said Celia.

"To be ready in time?" said Fritz.

"To sit still in the railway?" said Denny, rather meekly.

"All those are very good things," said auntie; "but they're not _the_
thing I was thinking of. It was _to keep your temper_."

The children got rather red, but I don't think any one noticed, for
already the train was slackening, and in another minute or two they all
got out and were standing together on the bustling platform, dimly
lighted up by the gas lamps, which looked yellow and strange in the
foggy air of a London November evening.

"Is zit London?" said Baby, and when Celia said "yes," he added rather
mournfully, "Him doesn't sink London's pitty at all."

  [Illustration: Poor little boys, for after all, Fritz himself wasn't
  very big! They stood together hand in hand on the station platform,
  looking, and feeling, rather desolate.--P. 84.]

Poor little boys, for, after all, Fritz himself wasn't very big! They
stood together hand in hand on the station platform, looking, and
feeling, rather desolate. Lisa was busy helping with the rugs and
bags that had been in the carriage; mother and auntie, as well as
grandfather and Peters and the maid, were all busy about the luggage.

"Stay there a moment, children," said somebody; but Denny had no idea of
staying anywhere. Off she trotted to have a look at the luggage too, and
Celia was half inclined to follow her, when her glance fell on her two
little brothers.

"Celia," said Baby, catching hold of her, "don't go away too. Fritz is
taking care of him, but we _might_ be lostened."

He spoke rather timidly, and Celia's heart was touched. She was a good
deal older than the others--nearly twelve--Fritz and Denny were very
near in age, and sometimes Celia was a little cross at mother for not
making difference enough, as she thought, and for keeping her still a
good deal in the nursery. Mother had her own good reasons, and it is not
always wise for big people to tell children their reasons, as Celia got
to know when she grew wiser and bigger herself. She sometimes spoke
rather crossly to the younger ones, and it made them a very little
afraid of her, but in her heart she was kind. Just now she stooped down
to kiss Baby.

"Don't be frightened, poor old man," she said, "you won't be lost. Fritz
wouldn't let you be lost, would you, Fritz?"

Fritz brightened up at that, as Celia had meant he should. He, too, had
been feeling a little strange and queer--the long journey and the
sleeping in the day, all so different from their life at home, had
rather upset him--but he would not have liked to say so! And now he was
quite pleased at Celia telling Baby that, of course, Fritz was big
enough to take care of him. It is so easy for children--bigger ones
above all--to please each other and give nice feelings, when they really
try to feel _with_ each other and _for_ each other.

The little boys looked much happier a few minutes later, when they were
seated at tea in a comfortable corner of the refreshment room.
Grandfather had sent Peters on, as soon as they had got the luggage all
safe, to see that a table was placed for them by themselves. He,
himself, went off to get some real dinner, for, of course, it was not to
be expected that a gentleman, and especially an _old_ gentleman, would
be contented with tea, and bread and butter, and buns, however nice,
but, to the children's great pleasure, mother and auntie said _they_
would far rather stay and have tea with the little people.

"It is a good thing, isn't it, for them to stay with us?" said Fritz to
Celia, confidentially, "for we are none of us _very_ big, are we? And
you know we _might_ get lost somehow, as Baby says, though I wouldn't
say so to him for fear of frightening him, you know."

"No, of course not," said Celia, and looking up she was pleased to see
mother smiling at her. Mother saw that Celia was trying to be kind and
helpful, and she did so like to see the way the little ones clung to
Celia when she was gentle. Mother must have been something like Baby in
her mind, I think, for when she looked at the boys sitting there in the
strange, big station-room, their little faces grave and rather tired
looking, a sort of sorry feeling came over _her_ too, as she thought of
the snug, cosy nursery at home, and the neat nursery tea, with the
pretty pink and white cups she had chosen, and the canaries and "Bully"
twittering in the window. Poor "calanies" and poor Bully! they didn't
know where they had got to! They had slept nearly all day, thinking, as
they were meant to think, that it was night, I suppose, but now they
must have given up thinking so, for they were fidgeting about in their
cages in an unhappy, restless sort of way. They had plenty of seed, and
Celia and Lisa took care that they should have fresh water, but still,
poor little things, they were not very happy.

"Going away from their own home is really a trial for children," thought
mother. She was a little tired herself, and being tired makes
_everything_ seem the wrong way.

But there was no help for it. They had all to make the best of things,
and to set off again in another train and be rattled away to the sea. It
was quite dark by now, of course, and it seemed very queer to start on
another journey with so little rest between. I think, however, once they
were all settled in the railway carriage, that the children slept the
most of the way; Baby, at any rate, knew nothing more till he woke up to
find himself in Lisa's arms, with a cold, fresh air--the air of the
sea--blowing in his face, and making him lift up his head and look about
him.

"Where is him?" he said. "Is him in the 'normous boat?"

"Not so, Herr Baby," said Lisa. "He shall first be undressed and have a
nice sleep all night in bed, to rest him well. Lie still, mine child,
and Lisa will keep you warm."

"Him likes the wind," said Baby. "It blowed his eyes open; him is quite
awake now," and he tried to sit straight up in Lisa's arms.

"Oh, Herr Baby, I cannot hold you so," said Lisa.

"There is such a little way to go," said his mother, who was just
behind, "lie still, dear, as Lisa tells you."

"Him would like to walk, him's legs is so 'tiff," said Baby. "P'ease let
him walk if it's such a little way!"

His voice was so piteous that mother told Lisa to let him walk; they
were going from the station to the hotel, a very little way, as mother
had said. Lisa put Baby down on the ground; at first he really tumbled
over, his legs felt so funny, but with Lisa's hand he soon got his
balance again. It was a very dark night; they could not have seen their
way but for the lights of the station and the town.

"What a dark countly zit is!" said Herr Baby. "Is there no moon in zit
countly? Denny says in her hymn 'the moon to shine by night,' is there
no moon 'cept in him's own countly?"

"What are you chattering about, little man?" said auntie.

"He's asking about the moon, auntie; he wants to know if there isn't
any moon here. He thinks we've left it behind at home," said Denny.

A sort of roar from poor Baby interrupted her.

"Oh, Denny, don't, _don't_ say that," he cried, "it makes him sink of
the labbits, and Thomas, and Jones, and the trees, and the flowers, and
him's dear little bed, and all the sings we'se leaved behind. Him
doesn't like you to speak of leaved behind."

"_Poor_ Baby," said Denny, "I'm so sorry." She stooped down to kiss him,
but it was so dark it wasn't easy to find his mouth, and she only
managed to kiss the tip of his nose, which was as cold as a little
dog's. This made Herr Baby begin laughing, which was a good thing,
wasn't it? And he was so taken up in explaining to Lisa how funny it
felt when Denny kissed his nose, that he had not time to think of his
sorrows again till they were at the foot of the large flight of steps
leading up to the big hotel where they were to sleep.

"Nice big house," said Baby, looking round; and as he caught sight of
some of the waiters running about, he asked Lisa if "them was new
servants instead of Thomas and Jones."

"Him likes Thomas and Jones best," he went on, the corners of his mouth
going down again, so that Lisa was obliged to assure him the servants
were not going to be _instead_ of Thomas and Jones, they were all only
just going to stay one night at this big house, and to-morrow they would
set off in the great ship to cross the sea.

The mention of the ship fortunately gave a new turn to Baby's thoughts;
and he allowed Lisa to take him upstairs and warm him well before a good
fire before she undressed him and put him to bed. The other children
thought it great fun to sleep in strange rooms, in beds quite unlike
those they had at home, and to have to hunt for their nightgowns and
brushes and sponges in two or three _wrong_ carpet bags before they came
to the right one; but Baby's spirits were rather depressed, and it was
not easy to keep him from crying in the sad little way he had when his
feelings were touched.

"He is tired, poor little chap," said auntie, as she kissed him for
good-night. "It is ever so much later than he has ever been up before.
It is nearly ten."

"Him _were_ up till ten o'clock on Kissmass," said Herr Baby,
brightening up. "Him were up _dedful_ late, till, till, p'raps till near
twenty o'clock."

Auntie would have liked to laugh, but she took care not, for when Baby
was in this sort of humour there was no telling whether other people's
laughing might not make him take to crying, so she just said,

"Indeed! That must have been _very_ late; well, go to sleep now, and
sleep till twenty o'clock to-morrow morning, if you like. We don't need
to start early," she added, turning to Lisa; and I think poor Lisa was
not sorry to hear it!

If I were to go on telling you, bit by bit, all about the journey, and
everything that happened big and little, it would take a good while, and
I don't know that you would find it very interesting. Perhaps it is
better to take a jump, as people do in real big story books, and to go
on with Herr Baby's adventures a few days later, when he, and Denny, and
Fritz, and Celia, and Lisa, and mother, and auntie, and grandfather, and
the "bully," and the "calanies," and Tim, and Peepy-Snoozle, and Linley,
mother's maid, and Peters, grandfather's man, and I forget if there was
any one else, but I think not; and all the boxes and carpet-bags, and
railway-rugs, were safely arrived at Santino, the pretty little town
with mountains on one side and the sea on the other, where they were all
going to spend the winter. I must not forget to tell you one thing,
however, which, I daresay, some of you who may have crossed "over the
sea," and _not_ found it very delightful, may be anxious to know about.
I mean about the voyage in the 'normous boat, which Baby had been so
looking forward to, poor little fellow.

Well, wasn't it lucky, he was not at all disappointed? They had the
loveliest day that ever was seen, and Baby thought 'normous boats far
the nicest way of travelling, and he couldn't understand why grandfather
couldn't make them go all the way to Santino in the nice boat, and when
they explained to him that it couldn't be, because there was no sea for
boats to go on all the way, he thought there must have been some great
mistake in the way the world was made. And when they got to Santino, and
the first thing he saw _was_ the sea, blue and beautiful like a fairy
dream, Baby was quite startled.

"Mother, auntie!" he said, reproachfully, "you toldened him there
weren't no sea."

"We didn't mean that, Baby, dear," said mother; "we meant that there was
no sea to come the shortest way; we would have had to come all round the
land, and it would have been much longer. Look, it is like this," and
mother traced with her parasol a sort of map on the sand, to show Baby
that they had come a much nearer way. For they were standing by the
sea-shore at the time.

"Yes," said Herr Baby, after looking on without speaking for a minute or
two, "him under'tands now."

"So you've had your first lesson in geography," said auntie.

Baby stared up at her.

"Are _that_ jography?" he said. "Him thought jography were awful, dedful
difficult. Denny is so _werry_ c'oss when her has jography to learn."

"Oh, because, of course, you know," said Denny, getting rather red,
"_my_ jography is _real_ jography, with books and maps and ever so long
rows of names to learn. Baby's so stupid--he always takes up things so;
he'll be thinking now that if he makes marks on the sand, he'll be
learning jography."

Denny turned away with a very superior air. Baby looked much hurt.

  [Illustration: "Are _that_ jography?" he said.--P. 94.]

"Him's not stupid, _are_ him?" he said; and in a moment Celia and Fritz
were hugging him and calling Denny a naughty, unkind girl to tease him.
Mother and auntie had walked on a little, so things _might_ have gone on
to a quarrel if Lisa hadn't stopped it.

"Mine children," she said, "it is too pity to be not friendly together.
See what one beautifullest place this is--sky so blue and sea so blue,
and all so bright and sunny. One should be nothing but happy here."

"Yes," said Celia, looking round, "it is an awfully pretty place."

Celia, you see, was just beginning to be old enough to notice really
beautiful things in a way that when children are _very_ little, they
cannot quite understand, though some do much more than others.

"It is a _very_ pretty place," she said again, as if she were speaking
to herself, for Fritz and Denny had taken it into their heads to run
races, of which Lisa was very glad, and Celia stood still by herself,
looking round at the lovely sea and sky, and the little white town
perched up above, with the mountains rising behind. Suddenly a little
hand was slipped into hers.

"Him would like to live here everways," said Baby's voice; "it _are_ so
pitty--somefin like Heaven, p'raps."

"I don't know," said Celia, "I suppose Heaven must be prettier than
anything we could fancy."

"There's gold streets in Heaven, Lisa says," said Baby; "him sinks blue
sky streets would be much pittier."

"So do I," said Celia.

Then they walked on a little, watching Fritz and Denny, already like two
black specks in front--they had run on so far--and, somehow, in the
_very_ bright sunshine, one seemed to see less clearly. Mother and
auntie were in front too, and when Fritz and Denny raced back again,
quite hot and out of breath, mother said it was time for them all to go
in; it was still rather too hot to be out much near the middle of the
day, though it was already some way on in November, and next month would
be the month that Christmas comes in!

"How funny it seems," said Celia. "Why, when we left home it was quite
winter. Just think how we were wrapped up when we started on the
journey, and now we're quite warm enough with nothing at all over our
frocks."

"It may be cold enough before long," said mother, who was more
accustomed to hot climates than the children; "sometimes the cold
hereabouts comes quite suddenly, and it even seems colder from having
been so warm before. I daresay you will be glad of your thick clothes
before Christmas. But we must get on a little quicker, or else
grandfather will be in a hurry for his breakfast."

"Ganfather's werry lazy not to have had him's breakfast yet," said
Baby. "_Him's_ had _him's_ breakfast ever so long ago, hundreds of years
ago."

"Oh, Baby," said Denny, "how you do 'saggerate! It _couldn't_ have been
hundreds of years ago, because, you know, you weren't born then."

"Stupid girl!" said Baby, "how does you know? you wasn't there."

"Well, _you_ weren't there," said Denny again.

"Children, don't contradict each other. It's not nice," said auntie.

"Him didn't begin," said Baby, "t'were Denny beginned."

"I didn't. I only said _once_ that Baby wasn't born hundreds of years
ago," said Denny, "and then he----"

"Onst is as wurst as twicet," said Baby.

Mother turned round at this. There was a funny look on her face, but
still she spoke rather gravely.

"Baby, I don't know what's coming over you," she said. "It isn't like
you to speak like that."

Baby's face grew red, and he turned his head away.

"Him didn't mean _zeally_ that ganfather were lazy," he said, in a low
voice.

"It wasn't _that_ I was vexed with you for," said mother. "I know you
were joking when you said that. I meant what you said to Denny."

"Him's werry sorry," said Baby, on the point of tears.

"Never mind. Don't cry about it," said mother, who really wanted the
children to be very good and happy this first day. And she was a little
afraid of Baby's beginning to cry, for, _sometimes_, once he had begun,
it was not very easy to stop him.

"You don't understand about grandfather and his breakfast," said auntie.
"Here nobody has big breakfast when they first get up except you
children, who have the same that you have at home."

"No we don't," said Denny. "At home we have bread and milk every day
except Sunday--on Sunday we have bacon or heggs, because that's the
nothing-for-breakfast day."

Auntie stared at Denny.

"Really, Denny," she said, "it is sometimes a little difficult to be
sure that you have got all your senses. How can you have 'nothing for
breakfast' when you have bacon, and--who in the world ever taught you to
say 'heggs'?"

"I meant to say 'neggs,'" said Denny very humbly. "Grandfather laughed
at me because I didn't say 'hippotamus' right--I called it a
'nippotamus,' and he made me say 'hi-hi-hip,' and that's got me into the
way of saying it to everything, like calling a negg, a hegg."

"A _negg_," repeated auntie slowly. "Can't you hear any difference
between 'a negg,' and 'an egg'? Spell, a-n an, e-g-g egg."

Denny repeated it.

"What dedful jography Denny's having," observed Baby; "I can say _a
negg, quite_ right."

"And so you too call 'a negg' nothing for breakfast?" said auntie.

"Neggs and bacon is nothing for breakfast," answered Baby.

"Auntie," said Fritz, "you don't understand. We call it nothing for
breakfast when there's not bread-and-milk, you know, for on
bread-and-milk days we have just one little cup of tea and a bit of
bread-and-butter after the bread-and-milk. But on Sundays, and
birthdays, there's nothing for the _first_, and so we get better things,
more like big people, and tea, and whatever there is, as soon as we
begin. That's why we like 'nothing for breakfast,' do you see, auntie?"

"I see," said auntie, "but I certainly couldn't have guessed. I hope
there's _something_ for breakfast to-day for us, for I'm very hungry,
and look, there's grandfather coming out to meet us, which looks as if
he were hungry too. And what have you to say to it, old man?" she added,
as Herr Baby came up the steps, one foot at a time, of course, "aren't
you hungry after your walk?"

"Him's hungry for him's _dinner_, but not for him's _breakfast_; in
course not," said Baby, with great dignity.




CHAPTER VI.

AN OLD SHOP AND AN OGRE

   "Innocent face with the sad sweet eyes,
    Smiling on us through the centuries."


Baby and Fritz went out a walk that afternoon in the town with auntie
and Lisa. Celia and Denny had gone for a drive with mother and
grandfather, which the big people thought would make a good division.
Grandfather was very fond of children, but in a carriage, he used to
say, _two_ small people were enough of a good thing. So Celia and Denny
worried Lisa to get out their best hats and jackets--which were not
unpacked, as grandfather had not yet decided whether they should stay at
the hotel or get a house for themselves--and set off in great spirits on
the back seat of the carriage.

Fritz and Baby were in very good spirits too. Fritz wanted to walk along
the sort of front street of the town which faced the sea, for he was
never tired of looking at boats and ships. Baby liked them too, but what
he most wanted to see was the shops. Baby was very fond of shops. He was
fond of buying things, but before he bought anything he used to like to
be quite sure which was the best shop to get it at--I mean to say at
which shop he could get it best--and he often asked the price two or
three times before he fixed. And he had never before seen so many shops
or such pretty and curious ones as there were at Santino, so he was
quite delighted, though if you hadn't known him well you would hardly
have guessed it, for he trotted along as grave as a little judge, only
staring about him with all his eyes.

And indeed there were plenty of things to stare at. Fritz's tongue went
very fast. He wanted auntie to stop every minute to look at something
wonderful. The carts drawn by oxen pleased him and Baby very much.

"That's the working cows they told us about," said Fritz. "They're very
nice, but I think I like horses best, don't you, Baby?"

"No, him likes cows best," said Baby, "when him's a man him will have a
calliage wif hundreds of cows to pull it along, and wif lots and lots of
gold bells all tinkling. Won't that be lubly?"

"Not half so nice as a lot of ponies, all with bells," said Fritz,
"they'd make ever so much more jingling, 'cos they go so fast. Isn't it
funny to see all the women with handkerchers on their heads and no
bonnets, Baby?"

"When him's a man," said Baby again--he was growing more talkative
now--"when him's a man, him's going to have auntie and Lisa," auntie and
Lisa came first, of course, because they happened to be in his sight,
"and mother, and Celia, and Denny _all_ for his wifes, and them shall
all wear most bootly hankerwifs on them's heads, red and blue and pink
and every colour, and gold--lots of gold."

"Thank you," said auntie, "but by that time my hair, for one, will be
quite gray; I shall be quite an old woman. I don't think such splendid
trappings would suit me."

"Him said _handkerwifs_, not traps--him doesn't know what traps is,"
said Baby. "And him will be werry kind to you when you're old. Him will
always let you come in and warm yourself, and give you halfpennies."

"Thank you, dear, I'm sure you will," said auntie. But she and Fritz
looked at each other. That was one of Herr Baby's ideas, and they
couldn't get him to understand, so mother settled it was better to
leave it and he'd understand of himself when he grew bigger. He thought
that _everybody_, however rich and well off they might be, had to grow
quite, quite poor, and to beg for pennies in the streets before they
died. Wasn't it a funny fancy? It was not till a good while afterwards
that mother found out that what had made him think so was the word
"old." He couldn't understand that growing old could mean only growing
old in years--he thought it meant as well, poor and worn-out, like his
own little old shoes. Just now it would have been no good trying to
explain, even if mother had quite understood what was in his mind, which
she didn't till he told her himself long after. For it only made him cry
when people tried to explain and _he_ couldn't explain what he meant.
There was nothing vexed him so much! And I think there was something
rather nice mixed up with this funny idea about getting old. It made
Baby wish to be so kind to all poor old people. He would look at any
poor old beggar in such a strange sad way, and he always _begged_ to be
allowed to give them a penny. And, though no one knew of it, in his own
mind he was thinking that his dear little mother or his kind auntie
would be like that some day, and he would like rich little boys to be
kind to them then, just as he was now to other poor old people. Of
course, he said to himself, "If _him_ sees dear little mother and auntie
when they get old, _him_ will take care of them and let them rest at his
house every time they come past, but _p'raps_ him might be far away
then."

And sometimes, when grandfather spoke about getting old and how white
his hair was growing, Baby would look at him very gravely, for in his
own mind he was wondering if the time was very soon coming for poor
grandfather to be an old beggar-man. Baby thought it _had_ to be, you
see, he thought it was just what must come to everybody.

Just as auntie and he had finished talking about getting old they turned
a corner and went down a street which led them away from the view of the
sea. This street had shops at both sides, and some of them were very
pretty, but they were not the kind of shops that the little boys cared
much for--they were mostly dressmakers' and milliners' and shawl shops.
Lots of grand dresses and hats and bonnets were to be seen, which would
have pleased Celia and Denny perhaps, but which Fritz said were very
stupid. Auntie did not seem to care for them either--she was in a hurry
to go to an office where she was going to ask about a house that might
do for them. So she walked on quickly, as quickly at least as Baby's
short legs could go, for she held him by the hand, and Fritz and Lisa
came behind. They left this street in a minute and crossed through two
or three others before auntie could find the one she wanted. Suddenly
Baby gave her a tug.

"Oh auntie," he said, "p'ease 'top one minute. Him sees shiny glass jugs
like dear little mother's. Oh, do 'top."

Auntie stopped. They were passing what is called an old curiosity shop;
it was a funny looking place, seeming very crowded even though it was a
large shop, for it was so very full of all sorts of queer things. Some
among them were more queer than pretty, but some were very pretty too,
and in one corner of the window there were several jugs, and cups, and
bottles, and such things, of very fine glass, with the same sort of
soft-coloured shine on it that Baby remembered in the two jugs that he
had pulled down in the tiny trunk. Baby's eyes had spied them out at
once.

  [Illustration: "Oh, auntie," he said, "p'ease 'top one minute.
  Him sees shiny glass jugs like dear little mother's. Oh, do
  'top."--P. 106.]

"Look, look, auntie," he said, again gently tugging her.

"Yes, Baby dear, very pretty," said auntie, but without paying much
attention to the glass, for she was not thinking of Baby's adventure in
the pantry at the moment, and did not know what jugs of his mother's he
meant.

"There is two _just_ like mother's," said Baby, but he spoke lower now,
almost as if he were speaking to himself. An idea had come into his mind
which he had hardly yet understood himself, and he did not want to speak
of it to any one else. He just stood at the window staring in, his two
eyes fixed on the glass jugs, and the great question he was saying to
himself was, "How many pennies would they cost?"

"Them's a little smaller, him sinks," he murmured, "but p'raps mother
wouldn't mind."

It was a mistake of his that they were smaller; they were really a
little larger than the broken ones. Besides Baby had never seen the
broken ones till they _were_ broken. One of them had been much less
smashed than the other, and mother had examined it to see if it could
possibly be mended so as to look pretty as an ornament, even though it
would never do to hold water, and, when she found nothing could be done,
she had told Thomas to keep the top part of it as a sort of pattern, in
case she ever had a chance of getting the same. I think I forgot to
explain this to you before, and you may have wondered how Baby knew so
well what the jugs had been like.

"Them is a little smaller," he said again to himself. He did not
understand that things often look smaller when they are among a great
many others of the same kind, and though there was not a very great deal
of the shiny glass in the shop window, there was enough to make it
rather a wonder that such a little boy as Baby had caught sight of the
two jugs at all, for they were behind the rest. He had time to look at
them well, for, though auntie had been rather in a hurry, she, too,
stood still in front of the shop, for something had caught her eyes too.

"How _very_ pretty, how sweet!" she said to herself, "I wish I could
copy it. It seems to me beautifully done," and when Fritz, who had not
found the shop so interesting as the others had done, in his turn gave
her a tug and said, "Auntie, aren't you coming?" she pointed out to him
what it was she was so pleased with.

"Isn't it sweet, Fritz?" said auntie.

"Yes," said Fritz, "but it's rather dirty, auntie, isn't it?"

Fritz was very, what is called, _practical_. The "it" that auntie was
speaking about was an old picture, hanging up on the wall at the side of
the door. It was the portrait of a little girl, a very little girl, of
not more than three or four years old. She had a dear little face, sweet
and bright, and yet somehow a very little sad, or else it was the
long-ago make of the dress, and the faded look of the picture itself,
beside the baby-like face that made it _seem_ sad. You couldn't help
thinking the moment you saw it, "Dear me, that little girl must be a
very old woman by now or most likely she must be dead!" I think it was
that that made one feel sad on first looking at the picture, for, after
all, the face _was_ bright and happy-looking: the rosy, roguish, little
mouth was smiling, the soft blue eyes had a sort of twinkling fun in
them, though they were so soft, and the fair hair, so fair that it
almost seemed white, drawn up rather tight in an old-fashioned way, fell
back again on one side as if little Blue-eyes had just been having a
good run. And one fat, dimpled shoulder was poked out of the prim white
frock in a way that, I daresay, had rather shocked the little girl's
mother when the painter first showed her his work, for our little, old,
great-great-grandfathers' and great-great-grandmothers', children, must
have had to sit very, very still in their very best and stiffest frocks
and suits when their pictures were painted, poor little things! They
were not so lucky as you are nowadays, who have only to go to the
photograph man's for half an hour, and keep your merry faces still for a
quarter of a minute, if your mothers want to have a picture of you!

But Blue-eyes must have had some fun when _her_ picture was painted, I
think, or else that little shoulder wouldn't have got leave to poke
itself out of its sleeve, and there wouldn't have been that mischievous
look about the comers of her mouth.

"_Isn't_ it a little dirty, auntie?" said Fritz.

"Wouldn't your face look a little dirty if it had been hanging up in a
frame for over a hundred years?" said auntie, laughing, at which Fritz
looked rather puzzled.

Then auntie's eyes went back to the picture again.

"It _is_ sweet," she said, "very, very sweet, and so perfectly natural."

All this time, as I told you, Herr Baby's whole mind had been given to
the shiny glasses. Suddenly the sound of his aunt's voice caught his
ear, and he looked up.

"What is it that is so 'weet, auntie?" he said.

"The picture over there, dear. Hanging up by the door. The little girl."

Baby looked up, and in a moment his eyes brightened.

"Oh, what a _dear_ little baby!" he said. "Oh, her _is_ 'weet! Auntie,
him would so like to kiss her."

"You darling!" said auntie, her glance turning from the sweet picture
face above to the sweet living face beside her. "I wonder if you will
ever learn to paint like that, Baby. _I_ should very much like to copy
it if I could have the loan of it. It would be sure to be very dear to
buy," she added to herself. "But we must hurry, my little boys," she
went on. "I was tempted to waste time admiring the picture, but we must
be quick."

Fritz and Lisa turned away with auntie, but Baby waited one moment
behind. He pressed his face close against the shop window and whispered
softly,

"Pitty little girl, him would like to kiss you. Him will come a 'nother
day. P'ease, pitty little girl, don't let nobody take away the shiny
glasses, for him wants to buy them for mother."

Then, quite satisfied, he trotted down the street after the others, who
were waiting for him a few doors off.

"Were you saying good-bye to the picture, Baby?" said auntie, smiling.

"Yes," said Baby gravely.

Auntie soon found the office where she was to hear about the house they
were thinking of taking. The little boys stood beside her and listened
gravely while she asked questions about it, though they couldn't
understand what was said.

"Him wishes the people in this countly wouldn't talk lubbish talk," said
Herr Baby to Fritz with a sigh. "Him would so like to know what them
says."

"_I_ want to know if we're going to have a house with a garden," said
Fritz. "That's all _I_ care about," and as soon as they were out in the
street again, he asked auntie if "the man" had said there was a garden
to the house.

"There are several houses that I have to tell your grandfather about,"
said auntie. "Some have gardens and some haven't, but the one we like
the best has a garden, though not a very big one."

"Not as big as the one at home?" said Fritz.

"Oh dear no, of course not," said auntie. "It is quite different here
from at home. People only come to stay a short time, they wouldn't care
to be troubled with big gardens."

"I don't mind," said Fritz amiably, "if only it's big enough for us to
have a corner to dig in, and somewhere to play in when Lisa's in a fussy
humour."

"Mine child," said Lisa mildly. Poor Lisa, she was not a very fussy
person! Indeed she was rather too easy for such lively young people as
Fritz and Denny.

"And do you want a garden, too, very much, Baby?" said auntie.

Baby had hardly heard what they were saying. His mind was still running
on the shiny jugs and the blue-eyed little girl.

"Him wants gate lots of pennies," he said, which didn't seem much of an
answer to auntie's question.

"Lots of pennies, my little man," said auntie. "What do you want lots of
pennies for?"

But Baby would not tell.

Just then they saw coming towards them in the street two very funny
looking men. They had no hats or caps on their heads, so the children
could see that they had no hair either, at least none on the top, where
it was shaved quite off, and only a sort of fringe all round left. Then
they had queer loose brown coats, with big capes, something like
grandfather's Inverness cloak, Fritz thought, and silver chains hanging
down at their sides, and, queerest of all, no stockings or proper boots
or shoes, only things like the _soles_ of shoes strapped on to their
bare feet. These were called sandals, auntie said, and she told the boys
that these funny looking men were monks, "Franciscans," she said they
were called. They all lived together, and they never kept any money, and
people said--but auntie thought that was not quite true--that they never
washed themselves.

"Nasty dirty men," said Fritz, making a face. "I shouldn't like to be a
Franciscan."

"Not in winter, Fritz?" said Baby. "Him wouldn't mind in winter when the
water _are_ so cold. Lisa," he went on, turning round to his nurse,
"'member--when the _werry_ cold mornings comes, him's going to be a
Frantisker--will you 'member, Lisa?"

"But what about the pennies?" said auntie, laughing. "If you are a
Frantisker, Baby, you won't have any pennies, and you said just now you
wanted a great lot of pennies."

Baby looked very grave.

"Then him won't be a Frantisker," he said decidedly.

After that he spoke very little all the way home. He had a great deal on
his mind, you see. And his last thought that night as he was falling
asleep was, "Him are so glad him asked the little pitty girl to take
care of the shiny jugs."

Funny little Herr Baby! How much was fancy, how much was earnest in his
busy baby mind, who can tell?

A few days after this, they all moved from the Hotel to the pretty house
with a garden which auntie had gone to ask about. It _was_ a pretty
house. I wish I could show it to you, children! It had not only a garden
but a terrace, and this terrace overlooked the sea, the blue sunny sea
of the south. And from one side, or from a little farther down in the
garden, one could see the white-capped mountains, rising, rising up into
the sky, with sometimes a soft mist about their heads which made them
seem even higher than they were, "high enough to peep into heaven," said
Baby; and sometimes, on very clear days, standing out sharply against
the blue behind, so that one could hardly believe it would take more
than a few minutes to run to the top and down again.

There were many interesting things in this garden--things that the
children had not had in the old garden at home, nice though it was. It
was not so beautifully neat as the flower part of the garden at home,
but I do not think the children liked it any the less for that. The
trees and bushes grew so thickly that down at the lower end it was
really like a wilderness, a most lovely place for hide-and-seek. Then
there was a fountain, a real fountain, where the water actually danced
and fell all day long; and all round the windows of the house and the
trellised balcony there were the most lovely red shaded leaves, such as
one never sees in such quantities in the north. And in among the stones
of the terrace there lived lizards--the most delightful lizards. One in
particular grew so friendly that he used to come out at meal-times to
drink a little milk which the children spilt for him on purpose; for the
day nursery, or school-room, as Celia liked it to be called, opened on
to the terrace too, though at the other end from the two drawing-rooms
and grandfather's "study," and the windows were long and low, opening
like doors, so that Lisa had hard work to keep the children quiet at
table the first few days, for every minute they were jumping up to see
some new wonder that they caught sight of. Altogether it was a very
pretty home to spend the winter in, and every one seemed very happy.
Bully and the "calanies" were as merry as larks, if it is true that
larks are merrier than other birds, and Peepy-Snoozle and Tim,
mistaking the bright warm sunshine for another summer, I suppose, got in
the habit of being quite lively about the middle of the day as well as
in the middle of the night, instead of spending all the daylight hours
curled up like two very sleepy fairy babies with brown fur coats on, in
their nice white cotton-wool nests.

There was so much to do and to think of the first few days that I think
Baby forgot a little about what he had seen in the old curiosity shop.
Auntie, too, was too busy to give any thought to the picture which had
so taken her fancy, though neither she nor Baby _really_ forgot the dear
little face with its loving, half-merry, half-sad blue eyes. But auntie
had to help mother to get everything settled; and of course there was a
good deal to explain to the strange servants, for neither Peters nor
Linley the maid knew "lubbish talk," as Baby _would_ call it, at all,
and it was very funny indeed to hear Peters trying to make the cook
understand how grandfather liked his cutlets, or Linley "pounding" at
the housemaid, as Fritz called it, to get it into her head that _she_
didn't call it _cleaning_ a room to sweep all the dirt into a corner
where it couldn't be seen! Peters was more patient than Linley. When
Linley couldn't make herself understood she used to shout louder and
louder, as if that would make the others know what she meant, and then
she used to say to Celia that it really was "a _very_ hodd thing that
the people of this country seemed not to have all their senses." And
however Celia explained to her, she _couldn't_ be got to see that she
must seem just as stupid to them as they seemed to her! Peters was less
put about. He had been in India with grandfather, so he said he was used
to "furriners." He seemed to think everybody that wasn't English could
be put together as "furriners"; but he had brought a dictionary and a
book of little sentences in four languages, and he would sit on the
kitchen table patiently trying one language after another on the poor
cook, just as when one can't open a lock, one tries all the keys one can
find, to see if by chance one will fit. The cook was a very mild, gentle
man; he had a nice wife and two little children in the town, and he was
inclined to be very fond of Herr Baby, and to pet him if ever he got a
chance. But that wasn't for a good while, for Baby was at first terribly
frightened of him. He had a black moustache and whiskers and very black
eyes, and they looked blacker under his square white cook's cap, and the
first time Baby saw him through the kitchen window, the cook happened
t