Produced by Al Haines









[Illustration: Cover art]





[Frontispiece: 'There is something in the man's appearance which seems
familiar to me.'  _page 139_]





THE ADVENTURE LEAGUE


BY

HILDA T. SKAE




THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, LTD.

LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK

TORONTO, AND PARIS




CONTENTS

CHAP.

    I.  WHAT HAPPENED IN ERRICHA
   II.  'THE PIRATES' DEN'
  III.  A SURPRISE
   IV.  THE COMPACT
    V.  SUSPENSE
   VI.  A DISCOVERY
  VII.  THE SIEGE
 VIII.  A CRUISE IN THE 'HEROIC'
   IX.  DISAPPOINTMENT
    X.  IN WHICH ALLAN IS VERY WISE
   XI.  A NEAR SHAVE
  XII.  SURROUNDED
 XIII.  ANDREW MACPETERS
  XIV.  CAUGHT
   XV.  HAMISH TO THE RESCUE



[Illustration: Map of Erricha Island]




THE ADVENTURE LEAGUE


CHAPTER I

WHAT HAPPENED IN ERRICHA.

It was very early on a bright summer morning.  Rocks and heather and
green fields lay bathed in sunshine; and round the shores of a small
island on the west coast of Scotland the sea was dancing and splashing,
while in the distance the Highland hills raised their bare crests
towards a cloudless sky.

The sun had not long risen, and it seemed as though no one could be
stirring at this early hour; yet there was an unusual commotion among
the birds nesting on the ledges of a high cliff.  The funny little
puffins, with their red, parrot-like bills, were peering anxiously out
of the crevices; while the curious little auks, standing erect in rows
like black and white mannikins, were exceedingly perturbed; and the
kittiwakes flew screaming from the rocky shelves, joining their voices
to the hoarser cries of the guillemots and the booming of the waves
among walls and pillars of rock.

The cause of the birds' agitation was not far to seek.  Some figures,
looking very small upon the huge cliff, were crawling on their hands
and knees upon the ledges, gathering eggs.  Two were boys; and the red
cap and serge frock of another proclaimed her to be a girl.  About
fifty feet below, with nothing between him and the waves which looked
small in the distance, a lad hung suspended by a rope, while the birds
circled and screamed around him.

One of the boys came to where the ledge ended in a sheer drop down to
the sea; and putting something very carefully in his pocket, he rose to
his feet and began to climb upward.

Catching hold of the tufts of heather on the verge of the cliff, he
swung himself on to firm ground, and proved to be a boy of about ten
years of age; thin and wiry, with a dark face and bright twinkling
eyes.  His thin brown wrists had grown a long way out of the sleeves of
his jacket; and he had torn a hole in the knee of each knicker.

After rubbing his elbows, which he had grazed against the rocks, he
turned to speak to a little girl who was sitting on a tuft of heather,
looking somewhat forlorn.  A handsome collie dog, yellow-brown with a
white ruffle round his neck, was lying impatiently at her feet, every
now and again glancing up at his mistress with bright, inquiring eyes.

'Well, Tricksy,' said the boy; 'tired of waiting, eh?'

'Yes,' replied his sister, 'you've been a long time, and I'm cold.  I
don't see why I shouldn't go down the cliffs with the rest of you.
Laddie's tired of waiting too.'

The collie rose upon hearing his name mentioned, and thrust his nose
into the boy's hand, wagging his tail and looking as though he would
say, 'Come along now, do; and tell the others to come; you've played at
that dangerous game long enough; let's all have a jolly scamper after
rabbits!'

A red cap appeared over the edge of the cliff, followed immediately by
a laughing face framed in a crop of fair curly hair; then a girl
scrambled on to firm ground.

'Hulloa, Reggie! are you there already?' she said.  'How many have you
got?'

'Five,' said Reggie, displaying the contents of his pockets; 'an auk's,
two puffin's, and two kittiwake's.  Aren't they prettily marked?'

'Beauties,' replied the girl, examining the eggs.  'Better get Neil to
blow them for you; he always does it the best.  I have only two, and
another broke as I was getting it out; but oh, it was glorious down on
these ledges!  I'd like to have a scramble like this every morning!'

'I daresay,' broke in an exasperated little voice; 'fine fun for you
others to get up at four in the morning when the steamer isn't expected
until six, and go scrambling about on the rocks, getting sea-birds'
eggs, saying that you'll only be five minutes, and then stay an hour!'

The child spoke in little rushes and gushes, and her eyes twinkled and
looked pathetic by turns in her little dark, round face.

'An hour, Tricksy!  It can't have been so long as that!'

'Indeed it was, Marjorie, because I have Reggie's watch; he left it
with me, and it has been rather tiresome waiting here, when you know I
mayn't climb the rocks as you do.'

'Poor Tricksy, what a shame!  It's too bad of us, leaving you alone all
that time.  Just wait until you are a year or two older, and then your
mother will let you climb like the rest of us.  Who would have thought
that we had been away so long!  Time _does_ go so quickly when you're
scrambling about for eggs!'

She looked around with bright, fearless blue eyes; a tall, slight girl
of fifteen, with a face so tanned by sun and wind as almost to have
lost its extreme fairness, and with the quick, free movements which
speak of perfect health and an open-air life.

'Hulloa,' said Reggie suddenly; 'there's the steamer!'

'Where?' asked both the girls eagerly.

'Over there, just rounding the headland, quite in the distance; you can
see the trail of smoke, She won't be in for some time yet.'

For a minute or two the young people stood watching the grey line upon
the horizon; then Marjorie said--

'She's coming along pretty quickly.  Hadn't we better call the others
and let them know?'

'Yes, do,' said Reggie; and hollowing their hands, they shouted,
'Neil!--Hamish!--hulloa!--the steamer!'

Their voices were blown back to them by the wind; but the lad on the
rope happening to look up, the others pointed energetically out to sea,
where the hull of the steamer was now becoming visible.

The boy glanced round; then climbed quickly hand over hand up the rope,
and joined the others.

'The steamer at last,' said Reggie.  'See, she is just rounding Erricha
Point now; she won't be long in coming in.  Isn't it jolly about the
measles, Neil?'

'Jolly for those who didn't happen to take them,' suggested Marjorie.

'Allan's holidays began six weeks sooner than they would have done if
the boys hadn't all been sent home,' continued Reggie.

'He is coming just when we're having the best fun,' said Marjorie,
watching the steamer with thoughtful eyes; 'what jolly times we'll have
now.  That was an awfully good idea of yours, Neil.'

The tall lad looked gratified.  He was a handsome youth of about
seventeen, dressed in the rough clothes of a fisherman, but refined in
appearance, with a straight nose, dark blue eyes, and curly black hair.

'I will be thinking that you and the others had as much to do with it
as I had, Miss Marjorie,' he replied.

'Not at all, old fellow,' said Reggie, who always spoke to his friend
as though he were a boy of his own age; 'not at all; we never could
have made the place what it is if it hadn't been for you.  Hulloa,
Hamish, old chap,' he added good-humouredly, as a somewhat
sleepy-looking, fair-haired boy joined the group--'reached the top?'

Marjorie looked angry, as she always did when Reggie Stewart assumed
patronising airs towards her brother.

'Yes,' replied Hamish simply; 'I thought there was no hurry, as the
steamer won't be in for a while, and I was trying to reach down for
these little things.  Look, Tricksy, I thought you might like to have
them--two young puffins, not long hatched.'

'O Hamish, what _lovely_ little things!' cried Tricksy, her eyes
growing large and her little round face dimpling with pleasure; 'it
_was_ good of you to get them for me.'

At this moment Laddie, who had been standing impatiently beside the
group, pricked up his ears with a growl, looking at something a short
distance away.

'What's the matter with you, Laddie?' said Reggie.

'He's looking at that man over there,' said Marjorie; 'who is it?  He
seems to want to speak to you, Neil.'

Neil looked round and then reddened slightly.

'It will be that poor fellow Gibbie Mackerrach, one of the band of
gipsies who are staying here just now,' he said.  'Go away, Gibbie,' he
added in Gaelic, shaking his head, since it was unlikely that the gipsy
would be able to hear distinctly where he stood; 'I can't come.'

'It's the lad who isn't quite right in his mind, isn't it?' said
Marjorie; 'the one whom you helped when his boat was upset on the loch?'

'Yes, it will be the poor fellow who had the ducking,' replied Neil.
'He will be quite harmless, only a little odd.  You will nefer be
seeing him with the others; he will always be wandering about by
himself, and sleeping in all kinds of places.  Och! but this will not
do though; he is meddling with our coats that we took off when we were
going to climb.  Hi, Gibbie! you must not be touching these things.'

The lad's handsome, foolish face became overspread with a smile as Neil
came towards him.

'Good Neil--kind Neil,' he said, patting him on the arm.

'Now go away, Gibbie; there's a good lad,' said Neil.  'I will have no
time to be talking to you just now, and you must not be touching our
things.  You had better go home, Gibbie; they will be looking for you.'

'Be quiet, Laddie,' said Reggie authoritatively to the dog, who was
still growling; 'he is not doing any harm.'

Laddie's remonstrances died away in a disapproving grumble, as though
he were saying that he wasn't satisfied yet, and would renew the
subject upon some future occasion.

'If you don't mind,' said Neil, who had been watching the retreating
form of the gipsy, 'I will be going a bit of the way with him.  He iss
trying to cross the Shaking Bog now, and he might be coming to harm in
it.'

'All right, Neil; see you again later,' said the others.

'Tricksy, what's the matter with you?' cried Marjorie; 'you are
trembling like anything, and your teeth are chattering in your head.'

'Cold,' said the little girl, whose small dark face was beginning to
look pinched and unhappy; 'and I'm a little hungry too; we hadn't time
to get anything to eat when you and Hamish came for us so early.'

'Comes of leaving you up there so long,' said Marjorie; 'how careless
we were.  Whatever will your mother say if you get ill.'

'Here, Tricksy,' said Hamish, 'take this coat, I don't want it; and
look, the steamer is not far from the pier; she is coming in at a rate.
We'll have to run if we want to get in as soon as she does.  Take my
hand, and I'll help you along, and you'll be warm in half a jiff.'

Tricksy smiled in a consoled way as she put her hand into the big
outstretched one of the boy; and the whole party set off to race along
the top of the cliff and down to where the pier jutted out from a small
village nestled in a low part of the shore.

Laddie gave an excited bark and scampered beside the others, wondering
what was going to happen.

The steamer was coming in pretty fast, and the pier being encumbered
with nets and with crans of newly caught fish, they reached the
mooring-place just as the hawser was being thrown ashore.

A bright-looking boy of about fourteen years of age was standing on
deck with his hands in his pockets and a tweed cap on the back of his
head, and a tall, sunburnt gentleman was beside him.

'Hulloa, father! hulloa, Allan!' said Tricksy, dimpling and smiling.

Laddie looked up for a minute; then burst into a joyous barking, and
sprang several feet off the ground, turning round in the air before
once more alighting upon his paws; then he tore up and down the pier
like a dog out of his senses.

In the midst of his excitement the gangway was thrown across, and the
sailors stood aside to let the laird and his son leave the vessel.

Immediately Laddie bounded forward and danced around them, barking
until the rocks echoed, and waving his bushy tail in an ecstasy of
welcome.

'Down, Laddie, down,' said Mr. Stewart sternly; and Laddie, after
looking up pathetically for a minute or two, contented himself with
following Allan as closely as he could.

'How do you do, Marjorie?' said Allan.  'Hulloa, Hamish; glad to see
you!  Hulloa, Reggie!--Tricksy, why don't you keep your dog in better
order?'

Tricksy looked hurt.

'He's a very well-trained dog,' she declared.  'He only barks because
he is glad to see you.'

'Tricksy thinks she owns a dog,' said her father, smiling down at the
little girl, 'but in reality the dog owns her.'

'Daddy, you are always teasing me,' said Laddie's eight-year-old
mistress; 'he's a _most_ obedient dog.--Laddie, come here.'

Laddie glanced at her and then looked up adoringly at Allan without
stirring from his side.

'That is so like a dog,' observed Marjorie; 'they always make more fuss
about a boy, even if he hardly notices them, than over a girl who is
always petting them.  It's too bad.'

Tricksy looked mortified.

'It's because he's so glad that Allan has come home,' she said.  'Just
wait, Daddy; he'll obey me sometime.'

Mr. Stewart and Hamish smiled; but the others were clustering round
Allan, asking questions.

'Had you a good journey, Allan?  The steamer's very late.  How are the
measles?  Are many of the boys ill?  Lucky you didn't take it.'

'It's very jolly that you've got such long holidays, Allan,' said
Tricksy, who was walking on her tip-toes with pleasurable anticipation.
'We've got such a jolly game at present; and Neil's helping us.'

'How is old Neil?' asked Allan.

'First-rate,' said Reggie.  'He was with us this morning, gathering
eggs.'

'Gathering eggs!' said Allan; 'you've been up very early.'

'Yes,' replied Marjorie; 'Reggie and Tricksy heard that you were
expected at six in the morning, so they rode over to ask us to be sure
to come and meet you at the steamer.  We got up ever so early--I don't
know when; and what do you think?  After we'd come all that long way
those lazy people were still asleep!'

'Yes,' piped Tricksy; 'at four in the morning we were wakened by having
pebbles thrown up at our windows, and we had to get up and dress in a
brace of shakes.'  (Reggie's face darkened.  Tricksy was fond of using
slang picked up from her brothers, and he felt it his duty to
disapprove.)  'Then we didn't know what to do to fill up the time, so
we went to Neil's mother's cottage, and Reggie knocked at Neil's
window, so that he came out to see what was the matter; and we all went
egg-gathering on the rocks.'

'Where's father?' said Allan suddenly; he has been left behind.'

'Go on--all of you!' called Mr. Stewart, who was engaged in talking to
a respectably dressed man on the pier; 'don't wait for me.--Take Hamish
and Marjorie home, Allan, and give them some breakfast, and tell your
mother I shan't be long.'

'I wonder who that is with father,' said Reggie; 'I can't see his face.
He looks like a stranger.  Father is always having people coming to
talk to him now that he has been made a J.P.'

'Allan,' said Marjorie, 'before we go to your house, I think we had
better go into Mrs. MacAlister's and get a scone or a piece of oat-cake
for Tricksy.  She has gone far too long without food.  You're hungry,
aren't you, Tricksy?'

Tricksy nodded.  Her little dark face was very pale, and she was
struggling with a vexatious desire to cry.

'She always _will_ insist upon doing what the rest of us do, that
child,' said Marjorie in an undertone to Hamish; and Hamish looked
kindly at the youngest member of the band.

'She has no end of pluck, the little kid,' he aid.

'We'll go to Mrs. MacAlister's shop,' said Marjorie.  'I am sure she
must be up by now, and we'll be able to get something.'

The young folks pattered along the unevenly paved streets of the little
village, which had the sea on one side and grassy cliffs on the other.

'It's curious what a lot of people are about so early,' said Marjorie,
as they passed some knots of men and women standing in corners and
talking.  'I wonder whether there is anything unusual going on.'

The party stopped at the door of a small shop which had some cakes and
jars of sweets in the window, and a post-box let into the wall.

'Here's Mrs. MacAlister's,' said Marjorie; 'she has her shop open very
early.'

The little place was in confusion.  The shutters were down, but the
shop had not been tidied, and Mrs. MacAlister herself, when she came
forward to serve her customers, was pale and had red eyes.

'Is anything the matter, Mrs. MacAlister?' asked Marjorie, while the
others looked at the untidy shop in surprise.

'Indeed, Miss Marjorie, I will just be having my shop broken into this
night; and they will be opening the post-box and taking away a lot of
the letters,' and the woman threw herself into a chair and began
talking and lamenting in Gaelic, while the children crowded together
open-eyed.

'No, Master Reggie--no, Miss Marjorie; do not be touching anything,'
said Mrs. MacAlister hurriedly, as they approached the shattered
letter-box; 'it hass all to remain as it iss until the chief constable
and the laird hev seen it; and they will be bringing the Sheriff from
Stornwell; it iss an unlucky day for a poor woman like me, whateffer.'

'It's a dreadful thing,' said Marjorie; 'I hope they'll catch the
thief, Mrs. MacAlister.'

Mr. Stewart, accompanied by the stranger and the island constable, was
approaching the door, so the young people trooped out into the street,
feeling greatly excited.

'Who do you think has done it, Allan?' asked Tricksy in an awestruck
voice.

Allan did not answer, and Reggie said, 'How can he tell, Tricksy?'
somewhat curtly.

Tricksy subsided, and a cart laden with peats coming by, Allan stopped
the driver and asked him to give them a 'lift.'

The man helped Tricksy into the cart, and the others scrambled in the
best way they could, and settled themselves among the peats.

'It's a dreadful business this,' said Marjorie, her eyes shining
brighter and bluer with excitement.

'I don't believe such a thing has ever happened with us before,' said
Allan; 'our people have always had the credit of being very honest.'

'Who can it have been?' said Hamish, after considering for a minute.
'I can't believe that any of our people would have done it.'

'There will be no end of a row,' said Reggie, speaking for the first
time.  'Father will have his work cut out for him, as he is a J.P. now.'

'Yes, and the Sheriff coming here, and everything,' said Marjorie.
'How will you like to meet your friend the Sheriff again, Tricksy?'

There was no reply.

Tricksy had fallen asleep among the peats, her head pillowed upon her
arm, and her soft, dark waves of hair falling over her face.

The others began to realise how sleepy they were, after having risen
before sunrise and spent several hours in the strong sea air, and in
spite of excitement, conversation languished while the cart jolted
along and finally halted at the gates of Ardnavoir, the manor-house of
the island of Inchkerra.




CHAPTER II

THE PIRATES' DEN

'Neil, old fellow,' Allan was saying, 'I wonder how much longer these
people are going to keep us waiting.'

The two were in a boat that was bobbing up and down upon the waves.
The shore close by was low and sandy, with some seaweed-covered stones
forming a convenient landing-place.  On one side the bay swept round in
a curve ending in a rocky headland; and on the other arose low cliffs
with brambles and sea-pinks growing in the crevices.  A breeze was
blowing shoreward; and the waves curled and broke upon the beach with a
pleasant sound.

'Nothing more found out about the robbery yet, I suppose?' said Allan,
after they had waited a little longer.

'Nothing at all,' said Neil.  'It iss a most extraordinary affair, for
there iss not a man on the island one could effer be suspecting of
doing such a thing; and if it wass a stranger, the wonder iss how he
will be managing to come and go without being seen.  The letter-box
wass broken into from inside the house, and whoever will be doing it
must have got in after MacAlister and his wife wass gone to bed.  It
iss a wonder they will not have been hearing anything.'

'There's the MacGregors' pony-cart at last,' said Allan, 'with Marjorie
and Hamish in it.  Let's bring the boat to the landing-stones.  They
will leave the trap at Mrs. MacMurdoch's cottage until we come back.'

A man came out of the cottage and held the little shaggy pony while
Marjorie and her brother took a variety of miscellaneous articles out
of the cart.

'Hulloa, Allan! hulloa, Neil!' they cried; 'where are the others?'

'Don't know,' said Allan, 'they are dawdling somewhere, and we'll never
get off at this rate.  What's all this that you've got with you?'

'Things for the hiding-place,' said Marjorie; 'and a nice lot of
trouble we've had to bring them all this way without breaking any of
them.  The pony was particularly tricky, not having been exercised.
You'll get a basket of crockery, Allan, if you'll go and take it out of
the trap.  Hamish is carrying some provisions and a tablecloth, and
I've got some knives and forks, and just look at this!--It's a girdle
for making scones with.'

'All right,' said Allan; 'chuck them into the boat, and get in
yourself.  But won't it be a little too civilised, bringing all these
things with you?'

'Not at all,' said Marjorie; 'wait till we show you what a jolly place
we're making.  We can spend whole days there without ever coming home,
and we must be able to cook dinner and tea for ourselves.  We've had no
end of trouble to get all these things out of the kitchen without
Elspeth seeing us.  She's so mean, you know, about letting us carry
away anything that doesn't belong to us.'

'All right,' said Allan; 'but when are Reggie and Tricksy going to turn
up?  It would serve them jolly well right if we went off without them.'

'There they are in the distance,' said Hamish; 'at least, these seem to
be the dogs.'

'That's certainly Laddie,' said Allan, standing up and looking, 'and
that little black speck seems to be Carlo; but surely those can't be
Reggie and Tricksy with them?'

All stared at two curious figures that looked like animated bundles of
hay coming along the road.

'It is Reggie and Tricksy,' said Neil, whose sailor's sight enabled him
to see farthest; 'and they're carrying something.'

'Carrying _what_?' said Allan, more and more puzzled.

'Perhaps they're bringing straw for bedding,' suggested Marjorie.

'Then if they are, they're not going to fill up the boat with it on
this trip,' said Allan decidedly.  'We shall be heavily enough loaded
already, with all of ourselves; and they're bringing both the dogs.'

As they came nearer the two walking bundles proved to be indeed Reggie
and Tricksy, carrying enormous bundles of ferns.  Reggie's face peeped,
hot and perspiring, round one side of his bundle, which he clasped with
the utmost extent of his arms; and Tricksy, with a smaller burden,
looked with a long-suffering expression over the fronds which tickled
her little nose.  Beside them Laddie stepped lightly along, his tail
curling over his back; while in the rear a small King Charles spaniel
waddled painfully along upon his little short legs; his tongue hanging
out, and his long ears sweeping the dust of the road.

'Well,' said Allan; 'whatever are they up to now?'

Reggie came down to the shore, picking his way cautiously over the
stepping-stones.

'You might hold the boat steady for me,' he said in a half-stifled
voice; then, stepping on to the thwarts, he lost his footing and fell
forward, load and all, into the boat.

Promptly he struggled to his feet and wiped his forehead, looking
around with a self-congratulatory smile.

'There,' he said, 'these will be a great improvement to the place.  Got
them up, roots and all.'

Meanwhile Hamish had relieved Tricksy of her load, and Neil was helping
the little girl over the stones.

'Why, Tricksy,' said Marjorie, as the little girl took her seat, 'you
_have_ got yourself into a state!'

'I know, but I couldn't help it,' said Tricksy, looking ruefully down
at her little black hands and muddy frock.  'Reggie wanted the ferns
for our garden, and we've been digging away with pieces of wood in the
banks of the burn.  Some of them had roots ever so deep down, and we
couldn't help making ourselves muddy.  I'll wash my face and hands in
the sea.'

'Why ever did you bring _that_ thing with you?' said Allan in disgust,
pointing to the little dog who was standing on the shore.  Already
Laddie had sprung on board and was lying curled up on the stern seat,
confident of his welcome.  'We'll have to leave him in one of the
cottages until we come back.'

'No, no!' cried Marjorie and Tricksy; 'Carlo must come too.'

'Let him come,' said Hamish; 'he won't be in the way.'

The little dog, who had been frisking about and wagging his tail, sat
up and begged, looking from one to the other of the young people with a
beseeching whine.

'You darling,' cried both the girls; and Tricksy sprang out of the boat
and lifted him in.

Allan looked contemptuous as he pushed off; but Laddie gave a little
yelp of satisfaction, and the little spaniel curled himself cosily in
Tricksy's lap, while Marjorie leaned over and petted him when the boys
were not looking.

The steady strokes of the rowers brought the boat rapidly through the
water, while the herring gulls flew screaming around, and a small
island in the middle of the firth came nearer and nearer.

Presently the sea became shallower, and the boat shot up on the beach.

'Here we are,' said Marjorie, springing out first; 'now you must see
what we've made of the place, Allan.  Haul up the boat, Hamish; and
Reggie, you might hand out some of these things.  Take care you don't
drop any of them.  Every one take something, and let's come.'

Laddie waited impatiently while the articles were distributed among the
party, and then followed his young friends with an anticipatory bark.
Carlo was lifted out by Hamish, and immediately set off to chase a gull
which sailed majestically out to sea, and left him barking on the shore.

'Now, Allan,' said Reggie, his dark eyes twinkling; 'you are going to
see what we've been about.'

The island consisted of a beach, rocky on the one side, sandy on the
other, enclosing a stretch of grass and heather.  A tiny hill rose by a
deserted shepherd's hut, and a miniature burn trickled down to the sea.
The place had once been used as a grazing ground for a few sheep, but
of late years had been entirely uninhabited.

'Now look, Allan,' said Reggie, as they stood by the bit of dyke which
protected the windy side of the cottage.

'Wh-e-ew,' said Allan; 'you have made a jolly place of it!'

'Rebuilt the cottage, which had been falling to ruins,' said Reggie.
'That was mostly Neil's doing, and Hamish and I helped.  Filled up the
holes in the thatch with fresh heather.  We all worked at that part of
it.  Then you see we've made a bit of a garden and thrown up the turf
for a dyke on the side where the stone one was broken down.  The shells
on the path were brought up from the beach of this very island.  Isn't
it jolly?'

'Awfully fine,' said Allan.  'Have you given the place a name yet?'

'Why,' said Marjorie, 'it's our Pirates' Den, and we mean to have all
kinds of fun in it all through the summer.  The boat is called the
_Pirates' Craft_ now, and we are going to have no end of fine doings,
particularly if Neil has time to join us.'

Allan shoved his cap to the back of his head, and looked about him
again with brightening eyes.

'Awfully jolly,' was all that he could say.  'Neil, you _are_ a fellow
for hitting upon good ideas.'

'Now come along and see the inside,' said Reggie, leading the way.

'This fine strong door was made by Neil,' said Marjorie; 'a fine time
we had getting it over in the boat.  We haven't got glass for the
windows yet, and I don't suppose we ever shall; but it doesn't matter.
What do you think of our kitchen?'

Hamish pushed open the door, and they all crowded in to see how Allan
would look.

'Well,' said Allan, 'you _have_ done a lot to the place!'

The clay floor had been swept dean and had been repaired in places; the
hearth had been cleared out, and a kettle hung from a hook in the wide
chimney.  Some gaily-coloured pictures had been nailed up over the damp
stains on the walls, and there were some rough chairs and a somewhat
rickety table.  Altogether it was a fairly comfortable little cottage.

'You must have worked very hard at this,' said Allan.

'Indeed we have,' said Marjorie.  'We've been gardening, and hammering,
and carpentering all our spare time since you left; Tricksy and all of
us.  We'd never have stuck to it as we did if it hadn't been for Neil.'

'Good old Neil,' said Allan, giving the elder lad a friendly pat on the
shoulder.  'Well, I must say it's an awfully jolly place, and I wish
I'd been here while you were working on it.'

'There's plenty to do yet,' said Marjorie; 'we are going to make all
kinds of improvements.  Mother and Mrs. Stewart can't make out how we
manage to spend so much time by ourselves and never come to any harm.'

They stood looking around for a few minutes and then Tricksy's voice
broke in, with a little laugh in it, 'Yes, these are very nice chairs,
and it's a very nice table; but are we going to get anything to put on
it?'

All the others laughed.

'Well,' said Allan, 'now I come to think of it, I _am_ a bit peckish.
What do you say, Hamish?'

'Yes,' said Marjorie energetically; 'bustle about, all of you, and
we'll have some dinner before we do anything else.  Get some peats,
will you, Reggie; some of the shepherd's peat-stack is still there, and
it comes in very usefully for us.'

A fire was soon burning on the hearth, and Marjorie suggested that the
boys should go to the rocks on the farther side of the island and try
to catch a few fish while she and Tricksy made scones and boiled the
kettle.

The boys scrambled out as far as they could and threw out their lines;
and when half-a-dozen rock-cod had been caught they returned to find
Marjorie and Tricksy very busy over the fire, while a pile of hot
bannocks smoked beside them.

'Take the dishes and set the table,' said Marjorie, rubbing her eyes,
which smarted a little with 'peat reek,' for the chimney did not vent
very well.

'Where shall we set it?' asked Reggie.

'Outside, of course; what's the good of being in a house when it isn't
raining?  Besides, it's smoky here.'

A tablecloth was spread on a sheltered piece of turf, and secured at
the corners with stones to keep it from blowing away; then the dishes
were set out upon it.

'What are the dogs about?' asked Marjorie, coming out of the cottage
with a plate of smoking fish.

'Rabbiting, I bet,' said Reggie, and began shouting, 'Laddie!  Carlo!'

In a few minutes there was a scamper, and Laddie's head appeared above
a ridge, waiting with pricked-up ears to know what was required of him.

'Dinner, Lad!' said Reggie.

Laddie gave a yelp, sprang up and turned a somersault in the air and
came running, followed by Carlo, who yapped with excitement, his ears
flying behind him and his curly black coat covered with earth and
stalks from burrowing in the rabbit-holes.

'Trust, Laddie,' said Tricksy; and the collie lay down obediently with
his nose on his paws.  Carlo stretched himself beside him, but was
unable to restrain his impatience, and sat up more than once and
begged, undeterred by warnings from Laddie, who feared that his little
friend's disobedience might get him into trouble.

'Isn't it awfully jolly having dinner out-of-doors?' said Marjorie,
whose short curly hair was blowing about her face and glistening in the
sun, while her blue eyes danced with merriment.

'Much nicer than indoors,' said Tricksy.  'I wish we could live here
altogether.'

'Jolly tired you'd get of it,' growled Reggie; 'wait till it rains, and
you find yourself shut up with half-a-dozen other people, and both the
dogs, in one little smoky room.  You'd tell another tale then.'

'What I will be wondering, Miss Marjorie,' said Neil; 'iss why you will
all be taking so much trouble to keep every one but ourselves from
knowing that you have this place?'

'It is only for a little while,' replied Marjorie.  'Of course we will
bring father and mother over here for a picnic some day and give them a
surprise.'

'And _my_ father and mother too,' piped Tricksy; 'we wouldn't want to
keep a thing from Mummie, except just for a little while, for fun.'

'Then how iss it that you will be finding so much pleasure in having a
secret just now?'

Marjorie looked out to sea with a puzzled expression.

'I don't know,' she said at last, with a little laugh; 'except that
it's such fun knowing that we've got a secret!'

'I've been thinking,' said Allan, who was lying full length upon a
ridge and looking towards Inchkerra, 'while we are having such a jolly
time of it over here, what must be the feelings of the man who stole
those letters, now he knows that the police are after him!'

The others all looked towards the island, where they could see the low,
grey cottages of the little village.

'It seems strange that they haven't got him yet,' observed Marjorie.

'I met MacLean the constable from Stornwell this morning,' said Hamish,
'and he told me that they had no trace as yet, and that they believed
it must have been done by some stranger who came over from the
mainland, and got away immediately after the robbery.'

'I hope so,' said Allan; 'it isn't nice to think of any of our people
being dishonest.'

'If it was a stranger,' said Reggie; 'they may never catch him.'

'I heard father say that he would be traced by the money-orders,'
replied Allan.  'It seems that there were several post-office orders in
a registered letter addressed to father, and that is one of the letters
that is missing.  Father says that the thief is sure to try to make use
of the orders sooner or later, and they have sent the numbers to every
post-office in the kingdom.'

'And then the man will be caught!' said Tricksy in an awestruck tone.

'That will be the best chance of getting him,' replied Allan.

'The fellow will find himself in the wrong box then, won't he, Neil?'

'I suppose he will,' replied Neil, rather absently.

'I hope it won't turn out to have been some one on the island,' said
Reggie.

'I hope not,' said Marjorie, looking over to the green fields and brown
heather moors of Inchkerra.  'Isn't it dreadful to think that it may
have been some one whom we know; some one we have spoken to quite
lately?'

'Well, Miss Marjorie,' said Neil, 'do you not think we had better be
getting the table cleared and the things put away?  We have plenty of
work before us, if we are to plant all Reggie's ferns; and we must not
stay too late, for it iss anxious about you that Mrs. Stewart and Mrs.
MacGregor will be.'

'Not they,' said Tricksy; 'no one is anxious when they know that you
are with us, Neil.'

Neil looked gratified, and the young people began to collect the dishes.

'Now, don't you bother about this piece of work,' said Marjorie, when
the boys had carried the plates into the cottage; 'you go and amuse
yourselves out-of-doors while Tricksy and I wash the dishes.'

'I wonder why you don't let them do their share of the disagreeable
work, Marjorie,' said Tricksy a little discontentedly, when the boys
had vanished.

'Pooh,' said Marjorie, with her arms in the hot water; 'what's the
good?  They'd only hate it, and besides, boys always do these things
badly.'

When the dishes and cooking utensils had been arranged upon the
shelves, Marjorie and Tricksy went out into the garden, their eyes
somewhat dim with peat smoke.

'Come along and help, you two,' cried Reggie; 'must get these things in
this afternoon, or they'll be dead before we come back again.  Bother
it, though; we haven't enough tools to go round.'

'Here, Miss Tricksy,' interposed Neil; 'you take this little spade.
This sharp piece of wood will be doing just as well for me.'

'And I've got a pointed piece of slate; I can scrape holes with that,'
said Allan.  'Take this old trowel, Marjorie; it hasn't a handle, but I
don't suppose you'll mind.'

For a long time the young people worked with a will.  The sun beat down
upon the unshaded island, and the breeze blew in from the sea, bringing
a salt taste to the lips and blowing the girls' hair about.  The waves
babbled round the shore, and the gulls sailed overhead and screamed.

When the sun's rays began to slant, and the pile of ferns was
diminishing, Neil kept glancing over his shoulder to watch the tide.

'There now, that's done,' said Reggie, pressing the earth round the
roots of the last fern and then rising; 'it's a jolly long time it has
taken us.  What shall we do next?'

'I think we ought to go now,' said Hamish.  'What do you say, Neil?'

'It is high time we wass making a start,' said Neil.  'The tide iss
rising fast, and the beach iss half covered already.'

'What a pity,' said Tricksy regretfully; 'we've had such a jolly day of
it, haven't we, Marjorie?'

'Awfully jolly,' replied Marjorie; 'but we'll come again soon.--You'll
come too, won't you, Neil?'

'I will be coming as soon as I can be sparing the time, you may be sure
of that, Miss Marjorie,' replied the lad with a smile.

The dogs were recalled from the rabbit-holes and came, their faces
covered with sand, and the boat was pushed off from the shore.

Half-way across the firth, Marjorie turned and looked back regretfully.

'What a pity we have to go home,' she said.  'It would be awfully jolly
to spend all night in the cottage.'

'Look to your oar, Marjorie,' sang out Allan, for the boat was
beginning to turn round.

In a short time they reached the landing-stones, of which the lower
ones were already submerged.

'Won't you all look in and see Mother before you go home?' suggested
Neil, after the boat had been drawn up and secured to the
mooring-chain.  'She'd be pleased if you'd come and say good evening to
her; and Miss Tricksy, you would be seeing the little puffins that
Hamish gave you; Mother tells me that they're coming along finely.'

Mrs. Macdonnell's cottage was not far distant, and the young people
accepted Neil's invitation.

'I'll just tell Mother that you're here,' said Neil, lifting the latch
and vanishing in the interior of the cottage.

'I wonder who Mrs. Macdonnell has with her,' said Allan, in an
undertone.  'I hear voices inside.  Perhaps we had better not go in
this evening.'

They waited for some time; but still no one came to bid them enter.

'This is strange,' said Marjorie.  'I wonder whether Neil has forgotten
us.'

The door was pushed half open, and Neil's face looked out of the
aperture, with his mother's behind him.  Both appeared agitated, and
Neil looked at the others as though he did not see them.

CHAPTER III

A SURPRISE

'Allan,' said Mrs. Stewart, coming downstairs, 'your father has to go
to Stornwell and will not be back until to-morrow, so there will be no
cricket match this afternoon.  I have a note from Mrs. MacGregor,
asking you all to spend the day at Corranmore instead.'

'All right, Mother,' replied Allan; 'when are we to be there?'

'Mrs. MacGregor asks you to come early,' said Mrs. Stewart, consulting
the letter; 'I had better send you in the dog-cart, as it's rather far
to walk.  Duncan is driving your father to the steamer, but he won't be
long.'

'Don't bother about the dog-cart, Mother,' said Allan; 'it would be
much jollier to walk; and we'd like to look in at Mrs. Macdonnell's
cottage on the way and ask what's the matter with Neil.  We haven't
seen him for a day or two.'

'I wouldn't go there to-day, I think,' interposed Mrs. Stewart
hurriedly.  'I don't think Neil will be at home.  I'm afraid the walk
would be too much for Tricksy,' she went on quickly, for the young
people were looking surprised.

'Not if we start now, I think, Mother, and give Tricksy a rest now and
again.  What do you say, Tricksy?'

'Of course I can walk,' said Tricksy.  'I shan't be a bit tired,
Mother.'

Mrs. Stewart looked at her little daughter with a smile.

'I am afraid of your overdoing it, Tricksy; she said.  'You are always
trying to do as much as the others, who are so much older than
yourself.  Well, do as you like; I leave you in Allan's charge, and he
will see that you are not made to walk too fast.'

'All right, Mother,' said Reggie; 'but won't you come a bit of the way
with us?'

'Not this morning, dear.  I will come with you some other time.'

'All right, Mother,' said Reggie; 'but it's a long time since you've
gone anywhere with us.  Cut away upstairs, Tricksy, and get your hat;
it's time we started if we are to take rests on the way.'

'Don't you think Mother is very quiet?' observed Tricksy, as the three
young people, accompanied by Laddie, were crossing the moor.  'I wonder
whether she's sorry about something?'

'I did not notice anything,' said Allan.

Tricksy had almost said, 'No, boys never do, but checked herself in
time.

The road between Ardnavoir and Corranmore led across the northern part
of the island, through fields and moorland.  All the turnings of the
way brought into view fascinating glimpses of the sea, running inland
between brown rocks.  Fishing-boats with white and russet sails lay
upon water turned to a sheet of silver by the sunlight, and grey and
white gulls floated about and screamed.

The breeze was blowing shoreward, tempering the warmth of the sun and
bringing brine and the odour of seaweed to mingle with the perfume of
bell-heather from the moors.

Laddie stepped lightly beside his young friends, waving his tail in the
air, and now and again pausing to investigate a rabbit-burrow or an
interesting tuft of heather or cotton-grass.

'Well, Tricksy, getting tired yet?' said Allan to his little sister
after they had walked between three and four miles.

'Not a bit,' replied Tricksy, trudging along determinedly, but with a
little roll in her gait which betrayed that she _was_.

'I think we'll rest awhile,' said Allan, and the three young folk sat
down upon a patch of fragrant, springy heather, while Laddie, after
looking at them for a minute, surprised at such an early halt, curled
himself up beside them.

'I wish Father would get the yacht out soon,' said Allan, watching the
sea and the fishing-boats.

'Yes,' said Reggie; 'he is very late this year.'

'He won't be long now,' said Allan.  'We are going to have visitors
soon.  Father has written to ask Graham major and Graham minor and
their Pater to come and stay with us as they have such long holidays
this year, owing to the measles.'

'Who are they?' inquired Reggie.

'Fellows from my school.  Did you never hear me speak of them?'

'_I_ didn't,' said Tricksy.  'Are they nice boys?'

'Decent enough.'

'Big or little?'

'One's a small fellow; only been at school one term.  The other's
bigger; not more than eleven, though; more of an age for Reggie than
for me.'

Reggie looked indignant, but said nothing.  There was nothing that
annoyed him so much as to be reminded that he was not yet a very big
boy.

'Well,' said Allan, 'perhaps we had better be going, if you have rested
enough, Tricksy.  Hulloa, there's Euan Macdonnell, the coastguard,
Neil's cousin; we'll stop and ask him if he can come out fishing with
us some day soon.'

'Good day, Euan,' said the young people, pausing to speak, but the
coastguard only saluted and passed on as though he were in a hurry.

Reggie looked at Allan in surprise.

'Been sent on a message, I suppose,' said Allan, 'and hasn't time to
talk.  The whole island seems to be upset by this affair at the
post-office.  I wish they'd hurry up and catch the fellow and be done
with it.  What's the matter with Laddie now?'

The collie, who had been sniffing about, following up a scent, had
suddenly given a bark and sprang over a dyke, and was now yelping and
baying excitedly as he jumped about on the other side.

'Hamish and Marjorie, I bet,' said Allan; and sure enough, two heads
appeared above the dyke, a good-natured one and a mischievous one, the
latter crowned by a scarlet cap on the top of a mass of fair curly hair.

'We thought we'd give you a surprise,' they said, 'but Laddie spoilt it
for us.  Good dog, Laddie, lie down,' for Laddie's manifestations of
delight were taking the form of a loud baying which drowned all
attempts at conversation.

'Trust, Laddie!' said Tricksy in her little soft voice; but Laddie took
no notice.

'Laddie, trust!' said Reggie severely; and Laddie subsided at once,
surprised that his attentions should be so little appreciated.

Tricksy uttered a reproachful sigh, caused by her dog's inattention to
her commands.

'When does your mother expect us?' inquired Allan.

'Any time before dinner,' said Hamish.  'That's half-past one, and it's
only eleven now.  We've got any amount of time.  What do you say to
coming and looking at the gipsy encampment in the Corrie Wood?  They're
breaking up camp and leaving the island to-morrow, so we may not have
another chance of seeing them.'

'All right,' said the others, and they trooped off to the tiny wood
nestling in a hollow through which a burn trickled, and from whence a
trail of smoke came blowing across the fresh green foliage of the trees.

All was bustle and stir in the gipsy encampment.  Two carts were
standing at the entrance to the hollow, and upon these the gipsies were
piling their household goods--iron pots and kettles, bundles of rags,
some gaudy crockery, and a variety of miscellaneous articles whose use
it would be hard to determine.

At the sight of the young people the gipsies smiled a welcome, and the
men took off their hats.  Some small black-eyed children toddled
forward, and stood staring, with their fingers in their mouths.

'Trust, Laddie!' said Allan; for two mongrel curs had rushed out and
barked, whereupon Laddie had stiffened his back and was growling
defiance.

Laddie was obliged to content himself with glaring at the other dogs
and making a few remarks to express his contempt for gipsy dogs, and
his view of their impertinence in presuming to look at his young ladies
and gentlemen.

'Tell your fortune, pretty lady,' said a woman to Marjorie, with a
smile which displayed her white teeth; but Marjorie shook her head.

'You are leaving Inchkerra?' said Allan to one of the men.

'Yes, sir.  We start for Ireland to-morrow, in a sailing boat.'

'You haven't stayed very long,' observed Marjorie.

'Three months, lady.  A long time for the gipsies.'

'Will you ever come back again?' inquired Marjorie.

The man shook his head.

'Can't say, lady.  Maybe yes, maybe no.  We never can tell.  Thanks,
master; good luck to you,' he said, touching his straggling forelock as
Allan slipped a few coins into his hand.

'Good-bye, masters; good-bye, pretty ladies,' cried the gipsies in
farewell.

Some distance from the hollow, a tall, loosely-made youth rose
unexpectedly from where he had been basking in the sun, by the side of
a dyke which screened him from the cold wind.

In the weak, handsome face and roving eyes the young people recognised
Gibbie, the half-witted gipsy lad.  An expression of disappointment
crossed his face as he looked over the group and seemed to miss some
one.

'Neil no with you,' he murmured.  'Want to see Neil.  Was not at home.'

'Can we give him any message from you?' inquired Allan.

'Tell Neil, Gibbie go away.  Long way; want to see Neil to say
good-bye.'

'Very well,' said Allan.  'When we see him, we'll tell him.'

A crafty smile flitted over the lad's face, and he lowered his voice to
a mysterious whisper.

'Neil will be pleased soon,' he said.  'Good Neil, good Neil.  Neil
will be very rich, richer than the Gorjos; has a piece of paper worth
hundreds of pounds.  Tell him to look for it.  Gibbie go long way off.'

'Poor fellow,' observed Allan to Hamish, as the gipsy returned to his
lazy basking on the heather; 'he is quite crazy; can't speak
connectedly for two minutes at a time.'

'There is one good point in Gibbie's character,' said Hamish; 'he knows
that Neil saved his life, and he is grateful.  I think the island won't
be sorry to see the last of him, though.  He hasn't lived with his
tribe for weeks.  He had a den of his own in the banks of the burn that
flows past our house; a queer place, far up in the hills.'

'Look,' said Reggie, 'that must be the gipsies' boat over there, off
the south side of the island; and a little boat is going out to it with
some of their things.'

'And there are the carts going down,' said Allan; 'it won't be long
before the camp is broken up.'

'Pity we couldn't go gipsying for a little while,' observed Marjorie;
'just for the summer.  It would be such fun wandering about from place
to place.  But look at the tide coming up in Cateran Bay; the waves are
dashing on the shore and making the most beautiful foam.  Would there
be time for us to go down to the beach for a little while?'

'Plenty,' said Hamish; 'Mother doesn't expect us before one o'clock.'

'Come along, then,' said Marjorie; 'let's run;' and they all raced down
to the shore, Laddie with them, the dog jumping with all four paws off
the ground, and barking in anticipation of sport.

Breeze and tide together were flinging up little breakers which curled
on the shore and then retreated, only to be sent up again by the next
roller.  A fascinating game was to run down to the very edge of a
retreating wave, with one's toes almost within the line of foam; to
wait until it gathered itself up again, and then fly to avoid being
overtaken by the water which came hissing and bubbling over the pebbles.

Laddie, after watching the fun for a minute or two, suddenly rushed off
with a bark, and returned dragging a huge flat stone which he deposited
at Allan's feet; then he stood eagerly waiting, making a variety of
signs to show Allan that he expected him to do something with it.

'Fetch, Laddie!' said Allan, throwing the stone as far as he could.

Laddie uttered a joyful yelp and sprang after it, returning with it in
his mouth to ask Allan to throw it again.

'Laddie, fetch!' cried Allan, throwing it into the sea this time, and
Laddie plunged into the water and came back dripping.

He laid down the stone and shook himself, to the great inconvenience of
Marjorie; then he jumped about, baying for Allan to throw the stone
once more.

The shouts and laughter and Laddie's barking were making a tumult which
vied with the noise of wind and waves, when Hamish touched Allan's arm
and pointed to the sky.

'Oh, I say,' said Allan, 'we really ought to go; it's going to pour
like anything, and the girls will get wet.'

'I'm wet enough already, I think, especially about the feet,' murmured
Tricksy; while Marjorie's lips tightened.  She did not like the boys to
show that they thought her less hardy than themselves.

Some large drops on the stones warned them to hasten; and they reached
the doctor's house just as the storm burst.

Mrs. MacGregor, a pretty, young-looking lady, ran down into the hall to
meet them.

'My dear Tricksy,' she cried, as she took the little girl's wet, cold
hand, 'you are soaking!  Your feet are drenched!'

'It's all right, Mrs. MacGregor,' piped Tricksy; 'we've been having a
fine game.  Hamish, you've let Laddie in, and his feet are making wet
marks all over the floor!'

'Never mind Laddie,' said Mrs. MacGregor; 'take her upstairs and give
her dry shoes and stockings, Marjorie, and then come to dinner, all of
you.'

'You know, Marjorie,' observed Tricksy, as the elder girl somewhat
anxiously assisted her to pull off her wet stockings; 'you know you are
always telling me that we must be plucky and do all the things they
want us to do when we play with boys, or else they think we're a bore.'

'That's all very well, Tricksy,' replied Marjorie, 'but what shall we
do if you get ill?  Your mother would stop your playing with us
altogether if that happened.'

'_I_ get ill with playing out of doors and having fun,' returned
Tricksy scornfully; 'I'm not such a duffer, Marjorie.'

Just before dinner Dr. MacGregor came in, 'such a dear of a man,' as
Tricksy had once described him, with bright blue eyes and curly hair
like Marjorie, and a kind expression like Hamish.

'How do you do, Reggie?' he said.  'How do you do, Allan?  Do you like
school as much as ever?  My dear,' turning to his wife, 'I shall have
to start immediately after lunch, and here is a note asking you to----'

The remainder of the sentence was lost, but the boys could see that
both Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor were looking very grave.

'I am sorry that Mrs. MacGregor and I must leave you,' said the doctor
while the meal was in progress, 'but I daresay you will manage to amuse
yourselves without getting into mischief; eh, Marjorie?' smiling at his
daughter, whose eyes flashed a saucy answer.  'You can have the boat
down if the rain keeps off.'

But the rain showed no disposition to keep off, despite the anxious
glances which were directed towards the window.  When the clouds
gathered once more in threatening masses, and the rain came lashing the
panes, Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor took their departure in a closed
carriage, warning Hamish that the boat was not to be used unless the
sea went down.

'Bother!' said Tricksy, looking at the waves, which were tumbling over
each other and whitening with foam; 'what are we to do while it rains?'

'Sit round the nursery fire, of course, and talk,' said Marjorie.

An immense pile of peats was built up on the hearth of the cosy, untidy
room which had been the MacGregors' nursery; and the young folk sat
round the 'ingle-neuk' and discussed matters dear to the heart of
gamesome youth.

Suddenly Marjorie looked up and said, 'Hurrah! the rain's stopped.
What shall we do?'

'Too stormy to get the boat out,' said Hamish, rising and going to the
window; 'it's still very rough, and there will be another squall soon.'

'_I_ know,' said Marjorie; 'let's play hide-and-seek.  No, not a
rubbishy game in the house,' she said, meeting Allan's look of
disapproval; 'a real good game out of doors, in the garden and the
sheds and the ruins.  The rain will only make it jollier, and those who
mind getting wet are funks.'

With the wind blowing in gusts, and sudden showers splashing down from
all the roofs, the game promised some fun.  Dr. MacGregor's was a
first-rate place for hide-and-seek, with a number of outhouses built
round a paved court, and the ruins of an old castle overlooking the
garden.

Marjorie and Reggie stayed at 'home' in the front lobby, where they
could hear calls both from out of doors or within; and the hiders
dispersed themselves quickly.

Soon three shouts were heard, coming from different directions; and the
pursuers ran out into the rain, which was beginning to fall again.

Hamish was quickly discovered in a window of the old ruin, for he could
not resist the temptation of grinning good-naturedly down from his
perch; but he escaped along the broken flooring while they were waiting
at the foot of a stairway, and reached 'home' before they were aware.

'You didn't give us enough of a chase,' cried Marjorie to him through
the streaming pane; then she went off, rather annoyed, to look for the
others.

They hunted for some time among the outhouses, getting shower-baths of
drops from the eaves; but no one was to be found.  At last they saw a
movement among some straw in the byre, and Marjorie made a dash
forward, just too late to catch Allan, who slipped out and made for the
door.

Reggie barred his passage.

'Unfair--different directions!' cried Allan; for it was the rule among
the Stewarts and MacGregors that when two were chasing one they must
both keep to the same route; and Reggie stood aside.

They were pretty fairly matched, pursuers and pursued; and for a long
time Allan led the two others a chase among the maze of buildings; but
at last, his foot slipping upon the wet paving-stones, he was captured
by a bold dash from Marjorie.

'Only Tricksy now,' gasped Marjorie, pushing back her wet hair, which
was clinging about her face; 'we haven't seen a sign of her; where can
she be?'

'You have run enough,' suggested Allan; 'go in and let one of us take
your place.'

Marjorie flashed a glance of indignation at him, annoyed that he should
suppose that she was not going to see the thing out, and after drawing
a few long breaths she and Reggie started off again.

By this time the rain had ceased, and a pleasant smell was rising from
the damp earth and dripping trees.

No little footprints were to be seen in the garden; and it was
impossible that Tricksy could have escaped observation had she been in
the ruins or in any of the outhouses.

They hunted all over the house, then went into the field, and even
climbed the dyke which separated the doctor's grounds from the
moorland; but no Tricksy was to be seen.

'I believe she has gone beyond bounds,' said Allan, who, with Hamish,
had grown tired of waiting and had wandered out to see what was going
on; 'we said the garden and the field, you know.'

'Not she,' declared Reggie, perched outside upon the dyke, with the
wind drying his wet face and clothing; 'we have taught her to play
fair.  She is only lying low in some place that we haven't thought of.
Let's shout to her to call "cuckoo."'

They raised their voices and cried, 'Call cuckoo, Tricksy;' and Laddie,
who had been shut in the house to keep him from spoiling sport, but who
had made good his escape behind the boys, pricked up his ears and
resolved to be useful.

A muffled voice was heard in response, and Laddie, with a bark, sprang
towards the peat-stack and stood before it, wagging his tail and trying
to make an entrance with nose and paws.

Some of the peats were tumbled aside, and Tricksy emerged, looking very
indignant.

'A nice way to play,' she said, 'setting Laddie on to me when you
couldn't find me yourselves.'

They tried to explain, but Tricksy's eyes were full of contempt, and
her small figure seemed to grow taller with offended dignity.

'Such a nice hiding-place,' she said; 'and now you've gone and spoilt
it all.'

'Don't be a little silly, Tricksy,' said Reggie to her in an undertone;
and Tricksy allowed her dignity to subside.

Fresh hiding-places were chosen; and when at last the young people were
so tired as to be disinclined to run any more, Marjorie suggested going
indoors to see whether tea were ready.

The dining-room table was bare, and all faces fell.

'I'll just go into the kitchen and see what Elspeth is about,' said
Marjorie; 'perhaps the servants are forgetting us.'

In the stone-floored kitchen, whither they all trooped after Marjorie,
Elspeth was sitting knitting by the fireside.

'Elspeth, when is tea going to be ready?' inquired Marjorie, rather
impatiently.

The girl looked up at her, then down again at her knitting with
pretended indifference.

'Tea, Miss Marjorie?  I wass thinking you would not be wanting any tea
to-day.'

Marjorie's lips tightened, but she kept down the rising temper with an
effort.

'Why not?' she asked.  'Here are Allan and Reggie and Tricksy from
Ardnavoir; and we want our tea, please.'

Elspeth looked up, and seemed to see the others for the first time.

'Would you ask the young ladies and gentle men to wipe their feet on
the rug, Miss Marjorie if you please?  They are spoiling my kitchen
floor.'

This request made the whole troop feel uncomfortable, and they began
shifting from one foot to the other, conscious that they must have
brought more mud into the house than the authorities were at all likely
to approve of.

'All right,' said Marjorie impatiently; 'we are not coming in any
further; but will you please get tea ready for us as soon as you can?'

'Get tea ready!  And how am I to do that, Miss Marjorie, if you please,
when the girdle hass been taken away out of the kitchen?  I cannot be
making scones on the open fire.'

Marjorie turned red and bit her lip.

'Oh, never mind the girdle,' she said.  'We'll do without scones for
one day.'

'Indeed, Miss Marjorie, I never saw tea without scones.  That may be
the way in foreign parts, but there never wass tea in the West
Highlands without scones; and I will be thinking you will have to wait
till the girdle comes home again.'

A flash darted out of Marjorie's eyes; and she remained rooted to the
spot for a minute.  Then she took a sudden resolve and turned away,
elbowing the others out of the room.

'Cat!' she muttered; 'I'll be even with her yet.  Never mind, people;
if she won't give us our tea we can get it for ourselves.  Get cups and
things out of the pantry, Hamish; and Reggie, you come with me.'

The larder window was rather high up from the ground and was secured by
several iron bars.

With some difficulty they pushed up the lower sash a little way; and
through the opening thus made Reggie contrived to wriggle his slight,
thin body.

'Is there anything there worth carrying away?' said Marjorie, standing
on tip-toe and peering in.

'Here's a cake,' said Reggie; 'and there are several pots of jam.'

'All right, hand them out.  There's a pie; we might as well have that;
serve Elspeth right for getting into a temper.  Now let's come in with
what we've got.'

Reggie squeezed himself through the opening, feet foremost, and dropped
to the ground.

'Here--Hamish--Allan;' said Marjorie, entering the house; 'take these
things to the dining-room.  Have you any plates?  No.  I'll get them
out of the pantry; and knives and spoons too.  Bother, she's got the
teapot in the kitchen; I'll have to go in and get it.'

She strode into the kitchen with flashing eyes and a haughty step; then
stopped short in amazement.

'Elspeth!' she exclaimed; 'whatever are you crying for?'

There was no answer.

'Is it because of the girdle?'

The girl shook her head; the tears falling upon the knitting which she
was holding with trembling hands.

'Is it because we are taking the things out of the larder?'

'Not that, Miss Marjorie.'

'Then whatever is the matter?'

By this time all the others had crowded in, looking very much
astonished.

'Elspeth, are you ill?' asked Tricksy, her large dark eyes growing very
round in her little face.

'No, Miss Tricksy; no, Miss Marjorie; it will be none of that; it will
be Neil.'

'Neil!' exclaimed Marjorie, while the others looked more and more
amazed.  'What's the matter with him?  Neil is Elspeth's cousin, you
know,' she explained.

'Neil, poor lad; he will hev been arrested, Miss Marjorie.  They will
hev taken him up for robbing the post-office!  Eh, Miss Marjorie, your
mother said you weren't to know, and it iss me that will hev been
telling you.  Och! the disgrace to an honest family!' and the girl
threw her apron over her head and moaned and lamented to herself in
Gaelic, while they all stood around her, speechless.




CHAPTER IV

THE COMPACT

'Neil!' said Reggie; 'it's impossible.'

Marjorie had become deadly white, and Allan pushed the hair back from
his forehead and stood staring, his hands in his pockets.  Reggie
pranced backwards and forwards, in uncontrollable excitement, while
Tricksy's dark eyes were growing as large as saucers in her little face.

'Elspeth,' said Marjorie sharply; 'you're talking nonsense, it can't be
true.'

'Indeed, Miss Marjorie, it's the truth I will be telling you; the
police came and arrested him before his mother's eyes that very day
just after he had been out with you on the boat, and he's before the
Sheriff in Stornwell this very day!'

'But, Elspeth, he did not do it!  Nobody could believe that old Neil
would do such a thing!'

'Indeed, Master Allan, there are those that do, although Neil, poor
laddie, would no more do such a thing than the laird himsel, or the
king upon his throne!  Appearances are against him, poor lad; and it's
for appearances that they've arrested him.'

'What appearances, Elspeth?  Tell us about it?'

'Well, Miss Marjorie, it's just this; one of the money orders that was
stolen was sent back from Edinburgh Post Office; and it was Neil who
had sent it away in a letter.  It's from that they make out that it was
Neil who stole it.'

'Neil couldn't have done such a thing,' broke in Reggie, with signs of
a storm in his voice.

'Does Mother know? and Father?' asked Tricksy breathlessly.

'Indeed, Miss Tricksy, the laird's away at the trial, and Mrs. Stewart
too, to be with Mrs. Macdonnell, poor soul; and Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor
went away this afternoon.  The whole island's away, except just those
whose work obliges them to stay; and it's a sore disgrace to a
respectable family, whateffer.'

'That's all right then, if father's there,' said Reggie confidently.
'He knows Neil far too well to believe such a thing of him, no matter
what may have happened.'

'The laird can't help him much if the case goes against him, Master
Reggie.  It's an awful thing that the money order should have come out
of the poor lad's letter; and it looks very bad.'

'But Neil couldn't have taken it,' protested Reggie; 'no matter where
the order came from, it wasn't Neil who stole it.'

'Well, anyhow,' said Tricksy, 'I'll never speak to the Sheriff again,
no matter what he does, if he lets Neil be put in prison.'

'The Sheriff only has to do his duty, Miss Tricksy; and if things go
against poor Neil he can't help him.'

'Well, we'll stand up for him, no matter who doesn't,' declared Allan;
'and we'll write and tell him so.'

'Of course we shall,' joined in the others.

'It's very kind of you, I'm sure,' said Elspeth, wiping her eyes; 'we
must just hope for the best.  And now, young ladies and gentlemen, you
must have your tea and not think too much about it; and Miss Marjorie,
I'm thinking I must just make you a few scones!'

Little appetite was left to the young folks for the meal; and the
half-hearted clatter of knives and plates soon died away.

'We'll stand up for old Neil, no matter what happens,' was the upshot
of their deliberations; and Elspeth, coming in and out, dried her tears
furtively with the corner of her apron.

Later in the evening a dog-cart drove up; and Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor
alighted.

Marjorie ran down into the hall, while the others all clustered about
the banisters and looked down.

'Mother,' said Marjorie, with a set face, 'we know about Neil; tell us
how things have gone for him to-day.'

'The case is against him, so far,' replied Mrs. MacGregor.

A groan burst from upstairs, and Marjorie set her lips tightly.

'What will be done to him?' inquired Tricksy piteously.

'Nothing yet, dear; the case is not finished.  He has to go to
Edinburgh to be tried; and we hope that something else may be found out
before that time.'

'Shall we see him before he goes?'

'No, he will not come back before then.'

'Where is he?' demanded Allan.

'At present he is in the--in the County Jail,' faltered Mrs. MacGregor.

'Poor Neil,' burst from the children.

'He will be kindly treated,' interposed the doctor; 'and it is only
until the case comes up in Edinburgh.'

The tears rolled over Tricksy's cheeks; and Marjorie turned away and
looked out of the window.

'And now,' said the doctor cheerily, 'you must not take the matter
tragically yet.  We must hope for the best.  Neil must stand his trial
like a man, and it isn't often that a miscarriage of justice takes
place.  He will have the very best advice, your father and I will see
to that; and you may depend upon it that some fresh evidence will turn
up before then, which will show matters in an altogether different
light.  In the meanwhile you must not go about looking doleful, as
though you had made up your minds already that Neil would not be able
to show a good case for himself.'

It was hard to be cheerful; and the young folk clustered about in
melancholy groups until the dog-cart arrived, when the Stewarts
unwillingly took their leave, with many promises on both sides to
communicate whatever might come to light in the meanwhile.

'Now, Duncan,' said Allan, after the dog-cart had started; 'tell us
what has happened?'

'Indeed, Master Allan; it iss ahl ferry unlucky indeed; and it iss
ferry sorry I will be for puir Neil and for Mrs. Macdonnell.  You will
be knowing the night before the robbery wass committed Neil will have
been spending the evening with the MacAlisters.  He wass expecting a
letter; and it will be a stormy evening and the mail steamer will not
be coming in till ferry late so that the letters wass not sent away
that night, but Neil wass allowed to look among them for his own.
There wass a registered letter for the laird; and it come out in the
evidence that Neil would see it, and that no one else but only Mr. and
Mrs. MacAlister and Neil himself could have peen knowing that it wass
there.'

'But what could make them think that Neil would break into the
post-office and steal a letter?  Neil, of all people!'

'Well then, the ferry next day Neil will pe sending away a letter, and
in that letter wass one of the ferry orders that had been in the
laird's letter.'

'But how do they know that it was the same order; and how can they be
certain that it was Neil who sent it away.  There must have been a
great many orders presented in the Edinburgh Post Office that day.'

'They know that it wass the laird's order, Master Allan, because the
gentleman who had sent away the orders had kept the number of them all;
and they know that Neil had sent it away because the man he sent it to
took it out of the envelope in ta post-office, and there wass a letter
with it signed clearly in his own handwriting; "Neil Macdonnell."'

Allan sat up and pushed his cap to the back of his head.

'It's very strange,' he said; 'there must be some mistake!'

'How did poor old Neil take it, when he was arrested and all that?'
asked Reggie.

'Neil wass ferry much astonished, Master Reggie, and could not pelieve
it at ahl.  He said the order he had sent away wass not the laird's but
another one ahltogether.  Afterwards he wass ferry angry; and in court
he stood up as prave as a lion and said he had neffer seen the order
and that he had neffer sent it away whateffer, and that it wass all
lies.  They will be showing him his name written on the order; and he
had to own that it wass his handwriting, but he will not be knowing how
it had come on the order.  Then when some of the people didn't seem to
pelieve him, he wass ferry angry again, wass Neil; and when the Sheriff
said he wass to go and pe tried at Edinburgh he went out of the court
in a terrible rage and a fury; and he said to us ahl that he would not
go to Edinburgh, because if ta people here who wass his friends didn't
peliefe him, they would not pe peliefing him neither in Edinburgh where
they wass ahl strangers to him, and that he would be finding some way
of escaping pefore he wass sent there and not be pringing disgrace upon
an honest family.  He will be saying a lot of foolish things, will
Neil, puir lad.'

Mr. and Mrs. Stewart were in the hall when their children arrived.
Tricksy flew into her mother's arms and burst into tears; Allan turned
a grave, concerned face towards his parents; and Reggie looked
inquiringly at his father without speaking.

'I see that you have been told about Neil,' said the laird in his kind
voice.  'We had been hoping that the matter might have been cleared up
without delay, and that it would be unnecessary that you should be
informed of it.  However, you need not despair; Neil is not the lad to
have committed a dishonest action, and I am convinced that we shall
find some evidence that will clear him.'

'And now,' said Mrs. Stewart, 'you must all go to bed, Allan as well as
the others.  It is late, and Tricksy is quite exhausted.  Sleep well;
you don't know what news may come in the morning!  Something may be
found out by that time.'

'I am sure,' said Tricksy still tearfully to Reggie as he said
good-night to her in her little bed; 'I don't know what I should do if
I hadn't a mother!  It's great fun running about with you and the
others, and staying out-of-doors for whole days at a time; but when we
get hurt or sorry, it's Mummie that we want!'

Little sleep came to the boys that night.  Each turned and tossed
uneasily upon his bed, trying not to disturb the other; falling into
broken dreams of being with Neil on the rocks in their own island, and
awakening to a sense of the reality.

Early in the morning it became useless to keep up the pretence any
longer.  They rose and dressed and went out-of-doors.

By the garden gate two shaggy ponies were standing; and the boys were
not at all surprised to see Marjorie and Hamish, who turned anxious
faces towards them.

'Well,' said Marjorie, 'anything new?'

'Nothing since we saw you.'

'There hasn't been time, of course,' said Marjorie.  'We couldn't rest,
so we came along to see you.'

'Let's go down to the shore,' said Allan.  'Can't talk here.'

A window was thrown open on the upper story of the house, and a little
voice cried, 'Wait a minute, people! don't go away!  I'm coming too.'

'Tricksy awake already!' said Marjorie; 'that child will make herself
ill.'

In a few minutes a little figure emerged from the front door, and
Tricksy ran towards them.

'What are you going to do?' she said.  'Is there any news?'

'Nothing at all, Tricksy,' said Marjorie; 'we were only going down to
the shore to talk.'

The little girl slipped her hand confidingly into Allan's and walked
beside him, trying to accommodate her steps to his long stride.

'Hullo, there's Euan Macdonnell,' said Allan.  'He was at the trial
yesterday; let's ask him about it.'

The fine frank-faced young coastguard touched his cap to the girls and
waited to be spoken to.

'Euan,' said Allan abruptly; speaking in Gaelic, which was always most
convenient for the islanders if a conversation was likely to be long;
'we know about Neil.  You were there; tell us about the trial.'

'Well, Mr. Allan, it was a very bad business, and we none of us
expected it to go as it did.  Poor Neil was most frightfully cut up
about it, and no wonder, poor fellow.  What he felt most was that some
of the people were against him when he thought they would be quite sure
to believe in his honesty, no matter what might have happened.'

'So they ought,' declared Allan.  'Any one who knows Neil in the least
would know that whether he sent away that order or not, he would never
have stolen it, and that there must have been a mistake.'

'Of course there must have been,' said Euan, 'and I'm glad to hear you
say so, Mr. Allan.'

'Suppose things were to go wrongly,' said Marjorie; 'I mean, supposing
that nothing is found out that will help to clear Neil when he comes
before the Edinburgh court, what will he have to expect?'

Tricksy's eyes were growing wider, and the pink in Marjorie's cheeks
became deeper.

'I am afraid the penalty for the poor lad would be two or three years
in prison, Miss Marjorie.  It's a serious crime, you know;
house-breaking, and robbing his Majesty's mails.  We can only hope it
won't come to that.'

The hearers all drew a long breath, like a gasp.

'Let's go down and sit on the rocks,' said Marjorie abruptly.  'Now,
Euan, tell us how you think it happened.'

'Well,' said Euan, 'the only explanation is, that that order came into
Neil's possession without his knowing it.'

Allan nodded.

'You see, Miss Marjorie,' continued Euan, 'Neil made no secret of
having sent off a post-office order that day.  He had got one on the
evening before, when he was at the MacAlisters', and he put it in the
pocket of his reefer jacket.  You know that new churn he got for his
mother?  Well, he was paying for that by instalments and this was one
of the payments.  The day after the robbery, he went into the
post-office, got the order, put it into an envelope containing a note
to say that he hoped to send the last instalment next week, and sent it
away.  But the order that came out of the letter was not the one that
he bought at Mrs. MacAlister's that night; and the curious thing is,
that he found the order that he believed he had sent away, still in his
coat pocket when he went to look.  At least that's the story he tells,
poor lad.'

'Then,' said Allan, 'how do you account for the wrong order being in
the letter?'

Euan pondered a minute, and then said, 'Mr. Allan, there's only one
explanation of it, so far as I can see.  Some person must have been
trying to screen himself by throwing suspicion on to Neil.  You say
that there was more than one order in the laird's letter?'

'Yes,' replied Allan, 'and they don't seem to have heard anything about
the others yet.'

'They will turn up some day, no doubt, and then the whole matter may be
cleared up; but in the meanwhile there's nothing to go by to help the
poor lad.  Perhaps they may be traced before the case comes up in
Edinburgh.

'Oh, I hope so,' cried the girls, 'and then they'll get their finger on
the real culprit?'

'The person who did it must have put the order into Neil's pocket,'
said Allan.  'How could they have managed it and what would make them
think of Neil?'

'Well, Mr. Allan; you know how these country post-offices are kept.
The letter-box is in the MacAlisters' kitchen, which is at the same
time their shop, and where every one goes in and out.  The box is never
locked; and after the letters are sorted they often lie on the table
for hours, waiting until the postman comes to take them away.  Any one
who was not honest could easily slip into the kitchen when Mrs.
MacAlister's back was turned and do what they liked with the letters;
but such a thing has never happened before.  Now, whoever committed the
robbery has seen that Neil was in the post-office that evening, turning
over the letters; and he saw that Neil got a money order to send away.
All this made him think that Neil was the one to fasten the guilt on
to, so after breaking into the post-office that night he slipped into
the house, unknown to Neil or his mother, and put the order where Neil
was likely to take it for his own.'

Allan nodded approvingly when the coastguard paused in what was an
unusually long effort for him.

There's something in that,' he said.  'But who would have done such a
thing?'

'There is one man on the island who might have done it, and that man
has had every opportunity.'

'Who is that?'

'Do you know a lad called Andrew MacPeters?  He works for the
MacAlisters sometimes.'

'I know him,' said Reggie, who had been listening but saying little.
'A red-headed man with foxy eyes.'

'The same,' said Euan.  'He is always in and out of the house; and most
likely he was there that night and saw everything that went on.  He has
always hated Neil since he was a lad, and got a beating from Neil, who
was much smaller than himself.  He would only be too pleased to do him
an ill turn.  It shows a nasty, mean disposition that he should have
taken the trouble to break open the box and throw the letters all about
the shop when he only had to open it and take out what he wanted.  Keep
a look-out on that man, young ladies and gentlemen, if you want to find
out what is at the bottom of the whole affair.'

'We will,' they all said.

'And if you could find out anything before the case comes up,' said
Euan, 'you might be the means of saving the lad and his mother too; for
she will be heart-broken if her son is not cleared, and that quickly.'

'We'll do all we can,' said Marjorie.

'Yes,' said Allan slowly and deliberately; 'I vote we all make up our
minds not to rest until we find out who did it and get Neil cleared.'

'We will, we will,' cried all the others in a chorus.

'How are we going to manage it?' asked Tricksy, with eyes and mouth
open.

The others did not reply.

'We will make a compact,' cried Marjorie, rising with sparkling eyes,
'and we'll all sign an agreement; something like this: "We hereby
promise never to rest until we find out who committed the robbery and
show that Neil didn't do it."'

'Yes,' said Tricksy; 'let's write it at once.'

'No pens or paper here,' said Marjorie; 'we'll write it down when we
get into the house.  Euan, you must join the compact too; we'll send
you a copy for yourself.  Each of us shall have his or her own copy to
carry about wherever we go; and each copy shall be signed by every
member of the compact.  We'll form ourselves into a Society to prove
that Neil is innocent.'

'So we shall,' said Allan; 'good idea that of yours, Marjorie.'

'That's all right,' said the youngest member of the Society; 'now, when
are we going to begin?'

'You must give us time, Tricksy,' said Allan; 'it won't be so very
easy;' but all the faces wore a more cheerful expression.

'There's a telegraph boy,' said Marjorie suddenly, 'do you see
him?--just going in at the gates of Ardnavoir.  Perhaps it's some news
of Neil.'

'Run, Reggie,' said Allan, 'you are the best runner; and see whether
it's anything of that kind.'

Reggie started off, and after an interval he came speeding back again.

It's something to do with Neil,' he said; 'come quickly.'




CHAPTER V

SUSPENSE

All crowded into the hall, where Mr. Stewart was standing with an open
telegram in his hand.

The laird was looking very grave.

'Most unfortunate,' he said.  'Neil has done a very foolish thing.  He
has broken out of the County Gaol and disappeared.  I regret extremely
that it should have happened.  It will prejudice many people against
him.'

Mrs. Stewart was looking extremely concerned; and the young people
crowded together in speechless dismay.

'Puir Neil,' said Duncan in the background, 'he said he would not go to
Edinburgh to pring disgrace on his family whateffer.'

'He would have done far better to have gone up for his trial,' said Mr.
Stewart.--'Good morning, Dr. MacGregor'--for the doctor had come in to
hear the news, having been summoned from a visit in the
neighbourhood--'unfortunate affair this; it's a pity Neil couldn't have
been more patient.'

The doctor read the telegram and looked extremely disappointed.

'Foolish fellow!' he exclaimed.  'If the lad was innocent he should
have stayed to see the thing out; he has only made things a dozen times
worse for himself by doing this.'

'But, Father,' said Marjorie, 'Neil couldn't have taken the letters;
they are sure to find out that he is innocent.'

The doctor was looking angry.

'He has made it far more difficult for his friends to see him through,'
he declared.  'Foolish, foolish lad; I have no patience with him;' and
the doctor strode out of the hall and away to his gig with a
disappointed expression of countenance.

Mrs. Stewart looked kindly at the dismayed faces of the young people.

'I am sure,' she said, 'that Neil did not realise what he was doing,'
and here she looked at her husband; 'he was hurt and disappointed at
finding that some of the people were able to believe that he could have
done such a thing, and that made him think that he might not get
justice.  It is a great pity, but those who have known Neil all his
life would never believe him capable of dishonesty.'

'Of course not,' said the laird kindly, 'and I only regret that Neil
did not wait to see the thing out, as I am convinced that some evidence
would have turned up which would have {74} enabled us to prove his
innocence.  As it is, he remains under a cloud, and it will be a great
grief to his mother.'

The young people went out, feeling very much discouraged, and wandered
down to the seashore, Laddie following with drooping ears and tail.
Mechanically they seated themselves upon the beach to discuss the
position of affairs, but no one seemed to have anything to suggest.

'Well,' said Marjorie at last, digging holes in the sand with a
sharp-pointed shell; 'what are we to do now?'

Allan pushed his cap on to the back of his head, and Reggie looked
thoughtful; but they did not reply.

It was a beautiful morning, and the distant hills showed the first
flush of heather where the light fell upon them.  Right in front the
waves were glancing like silver, and beyond the ripples the island of
the Den stood out invitingly clear.

Tricksy, who had been gazing wistfully across the water, suddenly
melted into tears.

'All our fun spoilt,' she said, with the big drops rolling down her
face; 'what a horrid, horrid summer we are going to have, and poor
Neil----

'Buck up, Tricksy,' said Allan; 'the bottom hasn't tumbled out of the
Universe yet.'

Laddie, who had been looking with a concerned expression at his young
friends, rose up and thrust his nose under Tricksy's hand, wagging his
tail in an encouraging manner.

'Good old dog, good Laddie,' said Allan, patting the dog's rough coat;
'he is telling us that we must not give in.'

Laddie pricked up his ears, and went from one to another of the group,
endeavouring to rouse them from their despondency.

'Poor Laddie, good Laddie,' said Marjorie, caressing him and feeling a
lump in her throat.

'Laddie, dear, don't lick me in the face--you're knocking me over,
Laddie!' cried Tricksy, as her big pet became more demonstrative.

When Laddie had been induced to sit down, which he did with the
expression of a dog convinced that his endeavours had been crowned with
success, Allan resumed: 'Well, we must remember that we've made a
compact, and we've got to stick to it and help Neil somehow, although
it looks pretty difficult at present.'

A murmur of approval went round the group.

'Yes,' said Tricksy, sitting with knitted brows; 'but we don't seem to
be doing anything.'

The others were silent.

'What would you have us do, Tricksy?' inquired Allan.

'Do?  I'd do something.'

'Well?'

Tricksy's face puckered again.

'I'd catch some of the people.'

'Well, Tricksy, and how?'

'I'd dig holes for them to fall into.'

Reggie uttered a contemptuous 'humph.'

'You'd dig holes for them, would you, Tricksy, said Allan; 'how could
you tell whether you had caught the right one?'

'I'd catch them all until I came to the right one.  I'd make them tell
me what they'd been doing, and then let the wrong one go.'

No one had any reply to make.

Tricksy looked extremely mortified.

'Well, anyhow,' said Allan, springing to his feet, 'we aren't doing
Neil any good by sitting here; let's go to Rob MacLean's cottage and
see whether he can help us.'

Rob MacLean was Neil's second cousin, and the proposition met with
approval.

The short, black-haired Highlander was working in his garden, and came
forward to greet his visitors with true Gaelic courtesy.

'How do you do, young ladies and gentlemen?' he said; 'it iss ferry
proud to see you that I am.  Come in, and it is ferry pleased that
Mistress MacLean will pe.'

In the dark, smoky hut the party were accommodated with seats, and Mrs.
MacLean went to fetch milk and oat-cakes according to Highland ideas of
hospitality.

'You will pe out early,' said Rob MacLean.  'Ferry fine day this, and
exercise iss good for the health.'

'Yes, Mr. MacLean,' said Allan abruptly; 'we came to speak to you about
Neil.'

Instantly the Highlander's countenance underwent a change.

'You hev?' he said.  'Poor Neil, it iss a ferry bad business whateffer;
a ferry bad business for the puir lad.'

'Yes,' replied Allan, 'of course we don't believe that Neil had
anything to do with robbing the post-office.'

'That iss right, Master Allan; that is right,' said the Highlander.
'No, puir lad; no one who will pe knowing him will hev been pelieving
that of him; and it wass ferry hard that efferything went against him
at the trial, whateffer.'

'Well, Mr. MacLean, we came to see whether you could help us,' said
Allan; 'we have made a compact, and promised not to rest until we have
found out that Neil didn't really do it, and have him brought home
again.'

'Proud to hear you say so, Mr. Allan;' broke out the Highlander; 'and
hev you ahl made a compact, the young ladies too?'

'Yes,' replied Tricksy, dimpling; 'we are all in it; Marjorie and I,
and even Laddie.--Down, Laddie; don't jump up on me,' as the collie,
who had been sitting with an amiable expression in the centre of the
group, sprang up and put one paw on her knee.

'Ferry proud indeed that you should hev done so,' repeated Mr.
MacLean.--'My tear,' he added, turning to his wife, who had re-entered
the cottage with a pitcher of milk; 'these young ladies and gentlemen
will hev been making a compact that they will help Neil, and prove that
he hass not committed the robbery.'

The woman, who knew very little English, replied in Gaelic, and the
young folk took up that language, somewhat to the relief of MacLean,
who prided himself on his knowledge of the Saxon tongue but found it
easier to sustain a conversation in his own.

'That would be a great comfort to Neil, did he only know of it, and to
his mother too,' he said.  'Poor lad, I wish we could send him a
message.'

'Does any one know where he has gone?' inquired Reggie.

'Some one must know, Master Reggie, since he could hardly have got
clear away without help; but we do not know how he managed his escape.
Some say that he went away with the gipsies that left Inchkerra the day
of the trial, for they put in at Stornwell harbour that same night; and
others think that it was smugglers who helped him.  He will no doubt
try to escape to America; but the poor lad stands a thousand chances of
being caught before he gets there.'

'Oh, I hope not,' cried the girls.

'I don't know, young ladies.  If there was any chance of his being
cleared, it might be better for him to stand his trial.  It is a very
strange thing indeed, how everything seemed to point to his being
guilty.'

'Then do you think some one has been trying to make him appear so?'

'I don't know, Master Reggie.  It is very mysterious indeed who can
have done it.  The police made an inspection of the gipsy camp, but
there seemed to be no evidence against them.  Well, we are all very
pleased that you are so kindly disposed towards Neil, and we can only
hope that you or some one else may be able to find out who really did
it.  If you must go, young ladies and gentlemen, will you not look in
at Mrs. Macdonnell's cottage and tell her that you have resolved to
help Neil?  Poor soul, she is very sorrowful, and it might comfort her
to know what true friends her son has.'

'Do you think she would care to be disturbed to-day?' said Marjorie,
somewhat doubtfully.

'I think she would be very glad to see you, Miss Marjorie, when you
come on such an errand.'

Mrs. MacLean said nothing; but she filled the young people's pockets
with oat-cakes, and stood watching them as they walked soberly along
the path.

'It's too late to go to Mrs. Macdonnell before dinner-time,' said
Allan, who seemed to be glad of an excuse to postpone so trying an
interview.  'You'd better come with us, Hamish and Marjorie; it's
half-past twelve now; much too late for you to go home.'

Places were found for the MacGregors at the hospitable table of
Ardnavoir; and after dinner, Tricksy drew her mother aside, while
Marjorie lingered to hear what Mrs. Stewart would say.

'Mummie,' said Tricksy, 'Rob MacLean wants us to go and see Mrs.
Macdonnell and tell her that we don't believe that Neil stole the
letters.  Do you think we can go?'

'Perhaps you might, as Rob wishes you to do so,' replied her mother.
'Don't stay long, and don't talk much, for, poor woman, this has been a
terrible blow to her.  Give her your message, and then say good-bye.'

'Do you think we need to go too?' said Allan, as the young people were
discussing their intention.

'Of course we must all be there,' declared Marjorie; 'it will encourage
her when she sees that we have all joined the compact.'

'Whatever are you doing that for?' asked Allan, when he saw his little
sister gathering flowers in the garden.

'They are for Mrs. Macdonnell,' said Tricksy, looking up with her soft,
dark eyes; 'I think she would be glad if we brought her some.'

Allan said nothing, and Reggie's dark face looked approving.

A walk of a mile or two brought the young folk to the heather-roofed
cottage where Mrs. Macdonnell lived.  A dog rushed out and barked, but
wagged his tail when he saw who the visitors were.

'Neil's dog,' said Allan; 'look how he speaks to Laddie.  Poor Jock;
poor old fellow; come here.'

'Where's your master, Jock; where's Neil?' said Reggie in a low voice,
as the dog came up to be petted.

They knocked at the outer door, but there was no answer.  After a
moment's hesitation, they pushed it open and knocked at the door of the
kitchen.

'Come in,' said a faint voice; and they entered.

A woman was sitting by the peat fire, with her neglected spinning-wheel
beside her.  She was strikingly handsome, in spite of her mournful
expression and dejected attitude.  Her black hair, as yet only slightly
touched with grey waved on either side of a broad low forehead, and she
had a straight nose like Neil's and a beautifully shaped face; but the
eyes which she raised at the children's entrance were full of sorrow.

The boys hung about the doorway, and Marjorie felt a lump in her
throat; but Tricksy advanced courageously.

'How do you do, Mrs. Macdonnell?' she said, with a little gurgle in her
voice, that expressed more than she had the power to say in words.
'Mother said we might come and see you; and we thought you might like
some flowers.'

'Eh, Miss Tricksy, what a pretty posy!  It wass ferry good of you to
come.  Tek a seat, Miss Marjorie.  Will you be finding places, young
gentlemen?'

'I hope you are pretty well, Mrs. Macdonnell?' said Marjorie, in a
voice which she could not keep from trembling a little.

'Pretty fair, thank you, Miss Marjorie,' replied Mrs. Macdonnell, while
Reggie and Hamish sat very stiffly upon their chairs, and Allan had
much ado to keep from fidgeting.

'We thought you would like to know, Mrs. Macdonnell,' began Tricksy;
'Bob MacLean said we might tell you; we wanted to say--Allan does, and
we all do--that we _know_ Neil couldn't have done such a thing, and we
have made a compact, all of us--Marjorie and Hamish and Euan Macdonnell
too--that we will never rest until we find out that he didn't do it,
and bring him home again.  I thought you would be glad, Mrs.
Macdonnell; for Allan and Hamish are going to try very hard, and Euan
will do his best to help us.'

Mrs. Macdonnell's eyes glistened.

'It iss ferry good of you ahl, I am sure,' she said; then after a pause
she added, 'Indeed it is proud I am to know that my puir laddie----'

Her voice became husky and then failed; and feeling that the interview
had lasted long enough, the girls kissed her and they all took leave,
wondering whether they had done harm or good by their visit.

'One thing we might do,' said Allan, after they had trudged for awhile
in a somewhat uncomfortable silence, 'we might take a look at Andrew
MacPeters.'

'Yes, let's get something done,' said Reggie; 'where do you think we
shall find him?'

'I heard that he was cutting peats on the hillside,' said Allan; 'isn't
that a cart over there, and two men stacking peats?'

'Yes, that is Andrew MacPeters,' said Reggie, when they had advanced a
little nearer; 'the red-headed man on this side.'

'Fine day, young ladies and gentlemen,' said the farther-away man; but
Andrew only gave them a sidelong look out of his red-lidded eyes.

'Fine day,' replied Allan civilly; then they all stood still and looked
at Andrew, who went on stolidly with his work.

'Let's come to the post-office now,' said Allan, and they all trudged
away.

'Eh, young ladies and gentlemen, pleased to see you,' said Mrs.
MacAlister in her lilting Gaelic; 'eh, but it's been a weary business
since you were here last!  Poor Neil, poor laddie!'

'Yes, Mrs. MacAlister,' said Marjorie; 'and of course we are all quite
sure that Neil had nothing to do with it.'

'So are we all, Miss Marjorie; but the hard thing is to prove it.
Things looked very black against him when the order came out of the
poor lad's very letter, and he the only person who had been in the
house that night.  Wait a bit, young ladies and gentlemen, and I'll
fetch my husband; he's been bad with the rheumatism but he's working in
the garden now,' and the good woman departed, leaving the field clear
for the young people.

'Look,' said Allan, 'there are the letters lying on the table.  They've
been taken out of the box, and they're waiting now until Mrs.
MacAlister is ready to stamp them.  The door's open, and any one can
come in and out.  It wouldn't be difficult to rob a post-office like
this!'

Just then the door opened, and Andrew MacPeters came slouching in,
looking very awkward when he saw who were in the shop.  The visitors
all watched him as he made his way clumsily across the room to fetch
something that he wanted; and when he came near the table Reggie said
suddenly, 'Been taking anything from here lately, Andrew?'

The man looked at him with a surly gleam in his eyes but did not
answer.  After a minute or two he went out, all eyes following him
curiously.

'There,' said Reggie triumphantly, 'did you see what a bad conscience
he has?' and they all looked at each other in silent assent.

Declining Mrs. MacAlister's invitation to stay to tea, they trooped out
of the post-office.

'We'll watch that man,' said Reggie, and Tricksy began to walk on the
tips of her toes in anticipation.

'Hulloa, young people, glad I've overtaken you,' said the doctor's
voice behind them.  'It's just going to pour with rain, and you're due
at my house to tea, I believe.  It's lucky I have the closed carriage;
jump in as many of you as it will hold, and the rest of you can sit on
the box.'

By the time the doctor's house was reached the rain had stopped, and
the sun was peeping out again.  A scrap of white paper fluttering on
the ruins attracted Reggie's attention, and he ran across the garden,
climbed the wall, and captured it.

After looking at it he gave a violent start, then ran towards the house.

'It's a postal order,' he said, giving it to the doctor; 'what's the
meaning of this?'

All clustered round, and the doctor took the piece of paper and
examined it.

'Strange thing,' he exclaimed; 'this order bears the number of one of
those that went missing on the night of the robbery.  How did it come
there?  It's wet with the rain, but not very dirty; probably hasn't
been there long.  This ought to shed some fresh light upon the case.
I'll have the police to make a thorough search of the ruins.'




CHAPTER VI

A DISCOVERY

'Reggie,' said Allan, 'there they are at last.'

Reggie slid down from the garden wall, looked towards the road, and
said, 'Where?'

'They're behind that hill now.  They'll be here in no time.  You'd
better call Tricksy, and tell her to be ready.'

Reggie went into the house, and called, standing at the foot of the
staircase, 'Tricksy, it's Graham major and Graham minor with their
Pater; and they're almost here.'

Tricksy came downstairs and waited in the hall, somewhat shyly, beside
her brothers.

'Oh, I do hope they will be nice,' she whispered apprehensively to
Reggie, as the dog-cart drew up at the door.

A tall pleasant-faced gentleman was beside the driver, and two boys
were on the back seat wrapped in Inverness capes, and with caps drawn
over their brows as a protection against the wind.

As Mr. and Mrs. Stewart were receiving their guests in the hall, Reggie
and Tricksy had an opportunity of observing the boys.  One was dark,
about twelve years of age; thin, alert, with bright, restless hazel
eyes; and the other was about as old as Reggie, with blue eyes and
reddish-golden hair; almost too pretty to be a boy, Reggie thought;
while Tricksy said to herself that he looked rather "nice."'

After greeting the grown-up folk, the new-comers turned to encounter
Tricksy's solemn, dark eyes and Reggie's bright, twinkling ones.
Tricksy shook hands very shyly, and Reggie a little stiffly; then the
visitors were taken upstairs to prepare for lunch.

Tricksy turned to Reggie, whose countenance wore a non-committal
expression; then she looked at Allan and heaved a little sigh.

'What do you think of them, Tricksy?' inquired Allan.

'Well, I think the little one looks rather nice, but the other is a
little proud.'

'Do you think they'd care about our Pirates' Island, and all that?'
asked Reggie doubtfully.

'Of course they would.  They're no end of a good sort.  Hush, they're
coming downstairs again.'

'Are you tired after the steamer?' Allan asked his guest during lunch.

'A bit, not very,' replied the elder lad, whose name was Harry.  'Feel
a bit as though the floor was rocking.'

'You'll feel like that until you've had a night's rest, anyway,' said
Allan.  'Are you too tired to do anything this afternoon?'

'Not at all,' answered his friend.  'Gerald, you're game to do
something after lunch, aren't you?'

His brother, who had been trying to make a conversation with Reggie,
while Tricksy sat shyly on his other side, looked up with a smile.

'The steamer went close under some fine rocks, not far from the
village,' he said; 'very high ones, with birds sitting in rows, all the
way up, and making an awful screaming.'

'Yes,' said Allan, 'those are the Skegness Cliffs, a great
nesting-place of the birds.  We'll take you there after lunch, if it's
not too far.'

The boys looked pleased, and as soon as freed from the restraint of
their elders' presence they ran to fetch their caps and demanded to be
taken to the rocks.

'We had better not go so soon, I think,' said Allan.  'We are expecting
Hamish and Marjorie, our friends from Corranmore, and we'll ask them to
go with us.  There's a jolly burn that runs quite near the house;
suppose we go and fish in it until they come.'

Fishing-tackle was found for the entire party, and they proceeded to
the banks of the burn, which trickled down the hill-side and across a
meadow, widening into little pools fringed with ragged-robin and queen
o' the meadow; and finally falling in a little cascade down to the
shore.

'What a fine dog this is of yours,' observed Gerald, caressing Laddie,
who had been fawning upon the new-comers, and now ended by sitting down
between Gerald and Tricksy.

Tricksy looked gratified.

'He's my dog,' she said.  'He likes you, I think.'

Gerald stroked Laddie's head and his white ruffle, and the dog made a
little sound to express gratification.

'Tricksy, keep your dog quiet, he'll frighten away the trout,' sang out
Allan warningly; and Tricksy requested Laddie to 'trust.'

The sun shone down upon green grass and brown pools, and drew out the
perfume of the flowers and heather.  Not far distant was the pleasant
noise of the sea, and the calling of the gulls answered the plaintive
cry of the plovers which fluttered about the moor and the meadows.

The day was too bright, and the trout which could be seen at the bottom
of the pools refused to take.  After a little while the strong fresh
air and sun began to have a drowsy effect upon the anglers.

Gerald rubbed his eyes once or twice, and stifled a yawn; and Tricksy
found that he was disinclined for conversation.

'Hulloa!' cried a voice from the top of a ridge; and Marjorie and
Hamish came racing down.  Laddie's welcoming bark roused Gerald, who
jumped into a sitting posture, and looked about him in a surprised way.

'Hulloa, Marjorie,' said Allan; 'glad you've come.  This is Harry
Graham, and this is Gerald.'

Marjorie looked at the new-comers with approval, and Hamish shook hands
good-naturedly.

'Are we going to fish all afternoon,' said Marjorie, 'or shall we take
a scramble?'

'A scramble,' replied Reggie; 'they want to see the rocks.'

'If Gerald isn't too tired,' put in Tricksy considerately; 'he was
asleep a minute ago.'

'No,' protested Gerald, flushing and looking very much vexed; 'I
wasn't.  I'm quite ready for a walk.'

'Suppose we take them to the Smugglers' Caves,' suggested Marjorie.
'They're the finest sight in the island, I think.'

At the mention of smugglers Harry's eyes began to sparkle, and Gerald's
blue ones opened very wide.

'Are there--are there any smugglers there now?' asked Harry.

'Sometimes there are,' replied Marjorie, 'but I don't expect we shall
meet any.  Smuggling isn't what it used to be,' she added somewhat
regretfully.

'What luck if we could only come across some,' said Harry.  'Let's go
and see the caves anyhow.'

'It's a long walk, across moors and bogs, and steep hills,' said
Marjorie; 'but if you're game, come along.'

Harry, walking beside Reggie, looked at the girl's slight, erect figure
as she went in front with Gerald.

'Does she always do what you fellows do?' he inquired, rather
doubtfully.

'Of course she does,' replied Reggie; 'she's fifteen years old, you
know; a year older than Allan.'

Harry looked at her again, and considered.

'Bit of a tomboy, isn't she?' he inquired again.

'An awful tomboy.  We've got her into the way of doing all kinds of
things.  She couldn't be much jollier if she was a boy.'

Harry took another look at her.

'Has she a bit of a temper?' he asked unexpectedly.

'A bit,' acknowledged Reggie, somewhat disconcerted, 'when she's
roused, you know.  She's fond of her own way; and she and Allan used to
quarrel a good deal at one time; but they seem to have made it up now.'

Reggie added to himself that there was no time to quarrel, now that
every one's thoughts were occupied with Neil.

Harry looked at Marjorie again.

'Does she ever quarrel with you?' he asked.

'N--no, not much,' he replied, his face darkening slightly.

Harry looked at Marjorie's tall young figure, and then at Reggie's
smaller and slighter one, and arrived at the conclusion which
particularly annoyed Reggie; that the girl disdained to quarrel with a
boy so much younger than herself.

Marjorie turned her bright face towards them.

'Find it tiring, walking on the heather?' she said.  'It's very
fatiguing when you're not accustomed to it.  We might take a rest after
we've climbed this hill; there's a beautiful view from the top.'

It was a steep climb, and when they reached the summit, all the young
folk were glad to fling themselves down on the short, fragrant heather.

The breeze came laden with the scent of wild thyme and heather and salt
from the sea; and the only live creatures save themselves were the
mountain sheep and the crested plovers, and grey gulls which wheeled
above the heads of the wayfarers.

Harry looked about him with brightening eyes.

'What an awfully jolly place this is of yours,' he said.  'I say, you
_do_ see a lot from the top of this hill.'

He was right.  The hill crest commanded a view of nearly the whole
island, with green fields and moors, and the white roads stretching
across them; houses and cottages in their little gardens; and the
village with the pier jutting out into the sea.  One or two larger
islands were in the distance; brown rocks and skerries lying like dots
upon the blue water; and away to the east the Highland hills rose among
the clouds.

'It must be awfully jolly, having an island all to yourselves,'
continued Harry.

'Yes,' replied Marjorie, perched on a boulder, 'and it's jollier still
to have an island of your very own, where no one comes but ourselves,
and we can do exactly as we like.'

'Where's that?' inquired Harry.

'I may tell them, mayn't I?' asked Marjorie of the others.

'Of course you may,' replied Allan; 'we must take them there some day
soon.'

Marjorie slipped down from her perch.

'Do you see the little island over there?' she said, pointing
southwards; 'a little black dot on the water, with some bright green in
the middle of it?  Well, that's our _own_ island which we have all to
ourselves, and we've made a place in it that we call our secret
hiding-place or Pirates' Den.  We must show it to you some day.'

The boys stood up and gazed out to sea, their eyes widening and
brightening.

'I say, this is jolly,' they murmured, rather than said to any one in
particular.

'Hamish,' said Allan, who had been looking at some object on the
southern side of the island; 'is that your father's gig, that has just
stopped before Mrs. Macdonnell's cottage?'

Hamish looked in the direction indicated.

'Yes, I believe it is,' he said.  'It must be true then, what we heard
Duncan say, that Mrs. Macdonnell is very ill.'

Such a grieved silence fell upon the island young people that the
Grahams looked at them inquiringly.

'They said that she would fall ill,' said Marjorie in a low voice,
'if--if she continued to fret so about----'

Allan pushed his cap to the back of his head, and Reggie looked hard in
the direction of the cottage, where the black dot was still standing by
the gate.

'Nothing else found in the ruins?' said Allan in an undertone.

'Nothing yet,' replied Hamish; 'the police are still trying to follow
up the clue----'

Marjorie's eyes encountered those of the guests, and she looked at
Allan and Reggie.

'Are you going to let them know about it?' she asked.  'Might as well,
you know; for they are sure to hear of it before long.'

Allan put his hands in his pockets and reflected; then he consulted
Reggie with a look, after which he turned to Hamish.  'Perhaps we might
as well tell them,' he said, and the others consented.

'Well, Graham major and Graham minor,' he began, to the boys who were
waiting expectantly; 'we are very much bothered about a friend of
ours;' and he told them about the robbery of the post-office and Neil's
flight, while the boys listened with wide-open mouths, throwing
themselves about and uttering exclamations of interest.

'You say that you are quite sure he couldn't have taken the letters?'
asked Harry, drawing himself into an upright position on the heather.

'Perfectly certain,' replied Allan.  'He would no more have done it
than you or I.  No one who knows him would believe such a thing of
Neil.'

'Oh!' interposed Tricksy, in a shocked tone, 'I think Dr. MacGregor
believed it.'

Hamish became very red and Marjorie's lips tightened.

'And he's so awfully, awfully jolly,' pursued Harry.

'One of the very jolliest people we know,' answered Marjorie.  'Father
doesn't really believe it of him.  He did everything for us, and was up
to all kinds of inventions.  We don't seem to have any fun at all
without him.'

'It's a most extraordinary story,' said Harry, jerking himself into a
fresh attitude; and both the new boys sat and pondered.

'What do you say to letting them both join the Compact?' suggested
Reggie.

Marjorie's eyes said yes; and Hamish, whom Allan consulted with a look,
gave a nod.

'What's that; a Compact?' inquired Harry eagerly.

'It's an agreement that we've all made,' said Allan, 'that we'll back
Neil up, and show that he didn't commit the robbery.'

'Hooray, what fun,' said Harry; 'I'm game.'

'You might let Gerald join too,' cried Tricksy from where she sat
beside her new friend; 'he's quite the right sort, and he only wants to
learn a thing or two to be equal to any of us.'

Gerald wriggled, and blushed to the roots of his golden hair.

'Well, then, you must do all you can to help us,' said Allan, 'and see
whether you can find out who really did it.'

'All right,' said Harry; 'I'll help you to catch the thief.'

'And you must sign an agreement like the rest of us, and you can each
have a copy to carry about with you always, as we do.  See, this is the
principal copy, that I have to take care of.'

'You can write it out now, with Allan's new fountain pen,' cried
Tricksy; 'this flat stone will do for a desk, and I've got some pieces
of paper that I've been carrying in my pocket in case we might find any
new people to join our Compact;' and she produced with great gravity
some crumpled sheets of note-paper, much soiled at the edges.

'All right,' said Allan, 'this is the agreement; "We hereby promise
never to rest until we show that Neil is innocent and have him brought
home again."'

Reggie held the papers down to keep them from blowing away, while Allan
made out fresh copies of the agreement; then all the documents received
the signature of Harry, who wrote his name with much ceremony and
handed the pen to Gerald.

'What an awful lark,' said Harry, who had clambered on to the boulder
and sat swinging his legs; 'it will be fine fun tracking the thief.'

Allan began to whistle.

'We haven't found much to track yet,' he said; 'neither have the
police, who have been at it nearly three weeks.  The less you talk
about it the better, except among ourselves, for it isn't a game, this.'

'Come along,' said Marjorie, springing up, as Harry looked somewhat
crestfallen, 'we've dawdled long enough; let's run down the side of the
hill, and then we shan't take long to get to the cliffs.'

'All right,' said Harry briskly, 'let's go to the Smugglers' Caves; oh,
I say, what a jolly island this is!'

All started to run down the steep descent, bounding from one tuft of
heather to the other, their speed increasing as they neared the bottom.

Allan, Marjorie, and Reggie reached level ground at about the same
time; then they turned to look at Harry and Gerald, who arrived next,
looking somewhat shaken, and Hamish, who had stopped to help Tricksy.

'Not far now to the caves,' said Marjorie encouragingly.  'Do you see
that headland, stretching far out into the sea?  They are on the side
farthest away from us.  Tired, Tricksy?'

'Not at all,' protested the child, stepping alone and trying to hide a
little roll in her gait, although her small face was beginning to look
pale.

Reggie glanced at her approvingly as Tricksy toiled along beside
Hamish, hoping that no one observed that she was hanging on to big hand.

'Oh, what a height from the ground,' said Gerald in an awed tone of
voice, as the moor ended abruptly and they found themselves gazing down
from the crest of what seemed a sheer precipice, with long lines of
breakers falling upon the strip of sand at the foot.  'What a
disturbance the birds are making, and what strange noises there are.'

'It's the waves echoing among the rocks,' said Marjorie.  'You must
come here some stormy day when the tide is up; the caves get flooded
and the noise is just like thunder.'

'If you'll come a little further along,' said Allan, 'there's a break
in the cliffs where we can get down pretty easily.  The tide is out, so
we have lots of time.'

'Can we really climb down there,' said Harry, as they came to where a
chasm opened in the line of cliff, with rough steps and ledges of rock
standing out in the riven walls.  Not a bird was to be seen in the
gloomy crevasse; although the skuas and black-backed gulls were flying
about and clamouring before the face of the cliff.

'Come along,' said Allan on the first step.  'Are you a good climber,
Harry?'

'Pretty fair,' replied Harry, with a rather wild look in his eyes.
Gerald said nothing, but swung himself down with a serious countenance.

'If any one wants help, just sing out,' cried Allan, descending by the
rocky steps.  'Don't look down, and you'll be all right.'

'Take my hand, Gerald,' said Tricksy graciously to Gerald, who
hesitated at a perilous-looking gap.

Gerald flushed pink, and pretended not to have heard the offer of
assistance; and the two strangers braced themselves to their
unaccustomed feat.

The way led round the chasm and downward, sometimes approaching the
face of the cliff, where the inquisitive eyes and red bills of the
puffins peered out of the crevices, and whole rows of auks and
kittiwakes were thrown into violent agitation by the sight of the
intruders; and sometimes leading back to the dark interior of the
chasm.  The place was full of echoes; the hollow boom of the breakers,
the swirling of water round half-submerged rocks, the hoarse cries of
the gulls and the shrill scream of the smaller sea-birds joining in an
uproar which made the air tremble.  Many a time, during the descent, it
cost the new-comers an effort to avoid being overcome by dizziness.

At last Allan reached the last ledge, and swung himself to the ground;
Reggie and Marjorie followed; Tricksy came last, and the Grahams
dropped down with an air of relief.

'Well done for you,' said Allan approvingly; 'it's your first climb of
the kind, and you haven't shown an atom of funk.'

Gerald's cheeks became a little redder, and Harry bore himself with
greater self-consciousness.

'Only Hamish now,' said Allan, looking up at the cliff; 'how cautiously
the old fellow is coming down; he has the steadiest head of the lot of
us although he is so slow.'

'"Sleepy Hamish,"' remarked Harry to Gerald in an aside, repeating a
nickname which he had heard Allan use.  Low as the words were spoken,
Marjorie heard them, and turned upon the boy like a flash.

'Some people have more in them than they make a show of,' she said.
'Perhaps you don't understand that kind of thing, though.'

Harry did not chance to have a reply ready, but he observed to Reggie
afterwards that it was a pity Marjorie seemed to be a quick-tempered
kind of a girl.

'Here we are,' said Allan, pausing beneath a great overhanging archway,
and speaking loudly so as to be heard above the din; for the waves and
the clamouring of the birds made a noise which was almost deafening.

'Can we go in?' asked Gerald.

'Of course we can.  There's no danger except in a westerly gale.  It's
dark after you get in a little way.'

The young people scrambled and slipped over the sea-weed at the mouth
of the cave, and presently found themselves standing on a floor of
light-coloured sand, strewn with shells and sea-drift.  The sides of
the cave were black and shiny with wet, and water dripped slowly from
the roof.

'Is this where the smugglers used to come?' asked Gerald in an awed
tone.

'Yes,' replied Allan; 'the schooners used to sail under the rocks on
moonlight nights when the tide was high, and the cargo was stored in
the caves until the people came secretly to take it away.  It was very
dangerous work sometimes, for if a storm comes from the west the caves
are often flooded.'

The light which glimmered under the archway did not penetrate far, and
the young people were soon in total darkness.  The air was damp and
chilly.  Strange draughts crossed each other from unexpected quarters,
and the water dripping from overhead, awoke weird echoes which seemed
to be repeated among far-reaching clefts and passages.

'Strike a light, Hamish,' said Allan, 'and let them see what kind of a
place they're in.'

The match spluttered and blazed, revealing dark rocks gleaming with wet
and the black openings to what appeared to be a series of underground
passages branching off from the main one.

'The caves are all connected with one another,' explained Allan, 'and
have separate openings to the sea.  Light up again, Hamish; strike two
this time, and they'll get a better idea.'

Again there was a splutter, and the flare revealed strange shifting
shadows among the rocks, and a circle of faces that looked unnaturally
white in the surrounding darkness.

Reggie's eyes were the sharpest.

'Hullo!' he exclaimed, 'there's something in that passage.  What can it
be?'

All crowded to examine the mysterious object, and the light flickered
upon a pile of kegs and bales lying half-concealed behind a corner of
rock.

'Smugglers!' declared Marjorie.

'Looks like it,' said Allan, as Hamish struck fresh matches and the
others crowded round, giving utterance to ohs! and ahs! of excitement.

'They're at their old trade again,' said Allan, examining the barrels;
'I wonder what Pater will say to this?'

'That's the last match, Allan,' said Hamish, as the light flickered out.

The darkness seemed to come down like a weight, and the young people
found themselves groping for each other's hands.

'We had better make the best of our way out of this,' said Allan.  'Try
to move quietly, for we don't know who might be about.  Help Tricksy,
Hamish; I think she's by you, and here, Tricksy, give me your other
hand.'

They groped their way towards the entrance, and soon were in the strong
sunshine at the mouth of the caves.

'Well,' said Allan, 'that was an adventure;' and they looked at one
another with varying expressions.

'Do you think they may have had anything to do with the robbery?' said
Marjorie.

'Shouldn't wonder,' replied Allan.  'Anyhow, we'll see what Pater says.'

'In the meanwhile,' said Marjorie, 'we had better be quick; the
breakers are close under the rocks, and we're almost cut off already.'

A stream of foaming, angry-looking water was running up into a hollow
on the shore, and the young folk could only escape by jumping on to a
stone in the middle of the flood, and from thence to the other side.

'Jump, Tricksy,' cried Reggie half impatiently, as his little sister
hesitated.

Tricksy, who was pale and overwrought, sprang, but fell short and
plunged overhead in the water.

Instantly two or three were in the flood, trying to prevent her being
swept out to sea.

Allan secured her; and gasping, struggling, with water running over her
face, Tricksy was pulled on to dry land.

'It isn't so very bad, is it, Tricksy?' inquired Reggie, in a tone of
somewhat forced cheerfulness; 'what a thing to do, to jump in when
you're told to jump over!'

Tricksy tried to smile; a miserable attempt, for her teeth chattered
and her lips were blue with the cold.

'Run to Rob MacLean's cottage, Reggie,' said Hamish, throwing off his
coat and wrapping it round Tricksy; 'ask him to lend us his pony, and
we'll take Tricksy to Corranmore; it's nearer than your house.'

With Hamish running by her side and holding her on to the pony, Tricksy
was not long in reaching Corranmore, and when the others arrived she
was already in bed, with Mrs. MacGregor beside her; the little girl
drinking hot milk and trying to restrain the tears that _would_ roll
down her cheeks, even when she forced herself to laugh.

'Feeling better, Tricksy?' asked Reggie apprehensively.

'She has had a nasty fall,' said Mrs. MacGregor somewhat reproachfully,
'and we may be thankful it is not any worse.  She can't possibly go
home to-night; you had better tell your parents that she is safe with
us.'

A look of relief overspread Tricksy's tired features.

'Oh, you _are_ a dear,' she exclaimed, springing up and throwing her
arms round Mrs. MacGregor's neck, forgetting that the lady had once
said that Tricksy Stewart was a spoilt little girl.  'Hooray, I'll
sleep with Marjorie and we can talk about what we have seen to-day!'




CHAPTER VII

THE SIEGE

'No, Mr. Allan,' Duncan was declaring, 'if I wass you, I would not pe
telling the laird whateffer; it can do no good pringing honest folk
into trouble.'

'But they are not honest folk if they're smugglers,' interposed Reggie,
who had been listening to the conversation without joining in.

A peculiar expression flitted across Duncan's face.

'Well, but, Mr. Allan,' he maintained; 'I'm just telling you, that it
will pe petter if you will not pe telling the laird; you will only pe
meking trouble in the island and will pe doing no good at ahl, at ahl.'

'But what if it was they who robbed the post-office?' said Allan.

'Robbed the post-office, Mr. Allan!' cried Duncan; 'what will they pe
doing that for?  Not them, Mr. Allan!  So do not pe meking trouble by
telling the laird----'

'But we _have_ told him,' said Reggie.

'Dear, dear, Mr. Allan and Master Reggie,' said Duncan with a vexed
face; 'what will you haf peen doing that for?  That wass a treatful
thing to do, to pe tale-bearers.  Tear me; and what iss to pe done now?'

'But, Duncan, smuggling is against the law, and it will be their own
fault----'

'Well, but, Mr. Allan, you will pe for punishing folks that iss not
deserving to pe punished if you do such a foolish thing ass to pring
the police to them, and--och!  Mr. Allan, Mr. Allan, why can't young
folks hev some sense!  What iss to pe done now, after all you young
ladies and gentlemen hev tone such a senseless thing!'

Duncan's evident excitement showed that argument was in vain; and there
was something in his manner that tended to convince the boys, against
their better judgment, that they had done wrong in speaking of their
discovery.  They wandered down to the cricket-field, where the Grahams
were indulging in a solitary practice.

'We'd better go and play with these fellows,' said Allan; 'we can't
leave them to amuse themselves all the time.'

Presently the sound of wheels caused them to look round, and they saw
the doctor's gig turning in at the gate, with Tricksy on the front seat
beside Dr. MacGregor, and Marjorie and Hamish behind.

'Brought you back the missing one,' cried the doctor to Mrs. Stewart,
who had come to the door to meet them; 'none the worse for her bath;'
and Tricksy jumped down and ran into the playing field followed more
slowly by the other two.

'Come along and have a game,' cried Reggie; but the new-comers appeared
to have something on their minds.  They stood eyeing one another in an
embarrassed way; Hamish looking sheepish and Marjorie mischievous;
while Tricksy's little flushed face was breaking into dimples, and both
girls displayed an inclination to giggle.

'Wait a minute,' whispered Tricksy, as Allan came towards them, and
Marjorie said to her in a sharp undertone, 'Go on, can't you, and don't
be silly.'

Thus admonished, Tricksy composed herself into gravity and produced a
large piece of cardboard with ornamental lettering from which she read
the following:--


PROCLAMATION

TO THE BOYS OP ARDNAVOIR

We, the undersigned, hereby declare war against you.  We challenge you
to open combat at our Fort.  You must give us warning at what date and
time you will attack us.  Any advantage gained in not attending to
these rules will be considered unfair.  Any weapons allowed except
stones.

(_Signed_) 'HAMISH MACGREGOR,
           'MARJORIE,
           'TRICKSY.'


'Our Fort is the hut, of course, in you-know-where,' added Marjorie;
'and the challenging party have the right to choose whether they will
be besiegers or defenders, advantages to be as equal as possible.
That's all,' she concluded, with a sudden lapse into her usual manner.

The two new boys had been listening with all their might.

'Whatever does she mean?' they asked in an aside, turning to Reggie.

'It's a challenge,' said Reggie.  'Let's hear what Allan says.'

Allan was considering.

'Shall we accept now, Reggie?' he asked.

Reggie thought the combat might as well take place without delay; and
Allan replied to the Proclamation in these terms:

'The Challenge is accepted.  We will meet you at the Fort.  You will be
the garrison, as there are fewer of you, and we'll attack.--Come along.'

'Call the dogs, Reggie,' said Marjorie.  'Do you like sieges?' she
asked Gerald, as they were on their way to the shore.

'Awful fun,' replied the fair-haired boy, whose pink and white face was
fast becoming tanned by wind and sun.

'What weapons are to be used?' asked Marjorie, turning quickly to the
others.

'Turfs,' replied Allan, 'and lumps of wet sea-weed if you like.'

Marjorie gave a little jump as though she were pleased.

The boat was launched, and cut swiftly through the transparent water,
while the new boys looked around with expectant faces.

'What an awfully jolly place,' they said, as they sprang out on the
beach.  'Awful fun, having an island of your own to do as you like
with.'

'Half-an-hour allowed for gathering ammunition,' called out Marjorie.
'We'll show Harry and Gerald over the place when we've had our fight.
We had better defend from the roof of the cottage, for we might pull
down the walls if we defended from the inside.'

Some time was spent in digging clods of turf, a quantity of which was
piled on the roof of the hut for the defenders, while the attackers
disposed theirs in little heaps at a short distance from the fort.

'Now for the sea-weed,' cried Marjorie; 'nothing like getting a heap of
wet tang thrown in your face when you're fighting.'

The tide was far out, and quantities of wet sea-weed lay exposed on the
rocks.

'No stones to be taken,' said Allan, sawing through the tough, thick
stalks with a large pocket-knife.

'How do you like our way of playing?' asked Marjorie of Harry, as she
passed him, grasping in each hand a mass of wet sea-weed which dripped
down on her frock and shoes.

'Awful fun,' replied the boy, his eyes sparkling with excitement.

'Come along then, I think we've got enough.'

She swung herself nimbly on to the roof, followed by Hamish and
Tricksy.  The wind was freshening, and sang in their ears, making them
feel excited and eager for the fray.

'It's rather stormy,' said Harry; 'do you think we'll get back?'

'Of course,' said Marjorie; 'why, this is nothing!  We like it to be a
little stormy, it's better fun.  Call the others,' and they shouted for
the rest of the attacking party, who came hurrying, armed with
missiles.  Laddie and Carlo followed in the rear, suspending their
operations among the rabbit burrows to see what was going to happen.

'To your post, Gerald,' shouted Allan; and Gerald made a dart towards
the besiegers, just in time to avoid being caught in a rain of clods
which hurtled through the air.

Allan and Reggie showed great dexterity in avoiding the missiles, but
Harry and Gerald, not having had so much practice in this kind of
warfare, acted the part of unwilling targets, and their neat suits were
soon bespattered with mud.

'All in the day's work, eh?' said Allan, as he hurried past Gerald, who
was somewhat ruefully wiping the dirt off his cheek with one hand;
'Awful fun, isn't it?'

'Awfully jolly,' assented Gerald, trying not to think that in the
bottom of his heart there was a doubt.

A fresh shower of sods came from the cottage, accompanied by shouts
both from besiegers and besieged; and Laddie, who had been looking on
with a puzzled face and trying to make out what was the matter, came to
the conclusion that his young friends were engaged in deadly warfare,
and rushed between the opposing sides with a bark and a wagging tail,
bent upon making peace.

'Down, Laddie, down,' shouted Allan, as the dog jumped up to lick his
face, after running frenziedly from one side to the other; 'trust, sir!
Go and lie down;' and Laddie, looking heart-broken, retired to the turf
dyke and lay watching the fray in consternation.

The battle raged long and furiously, neither side appearing to gain the
advantage.

The attacking party pressed round the walls of the cottage, only to be
beaten back by the projectiles which were showered upon them.  Nerving
themselves to fresh efforts, they rushed to the attack, Allan calm,
Reggie intrepid, and the two Grahams animated by the wildest excitement.

Seeing one spot undefended, Gerald made a dash for it, and had already
one foot on the wall, preparatory to scaling the cottage, when 'swish'
came a lump of sea-weed in his face; and before he had recovered from
the shock a pair of strong hands seized him and Marjorie's voice
shouted, 'A prisoner!'

A wild rush was made to effect a rescue, but Hamish came to Marjorie's
assistance, and Gerald was pulled kicking and struggling up on the roof.

'Now you had better sit down quietly,' said Hamish; 'you can watch the
fight from behind the chimney,' and Gerald was reluctantly obliged to
remain inactive.

Furious at the loss of one of their number, the attacking party
precipitated themselves against the walls of the fort and the battle
became fiercer than ever.  For some time the issue appeared doubtful,
but gradually the besiegers gained a footing on the walls from which
they could not be dislodged.  Panting, buffeted, they forced their way
upwards, while the defenders rained blows and clods upon them.

With a shout of victory, Allan had swung himself on to the roof, when a
cry of dismay was raised.

'The roof is giving way!'

Hastily they all jumped, and not a minute too soon, for some gaping
holes appeared in the thatch, and there was a rumble of falling stones.

'It's all right,' panted Marjorie; 'we can put that right in a
morning's work.  Oh, wasn't it a first-rate fight!'

'Capital,' agreed the others, and Tricksy's voice piped in.  'I fought
very well too, didn't I, Marjorie?'

'Oh, very well,' replied Marjorie, who had been greatly hampered by
Tricksy getting in her way at critical moments.  'But I think we all
need a rest now, don't we?'

No second suggestion was needed; and they all flung themselves on the
ground and lay where they were, letting the sea-breeze blow upon their
heated faces.

'Awfully jolly,' murmured Gerald; 'I should like to have a fight like
that every day.'

Harry lay stretched out with a restless face looking about him with
eyes that sparkled notwithstanding his fatigue, and kicking his heels
when he had the energy to do so.  Had he been less completely
exhausted, he would have got up and explored the island, taking Gerald
with him, but a cricket match and a siege in one afternoon, following a
long walk in the morning, are as much as most boys are capable of.

Presently Reggie jumped up.

'Allan,' he said, 'don't you think we ought to be going?'

Allan looked at the waves which were beginning to jostle one another in
mid-channel.

'Just about time,' he said.

'Couldn't we show them the inside of the house first,' said Marjorie;
'it won't take a minute.'

'All right,' said Allan, 'but we must be quick.'

'Is this where you stay when it is wet,' said Harry, as they pushed
open the door of the cottage.  'What a jolly place.  Can you light
fires on the hearth?'

'Of course we can,' said Marjorie, 'and bake bannocks--why, Allan; some
one has been here since we left!'

'Nonsense,' said Allan, looking about him.  'Why, I declare, some one
has!'

'There has been a fresh fire lighted on the hearth,' said Marjorie,
'and the things are not as we left them.  There are marks like
footprints on the floor too.'

'What impudence,' said Reggie, with a darkening face.  'We must put up
a notice board.  No one has any business to come here except ourselves.'

Allan had been looking about him, and he suddenly darted forward and
took possession of some object lying upon the floor.  After a glance at
it he turned white, gave an odd little gasp and slipped it into his
pocket.

'What is it, Allan?' asked the others, crowding around.

'Nothing,' he said; 'nothing at all.  I don't think any one has been
here; it's all fancy.'

Reggie's eyes looked very much astonished at this change of front.

'Come along,' said Allan impatiently; 'it's time we went home,' and he
swept them out of the cottage with so much decision that they obeyed,
looking at him with puzzled faces.

'Hulloa!' cried Hamish; 'we had better be going.'

'Going?' echoed Allan; 'why, yes, we have no time to lose.  Come along,
all of you.'

'What's the matter?' asked Harry of Marjorie as they hurried towards
the boat.

'It's a very high tide,' she said.  'Soon there will be a dangerous
current flowing between the two islands, and if we get into it we might
be swept out to sea.  We are allowed to have the boat on condition that
we watch the tide-ways; so we have to be careful.'

It took some hard rowing to gain the opposite shore; and when they had
landed, Reggie turned to Hamish.  'A near thing that, eh, Hamish?' he
said; and they all looked at the dark swift current which filled the
channel.

'Ten minutes later, and we couldn't have crossed,' said Marjorie.
'What do you think, Allan?'

Despite the danger so recently escaped, Allan's thoughts were
wandering.  He looked round abstractedly, and slid into his pocket some
object which he had been turning over unobserved; and Reggie fancied he
caught a glimpse of a sailor's knife with some elaborate carving on the
handle.

Reggie looked at his brother with a gleam of curiosity in his eyes.

'Come along,' said Allan authoritatively; 'don't let's stand dawdling
about.'




CHAPTER VIII

A CRUISE IN THE 'HEROIC'

'I can't understand Allan at all,' declared Marjorie.  She and Reggie,
armed with large pocket-knives, were engaged in cutting heather on the
moor, which stretched, a mass of purple, to the verge of the cliffs.  A
pile of heather lay beside them, the result of an hour's hard sawing of
the wiry stems.

Marjorie's remark had interrupted a busy silence.

Reggie looked up with a twinkle in his eyes.  He had been growing
thinner and browner during the summer, and his wrists came further
beyond the sleeves of his jacket.

'What's the matter with Allan?' he asked.

'Why,' said Marjorie impatiently, 'he is going on so oddly.  First of
all, he wasn't to be found when we came here this morning--had been
away for hours--and he isn't usually in such a hurry to get up in the
holidays.  Then when he comes back we all have to go off and get
heather to patch up the roof of the Pirates' Den.  I can't make out why
he has grown so particular all of a sudden.'

Reggie looked at her with a provoking smile.

'I thought it was you who wanted the place kept water-tight,' he
suggested, 'in case we might be storm-stayed some evening and have to
spend the night there----'

'That's all very well,' interrupted Marjorie, 'but that's not what's
making you and Allan so busy just now.  Why did you go off together
yesterday, and stay away for such a time, leaving us to entertain your
guests?  You're busy with something that you don't want us to know
about and I'd just like to find out what it is.  It always irritates me
when people make mysteries out of nothing.'

Reggie was looking grave, and his dark eyes studied Marjorie intently.

'Hullo, you two,' said Allan, coming up; 'how are you getting on?'

Marjorie rose up from the ground, and seated herself upon the pile of
cut heather.

'I've just been telling Reggie that I know that you and he have a
secret between you,' she said, looking boldly at Allan.  'I'd just like
to know what it is.  Hardly fair, I call it; keeping something from the
other members of the Compact----'

She broke off upon seeing the grave, concerned expression in Allan's
eyes.

'It's all right,' she said, looking fixedly out to sea; 'it's something
that you know you ought to keep from me, and I'm not going to find out
what it is.'

She had become flushed, and her heart was beating fast as a suspicion
forced itself upon her.  She turned, and stooping down, took up her
armful of heather.

'I'm going to carry this to the boat,' she remarked, without looking
round.

The boys looked after her retreating figure.

'H'm,' said Allan, 'not bad for a girl.'

Marjorie's reflections were interrupted by a about, and Harry came
running down the hill and caught her by the arm.

'Well, what's the matter?' she asked irritably.

'Look!' he panted, pulling her round.  'Look at that!  Well, if you're
so cross you needn't, but you must be a duffer if you don't care to see
what's coming round that headland----'

Marjorie's eyes followed in the direction pointed out by his shaking
finger, and her face cleared.

A large vessel was gliding into view.

Tricksy came running as fast as her little short legs would carry her,
the two dogs barking in her wake.

'Marjorie,' she gasped,  it's a man-o'-war; oh, don't you hope it's
that nice one that came last year!'

By this time the vessel had been sighted by the others, who came down
to discuss the situation.

'Perhaps she's a stranger,' suggested Hamish, feeling that it might be
better to prepare for a disappointment.

'She's a fine big vessel, whatever she is,' said Harry.

'She's like the one that was here last year,' said Marjorie.

'Oh, don't you hope she's the same,' sighed Tricksy.

'You are right, Marjorie,' said Reggie, whose eyes were the best; 'I'm
certain it's the old _Heroic_.'

'What fun!' said Marjorie; while Tricksy sighed 'Oh, how nice!'

'I wonder whether the same men are on board,' said Reggie, whose
serious expression had changed.

'Don't know,' said Allan briefly, looking out to sea with his hands in
his pockets and a thoughtful face.

His lack of enthusiasm caused all the others to look at him, and
Marjorie felt her fears revive.

The man-of-war came to a standstill in Ardnavoir Bay and a boat put off
from her side.

'Look, oh look,' cried Tricksy, 'they're coming on shore.'

'Do you think they'll speak to us if they meet us?' inquired Harry,
whose eyes had never ceased to sparkle since the first discovery of the
vessel.

'We'll go down to the landing-place as soon as the boat comes in,' said
Allan.

'Can I go too?' asked Tricksy.

Allan looked at her.

'I think you two girls had better stay up here,' he said; and Tricksy's
face showed her disappointment.

The boat was rapidly coming nearer, and soon she grounded near the spot
where the Pirate Craft lay beached.

'There,' said Allan; 'there are three officers in the boat, and they're
getting out.'

The young people clustered at the edge of the rocks and looked down.

'We had better wait until they are gone,' said Allan; 'don't let them
see that we are watching them.'

'They are going in the direction of Ardnavoir,' said Marjorie; 'I
believe they are going to call for your father and mother!'

'Oh,' sighed Tricksy after the breathless pause during which they were
uncertain whether the officers were really going to enter the gate or
would pass by; 'they've gone in.  I saw that nice one who came here
last year.  Do you think they can be going to invite us to come on
board?'

This question being rather difficult to answer, Allan suggested that
the boys should go down to the shore and see if any of their old
friends were in the boat.

'Marjorie,' said Tricksy, as the two girls remained looking down from
above; 'do you think we should have better fun if we were boys?'

Marjorie's reply was forestalled by a shout from below; and the girls
scrambled down to the beach.

'Come along, you two,' said Allan; 'here's Jim Macdonnell, Euan's twin
brother, and a lot of the men who were here last year.'

Greetings were exchanged with the pleasant-faced young blue-jacket and
his companions; and then the boys and girls sat down on the stones to
talk with their friends.

The men could not come on shore, as no leave had yet been given, but
they hoped to be allowed to land on the following day.

'You will be glad to see Euan,' said Marjorie to Jim Macdonnell.

'Yes, Miss Marjorie,' replied the lad, but his handsome face clouded;
and Marjorie knew that he was thinking of his cousin Neil, once the
favourite of the island.

'We were going to ask you, Mr. Allan,' he said, 'whether you young
gentlemen would come and have tea on board this afternoon; just with us
men, you know, sir.'

'Thank you very much,' replied Allan, while all the boys looked
gratified; 'it would be no end jolly, and we'll come if Father will let
us.  I'm sure he will.  May we bring our friends too, Harry and Gerald
Graham?'

'To be sure, sir,' replied Jim; 'we'll be glad to see the young
gentlemen.  Are you fond of the sea, sir?' he inquired, turning to
Harry.

Yes,' replied Harry, 'and I'm going into the navy.'

'That's good,' said Jim.  'Perhaps I'll see you as a midshipman next
time we meet.'

'Perhaps,' said Harry; 'and I hope I'll be a captain before very long.'

'I hope you will be an admiral some day, sir, I'm sure,' answered Jim
gravely.

'Thank you,' said Harry; 'yes, I daresay I shall be.'

Allan turned his head away, and a smile gleamed out for an instant upon
Marjorie's face.  Harry saw it and did not feel pleased, and he
remarked to Gerald afterwards that he was afraid Marjorie thought a
great deal too much of herself.

'And what are you going to be, air?' inquired another of the men,
turning to Gerald, who was sitting by with a thoughtful face.

'I'm going into the army, I think,' answered Gerald; 'but I don't know
if I can pass the exams.  They're very difficult, but I'm going to try.'

'Here are the gentlemen coming back again,' said Jim.

'Then we'll leave you now,' said Allan; 'but we'll see you again in the
afternoon.'

'Right you are, sir,' replied Jim; 'we'll send a boat to fetch you.'

'You are lucky,' said Marjorie to the boys.  'How I wish we could go
too.  Do you think they meant to invite us?'

Allan looked doubtful.

'I don't know,' he said.  'I don't think they thought of it.  But I
daresay they would be glad to see you if you came.'

'It's no good, I'm afraid,' answered Marjorie; 'I'd have to ask Mother
and she'd be sure to say no.  But there is the boat going away, and
listen, isn't that the horn?'

They hearkened for a moment, and it was unmistakably the old ram's horn
which was sounded at Ardnavoir to summon those at a distance when any
notable event was about to take place.

'I wonder what it can be,' said Tricksy, as they scampered in the
direction of the mansion-house; 'do you think it can have anything to
do with the _Heroic_, Allan?'

Mrs. Stewart was in the doorway.

'We are invited to luncheon on board the _Heroic_,' she announced.
'The officers have signalled to ask Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor to come too,
and we have telephoned to say that Marjorie can get ready here, if Mrs.
MacGregor will bring her things with her.'

The young people did not look so pleased as Mrs. Stewart had
anticipated.

'How many of us are asked, Mummie?' inquired Tricksy.

'As many as care to come,' answered Mrs. Stewart.  'The boys may come
too if they like.'

All the boys looked unwilling.

'Don't you want to go?' asked Mrs. Stewart in surprise.

'Yes, Mother,' answered Allan; 'but the men have invited us already.'

'And would you rather go with them?'

The boys' faces showed that they would, and Mrs. Stewart gave
permission with a laugh.

Tricksy sidled up to her mother.

'Mummie, don't you think that Marjorie and I could go too?' she asked.

'No, I am quite sure that it wouldn't do,' replied Mrs. Stewart; and
the girls looked disappointed.

'You had better go upstairs and begin to get ready,' said Mrs. Stewart.
'Marjorie can brush her hair'--looking dubiously at the tangled mass of
curls, in which bits of grass and heather had become intermixed, 'and
perhaps by that time her other frock and her hat will have arrived.'

The girls turned to go upstairs, but paused to look at Carlo, who came
running down the steps, wriggling his small body, and whining as though
he were in pain.

'What's the matter with the poor little dog?' they cried.

Every one turned round as Carlo landed on the rug, and stood yelping
distressfully.

'Whatever is the little brute going on about?' said Reggie, looking at
him with curiosity.

'Something is hurting him,' said Hamish.

'I never saw him go on like that before,' remarked Allan.

Laddie sprang forward, wagging his tail and running to every one in
turn, trying to explain that his little friend needed help.

'Look how he bites his tail,' cried Mrs. Stewart, 'why do you do that,
Carlo?'

'Hydrophobia, perhaps,' suggested Allan; and some of the bystanders
edged a little farther away.

'Poor little dog,' said Gerald soothingly; 'tell us what's the matter
with you.'

At the sound of the pitying voice the little dog gathered up his ears,
then sat up and uttered a doleful howl, accompanied by agitated
movements of his fore-paws.

'There's something clinging to his tail,' cried Reggie suddenly,
pouncing upon him.  'Why, just look at this; it's a couple of small
crabs!'

'Where can he have got them from?' asked Mrs. Stewart, looking
bewildered; 'he came from upstairs.'

'Oh, it's--it's--_I_ know,' stuttered Gerald, flushing deeply.
'It's--I'll put it all right, you needn't come.'

The remainder of the sentence was lost as he hurried upstairs.

'Whatever is he about?' said Marjorie; 'let's go and see.'

Gerald became very red again as he was discovered in the room which he
shared with Harry, collecting some small objects from the floor.

You needn't have come,' he said.  'It's--it's only my collection, and
they've been escaping----'

'Ha, ha!' laughed Harry; 'it's those snails and things that he has been
gathering on the beach, and they've crawled all over the place!'

Gerald stood, flushing to the roots of his hair, and shrinking from the
mirth of the others.

His treasures had been trying to make themselves at home in their new
quarters.  The little crabs and lobsters had scattered in search of
water, and the shell-fish had crawled over the floor or attached
themselves to the wall, where they waited with tilted shells for the
tide that failed to come.

'Never mind, Gerald,' said Marjorie, as tears began to start in the
boy's eyes; 'it's very nice making a collection, and I've got a nice
pail with a lid that I'll give you to keep the things in.'

'And now,' said Mrs. Stewart, 'I see the pony cart coming up the drive,
with Mrs. MacGregor in it; run and get ready, girls, or we shall be
late.'

After about a quarter of an hour's tidying, Marjorie was released from
her mother's hands, dressed in a cream serge frock and a large hat, and
with her hair brushed out and neatly arranged.

Feeling unlike herself and hardly satisfied with the change, she peeped
in the glass as soon as her mother's back was turned.

Her own reflection caused her to start and colour with surprise.

Blue eyes, bright with suppressed excitement, a wild rose face framed
in short fair curls and set off by the light colours of her attire,
slender hands and neat ankles--'and that's me,' said Marjorie to
herself in bewilderment.

Tricksy came into the room, wearing a white hanging frock with a big
floppy white hat.

'Dear me,' said Marjorie to herself, taking another glance in the
mirror, after the eyes of the two girls had met in silent approval of
one another; 'curious that we've never thought of it before--perhaps
it's because we so seldom have bothered to look in the glass--but it
strikes me that we're actually a pair of very pretty girls--with our
hair brushed and our faces washed!'

They went downstairs without speaking, and encountered the boys in the
hall.

All eyes were attracted to them; then an approving expression came into
the boys' faces, and as the girls passed they moved somewhat aside to
look at them from another point of view.

Despite the anxiety which had brooded over her since morning, Marjorie
began to feel her spirits rise.

'Marjorie,' said Tricksy solemnly, as Duncan was driving them to the
landing-stage, 'which do you think is the best fun, being a boy or
being a girl?'

Marjorie had been lost in thought, but at Tricksy's question her eyes
began to dance.

'I think it's best of all to be a tomboy,' she said, 'and then you can
be a bit of both!'

When the sailors had shipped their oars, and the boat glided under the
side of the great war-vessel, first the ladies, and then the girls were
assisted on deck and greeted by the captain, erect and
broad-shouldered, and by the officers, the youngest of whom was
Tricksy's friend of the year before.  Dr. MacGregor and the laird and
Mr. Graham were already on board.

'Hullo, Miss Tricksy, how do you do?' said a voice, and Tricksy looked
up to see the Sheriff, who was smiling at her with outstretched hand.

Tricksy looked solemnly up in his face.

'Well, aren't you going to shake hands, Tricksy?' said the Sheriff.

'No,' said Tricksy deliberately.

The Sheriff's expression altered.

'And why not, Miss Tricksy, if I might inquire?' he said.

Tricksy met his grim smile with a solemn stare of disapproval.

'Because you let a great friend of ours be put in prison when he didn't
deserve it,' she replied.  'That was why I sent back the big box of
chocolates that you sent me by post.  Mother did not know that it had
come.  We can't be friends until you've owned yourself in the wrong.
We've all joined a Compact to get our friend back again and to show
that it wasn't he who did it.  I've got it with me,' and Tricksy began
to fumble in her pocket.

The smile was beginning to twitch at the corners of the Sheriff's lips
again when he was addressed by one of the officers.  The little scene
had passed unobserved by all save Marjorie, as the captain suggested
that, the weather being fine and time at their disposal, the _Heroic_
should take their visitors on a tour round Inchkerra.

'Certainly, certainly,' said the Sheriff at haphazard, and Tricksy
slipped away.

'In the meanwhile I think lunch is ready,' said Captain Redwood, and
each of the officers took a lady downstairs, Tricksy falling to the
share of the youngest.

'Dear me, this isn't half so exciting as I expected,' said Marjorie to
herself.  'What stupid grown-up things they are talking about; I am
sure they wouldn't be interested if I were to tell them about the
things we do, riding bare-backed ponies, and about the Craft and the
Den, and finding the smugglers; and I have nothing else to talk to them
about.  They haven't taken much notice of Tricksy and me after all;
they weren't a bit surprised when they saw us; we're pretty, but not
any prettier than lots of other girls, and it isn't enough to make a
fuss about.'

She wondered what Tricksy was finding to say to Lieutenant Jones, the
young officer by whose side she was sitting, and who appeared to be
greatly entertained by the little girl.

After lunch they returned on deck to see a boat bring the boys on
board; then the screw was set in motion and the water began to churn
itself into foam round the vessel's sides.

'It isn't bad,' said Marjorie to herself as the _Heroic_ ploughed her
way past the well-known shores, 'but it's a bother not having anything
to do.  I've seen all this before, and it isn't as though we were
rowing for all we were worth in the old _Mermaid_--I mean, the
_Craft_--and in danger of getting into currents and being swept away to
I don't know where.  Now I have no doubt the boys are having no end of
a good time, going into the engine-room and getting themselves dirty,
and climbing all over the place, and listening to the sailors' yarns.
Once I get out of this, catch me bother any more about looking nice,
and being grown-up, and all the rest of it--it will be time enough when
I'm so old that I get no fun out of being a tomboy any more.'

Lieutenant Jones left Tricksy and came to sit beside Marjorie for a
turn.

'I suppose you are quite accustomed to sailing as you live in an
island, Miss MacGregor?' he said.

'Yes,' replied Marjorie, 'we are all very fond of boating, the boys and
Tricksy and I,' and after talking for a little while she began to think
that a grown-up man was nearly as good company as a boy once you got
him upon the right subject.

'Now,' said the Sheriff, coming up with his spy-glass, 'we are coming
near the finest bit of rock scenery on the island; one of the finest,
in my opinion, on this part of the West Coast.'

The _Heroic_ was just rounding the point which concealed the Smugglers'
Caves from view.

'The Corrachin Crags,' continued the Sheriff; 'the caves are remarkably
fine; interesting, too, as in former times they are said to have been
used for smuggling purposes, and as hiding-places for pirates and other
lawless characters----'

'Now!' burst from the lips of the gazers as the lofty cliffs came in
view, with the waves tumbling at their base.

Captain Redwood had issued orders to slacken speed, and as the vessel
steamed slowly past, a fine view was obtained of bold masses of rock
and the black openings to the caves, with the startled birds rising in
clouds and screaming.

'If all stories are true, the caves are still sometimes put to their
old uses,' observed Mrs. MacGregor as the _Heroic's_ engines throbbed
through the smooth swell of the water; 'for all we know, the most
thrilling adventures may be taking place there.'

'A score of men might lie in hiding without discovering one another's
presence,' said the laird; 'the caves form a regular network, and
stretch a long way underground.  The entire headland is said to be
honeycombed with them----'

'Hullo, good people!' cried a soft little voice from overhead, followed
by a triumphant laugh.

Every one looked round, and half-way up the mast Tricksy was
discovered, who having become annoyed at her desertion by Lieutenant
Jones, was indulging in an exploring expedition on her own account.
Her little round face smiled mischievously from between a large white
hat and tumbled frock, and she sat swinging her heels in perfect
contentment.

Jim Macdonnell's duties having brought him to the quarter-deck at this
moment, the captain made him a sign almost without pausing in the
sentence which he was addressing to Mrs. Stewart.

The sailor climbed into the rigging and removed Tricksy very gently
from her perch, tucked her under one arm with her head hanging in front
and her heels behind, slid down the ropes and deposited the little girl
on the deck.

Tricksy stood and looked at every one in speechless wrath.  Her
dignity, being as great as her anger, prevented her from giving way to
an outburst before she should have discovered who deserved it most.

Lieutenant Jones crossed over to her.

'I suppose you have been round all this place before, Miss Tricksy,' he
said in a conversational tone.

Tricksy looked at him with mistrust.

'I believe you are great explorers and rock-climbers, you and your
brothers, Miss Tricksy,' continued the officer, as though being carried
down from a mast before a crowd of people were a matter of everyday
occurrence; 'I envy you your opportunities----'

This sounded quite like the way the other officers had been talking to
the grown-up ladies, and Tricksy found her stiffness begin to forsake
her.

The most important point was to discover whether the Sheriff had seen
what had occurred.  If he had not been a witness, Tricksy felt that she
might allow herself to get over it.

Her eyes sought her enemy, but that magistrate was, or affected to be,
engrossed in trying to bring his telescope to bear upon the caves, and
the episode had apparently escaped him.

'Talking of people hiding in the caves,' he said suddenly; 'Mrs.
MacGregor, do you see the figure of a man at the mouth of the one which
we are now opposite?  From his attitude he might be a fugitive from
justice or any other of these interesting desperadoes about whom we
have been talking----'

Marjorie's face flushed, and she began to tremble from head to foot.

'Wait a minute, Mrs. MacGregor,' said the Sheriff, 'I will get my
glasses adjusted.  Curious; there is something in the man's appearance
which seems familiar to me----'

He was about to take another look when the air was rent by the shrill
whistle of a siren.

They all turned round in astonishment, and when they looked towards the
rocks again the figure had disappeared.

The captain's face had become stern, but the culprit proved to be only
a small boy in a jacket whose sleeves were too short for him.

Marjorie had seen more, however; she had seen that it was Jim
Macdonnell who had made Reggie blow the siren.

During the rest of the afternoon things seemed to be swimming before
Marjorie's eyes, and she heard only a confused murmur of voices.

When the voyage was over she went straight to Allan.

'Allan,' she said abruptly, 'I may as well tell you that I know your
secret.  Neil is in Inchkerra--and he is in hiding.'




CHAPTER IX

DISAPPOINTMENT

Allan looked at Marjorie with his hands in his pockets.

'It's all right,' said Marjorie hastily; 'I won't tell any one, but I
couldn't help finding it out, for I saw Neil.  Anyhow, I know so much
already that I might as well know the rest.  To begin with, it was
Neil's knife that you picked up in the Den; I saw the letters on the
handle.'

Allan watched Marjorie narrowly for a minute, and then he seemed to
become reassured.

'Listen, Marjorie,' he said; 'mind you don't let out a word of this to
any one.  It would be an awful thing if Neil were taken now.  He came
back a few days ago, in a smuggling vessel, to see his mother.  Mrs.
Macdonnell is very ill, as you know'--Marjorie nodded, a lump being in
her throat--'and she thinks she can't live long.  Some one who knew
where Neil was wrote and told him that she was always saying how much
she wished she could see him before she died, and he came back at once,
although the police may get him at any minute and he knows it.  In the
meanwhile she is much worse, and he refuses to go away until he sees
whether she is going to recover.  Mrs. Macdonnell keeps asking him to
clear out, but he always says there is no hurry, and that he will wait
until she is better.  It's awfully senseless of him, for he might be
seen any day; but Neil always was a bit obstinate once he takes a thing
into his head.  He hides most of the day and comes out when there isn't
much chance of his meeting any one.  But if he were found out he would
be taken and sent to prison as sure as fate, so you must tell no one,
Marjorie, not a soul.  Reggie knows, but none of the others.'

Every particle of colour had left Marjorie's face, but her lips set
themselves firmly.

'You needn't be afraid of me, Allan,' she said.  'We must get him
persuaded to go away at once, for his mother would never get over it if
he were caught.'

'Can't do anything just now,' said Allan; 'there is no way of getting
him out of the island while the _Heroic_ is here, and this afternoon
the men were declaring that as soon as they got shore leave they would
search the island for the man who they say is "skulking round."  We can
only hope that they won't go very far into the caves, or that the ship
will soon be ordered north.  But, Marjorie, don't go about with a face
like that, whatever you do, or you'll show people that something's the
matter.  Remember that if either the Pater or your father were to find
out that Neil is here, it would be their duty to let the police know,
and they wouldn't like to have to do that.'

Marjorie drew herself together.

'You needn't be afraid of me, Allan,' she said, as she turned away.  'I
can keep a secret as well as you and Reggie, and you know it.'

On the following morning Allan was hardly surprised to encounter
Marjorie upon the little hill which commanded a view of the sea near
Ardnavoir.  Her pony was beside her, and she had evidently risen with
the dawn and ridden over the moors.

'Any news?' she inquired anxiously.

'Nothing at all,' he replied.  'The _Heroic_ is quite quiet yet, as you
see.'

They looked at the dark hull which was lying motionless upon the water.

'Duncan rode over to the caves last night to tell Neil to keep out of
sight while the _Heroic_ is here,' said Allan.  'The only fear is if
the men should try exploring with torches.  There are openings from the
caves on to the moors, but if the island is swarming with men it
wouldn't be much good trying to escape by them.'

'Oh,' cried Marjorie, looking at the _Heroic_, 'if only they would go
away.  Couldn't we invent some excuse for getting them out of the way
while we get Neil into safety.'

'No good, I'm afraid,' said Allan.  'They have their orders from the
Admiralty, and they wouldn't attend to anything else.'

Marjorie looked hopeless.

'I shall have to go home now,' she said; 'there's some one moving about
in your garden, so it must be nearly breakfast-time.  Let me know if
there's any news.'

'Don't go yet,' said Allan decidedly.  'You must stay and have
breakfast with us.  I bet you didn't have anything before you left?'

'I had a crust of bread,' said Marjorie reluctantly.  'Elspeth keeps
everything locked up at night, and I couldn't wait.'

'Come along,' said Allan.  'You'll be in the best place for seeing what
the _Heroic_ is about.'

The argument was irresistible and Marjorie yielded.

'Never mind Cheeky,' said Allan; 'he won't wander far.'

The bridle was taken off the shaggy little pony whom Marjorie had not
waited to saddle, and Marjorie and Allan went down the hill.

Reggie and Harry were already out of doors, Harry addressing himself
with sparkling eyes to Reggie, who was unusually silent.  When Allan
came in view together with Marjorie, Reggie studied the pair
inquiringly and received a reassuring nod from Allan.

'Seen the _Heroic_?' began Harry; 'I say, if the men get their leave
to-day do you think they will let us come with them?'

'We might show them the interesting places on the island,' said Reggie,
with a sidelong glance at Allan.

'Oh, I say, what fun,' exclaimed Harry; 'I'd take them to the
Smugglers' Caves and let them explore.'

Reggie looked at Allan again.

'I wouldn't do that, if I were you, Harry,' said Allan.  'You don't
know much about the caves yourself yet, you know, and they're most
awfully dangerous; great holes full of water where you don't expect
them, and rocks that might fall on the top of you and crush you to
pieces; and then the smugglers might be lying in ambush round the
corners, you know.'

Tricksy, who had come out to join the others, opened her eyes very
widely at this account of the hidden perils of the caves.

'Look,' cried Reggie, 'they're signalling something from the _Heroic_.'

A string of flags had suddenly floated out from the _Heroic's_ masthead.

'Wait, and I'll fetch a spy-glass,' said Allan, running towards the
house.

'Something about telling something to Father,' he said, after studying
the signals for awhile; 'I can't make out the rest.'

They looked at each other with frightened eyes.

'Here, Reggie,' said Allan, handing him the glass, 'you try.'

Reggie looked, then shook his head.

'Can't make anything of it,' he said.

'Perhaps they want us to come on board again,' said Harry.  'You might
give me the glass for a minute, Reggie.'

'They can't have been exploring already?' suggested Marjorie, in a
voice designed only for Allan's and Reggie's ears.

'Don't know,' said Allan.  'If only they hadn't gone and made Father a
J.P.!' he added, with a judiciously suppressed groan.

'They're signalling from the coastguard station, do you see?' cried
Tricksy.

'Where's Gerald?' said Harry; 'he ought to be here to see this.  Lazy
beggar, if I don't remember to wake him at four in the morning he
always oversleeps.'

He flew into the house, and returned shortly, followed by Gerald, who
came rubbing his eyes and trying to seem grateful to his brother for
having roused him out of the first good sleep he had enjoyed for weeks.

'There's a coastguard just coming up the drive,' said Reggie.

'Perhaps all the men are going to ask us to a picnic or something,'
suggested Harry; while Marjorie, Allan, and Reggie watched the
messenger.

Nothing was to be gathered from the demeanour of the coastguard, and
after he had gone down the avenue all the young people crowded into the
hall.

'A letter,' said Allan, looking at an envelope lying on the hall table;
'Allan Stewart, Esq. that doesn't tell us much, and Father has gone
out.'

'Perhaps it's for you,' suggested Tricksy.

'Not it,' said Allan unwillingly; 'they'd never address me as esquire,
especially as Father is Allan too.  Can't do anything until he comes
back.'

'What do you think he can have gone out for?' inquired Marjorie, and
the faces of the others were as anxious as her own.

'Now, young people,' cried Mrs. Stewart's voice, 'come to breakfast;
the _Heroic_ will wait while you have some food.'

Marjorie, Allan, and Reggie tore themselves unwillingly away from the
letter.

'Mother,' said Allan persuasively, 'there's a letter for Father out
there on the hall table; it's some message from the _Heroic_; don't you
think you might open it and see what they say?'

Mrs. Stewart looked surprised.

'I can't open a letter addressed to your father,' she said.  'Have
patience a little while; he may not be long.'

'But, Mother, perhaps it's something very important,' persisted Allan;
'they may be waiting for an answer, you know.'

'I don't think it can be so important as all that,' said Mrs. Stewart.
'Take your places, Allan and Reggie, everything is getting cold.'

The young people felt that their patience would give way in another
minute.

'Come here, Gerald,' said Mrs. Stewart, 'beside Tricksy; and Harry, you
can sit by Marjorie.'

Harry looked unwilling.

'Oh, Mother,' cried Tricksy, 'you are putting him with his back to the
window!'

Mrs. Stewart looked mystified.

'He wants to see the _Heroic_,' explained Tricksy; 'we are watching to
see when the boats leave.'

Mrs. Stewart gave Harry a seat on the other side of the table, an
arrangement which placed Allan where he could not see what was going
on.  He and Marjorie and Reggie had to rest satisfied with the
discovery that they were able to communicate by means of kicking one
another's shins under the table, although this method of intelligence
made them feel if possible more distracted than before.

'Look how the men are running about on board,' said Tricksy.  'They
look like little black ants!  They must be going to launch the boats
now.'

Harry's bright eyes did not leave the vessel for an instant.  Of a
sudden his jaw dropped and his face became blank.

'What's the matter?' cried every one.

'They're going away,' cried Harry.

Every one sprang from table and looked.

'They can't be going round to the caves,' said Marjorie.  'Oh, dear,
how can we stop them.  I'll take Cheeky and go and warn him.'

Fortunately this remark passed unnoticed amid the hubbub.

'They aren't going away altogether, are they?' asked Tricksy, her eyes
becoming large with dismay.

Allan made a rush for the door, and ran up against his father, who was
coming in.

'Hard luck,' said Mr. Stewart, holding out the letter; 'the _Heroic_
has received unexpected orders, and they have to sail northward without
delay.  No shore leave, so they take this opportunity of saying
good-bye.'

'Aw--w--w,' said Harry, Gerald, and Tricksy, while the others had
difficulty in repressing an inclination to cheer.

'When are they coming back again?' asked Gerald.

'Next year, perhaps,' said Mr. Stewart, smiling.

The faces became if possible more blank than before.

'She's out of sight,' said Harry in a dejected tone, going to the
window.

'Is she?' said Gerald, looking out too; 'why, so she is.'

'If you fellows want to see her,' said Allan, 'why don't you go to the
top of the hill?  You'll get a first-class view from there.'

Without a word the boys darted from the room and out at the front door,
Harry with his bootlaces untied and flapping about his ankles, and
Gerald without a hat.  In scrambling over the wall Harry became caught,
and fell sprawling on the ground, but picked himself up and ran on as
if nothing had happened.

'Come, you two,' said Allan, 'now that we've got them safely out of the
way we've got to do something.'

Marjorie ran for her bridle and put it on Cheeky, who was cropping
grass by the stream.

'Go on,' shouted Allan; 'don't wait for us, we'll soon catch you up.
Let's go and catch Dewdrop and Daisy, Reggie; bicycles are no good for
the moors.'

In a short time Marjorie was overtaken by the two boys, perched upon
bridleless, bare-backed ponies.

The wind whistled past as they galloped over the level ground, and they
were almost too breathless to speak as they urged their ponies up the
slopes of the hill.

'Oh, gee up, Daisy; gee-up!' cried Allan, 'we have no time to lose
to-day!'

'Glad we got away all right,' he panted as they stood breathing their
ponies on the summit; 'it would never do to have these two dragging
about and asking questions.  We've just got to get Neil out of there
before anything more happens,' he continued.  'The boat is waiting
about, watching for an opportunity to leave as soon as the _Heroic_
goes; and we must make Neil promise to leave with her.'

The sturdy little ponies descended the slopes with the sure-footedness
of cats; then sprang pluckily over the moss-hags which covered the
greater part of the peninsula.

Suddenly, without warning, they became entangled in a treacherous piece
of bog, from which they did not struggle into safety until Marjorie's
pony had lost a shoe.

'Look out,' cried Allan, as they were about to spring forward once
more; 'it's here that there are those holes that go down into the
caves, and you don't see them until you've nearly fallen into them.'

Curbing their impatience, they dismounted and walked, leading the
ponies by the bridle.

'There,' said Marjorie as they neared the cliff, 'the tide's rising,
and they're shaking out the sails on the smugglers' vessel.'

'Shall we all go down?' asked Reggie.

'No,' said Allan, 'the fewer the better.  You stay here with the
ponies, and I'll go down with Marjorie.'

'Me?' said Marjorie, surprised.

'Yes, you.  You've got to speak to him and get him to leave.  Come
along.'

They lowered themselves over the edge of the cliff, and clambered to
the beach.

Two faces scowled at them over the bulwarks of the boat, and the
captain waiting on the shore, a man of foreign appearance, with a
shaggy black beard and a sou'-wester, glanced disapprovingly at
Marjorie.

Somewhat alarmed, she turned and discovered Duncan standing beside her.

The butler was more disturbed at the encounter than seemed to Marjorie
at all necessary, and her astonishment was completed when Rob MacLean
and the lighthouse-keeper appeared, rolling a heavy barrel between them.

'Here, lend a hand,' they cried to Duncan; then they stopped short on
observing Allan and Marjorie.

'Why, they are _all_ smugglers!' Marjorie was on the point of
exclaiming; but Allan seized her arm and gripped it warningly.

'We've come to see Neil, and to try to make him go with you,' he said,
addressing himself to the men in a body.

Immediately the faces became less grim.

'That iss ahl right, Mr. Allan,' said Rob MacLean; 'you will pe finding
him in a cave right opposite.  Speak to him, Miss Marjorie; he iss
ferry foolish and he will not pe wanting to come.'

Marjorie was still looking in a surprised way at Duncan, whom she
hardly seemed to recognise in his new character of a smuggler; but
Allan renewed his pressure upon her arm.

'Tell him he must go, Mr. Allan and Miss Marjorie,' said Duncan, 'and
he must not be long, ta captain cannot be waiting or he will miss the
tide.  He iss a ferry impatient man iss ta captain, whateffer.'

All right,' said Allan; 'we'll talk to him.  You go in first, Marjorie.'

A short way from the entrance Marjorie came upon Neil; but what a
change in her old playmate!  Pale, and looking still paler in the dim
light; with worn and soiled clothing, and his former bright, pleasant
expression changed into sullen despair.

Marjorie's heart sank.

'Neil,' she began, 'we've come to see you, Allan and I.'

'Indeed, Miss Marjorie, it is ferry good of you,' said the lad, rising
and looking down upon her with a grateful expression, 'but wass it not
ferry unwise of you to come?  That sea-captain iss a rough character
and he might----'

'Never mind us, Neil,' said Marjorie, 'we're all right.  We only wanted
to say that we are your friends, whatever happens, and we hope that
things will come right for you.  And now, Neil, you will go away for a
little while, will you not?  Don't stay here while you are in such
danger of being found.'

Neil looked down upon her, and his face darkened again.

'I cannot be leaving Inchkerra just now, Miss Marjorie,' he said.

'Oh, Neil, do go away.  Think what it would be to your mother if you
were found--think what it would be to _all_ of us, Neil----'

'Schooner's beginning to weigh anchor,' cried a gruff voice outside.

'Come, Neil, don't waste time,' said Marjorie.

Neil seated himself determinedly upon a fragment of rock.

'I will not be leaving the island just now, Miss Marjorie,' he said.

Marjorie looked at him, and noted the dulness of his eyes and the
obstinate lines round his mouth.

'Neil, do, do go,' she said, clutching him by the arm.  'Come with me,
Neil, and don't be foolish.'

'Are you ready, Neil?' said Allan, appearing inside the cave; 'the
schooner can't wait much longer.'

Marjorie turned round in despair.

'Oh, this will never do,' said Allan.  'Come along, Neil, there's a
good fellow, and don't keep them waiting.'

Neil remained firm and Marjorie felt that it was hopeless.

'Are you not for coming, Neil?' said Duncan, standing in the mouth of
the cave; 'ta captain says he iss in a hurry to be gone.'

'Come, Neil,' said Rob MacLean persuasively, 'it will not pe meking
Mistress Macdonnell any better, puir soul, for you to be waiting here
with ta police, silly bodies, at your heels.'

Neil came forward, Marjorie and Allan following him anxiously.

'I will not pe going,' he said briefly.

'Of all ta fulish gomerals!' burst out Duncan, and clenched his fists
and stormed in Gaelic to the lad, who remained unmoved.

'That will be a ferry foolish thing, Neil; gang wi ta captain,' said
Bob soothingly.

'Go on board, Neil; it isn't too late yet,' implored Allan.

'Tide's on the turn,' shouted the gruff voice of the captain.  'Come if
you're coming, and if not, don't keep honest folks waiting.'

Neil leaned against the cliff and looked stubbornly into vacancy.  From
his attitude it was plain that he was inflexible.

'Yo-ho!' sang out the sailors; 'heave-ho!' and the sails of the little
vessel slowly filled as her bows swung round to the sea.

Marjorie made a bolt towards the cliff, and began to climb.

On the top she turned and looked at Allan, whose face was as white as
her own.

'Can't be helped,' he said in a hard voice.  'Some ass went and told
him that Mrs. Macdonnell was worse.'

'Hullo,' called out Reggie as they came within hearing, 'is he gone?'

'Gone!' echoed the others, and Marjorie sank down on the heather and
gasped.

When she looked up the boys were sitting beside her.

'Well?' began Reggie sympathetically.

'He wouldn't go,' said Allan; 'we did all we could.  Duncan and Rob are
still storming at him down there.'

There was nothing to be said, and they all sat and reflected.

'The worst of it is,' said Marjorie in a trembling tearless voice,
'that in spite of our Compact and everything else, we haven't been able
to do him a bit of good!'

The others assented by their silence.

'And I don't believe we ever shall,' continued Marjorie, 'we don't seem
to have set about it the right way, somehow.'

The boys looked so downcast that Marjorie judged it inadvisable to
pursue the subject further and they mounted their ponies and rode
slowly in the direction of Ardnavoir.

Half-way down the hill they discovered Tricksy sitting on a clump of
heather, with Hamish beside her and Laddie curled at her feet.

'You are nice, kind people,' said Tricksy reproachfully, 'going away
like that and leaving me all alone!'

'Why, Tricksy,' began Marjorie, 'why didn't you go with the others?'

'Go with the others!' echoed Tricksy, 'do you think I could run up the
hill as they did?  If it hadn't been for Hamish I shouldn't have seen
anything.  Then leaving me all alone too.'

'But, Tricksy, where are Harry and Gerald?'

'I don't know, I'm sure.  Gone off somewhere by themselves, and I came
to meet you with Hamish.  I think you might have let me come with you.'

'Don't be a little silly, Tricksy,' said Reggie irritably; 'you are too
little to go all that distance.'

'Too little!' cried Tricksy, exasperated; 'I'm not too little to be
sent messages for the others, and I'm not too little to dig in the
garden and carry stones for the Pirates' Den; I'm only too little when
it's a jolly piece of fun that you want to keep to yourselves.  Oh,
Laddie, dear,' to the dog who had jumped up and was licking her face,
'you are the only nice ones, you and Hamish'--and she threw her arms
round the collie's neck to hide a tear.  'Don't lick my face though,'
she added, with a change of manner that forced a laugh even from the
tired and weary adventurers.

'You haven't shown them what you found, Tricksy,' said Hamish.

'No,' said Tricksy, 'neither I have,' and she fumbled in her pocket and
drew out a crumpled paper which she gave to Allan.

Her brother looked at it.

'What's this?' he said.  'I don't understand.'

'Look at the number, Allan, and the date,' said Hamish.

Allan examined the paper; then flushed to the ears.

'Tricksy, you little owl,' he burst out; 'to think of you going on
about your potty little feelings and wounded dignity and all that when
you had _this_ to show us.'




CHAPTER X

IN WHICH ALLAN IS VERY WISE

'I--I--I didn't know,' stammered poor Tricksy.

'What is it?' cried the others, pressing round to look.

'It's one of the orders that were stolen,' said Allan.

'Tell them where you found it, Tricksy,' said Hamish.

'It was in the box-room, where the spare coats and the fishing baskets
are kept,' said Tricksy.  'I went to see if Reggie's knife was in the
pocket of his old great-coat, and when I pulled it off the shelf this
fluttered down.'

'Well,' said Allan, while the others were dumb with astonishment, 'this
beats me altogether.  It wasn't _we_ who were the thieves!'

Every one looked at the order, and turned it round, and examined the
back of it, but there was no clue to the mystery.

'Let's go and have a thorough search of the box-room,' said Marjorie;
'who knows what we may bring to light.'

'Take my pony, Tricksy,' said Reggie considerately.  'Those who haven't
ponies will have to walk.  Don't begin the search until we are all
there!'

When the walkers reached Ardnavoir they found the others standing guard
at the door of the box-room.

'Now!' said Marjorie, throwing open the door; and they all burst in.

All the garments were taken down from the shelves and unfolded and
shaken, but nothing was to be found.  Every pocket was turned out; but
the contents were only pebbles, and bits of string, and pieces of dried
seaweed.

All the fishing baskets were opened and peeped into, and turned upside
down and shaken, but without result.

Afterwards they pulled out the boxes that were ranged against the wall,
and looked behind them, but no postal orders were found.

'This box is unfastened,' cried Tricksy; 'let's look inside it.'

'Do you think we should do that,' demurred Hamish; 'Mrs. Stewart might
object.'

'Can't stop to think of that in a case of necessity,' replied Reggie,
and Marjorie's hands were soon in the trunk.

Furs smelling strongly of camphor, some old chair covers, then a
quantity of frocks and boys' suits grown too small, and a layer of
boots at the bottom.

'Nothing there,' said Marjorie, cramming the things into the box again.

'These other trunks are all locked,' said Reggie, trying them one after
the other.

'They'll have to be opened when the police come,' observed Hamish.

Marjorie and Allan looked at each other.

'Do you think we ought to bring the police back at this time?' asked
Marjorie in an undertone.

Allan sat down on a box, and the others all followed his example.

'We've got to consider what's to be done about this discovery,' began
Allan.  'The first question is, have you showed the order to Pater or
Mother already, Hamish?'

'Not yet,' said Hamish.

'Well, then,' said Allan, 'we've got to make up our minds whether we'd
better do it or not.'

Hamish looked astonished.

'I don't see how there can be any doubt about that,' he began.  'Surely
it's the very first----'

Marjorie, Allan, and Reggie were all looking at each other.

'We couldn't possibly keep back evidence like this,' pursued Hamish.

Marjorie's and Reggie's eyes were saying 'Don't tell them.'

Allan pushed his hair back from his forehead, thrust his hands into his
pockets, and then turned to Hamish again.

'We've got to think of a lot of things in an affair like this,' he
said.  'For instance----'

'It seems to me there's only one way of looking at it,' replied Hamish,
his slow voice becoming steadier.  'You've got an important piece of
evidence which may prove the turning-point of the case, and you don't
even tell your father and mother.'

'_I_ think Hamish is in the right,' broke in Tricksy's little voice.

A glance from Reggie caused her to quail and Allan turned upon Hamish.

'Now, Hamish, old fellow, don't you jolly well make an ass of yourself.
We find ourselves in this predic.; either we've got to shut up about
this valuable find, or have the police poking about the island when
they're not wanted.'

'We've all three voted against you, so you are in a minority, Hamish,'
broke in Marjorie, her voice sharp with vexation.

Hamish became very red, and looked at them steadily.

'I can't act contrary to the wishes of the majority,' he said,  since
we've made a Compact; but I wish to say that I think you are making a
great mistake and that I think we shall all have cause to regret what
you are doing.'

There was no reply since none could be made, and the meeting closed in
an uncomfortable silence.

'Tear, tear,' they heard Duncan's voice saying in irritable tones
outside the door; 'what will hev become of ahl ta young ladies and
gentlemen?  They will ahl pe away just at ta ferry time when they will
be wanted.  They will pe after some nonsense.  I will ahlways pe the
mosst afraid when they are ferry quiet when Mr. Allan will pe with
them.  He iss so sensible and wiselike, iss Mr. Allan, that when he
finds mischiefs for them to do they will ahlways pe the ferry worst
kinds of mischief, whateffer.'




CHAPTER XI

A NEAR SHAVE

They all trooped out, and followed Duncan's retreating figure.

'Here we are, Duncan, what do you want us for?'

'Tear me, young ladies and gentlemen,' said Duncan, 'we will hev peen
looking for you ahl over the house and grounds.  The Sheriff iss here
from Stornwell and the minister iss come to call, and the laird says as
it iss such a ferry fine day he iss going to take effery one out for a
sail in the yacht, and Dr. and Mrs. MacGregor iss come, and we are to
hev lunch on board and go over to Alvasay, and afterwards if there iss
time we will pe stopping at the Corrachin Caves, for Mr. Graham says he
will pe liking to explore them; and here we will ahl pe waiting for
you, young ladies and chentlemen.'

Marjorie's lips tightened.

'Look here, Duncan,' she said, after Hamish, followed consolingly by
Tricksy, had passed out of hearing, 'we must make them too late for the
caves.'

'Indeed, Miss Marjorie, we will hev to keep them out whateffer,' said
Duncan, 'Mr. Graham's eyes will pe ferry sharp, he iss as bad as Mr.
Harry, who is notticing efferything.  But there iss ta laird, Miss
Marjorie, he will pe calling to me to come with ta lunch baskets, I
will hev to go.'

The hall was a scene of animation.  The Sheriff was standing talking to
Mrs. MacGregor and receiving defiant glances from Tricksy; the
minister, an elderly man with white hair and stooping shoulders, stood
somewhat apart; the other gentlemen were collecting rugs and fishing
tackle, and Harry and Gerald were jumping about, asking questions and
getting in every one's way.

'Rob MacLean has come to say that the _Kelpie_ iss all ready, sir,'
said Duncan, who among his other avocations sailed his master's yacht.

'Don't let us wait any longer then,' said the laird; 'we shall not have
time to visit the caves this evening if we miss the tide.'

Two trips of the _Mermaid_--the Craft only when her young owners were
by themselves--conveyed the entire party on board the _Kelpie_, whose
crew, consisting of Rob MacLean and another crofter, were in readiness.

'We must manage not to go to the caves, Rob,' said Marjorie as she
passed.

'Aye, Miss Marjorie, she will not pe going to the caves to-day,' said
the Highlander grimly.

It was a glorious day for a sail, and the young people's spirits rose
in spite of themselves.  There was enough wind to fill out the sails
and make the vessel skim swiftly over the water, but not enough to make
any one in the least uncomfortable, and the waves were dancing in the
sunlight.

'Do you see that island over there?' said Marjorie to Harry, who was
looking about him with sparkling eyes; 'that high one beyond all the
little skerries?  That's where we're going; it's an awfully jolly
place, there's a fine loch with sea trout in it and a capital beach.'

Harry looked at the island, and then at the water tumbling and foaming
in the vessel's wake; and then he began to look about for some more
active occupation.  The ladies were talking to their guests and
pointing out the interesting places as they passed, and Gerald and
Tricksy were sitting soberly in a corner by themselves.  Mr. Stewart
and Dr. MacGregor were busy with the sailing of the vessel, which
seemed to require a great deal of management at this stage; and Harry's
soul became filled with envy as he saw the other boys helping them
dexterously as though they had passed their lives on board a ship.

Seeing Reggie perched half-way up the mast, helping to shake out a
sail, Harry tried to scramble up after him, but Hamish ordered him down.

Harry turned and looked up with an indignant stare.

The elder boy, who seemed almost grown-up in his yachting suit, met the
look with his usual good-natured smile, but did not seem disposed to be
trifled with.

'You had better begin when the vessel's steady,' he said; 'it would
never do to fall overboard while she's going along at this rate.'

'Why,' said Harry; 'couldn't you lower a boat?'

'It would not do you much good,' said Hamish.  'The current's flowing
pretty rapidly one way, and the wind's driving us along at a fair speed
in exactly the opposite direction; you might be carried miles out into
the open before we could get a boat out.'

Harry went to the side and looked down at the water that was eddying
past.

'It wouldn't be at all nice to fall overboard here, would it?' said
Marjorie, who seemed to be blown along the deck, her hair flying in the
wind.  'It will soon be over now, and see how near the island has been
getting; we'll be there in no time.'

She hurried off to help in the coiling of the ropes, and in about
half-an-hour the _Kelpie_ was brought alongside the rude stone pier of
Alvasay.

First came a walk to a wonderful rocky fiord, where the stones that
were thrown down rebounded from side to side, and finally landed with a
dull thud in some stagnant-looking water at the bottom.  Afterwards,
the day being hot, boys and girls scattered for a bathe.

'I can swim twice across the school swimming-bath,' said Harry, picking
his way barefoot over the rocks and shivering a little, for although
the sun was hot, the wind seemed cold when one had nothing on.

'You'll find it a bit rough with these waves against you,' said Reggie
briefly.

'Far jollier,' said Harry, looking at the pebbles underneath the bright
waves and the masses of seaweed swaying to and fro--'ugh, it is cold
though!'

When his splash had subsided he saw the island boys swimming far ahead
of him.  In a little while he began to feel tired, and the waves seemed
to be growing bigger and bigger, and stronger and stronger.  When he
was able to see over their crests he could make out the other two
sitting upon a rock which raised its head out of the water, and waiting
for him.

After considerable efforts he reached the islet, grasped a point of
rock, and drew himself on to dry land.

The others looked at him approvingly.  Gerald was still splashing in
shallow water near the shore.

'Good for you,' said Reggie; 'it's a pretty stiff sea for a fellow who
has only practised in a swimming-bath.'

Harry did not look quite pleased.

'I say,' began Allan, 'look at Gerald, he's actually trying to come out
to us.  He is a plucky little chap.'

'That he is,' said Hamish.  'I'll swim back and see if I can help him.'

He dropped into the water and swam to meet Gerald, who was struggling
gallantly along, making very wry faces, and swallowing quantities of
water.  With the bigger boy swimming by his side and occasionally
helping him Gerald got along fairly well, and in a little while
clambered on to the rocks, looking exceedingly happy.

Diving from steep places and swimming until they were tired, then
getting out and sunning themselves on the warm rocks or sand of the
little islets, running races and pushing each other into the water, the
time passed quickly, and they were all surprised when Duncan came in
view signalling that tea was ready.

They had been in the water long enough, for their teeth were chattering
and they could hardly get into their clothes for trembling.

'I say,' began Harry with chattering teeth, 'you fellows ought to learn
to tread water and to swim on the side.  They teach these things at the
swimming-baths.  The ordinary kind of swimming does well enough in a
place like this----'

'It's the best way of getting along, I should say,' suggested Reggie.

'Yes,' said Harry rather contemptuously; 'getting along is all very
well; but when you're swimming where a lot of people see you, you like
to be able to do the fancy strokes.  You need to have lessons for these
things though.'

Reggie's dark, serious eyes exchanged a glance with Allan's amused ones.

'Good thing Marjorie isn't here,' observed Allan in an aside; and the
other boys grinned as they thought of the way in which Marjorie always
had a reply ready for Harry when he was caught boasting.

'What's that?' said Harry, his head popping out of the opening of his
shirt.

Allan was saved from the necessity of replying by the reappearance of
Duncan, to say that 'The young gentlemen wass to please mek haste and
come at once, as effery one wass waiting for them.'

During the walk from the bathing-place Allan was very silent, and all
tea-time he watched Reggie and Harry thoughtfully, and was evidently
revolving something in his mind.

After tea he took an opportunity of saying to Marjorie, 'Now, Marjorie,
remember that we've got to make the _Kelpie_ late.'

'I'll try to get lost,' said Marjorie.  'I hope they won't go off
without me though.  You'd better lose yourself too, with one or two of
the others; and they'll notice if so many are absent.'

'I'll do my best,' said Allan.  'I think we'll manage to keep them back
an hour or so.  You might come this way, Reggie, will you?'

Allan walked for some distance in silence, and Reggie began to wonder
what was coming.

'Reggie,' began Allan, rather absently, 'have you been thinking that
you're going to school next term?'

'Yes,' answered Reggie, wondering what this was going to lead to.

'Well,' resumed Allan, 'you'll need to have some fights, you know,
almost as soon as you get there.'

'I suppose so,' said Reggie.

'I mean,' said Allan, 'even supposing that no one challenges you,
you'll have to fight some of the fellows at the very commencement,
don't you see, just to show that you're not the sort to be put upon.'

Reggie listened attentively, but said nothing.

'You haven't had much opportunity of practising yet, of course, and it
won't do, if you want to make a position for yourself in the school,
just to begin upon some of the new fellows, kids of your own size or a
little bigger; any one can do that.  What you want is to challenge some
of the older fellows at the very beginning, and then, no one will try
humbugging you, as they do with the new fellows.'

Reggie looked doubtful.  The idea of making a position for himself was
tempting, but if it was only to be carried into effect by fighting
bigger boys he felt that the result might be failure.

'What you want is practice,' resumed Allan.  'Now it's no use your
trying to fight me--I'm much too big and strong for you; nor Hamish,
for he's far too good-natured and would never hit out at you enough; so
it's awfully lucky we've got Harry here just now--he's just the very
fellow.'

Reggie looked up in perplexity.

'But how can I fight Harry?' he said; 'I've never quarrelled with him.'

'You young duffer,' said Allan, 'you don't need to fight about anything
in particular.  It's only for practice.  Then we've got to make the
yacht late, you know, and this is no end of a good opportunity, as we
can't be expected to stay where the grown-ups are likely to find us
when we've got a fight on hand.  Here's a nice quiet place, just behind
these rocks, and there's Harry wading in that pool; you can just fight
him at once, or I'll punch both your heads for you.  Hullo, Harry!
Come along!  Reggie wants to fight you.  Now, go it, you two, and I'll
be umpire;' and before the younger boys knew what they were about they
were sparring at each other like a couple of angry cocks.

'Straight, Reggie, you young duffer,' said Allan, settling himself to
give professional advice.  'Give it to him from the shoulder.'

'I say, what's the row?' asked Hamish, who came strolling down to the
scene; 'so these two have come to loggerheads, have they?'

'Not they,' replied Allan carelessly; 'it's only practice.'

Marjorie's curly head rose above a rock behind which she had been lying
_perdu_; and when she saw what was going on she jumped up and scrambled
to the other side.

'Whatever is the matter?' she cried.  'Can't you make them stop, Allan?'

'Practice-fight,' replied Allan; 'don't call out, Marjorie; you'll
distract their attention.'

Reggie, unused to fighting, soon began to have the worst of it, but he
struggled manfully until a well-planted blow from Harry knocked the
breath out of him.

'That's enough for a beginning,' said Allan.  'You've done not so
badly, Reggie, for the first time, and you'll get into it all right by
practice.'

'But what did he go at me for?' cried Harry, with a blank expression of
countenance.  'I didn't do anything to him.'

'Nobody said you did, you duffer,' replied Allan; 'Reggie only wants to
be able to fight the fellows at school; and you and he can have a go at
each other every day if you like.'

'Dear me,' said Mr. Matthews the minister, coming towards the group
with a concerned face; 'I am sorry to see that some of you have been
quarrelling.  Pray, what has been the subject of dispute?'

'It's nothing,' said Allan, 'only practice.  There's no quarrel at all.'

'What's this? what's this?' broke in the somewhat rasping voice of the
Sheriff, who had followed Mr. Matthews, unobserved by the young people;
'it seems that half-a-dozen boys cannot be together without coming to
blows.'

'They're not fighting seriously,' cried Marjorie; 'it's only fun.'

Mr. Matthews was looking both grieved and puzzled.

'Dear me,' he said, shaking his head, 'this is most distressing.  To
fight when you have not any ground for quarrelling.  Why did you not
endeavour to dissuade them, Miss Marjorie?'

'It's all right,' said Marjorie.  'What would be the good of
interfering?'

The Sheriff said nothing, but he was looking so grimly amused that
Marjorie added hastily, 'Why, it doesn't matter!  Why shouldn't they
fight if it amuses them?  When once you learn to understand boys you
know that it's no use being surprised at anything they do!'

'Allan!  Reggie!'  Mr. Stewart's voice was calling somewhat
impatiently.  'Go and look for the young ladies and gentlemen, Duncan;
quick, don't lose time, we're late already.'

'Tear me,' observed Duncan, looking at Harry's and Reggie's somewhat
battered faces as they passed; 'so there hass peen a fight between you
two young gentlemen, and Mr. Allan hass been helping you.  I wass
thinking from Mr. Allan's looks these last days tat there would pe some
mischief pefore ferry long!  It iss ahl right, Miss Marjorie, it iss
ahl right,' he said soothingly, in response to her glance; 'we hev made
the _Kelpie_ an hour and a quarter late, whateffer.  That iss ferry
good, although Rob says he will pe thinking it iss a pity that the sea
will not pe going to pe at ahl rough.'

There was only enough breeze to fill the sails as the _Kelpie_ glided
gently towards the island of Erricha.  The gulls sat balancing
themselves on the smooth swell of the waves; and as the vessel passed a
low rocky islet a number of seals flopped into the water and swam in
her wake.

'It's awfully nice,' observed Gerald, his blue eyes shining with
enjoyment.

'Yes,' replied Tricksy; 'we've had an awfully jolly day, but I've been
thinking, that all this time we've been doing nothing for Neil.  We
ought to, you know, as we've made a compact.'

Allan produced a bit of stick and began whittling it.

'It would be nice if we could begin now,' observed Gerald.

'It's all very well,' said Harry disgustedly, 'but there seems to be
nothing to do.'

'I heard the Sheriff saying to Mother that the gipsies had come back
again,' said Tricksy.

Reggie's dark eyes looked at Allan, who stopped his whittling.

'Look!' said Marjorie abruptly, 'we're just rounding the headland.'

The Grahams wondered at the sudden silence which fell upon the group.

'We'll tack shore wards, Duncan,' announced Mr. Stewart.  We would like
to spend an hour or two at the caves.'

'Aye, aye, sir,' replied Duncan stiffly.

Allan and Reggie began to look intent.

'There's Rob coming forward,' said Marjorie softly.

The Highlander touched his cap respectfully.

'I do not think we can pe landing at ta Corrachin Caves to-night, sir,'
he said civilly but firmly; 'ta wind iss north-west and ta current iss
running ferry strong, sir.  We wass thinking it would pe too dangerous.'

'Tut, tut,' said Mr. Stewart; 'we're not going to be so timid as all
that, Rob.  Just think of some of the days when we have landed, man.'

'But Duncan and I was thinking that it wass a ferry tangerous sea
to-day, sir, ferry tangerous indeed, and we will pe afraid for ta
ladies, sir, and for ta young ladies and gentlemen.'

'Nonsense, man,' returned Mr. Stewart; 'call this a heavy sea?  I never
saw a better sea in my life.  Tell Duncan to put her head south-east by
south.'

But Duncan had taken the helm, and the vessel lay unexpectedly against
the wind.

'It iss ta cross currents, sir,' said Rob.  'Yo-ho there!  Slack the
main-sheet!' and the boys were easing off the rope before they had
realised what they were about.

The vessel gave a plunge or two and then steadied herself, Duncan
standing with a grim face at the wheel.

'It iss ahl right now, sir,' said Rob composedly; 'but we cannot pe
teking her back to catch a wind tat will tek her to Corrachin after
this.'

Dr. MacGregor was looking surprised.

'I can't think what ails the men,' fumed Mr. Stewart.  'There is
nothing unusual in the appearance of the sea so far as I can make out,
and I ought to know as well as they can.'

'Successful mutiny,' muttered Marjorie; and the boys grinned.

Mr. Graham walked to the side and looked down at the water, but did not
take it upon himself to express an opinion.

'It looks as though the fellows were keeping something back,' continued
Mr. Stewart.

'Perhaps it's one of their Highland superstitions,' suggested Mrs.
Stewart.  'I wouldn't take any more notice if I were you.'

Silence fell as the _Kelpie_ glided past the caves.  The vessel passed
near enough for those on board to look into the yawning hollows beneath
the overhanging cliffs, and to hear the thunder of the angry sea which
always beat upon that shore.

Marjorie and the boys felt a lump rise in their throats as they thought
of the comrade driven to seek refuge in that desolate spot.




CHAPTER XII

SURROUNDED

'Twelfth of August,' said Allan; 'Pater's out on the moors with Mr.
Graham, slow day for us; suppose we take the boat and go fishing for
crabs!'

'All right, let's,' said Marjorie; 'Harry's in a fidgety mood and will
be quarrelling with some one presently if he has nothing to do.'

'I say, you fellows,' cried Allan, 'we're going crab fishing.  Come
along and let's rummage out the lines, Reggie.  We must be sure and get
enough for all.  Tricksy, you might ask Duncan to put some provisions
in a basket for us, as we shan't be home for tea or supper.  Let's
hurry up or we'll lose the best of the afternoon.'

The various belongings having been collected, the boys and girls
trooped down to the cove and began loosening the Craft.

Laddie and Carlo, who had followed uninvited, came and stood by the
boat, pricking up their ears.

'Can't take you, Laddie,' said Allan; 'we're going a long way and
there's no room for you in the boat.'

Laddie smiled an intelligent dog smile and wagged his tail as though to
say, 'I'll wait and see whether you won't change your mind, young sir.'

'Come now, a good shove all together,' said Allan; and the boat ran
down to the water.

'All right; chuck in the things, Reggie; and now, girls, will you take
your places.'

They all seated themselves and the Craft was pushed off.

'Go home, Laddie,' called out Reggie to the two dogs, who were standing
side by side on the shore, looking pitifully disappointed.

The dogs remained looking after the boat for a minute or two; then they
gave each other a resigned glance and turned tail and trotted off,
having evidently made up their minds to seek consolation in some other
form of amusement.

The boat was rowed to where a bottom of weedy stones showed through the
water, then Allan began to explain to his guests the method of fishing.

'You see this weight on the end of the line,' he said, 'and there's a
bit of scarlet cloth attached; well, you let down the line to the
stones and then draw it up again like this, and keep doing so until the
crabs come out to see what's the matter; then you dance it up and down
in front of them until they get into a rage, and catch hold of it; then
you draw it up on board and the silly asses are too angry to let go and
you catch them, don't you see?'

'Jolly fun,' said Harry, and a smile overspread Gerald's features.  'I
suppose you get a lot of them that way?'

'Yes,' said Marjorie, 'but don't jump about so, Harry; you're making
the boat bob from side to side.'

Harry muttered something and drew back into the boat.  All the lines
were flung out, and every now and again an irate crab was drawn up,
clinging obstinately to the string.

The sport proved most absorbing, but after a little, Tricksy happening
to look towards the shore drew Marjorie's attention to two figures
standing on the hillside.

'What's the matter, Marjorie?' said Reggie, as the girl changed colour.

Following the direction of her eyes his attitude stiffened, and Allan
and Hamish looked to see what was the matter.

'It's Gibbie MacKerrach,' said Reggie, 'and he's talking to Andrew
MacPeters.'

The combination had an ominous sound, and they all looked extremely
concerned.

'What's the matter?' asked Harry.

'It's that gipsy lad who used to like Neil so much,' said Allan; 'the
other is the fellow who we suspect may have been the thief.  It's to be
hoped that he is not making Gibbie tell him things that will do harm to
Neil.'

'Which one is the gipsy?' asked Harry.  'I heard father say that they
were camping on the moor not far from the Corrachin Caves.'

Marjorie, Allan, and Reggie looked at each other with startled eyes.
Then Allan said, 'Pull away from here, will you, Reggie, and don't let
them see us if you can help it.  It would be better that Andrew should
not know that we saw him with Gibbie.'

'Now,' said Allan, after the boat had been rowed out of sight.  'We can
try some deep-sea fishing.'

Reggie caught a small haddock which was divided among the party for
bait, and the lines were thrown out again.

In a little while Reggie drew in a small cod, and a minute afterwards a
good-sized haddock was found to be on Harry's line.

'Gently, Harry, gently, you'll get the line broken,' said Hamish
warningly as Harry sprang up and Gerald danced about in his seat, to
the great discomfort of Tricksy.

'There you are!' cried Marjorie, as the fish was drawn leaping and
struggling into the boat.

'Hullo!' said Harry triumphantly; 'it's a fine big one and no mistake!'

'It's a good size,' said Marjorie, 'but, Harry, _would_ you mind not
kicking my feet as you jump about.'

Harry muttered an apology, and just at that moment Hamish drew in a big
cod, then two little haddocks were pulled up by Tricksy.

'Gerald, look at your line,' cried Harry, springing forward, and Gerald
pulled in a haddock, while Allan and Hamish steadied the boat, which
had been set rocking by Harry's sudden movement.

It was a beautiful evening, and the fish were taking well, but sport
was spoiled by the incapacity of the Grahams to keep still.  If Harry
hooked a fish Gerald sprang up to look, and if any one else had a take
Harry pranced backwards and forwards until it was drawn on board.

At last Hamish suggested that it was time to row to the Pirates' Island
and have tea in the Den.

'Yes, I think so,' said Marjorie, somewhat irritably.  'I've had my
ankles tripped over quite often enough as it is.'

'And I've been _trying_ to keep my feet out of the way,' said Tricksy,
rather dolefully, 'but one has to put them somewhere, you know.'

'Have you been so uncomfortable?' said Harry, looking round with serene
unconsciousness; 'Hamish's boots _are_ rather big.'

A smile travelled round the group as the lines were hastily wound up.

'You'll feel better after tea,' said Hamish soothingly.

The sun was already low when they landed, and Marjorie and Tricksy went
into the cottage at once to get tea ready while Reggie fetched peats,
and Allan and Hamish lingered behind to secure the Craft.

The Grahams, finding themselves with no special duties, wandered
aimlessly about, getting into the way of the busy people.

'We've had a jolly fine take, haven't we?' said Harry, sauntering up to
Reggie, who was busy at the peat-stack.

'Not bad,' said Reggie briefly.  'Here, take an armful of these, will
you, and carry them into the house.'

Harry carried in the peats and set them down by the fire-place, where
Marjorie was busy frying fish, while Tricksy was making bannocks at the
table.

'I say, Marjorie,' began Harry, 'we've had fine sport, haven't we?'

'Yes,' replied Marjorie absently.

Harry looked at the two girls, who went on quietly and busily with
their work.

'I caught as many as Allan, didn't I?' he began again.

'I'm sure I don't know,' said Marjorie indifferently.  She was tired
and the peat smoke was making her eyes smart, and it irritated her to
see Harry doing nothing.

'But surely you kept count,' persisted Harry; 'I caught more than
Hamish, anyhow.'

'I wasn't looking,' said Marjorie.  'If you caught more than Hamish
to-day it was more than you do when you go trout fishing.  I wish you
would go away now, Harry, and not talk to me until tea is ready.'

'Let her alone, Harry,' remonstrated Gerald, who had followed his
brother into the hut; but Harry was in a teasing mood and Marjorie's
reply had stung him.

'Cross patch!' he muttered, giving her elbow a shove.

Marjorie had not been prepared for the movement, which jerked some of
the fish into the fire.  In an instant she turned round and pinned
Harry against the wall, while her eyes blazed.

'Harry! you struck a lady!--Apologise!'

'No, I won't,' muttered Harry, struggling to free himself.  His arms
were held as in a vice.

'Are you going to apologise for having hit a lady?' reiterated Marjorie.

'No,' replied Harry, trying desperately to free himself, and becoming
aware that the other boys were nearing the door of the hut.

The struggle was prolonged for a minute or two, and then, just as the
boys, to Harry's unspeakable confusion, were on the point of coming in,
Marjorie slowly relaxed her hold and let him go.

Harry left the cottage, followed by Gerald, and seated himself on the
turf dyke with his chin resting on his hands.  For a long time he gazed
blankly in front of him, and neither boy spoke.

At last Harry began, 'I say, Gerald, do you think they saw?'

'Yes,' answered Gerald; 'I'm afraid they did.'

Harry dropped his chin on his hands again and reflected.

'Do you think it was because of that that they didn't come in at
first?' he queried after awhile.

'I think so,' said Gerald; 'they didn't want to have to interfere.'

A long pause followed.  Harry gazed seawards, absorbed in gloomy
reflections.

'It was awfully stupid of you to go on teasing her,' said Gerald; 'any
one could have seen that she was going to lose her temper.  She's so
strong too; always rowing and climbing, and doing things like a boy.'

'Don't tell the boys at school,' said Harry, after a long time; then he
relapsed into silence again.

Suddenly he pulled himself together, and jumped off the dyke just as
Marjorie was coming out of the hut.

'Look here,' he began, planting himself in front of her, with a flush
rising to his face; 'I apologise! but it's because I shouldn't have hit
you and not because you held me.'

'It's all right,' said Marjorie, who was sorry that she had lost her
temper; 'don't let's think of it any more but come and have tea.'

The other boys tried to drown any lingering embarrassment by talking
very fast, and the meal became an animated, if not a merry one.

'Hark,' said Reggie suddenly, 'what's that?'

They all became silent and listened, Allan standing up.  A deep rushing
noise was filling the cottage, and rapidly increasing in volume.

'It's the tide-way,' said Reggie; 'we've forgotten to keep a look-out.'

All trooped out of the cottage and looked at the angry current which
was sweeping past both shores of the island.

'Here's a jolly go,' said Allan; 'we shan't get home to-night.'

Tricksy looked frightened and Harry amazed, but Marjorie's face cleared
and she jumped up and clapped her hands with glee.

'Oh, hooray, hooray,' she said; 'just what I always wanted.  We'll have
to spend the night in the cottage.  Oh, what fun!'

'But won't Mrs. Stewart be frightened?' suggested Gerald, the
thoughtful boy.

'Not she,' said Marjorie; 'she knows that we can take care of
ourselves; besides, Father and Mr. Stewart made us promise that if we
were surrounded by a tide-way we were not to try to come home, however
long we might have to wait.  It would be quite impossible for us to row
across.  We must make up our minds to spend the night here.'

They remained out of doors a little longer, discussing the situation,
while the red turned to grey beyond the far-off islands; then they went
indoors to make preparations for the night.

Fresh peats were cast on the fire, and the stores of cut heather were
brought out and laid on the floor to serve as beds.  Marjorie lighted
the lamp which hung from the ceiling, and its smoky glare lighted up a
circle of eager, wakeful faces.

The novelty of their surroundings, together with the voice of the
current, which was running deep and swift round their tiny strip of an
island, took from them all disposition to sleep during the early part
of the night.  It was not until the lamp had burnt out, and Tricksy's
head had sunk heavily against Marjorie's knee that the rushing became
fainter and finally died away, and one by one the listeners dropped to
sleep upon their heather couches.

It was about midnight when Marjorie awoke, aroused by a slight noise,
and the flames from the peats showed her Allan staring in front of him
with wakeful eyes, and listening.

'What is it?' she asked.

'Hush, don't wake the others.  There it is again--now, hark.'

Marjorie listened, and in the calm night she distinctly heard the
grating of oars in rowlocks and the sound of a boat's bows dividing the
water.

'It's some one coming for us,' she said.

'No, for they would have called out before they got so near.'

Marjorie jumped into a sitting posture and her eyes gleamed.

'What if it should be the smugglers?' she suggested.

She was not frightened, only excited, for the situation promised some
adventure.

'It's more likely to be Neil,' said Allan.  'He comes here sometimes.
Let's go out and see, but tread softly and don't disturb the
youngsters.'

They threaded their way cautiously among the sleepers, shivering a
little with the chilliness of the air and with excitement, and stood
out of doors in the cool quiet night.

'Crouch down, Marjorie, and keep behind the dyke,' said Allan.  'Let's
make certain that it _is_ Neil before we show ourselves.'

By this time the boat was close to the shore, and its occupant sprang
out.

The cloudy moonlight showed the face and figure to be those of Neil.

'Stand up, Marjorie; let him see it's a girl,' said Allan, 'and he'll
know that he's safe.'

Marjorie stood up, and called 'Neil!  Hist!  Neil!'

The figure turned round.

'Who is that?' asked a voice in Gaelic.

'It's Marjorie, Neil; and Allan.'

Neil carefully secured the boat and came forward.

'What are you doing here, Miss Marjorie, at this time of night? and
Allan too?  Has anything happened?'

'We're shipwrecked, Neil; or rather we've been cut off by the
tide-way,' said Marjorie.

'The others are here,' said Allan, 'in the cottage; you're quite safe.
Come along.'

They entered very softly, Neil dragging his limbs as though he were
fatigued.

'What's the row?' inquired Reggie, opening his eyes.

'Hush, don't wake the others,' said Marjorie; but already Harry had
stirred on his heather couch.

'It's Neil,' said Allan, as the boy sprang up, wide awake.  'He's going
to stay here till morning.'

'Neil?' repeated Harry.  'Oh, I say, what a lark.  Gerald, wake up, you
lazy beggar, here's Neil at last--Neil, I tell you; get up,' and he
administered a shove to his sleeping brother.

By this time all the inmates of the cottage were awake, Hamish being
the last to open a pair of bewildered, sleepy eyes.  Room was made for
Neil at the fire, the smouldering peats were roused to life, and the
boys and girls clustered round, staring and asking questions, much too
excited to think of sleep.

'How is your mother, Neil?' asked Tricksy, whose dark eyes looked
bigger and darker than ever between surprise and sleepiness.

'She iss better, thank you, Miss Tricksy.  I will have left her
sleeping quietly, and I will pe coming here so that I can be going back
early to see how she iss in the morning.'

Then after a little hesitation he added, 'She has made me promise that
I'll go away now.  Rob MacLean's boat goes to-morrow evening.'

'Oh, what a sell!' exclaimed Harry, who had been sitting cross-legged
by his hero and looking up in his face with sparkling eyes.  'I mean,'
he added, somewhat confusedly, as he saw the faces of the others, 'I'm
sorry you have to go; it would have been such fun if you could have
stayed.'

They conversed a little longer, but quietly, for the darkness and
silence which reigned outside their little shelter, and the monotonous
lapping of the waves made them drowsy; and one by one they dropped to
sleep.

Marjorie was the first to awaken.  The clear morning light was already
filling the hut, and the others were lying around and breathing heavily.

She rose and went out of doors.

The sun had not yet risen, but the clouds in the east were red.  Some
gulls were rising languidly above the shimmering water.

Marjorie stood looking about her for a minute or two; then she ran into
the cottage.

'Allan,' she cried, 'wake up!  There are some people standing on the
shore; your father and Mr. Graham and some others and Laddie is with
them.  They are just going to launch the boat.  Get up, quick; there's
no time to lose!'

Neil was already on his feet, the events of the past few months having
taught him to keep on the alert; and the others had begun to open their
eyes and stretch themselves.

'Hullo,' said Reggie, grasping the situation, 'boat coming over here;
that will never do.'

'Hurry up,' said Allan, 'or they'll be across before you know where you
are.'

'You had better wait until we've gone,' said Marjorie to Neil.  'Stay
in the cottage, or they may see you.'

Hastily saying good-bye they ran down to the shore, but stopped short
in dismay.

The boat was gone.

'Comes of not having fastened her securely,'.  said Allan; 'the current
has carried her away.'

'What shall we do?' said Marjorie.  'We'll have every one coming to the
island.  Hide Neil; let's pile all the heather on the top of him----'

'What's the matter?' cried Neil from the hut.  'Why are you waiting?'

'The boat's gone,' they cried.

Neil came out.

'Mine's still there, on the other side,' he said.  'Take her, and some
of you can come back for me.'

'Oh, Neil, we couldn't do that!  What if any one were to come in the
meanwhile?'

'We must risk it.  It will be better than bringing the whole boat-load
upon us.  Quick, get in; they will be shoving down the boat.'

In another minute they had pushed off, leaving Neil behind.

When the boat left the island the figures on shore stood still and
waited; and half-way across Marjorie waved her handkerchief.

'It's Father,' said Tricksy, 'with Mr. Graham and Duncan and a lot of
others; and there's Laddie jumping about and barking.'

'Allan,' said Marjorie, touching his arm, 'there's Andrew MacPeters, do
you see him? standing behind the others.'

The boat glided in beside the landing stones, while a row of anxious
faces watched and waited.

'Down, Laddie,' said Mr. Stewart, as the collie rushed forward with a
joyful welcome.  'So there you are,' he said to the young people.  'You
are not cold, are you?'

'We're all right, Father,' said Allan.  'We landed on that island
yesterday evening and we were surrounded by the tide-way so we could
not return.  I hope Mother was not anxious.  We thought you would
rather we stayed there than tried to cross when the current was
flowing.'

'You were quite right not to try to get back under these
circumstances,' said Mr. Stewart gravely; and the young people knew
that he had been anxious, although he did not wish to blame them.

Mr. Graham said nothing, but after his eyes had travelled over the
group, and he had, as Tricksy afterwards expressed it, 'counted his
boys,' he placed himself between them and set off in the direction of
Ardnavoir, still without speaking except to ask them whether they had
wet feet.

Reggie, as the quickest runner, was sent on ahead to tell his mother
that they had returned, and a brisk walk brought them all to the house.

'By the way,' said Mr. Stewart as the young people were refreshing
themselves with a good breakfast; 'what man was that who was with you
on the island?'

A startled movement went round the group, and Allan looked at his
father without replying.

'That man who helped you with the boat,' said Mr. Stewart; 'he stayed
behind after you left; who was he?'




CHAPTER XIII

ANDREW MACPETERS

For a moment no one stirred; then Allan braced himself to meet the
difficulty.

'I'm sorry, Father; but I can't tell you that,' he said.

Mr. Stewart looked at him in astonishment.

'You can't tell me?  You mean you don't know?'

Allan was silent.

Mr. Stewart waited.

Tricksy crept closer to Marjorie and trembled with dismay.

'You associate with people that you cannot tell your parents about,'
said Mr. Stewart in great displeasure; 'and you allow him to associate
with your little sister and with Marjorie.  I am sorry that I must
forbid the use of the boat until you tell me who was with you this
morning.'

Allan waited with a white face until his father had left the room; then
he turned to the others.

'No one is to let out who it was,' he said.  'You have all signed the
Compact, and any one breaking it will have me to reckon with.'

Reggie's brown face wore an expression which showed that he, at least,
meant to be trustworthy; and Marjorie's lips set themselves firmly.
The Grahams, major and minor, had said little, but now Harry's eyes
sparkled, and Gerald flushed, as he always did when he was trying to be
brave.

'But, Allan,' said Tricksy in a trembling voice, 'wouldn't it be better
to tell Father about it and ask him to let us have the boat for Neil?
We must get him away from the island, you know.'

'Can't tell Pater, Tricksy,' replied Allan.  'It would be all right if
they hadn't made him a Justice of the Peace; that's some kind of a
judge, you know.  He couldn't help any one like Neil; indeed I'm not
sure that he wouldn't have to telegraph for the Sheriff and let him
know that Neil is here, and it would be a dreadful thing for Father to
have to do that.'

'Then how are we going to get Neil away from the Den,' said Tricksy.
'They'll find him if he stays there.'

'Allan,' said Marjorie firmly, 'Hamish and I will go.  We haven't been
forbidden the use of the boat.'

'We'll go too,' said Harry.  'We aren't his children, and Mr. Stewart
didn't say anything to us.'

'All right, Marjorie,' said Allan; 'you'd better all go, for Neil's old
boat is pretty heavy to get through the water.  Quick, there isn't a
minute to lose.'

Little was said as the old herring-boat was pushed off and manned, for
even Harry was feeling subdued.

'It's all right, Neil,' said Marjorie as the boat landed and Neil
looked inquiringly for the others; 'they've been kept at home by their
father.  We'll land you at the Skegness Cliffs as there's least chance
of being seen there.'

The passage was accomplished without incident, but as Neil stood up to
spring ashore Hamish uttered an exclamation and pointed to the top of
the cliff.  All looked up.  A man was standing on the verge, and
looking down.

'It's Andrew MacPeters again,' said Hamish.

'Let's land somewhere else,' said Marjorie.

'No use, Miss Marjorie,' said Neil.  'If he means ill by me he will
give the alarm; it will be better for me to be landing while there iss
still a chance.  I'm not afraid if I only have him to deal with.'

He stood up once more, then turned to the others.  'Remember,' he said,
'whatever happens, my mother iss to be told that I haf left the island.
Miss Marjorie, you promise?'

'I promise,' answered Marjorie; then Neil sprang on shore and vanished
behind a mass of rock.

For a minute or two they remained looking up at the cliff, but nothing
was to be seen of Andrew MacPeters; then they rowed slowly back to the
place where the Craft had been moored.

'Well?' said Allan and Reggie, who met them half-way on the road to
Ardnavoir.

The others gave a brief account of what had taken place.

'Bad luck,' said Allan when they had described the encounter with
Andrew MacPeters.  'I'd back Neil against Andrew any day; he won't
interfere with Neil himself, but then the fellow's quite capable of
giving the alarm to the police.'

They wandered disconsolately a little farther.

'It seems horrid to have to give Mrs. Macdonnell that message,' said
Marjorie; 'but it will have to be done, I suppose, since we promised.'

'Yes, Marjorie,' said Hamish, 'it will have to be done.  It would be
enough to kill her if she knew that Neil was in danger.'

Who was to be entrusted with the message?  Every one looked at
Marjorie, who became red and looked unhappy as she realised what was
expected of her.

'You will have to do it,' said Allan.

'Me?' said Marjorie; 'no, you go, Allan.'

'No,' said Allan decidedly; 'it's not the kind of thing for a fellow.
It needs a girl, so it will have to be you.'

'Allan is quite right, Marjorie,' joined in Hamish; 'there is no one
but you who can do it.  Mind you don't let her see that you are not
telling the truth.'

Marjorie looked very distressed, but saw she must make up her mind.

'Well, you come with me as far as the cottage,' she said; and the
entire party set off.

Arrived at the gate, Allan threw it open, and Marjorie walked up the
path and disappeared inside the cottage.

The others sat down on the heather and waited.

A long time seemed to pass, and then Marjorie reappeared looking very
subdued.

'All right, Marjorie?' inquired Allan.

Marjorie nodded without speaking, and others judged it best to refrain
from asking questions.

For some time they walked in silence, and then Tricksy quietly slipped
into the place next to Marjorie.

After a while, finding that the boys were out of earshot.  Tricksy
sidled closer, and ventured to ask Marjorie very gently how Mrs.
Macdonnell had received the message.

'I--I--I--she was in bed,' said Marjorie, 'and I went to her, and it
was rather dark, and after I had asked how she was and all that,
I--I--I just told her.  She never thought I was saying what wasn't
true, for she said "Thank God for that."'

Marjorie ended with a little tearless sob, and neither of the girls
could find anything to say for a little while.

When the boys came beside them again Tricksy walked on silently for a
little way, then she suddenly burst out--

'I don't care, but what's the use of a Compact if we can't do anything
to help Neil?  There he is, in great danger, and Mrs. Macdonnell may
hear of it any day, and if she does it will kill her; and we haven't
done anything that's of any use.'

'What do you think we can do?' replied Reggie gruffly.

'Why, bustle about until we find out who stole the letters.  Here we
are, and we find little bits of paper which ought to tell us something
if we had any sense, but we don't get further.  Seven of us and we
can't help poor Neil when he is in trouble.'

Nobody seemed to have anything to say, and Tricksy burst out again--

'You say you know who was the real thief?'

'We think we do, Tricksy,' interposed Hamish; 'but we don't know for
certain.'

'Then why don't we make sure?'

'How would you do it, Tricksy?' asked Allan, while the others trudged
steadily onwards.

'Why, watch him wherever he goes; and we'd soon find out where he kept
the papers if he had taken them.'

There was no answer for a moment.

Then Allan said gravely, 'That wouldn't be honourable, Tricksy.  We
must play fair, you know.'

'Honourable!  Honourable to a thief!--But yes, of course we must.
Well, I don't know what's to be done then,' and Tricksy concluded by a
big sigh.

When the coastguard station came in view a man was standing at the
gate, scanning the road with a telescope.  Upon catching sight of the
young people he lowered the glass and came forward.

'Euan Macdonnell,' said Reggie, quickening his pace; 'let's hear
whether he has any news.'

'I was on the lookout for you, young ladies and gentlemen,' said Euan.
'We've just got a telephone message from the Corrachin lighthouse sent
by Rob MacLean.  We were to tell you that Neil has reached the caves
and is safe for the meanwhile, and he supposes that you, young ladies
and gentlemen, have remembered the message to his mother.'

'If only Andrew hasn't seen him,' said Marjorie after the first
exclamations of thankfulness.

Euan looked grave as he heard how Andrew had witnessed the landing.

'I don't trust that fellow for an instant,' he said.  'He would think
nothing of putting the police on the alert if he had a mind to.  We can
only hope that he hasn't recognised Neil, or that Rob will find a way
of getting the poor lad out of the island before any harm comes.'

When the young people had reached Ardnavoir, weary and discouraged, Mr.
Stewart was in the hall.  'I know who was with you this morning,' he
said abruptly.  'Was it by accident that you met?'

'Yes,' said Allan.

'Your boat was stranded on the Reachin Skerry,' went on Mr. Stewart,
'and the men have brought her home.  You may have the use of her again.'

'Thank you, Father,' said Allan.

They all scanned Mr. Stewart's face to read, if possible, his
intentions regarding Neil; but nothing was to be gathered.

'Isn't Father a dear?' said Tricksy, when they had wandered out to the
cricket-ground.  'He knows we couldn't betray our friend, not even for
him.'

'Yes,' said Reggie; 'but the question is whether he will have to do
something himself, since he's a J.P.'

The question was not answered that day, and during the next they were
still in ignorance.

On the third day it was discovered that detectives were in the island
again, and Euan brought the news that every boat was watched both
coming and going.

The days dragged on in suspense, and still Neil was in the caves.  Rob
MacLean had a plan for conveying him away by night and landing him
somewhere on the coast of Scotland, from whence the lad was to tramp to
some large town and stow himself away on a vessel bound for America;
but the bright, full moon rendered any such attempts impossible for the
meanwhile.

'Isn't it too bad?' broke out Marjorie one day; 'I think the law is
cruel if it forces Mr. Stewart to have Neil arrested.  I wonder how he
could do it.  He knows as well as we do that Neil isn't a thief.'

'It wasn't Father,' said Allan.  'I happen know that he's lying low and
won't take any notice.  All our people are bound together not to betray
Neil, but some one has been a traitor; they don't know who.  Neil has a
secret enemy in the place.'

They all thought they knew who this was, but no one could bring the
deed home to the culprit.  All desire for fun and adventure seemed to
have left them, and the boys and girls wandered about disconsolately or
sat in groups talking about plans which they were unable to carry out;
or later, ceased to find anything at all to suggest.  Even the dogs
seemed to know that something was the matter, for they would lie
quietly beside the children for hours, and sometimes Laddie would
thrust his nose into some one's hand and look up with his honest,
affectionate eyes full of sympathy.

The weather became more broken, and sometimes all intercourse between
Ardnavoir and Corranmore was cut off during the greater part of a day.

When the rain ceased, Andrew MacPeters, looking up from his work, would
find Reggie's dark eyes contemplating him as their owner sat astride
upon a dyke, or Allan considering him with hands in his pockets, and a
thoughtful countenance; or else it was the Grahams who regarded him
with a mixture of interest and aversion, or Tricksy with her great eyes
resting upon him with an expression of sorrow that any one could be so
dreadfully wicked.

The lad would look up with a surly expression in his red-lidded eyes;
but watch as they might, they never detected in him any expression of
guilt or embarrassment.




CHAPTER XIV

CAUGHT

The evening had closed in heavy rain, and towards morning a gusty wind
arose, buffeting the walls of Corranmore and making wild noises in the
ruin.

Marjorie awoke and sat up in bed.  A moment's hearkening convinced her
that what the islanders most dreaded had become reality; a westerly
gale had arisen while Neil was still in the caves.

She sprang to the window; and the grey light showed her an angry sea,
with the white horses leaping and hurrying towards the Corrachin
headland.

The tide was rising, and was being driven eastward with terrific force
by the gale.

Marjorie ran to her brother's room; but a glance showed her an empty
bed.

'No time to lose,' said Marjorie to herself; 'perhaps he has gone to
warn Neil, and perhaps he hasn't; in any case I'd better go too.'

She hurried on some clothing and ran out of doors.  The wind had swept
the clouds towards the east, and an angry dawn was breaking above the
hills.  Marjorie sped over the drenched grass and heather, the wind was
lifting her nearly off her feet, and blowing her frock in front of her
like a sail.  There were more than three miles of rugged country
between Corranmore and the headland.  It was a race between herself and
the tide; and the tide seemed to be gaining.

Marjorie ran on and on.  Neither Hamish nor any other living creature
was in sight.  The sheep had left the moors and the gulls were taking
refuge inland.

At last the headland came in view.  A glance showed Marjorie that the
waves had not yet reached high-water mark.  Mechanically she chose the
road by the shore.

Now the wind was partly against her, and at times threatened to pin her
against the cliff; but Marjorie struggled forward.  Soon the rocks were
frowning above her head, while the breakers were coming closer, rising
in solid walls which thundered as they fell.  Showers of spray were
flung shoreward; and looking up at the wet glistening cliffs Marjorie
wondered whether foothold would be possible upon them, and what her
feelings would be were she to find herself caged between the cliffs and
the breakers.

Yet she did not feel frightened, only excited.

At the caves she had only time to make a dash before a huge breaker
fell; and some of the water swirled after her into the opening.

'Neil!' she cried; 'Neil!'

Neil was lying watching the flood quite calmly, as though it did not
concern him in the least.

Catching sight of Marjorie he looked up in amazement; then sprang to
his feet.

'Is Hamish here?' shouted Marjorie.

Her voice was drowned in the thunder of waves and wind.

Neil led her to a small chamber in the rocks, lighted from above, and
where the tumult was softened into a dull roar; and she repeated her
question.

'No, Miss Marjorie, I hef not seen him,' answered Neil.  Their voices
sounded strangely muffled, the force of the breakers making the walls
of the little cavern tremble.

'Then, Neil, you must leave this at once; the caves will be flooded in
another minute, and I've come all this way to warn you.'

'Did you, Miss Marjorie?  Did you indeed?  You came to warn me.  No,
indeed; I cannot let you stay here.'

'How are we to get out, Neil?  I think the tide is at the foot of the
cliffs now?'

As she spoke a stream of water broke in and ran along the floor of
their little shelter.

'It iss too late to get out that way now, Miss Marjorie,' said Neil;
'and in any case it would be too slippery that the cliffs would be.  I
will pe knowing an opening leading to the moor, where it's not
difficult to climb up.  Come this way.'

He helped her along the passages.  Soon they were in total darkness.
The flood was gaining upon them, and the noise rendered it impossible
to exchange a word.  Sometimes the water hissed and gurgled at their
heels, and sometimes they plunged ankle-deep into pools.

They slipped and scrambled along, Marjorie clinging to her guide; and
presently a glimmer of light came from above.

'Here we are, Miss Marjorie,' said Neil.  'If you could be managing to
climb up here we would come out on the moor.'

The ascent was broken and dangerous, and was in some places only very
imperfectly lighted.  Neil, with his sailor's training, swung himself
from point to point, sometimes drawing Marjorie up to a ledge, and
sometimes instructing her where to set her feet.  At last the welcome
daylight burst upon them, and grasping the tufts of heather, they drew
themselves on to firm ground.

'At last,' said Marjorie, throwing herself down on the heather, and
blinking in the sun.  'Now you can go to the lighthouse, Neil.'

'Hullo,' said a voice; and Marjorie looked up to see the laird and Mr.
Graham, who had come all this way to watch the storm at the Corrachin
Caves, and were very much astonished at this sudden encounter.

'Run, Neil,' gasped Marjorie; but Neil drew himself together.

'It iss no use,' he said; 'they will be watching wherever I will go,
and I hev not a chance.'

Then to Mr. Stewart he said, 'I am not for trying to escape.  I know I
shall be taken.  I'd rather give myself up to you than to any one else.
If you wass not to be letting my mother know it iss grateful to you I
will be, sir.'

The laird looked greatly distressed.

'Neil, my lad,' he said, 'I have no warrant for arresting you.  It's
none of my business.  You may go away if you like; I shall not try to
prevent you.'

Neil shook his head.

'It iss no use, sir,' he said; 'I would rather yield of my own accord
than be taken, and I have no chance of escaping now.  I had nothing to
do with the theft of the letters, but it iss no matter.  My mother hass
not long to live, and she need neffer know if things go against me.
Keep it from her if you can.'

Marjorie stood by, white and trembling, and nearer to shedding tears
than she could have believed possible.

'You can come with me for the present, Neil,' said the laird; 'we'll
see what can be done.'

A pony cart was chartered from the nearest farmhouse.  Marjorie got in
with the others and a sorrowful party set out across the moors.

When they reached Ardnavoir, the ill news seemed to have preceded them,
for Reggie looked stormily from an upper window and then came into the
hall where Allan and the Grahams were already waiting, and Mrs. Stewart
came downstairs accompanied by Tricksy, whose eyes were very big and
dark with dismay.

Neil dropped into the chair that was offered him, and leant his head on
his hand, while the others gathered silently around him.  Allan and
Reggie were nearest, one on either side, and Reggie put his hand
protectingly on his friend's shoulder.  In the background, Mr. Stewart
fidgeted with the things that had been carried in from the pony cart,
and Tricksy was silently shedding tears, poor little girl, leaning
against her mother.

The only one who could think of anything to do was Laddie, who came in,
planted himself in front of Neil, and endeavoured to express his
sympathy by slipping his nose under the lad's disengaged hand.  Almost
without knowing that he was doing it, Neil put out his hand and
caressed the dog's smooth head, and the two remained thus in a silent
understanding.

Every one was feeling very miserable when there came a sound of wheels;
a gig drew up at the door, and several persons sprang down and burst
into the hall.




CHAPTER XV

HAMISH TO THE RESCUE

The storm which awakened Marjorie had also roused Hamish.  He awoke to
hear the rain pouring down, and the burn rushing along in heavy spate.

'Fine fishing, to-morrow,' said Hamish to himself, 'but, whew! how the
wind's rising.  The rain can't last long at this rate.'

He lay a little longer, listening to the rushing of the burn; then he
began to think of the people who might be without shelter that night;
Neil (who he hoped would take shelter in one of the cottages if the
gale continued) and the gipsies, and Gibbie MacKerrach.

At the thought of Gibbie a sudden recollection came into his sleepy
brain.

He remembered the lad's lair in the hills, above his father's house,
and that the wind had been blowing from that direction on the day when
a paper had been found fluttering in the ruins.

Had no one ever connected the crazy lad with the robbery?

The idea seemed fanciful, but still it would do no harm to go and
examine Gibbie's curious little cave on the hillside.

Hamish thought he would set out at once, before daylight came and made
him feel how ridiculous it was to think of such a thing.

The dawn was hardly making any headway through the clouds and the rain,
and Hamish pulled up the collar of his coat and pushed forward in the
darkness.

As he toiled up the hill the wind was rising in angry squalls and after
awhile the rain ceased and a large break began to open in the clouds,
letting the grey light through.

The burn, along whose banks Hamish was making his way, was coming down
tumultuously, bearing with it bits of stick, clods of earth, and other
rubbish.  Once or twice Hamish fancied he saw a bit of white paper
whirl past, but it was carried down stream before he could reach it.

At last he reached the hollow where Gibbie's little dwelling was
situated.  Just above there was a little cascade, and the swollen
waters, coming down with a rush, overflowed their banks and flooded the
lair, sweeping out a quantity of straw mixed with scraps of paper.

Hamish plunged into the stream and caught straw, papers and all in his
arms.

A shout from the lair made him look round, and there stood Gibbie,
soaked with wet, and plastered with mud from head to foot.

'You must not be touching these,' cried the lad; 'they're for Neil, all
for Neil!'

'All right, Gibbie,' said Hamish tranquilly; 'you can give them to Neil
as soon as you like, I was only keeping them from being carried away.'

'Who told you I had seen Neil?' asked the lad craftily; 'Andrew said I
was not to tell any one, and I'm not going to say he is here; only the
nice gorjo in dark blue clothes asked me and I told him.'

'Ah, did you tell him?' said Hamish, speaking quietly, but trembling
between the fear of asking too much or too little; 'and when did you
see Mrs. MacAlister last?'

A sly expression passed over the lad's face.

'Me and Mrs. MacAlister not friends,' he said.  'Play her tricks.'
Suddenly he began to laugh.  'Played her a fine trick, though; she
never find out!  Gibbie steal her letters when she and her husband had
gone out to see Neil home.  Door left open, no one see Gibbie--clever
Gibbie!'

'Wait, Gibbie,' interrupted Hamish; 'I'm going to fetch something for
you,' and he made off downhill with all speed.

Dr. MacGregor was just driving home from a night visit to a patient
when his son dashed into the road, spattered with mud and with the
water squelching from his boots.

'Father,' said Hamish, 'come with me; I've found out who robbed the
post-office,' and throwing the reins to his groom, the astonished
doctor was dragged all the way to the gipsy's burrow.

'Hullo, Gibbie, you look cold,' said the doctor, taking in the
situation with great presence of mind; 'come with me and have a glass
of something hot.'

Sitting by the fire in the nearest cottage, with a glass of steaming
toddy in his hand, Gibbie became communicative, and the doctor soon
drew from him the rest of the story.

'Neil's a good lad,' said the gipsy.  'Neil knows how to behave to a
Romany chel; drives away bad boys when they laugh and throw stones.
Gibbie gave Neil a present; two presents; something out of the letters.
Neil will find it in his coat pocket some day.  Papers worth a hundred
pound.'

'All right, Gibbie,' said the doctor craftily; 'suppose we go and tell
Neil that you put them there.  He may not have been able to find them
yet.'

Dr. MacGregor's tired horse was withdrawn from its feed, and Hamish,
his father, and Gibbie set out for Ardnavoir.

'Neil's cleared,' announced Hamish; and every one turned round to
encounter the strange-looking figure of the gipsy.

Finding himself among so many people, Gibbie became suspicious and
refused to speak, but the faces of his companions rendered all
explanation unnecessary.

'I am glad to say that your innocence is established beyond a doubt,
Neil,' said Dr. MacGregor beaming upon him; 'and I am glad to shake
hands with you.'

'Oh, hooray, hooray,' shouted the boys.  'Neil, old boy, you're
cleared,' and they capered round him, patting him on the back and
cheering until the lad was quite bewildered.

Laddie, after looking puzzled for a moment, burst into a joyous barking
and leaped up three times and turned round in the air; then ran to Neil
and jumped up again, trying to lick his face.  An indescribable tumult
reigned, and Neil extricated himself with difficulty.

'Excuse me,' he said; 'you are all ferry kind, but I must pe going and
telling my mother.'

'Wait a bit, Neil,' said the doctor, laying a detaining hand upon the
lad's shoulder; 'not so suddenly, if you please; I will go with you and
prepare her,' and the two left the house together.

'But Mrs. Macdonnell, Mummie,' said Tricksy, with a quivering lip, 'do
you--do you think she'll die?'

'Not she,' said the laird, coming forward; 'happiness has never killed
any one yet, and a little of that is what Mrs. Macdonnell was wanting.
But where is the hero of the day; the one who found out what no one
else has been able to discover!  We have not congratulated him yet.'

'We do, we do,' they all cried; and they laid forcible hands upon
Hamish, who had retired into the background with a very red face,
carried him out of doors and chaired him triumphantly round the
courtyard.

'But _Hamish_,' said Harry later in the day, his eyes bright with
astonishment; 'to think that after all it was Hamish who did it!'

'Why not?' inquired Allan gruffly.

'Why, he's such a quiet fellow, one never thinks of his doing anything.
If it had been you or me now, or Reggie, or even Marjorie (although
Marjorie's far too conceited for a girl); but Hamish!'

Marjorie had caught some of the last words, and she turned upon the boy
like lightning.

'Ever heard the fable of the Hare and the Tortoise?' she queried.  'If
not you'll find it in the Third Reading Book.  Perhaps you're not as
far as that yet though.'

Still Harry found the matter hard to understand, and during several
days, he was frequently to be observed sitting on dykes and
contemplating Hamish, who shared the honours of the time with Neil.

'Only a few days now,' observed Tricksy regretfully, 'and there will be
an end of all the fun.  Every one's going to school except me, and
there will be no boating or fishing or playing at pirates any more.'

'What about next year, Tricksy?' said Marjorie.

'Next year!  Why, you'll be grown-up by then.  Your mother said you
must be sent to school to learn to be less of a tomboy.'

'I won't be less of a tomboy,' declared Marjorie.  'I'm going to fish,
and climb rocks and ride ponies bare-backed, and do all those kinds of
things until I'm ever so old.  We'll have better fun than ever, now we
have Neil back again.  I vote we make a Compact----'

'We've made one already,' interposed Tricksy.

'Well, a new one then.  We'll call it a League;--the Adventure
League--and we'll promise to come back every year.  Harry and Gerald
too, and we'll have the Pirates' Den for our house; and we'll never
bother about being grown-up until we're too old to get any fun out of
being tomboys any more.'

'Agreed,' said the others.  'Neil, you shall be Captain of our League.'






  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
  THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS.













*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE LEAGUE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.