Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









[Illustration: Resp'ct Yours

Geo. T. Ulmer

Feb. 1892]




  Adventures and Reminiscences
  of a
  Volunteer,

  or
  A Drummer Boy from Maine


  BY
  GEO. T. ULMER,
  COMPANY H, 8TH MAINE VOLUNTEERS.


  Dedicated to the Grand Army Republic.



  Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1892,
  by GEO. T. ULMER, in the office of the Librarian
  of Congress, at Washington D. C.




PREFACE.


In submitting this little book the author does not attempt to edit a
history of the rebellion, nor does he assume to be correct in the date of
events to a day. He does not hope or expect to make a hero of himself by
writing it, for he was far from doing anything heroic, believing, as he
does, that most of the heroes of the war were killed. Perhaps the WRITING
of this book may stamp him a hero, and for his audacity in so doing some
one may kill him. But he intends to clothe his little work in homely,
rugged, commonplace language. Not striving to make it a work of literary
merit, only a truthful account of an unimportant career and experience in
the army. It may, perhaps, be interesting to some of his comrades, who
recollect the incidents or recall similar events that happened to
themselves, and thereby serve the purpose of introducing one of the
youngest soldiers and a comrade of that greatest and most noble of all
organizations, the Grand Army of the Republic.

Respectfully,

GEORGE T. ULMER.




[Illustration: _The Memorable Bombardment of Fort Sumter._]




Bombardment of Fort Sumter. This was the beginning and the first sound of
actual war which inspired me, and kindled the fire of patriotism in my
youthful breast. The little spark lay smoldering for two long years, 'till
at last it burst forth into a full blaze. When Fort Sumter was bombarded,
I was a midget of a boy; a barefooted, ragged newsboy in the city of New
York. The bombardment was threatened for several weeks before it actually
occurred; and many nights I would have been bankrupted, but that everyone
was on the "qui vive" for the event, and I got myself into lots of trouble
by shouting occasionally, "Fort Sumter Bombarded!" I needed money; it sold
my papers, and I forgave myself. When the authentic news did come, I think
it stirred up within me as big a piece of fighting desire as it did in
larger and older people. I mourned the fact that I was then too small to
fight, but lived in hopes that the war would last until I should grow. If
I could have gone south, I felt that I could have conquered the rebellious
faction alone, so confident was I of my fighting abilities.

In the fall of '61 my dear mother died, and my father who had a great
desire to make possibilities out of improbabilities, and believing a farm
the proper place to bring up a family of boys, bought one away in the
interior of Maine. The farm was very hilly, covered with huge pines and
liberally planted with granite ledges. I used to think God wanted to be
generous to this state and gave it so much land it had to be stood up
edgeways. Picture to yourself, dear reader, four boys taken from the busy
life of a great city, place them in the wilderness of Maine, where they
had to make a winrow of the forest to secure a garden spot for the house,
pry out the stumps and blast the ledges to sow the seed, then ask yourself
what should the harvest be?

Father's business required all of his time in New York City, and we were
left with two hired men to develop the farm, our brains and muscles, but
mine didn't seem to develop worth a cent. I didn't care for the farmer's
life. The plow and scythe had no charms for me. My horny, hardened little
hand itched and longed to beat the drums that would marshall men to arms.

After eight months of hard work we had cleared up quite a respectable
little farm, an oasis in that forest of pines. A new house and barn had
been built, also new fences and stone walls, but not much credit for this
belonged to me. Soon after, we received a letter from father stating that
he would be with us in a short time and bring us a new mother and a little
step-sister. This was joyous news, the anticipation of a new mother, and
above all a step-sister, inspired us with new ambition. The fences and
barn received a coat of whitewash, the stones were picked out of the road
in front of the house, the wood-pile was repiled and everything put into
apple-pie order. We did not know what day they would arrive. So each day
about the time the stage coach from Belfast should pass the corners, we
would perch ourselves on the fence in front of the house to watch for it,
and when it did come in sight, wonder if the folks were in it; if they
were, it would turn at the corners and come toward our house. Day after
day passed, and they did not come, and we had kind of forgotten about it.
Finally one day while we were all busy burning brush, brother Charlie came
rushing towards us shouting, "The stage coach is coming! The stage is
coming!" Well, such a scampering for the house! We didn't have time to
wash or fix up, and our appearance would certainly not inspire our city
visitors with much paternal pride or affection; we looked like charcoal
burners. Our faces, hands and clothes were black and begrimed from the
burning brush, but we couldn't help it; we were obliged to receive and
welcome them as we were. I pulled up a handful of grass and tried to wipe
my face, but the grass being wet, it left streaks all over it, and I
looked more like a bogie man than anything else. We all struggled to brush
up and smooth our hair, but it was no use, the stage coach was upon us,
the door opened, father jumped out, and as we crowded around him, he
looked at us in perfect amazement and with a kind of humiliated
expression behind a pleasant fatherly smile he exclaimed, "Well, well, you
are a nice dirty looking lot of boys. Lizzie," addressing his wife and
helping her to alight, "This is our family, a little smoky; I can't tell
which is which, so we'll have to wait till they get their faces washed to
introduce them by their names." But our new mother was equal to the
occasion for coming to each of us, and taking our dirty faces in her
hands, kissed us, saying at the same time, "Philip, don't you mind, they
are all nice, honest, hard-working boys, and I know I shall like them,
even if this country air has turned their skins black." At this moment a
tiny voice called, "Please help me out." All the boys started with a rush,
each eager to embrace the little step-sister. I was there first, and in an
instant, in spite of my dirty appearance, she sprang from the coach right
into my arms; my brothers struggled to take her from me, but she tightened
her little arms about my neck and clung to me as if I was her only
protector. I started and ran with her, my brothers in full chase, down the
road, over the stone walls, across the field, around the stumps with my
prize, the brothers keeping up the chase till we were all completely tired
out, and father compelled us to stop and bring the child to the house.
Afterward we took our turns at caressing and admiring her; finally we
apologized for our behavior and dirty faces, listened to father's and
mother's congratulations, concluded father's choice for a wife was a good
one, and that our little step-sister was just exactly as we wanted her to
be, and the prospect of a bright, new and happy home seemed to be already
realized.

  A home is all right
    With father and brother,
  But darker than night
    Without sister and mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

The war grew more and more serious. Newspapers were eagerly sought; and
every word about the struggle was read over and over again. A new call for
troops was made, another and still another, and I was all the time
fretting and chafing in the corn or potato field, because I was so young
and small. I could not work; the fire of patriotism was burning me up. My
eldest brother had arrived at the age and required size to fit him for the
service; he enlisted and went to the front. This added new fuel to the
flame already within me, and one day I threw down the hoe and declared
that I would go to the war! I would join my brother at all hazards. My
folks laughed at me and tried to dissuade me from so unwise a step, but my
mind was made up, and I was bound to enlist. Enlist I did, when I was only
fourteen years of age and extremely small for my years, but I thought I
would answer for a drummer boy if nothing else. I found that up hill work,
however, but I was bound to "get there," and--I did.

It was easy enough to enlist, but to get mustered into the service was a
different thing. I tried for eight long weeks. I enlisted in my own town,
but was rejected. I enlisted in an adjoining town--rejected, and so on
for weeks and weeks. But I did not give up. I owned at the time a little
old gray horse and a two-wheeled jumper or "gig," which I had bought with
my savings from the sale of "hoop poles," which are small birch and alder
trees that grow in the swamps, and used for hoops on lime casks; at this
time they were worth a half a cent a piece delivered. I would work cutting
these poles at times when I could do nothing else, pack them on my back to
the road, pile them up, till I had a quantity to sell. At length I
concluded I had enough to buy me a horse and cart; the pile seemed as big
as a house to me, but when the man came along to buy them, he counted out
six thousand good ones and rejected nine thousand that were bad. "Too
small!" he said.

"Too small?" I exclaimed, "why there is hardly any difference in them!"
But he was buying, I was selling, and under the influence of a boy's
anxiety, he paid me thirty dollars, which I counted over and over again,
and at every count the dollars seemed to murmer, "A horse, a horse!--war!
war! to the front! be a soldier!" I could picture nothing but a soldier's
life; I could almost hear the sounds of the drums, and almost see the long
rows of blue-coated soldiers marching in glorious array with steady step
to the music of the band. "Thirty! thirty!" I would repeat to myself, but
finally concluded thirty wouldn't buy much of a horse, but my heart was
set upon it, and nothing remained for me to do but cut more "poles." One
day when I arrived at the road with a bundle of them, a farmer happened
to be passing, driving a yoke of oxen as I tumbled my hoop-poles over the
fence on to the pile.

"Heow be yer?" Addressing me in a high, nasal twang peculiar to the
yeomanry of Maine, and then calling to his oxen without a change of tone,
he drawled, "Whoa! back! Whoa you, Turk! Whoa, Bright!" at the same time
hitting the oxen over their noses with his goad-stick, and resting on the
yoke, he asked, "What yer goin' ter dew with them poles?"

"Sell them," I replied.

"What dew yer want for 'em?" taking in the height and width of the pile
with a calculating eye.

"Fifty cents a hundred," I said, with some trepidation.

"Don't want nothin', dew yer," coming over and picking out the smallest
pole in the pile; "Pooty durned small, been't they? What'll yer take fur
the hull lot?"

"Twenty dollars," I said.

"Twenty dollars! Whew!" Emitting a whistle that would have done credit to
a locomotive exhausting steam. "Why, thar been't more'n a thousan' thar,
be thar?"

"Oh yes, I guess there are over four thousand."

"Say!" sticking his hands in either breeches pocket and taking me in from
head to foot with a comprehensive glance, "What might yer name be?"

"Ulmer," I said.

"No? You been't Phil's son, be yer?"

"Yes, sir."

"Yer don't tell me! Wall, by gosh! I like Phil, he's a durned smart 'un.
I'll tell yer what, I'd like ter see him and Jimmie Blaine a settin' up in
them gol-durn presidential cheers; why, by gosh, they'd jist open the hull
durned treasury bildin' an let all ther gor-ramed gold an' silver role
right out inter the streets, by gosh, they would." Having delivered
himself of this panegyric, together with an accumulated quantity of saliva
resulting from the constant mastication of a large tobacco quid, he again
turned his attention to the pile of poles and said, "How much did yer say
fur the lot?"

"Twenty dollars."

"Twenty!" Drawing the corners of his mouth down and stroking his chin,
then turning to me, "Wall, more I look at yer, by gosh, yer do look like
Phil. Wall, I'd like purty well ter have them poles, but--," as if a
sudden idea had struck him,--"Don't want ter trade fur a horse, dew yer?"

"What kind of a horse?"

"Wall, a pooty durned good 'un. I hain't druve him much lately, but he
yused ter go like smoke; he's a leetle old but, will prick up his ears
like a colt when he's a mind ter."

"Well, I do want a horse, if I can trade for one," I said, trying not to
show anxiety.

"Say, got time ter get on' ter the waggin an go over to my farm and see
him, take dinner with me? Guess, the old woman'll have enough for both."

Being anxious, I accepted the invitation, and was soon on the way. He
pestered me with all kinds of questions; asked all about my family affairs
and told me all of his and every other family for miles about. Finally we
reached his house, one of those old-fashioned farm houses with several old
tumble-down sheds and out-buildings attached, near by an old barn that was
once painted red, the shingles had rotted and blown off here and there, so
you could see daylight from any portion inside. Scattered about were old
wagon boxes, odd wheels, old toothless harrows, plows, a wheelbarrow
upside down with the wheel gone, part of an old harness lying across it;
bits of harness were hanging on pegs in the barn. Geese, turkeys and
chickens were numerous and clucked about as if they were really pleased to
see us, and in fact, I discounted or anticipated the looks of the house
from the careless dilapidated appearance of every thing around and about
the old man's farm.


[Illustration]


He finally unyoked his oxen, dropped the yoke right where he took it off
and turned his cattle into the yard. "Now then, we'll get a bite to eat,
and I'll show you two horses, and durn me if I won't give you your choice
and a good trade." "Martha-Ann," he called, "Martha-Ann!"

In a moment a little, bright, bustling old woman came to the door and
shading her eyes with her apron, called back: "What is it, Dan'l? Did you
bring the merlasses, and candles, and the broom?"

"Yes," he answered back.

"And the salt?"

"Yes."

"And the rennet for the cheese, and the salt-pork?"

"Yes, yes, yes," he answered, "and I've brought a young man, Phil. Ulmer's
son; goin to trade him 'Dick.'"

"What?" said she, coming out to where we were. "Now, Dan'l, you are not
going to do anything of the kind."

"Yes, I be," he said.

"You shan't, I won't have my horse sold; you know he is the only one I can
drive, and he is so kind and gentle, and the only good horse you have; you
shan't sell him." And then she sat down on the cart-tongue and cried as if
her heart would break, and I began to think I was going to really get a
splendid horse at a bargain.

All through the dinner she sobbed, and when she would pass me bread or
anything, it was with a heartbroken sigh, and I began to want that horse.

Finally dinner finished, he took me to the barn. There were two horses
together standing on the barn-floor eating corn-husk. They both looked as
if they never had eaten anything else. One was a bay, and the other a
grey; they were so poor that you could mistake either for a barrel with
half the staves fallen in.

"Thar, sir, be two fine critters; you can have either; this grey one is
Dick, the one the old woman is so sot on, but he's getting too frisky for
her ter handle, he's the best dispositioned animal yer ever saw; yer do
anything with him, he's always ready. Get him with 'tother on a load at
the bottom of a big hill and he's thar every time; yer see, he's a leetle
sprung in one knee thar, he done that by pulling; it don't hurt him a bit
ter drive, and go! Why, do you know he's trotted in two minutes? You
notice, one eye's bit off color! Blue? Wall sir, that was strained a
leetle by watching over his blinder to see that no other hoss should pass
or get near him when he were druve on the race track twelve years ago, but
it don't hurt him now."

"You praise this horse," I remarked, "but don't say a word about the
other."

"Oh, he don't need it," said the old man dryly.

I was so anxious to get a horse, I concluded to take Dick. I thought, he
must be the best on Martha-Ann's account, and really there didn't seem
much choice.

"You want a harness and waggin too, don't yer?"

"Yes," I replied, "I shall have to have something to drive him in."

"Wall, I guess I can fix you out with a full rig."

So after looking through the sheds, he pulled out an old gig with one
shaft broken and without wheels. "Guess I'll find the wheels of this
somewhar. Do you know this is the same gig that very Dick yused ter haul
on the race track; he may remember it after yer hitch him into it. If he
does, you want to look out for him, and here are the wheels."

He pulled them out of a pile of old lumber and rubbish, and fitted them
on; one was badly dished in and was painted red, the other was as badly
dished out and one day had been painted yellow; but I was anxious and
didn't object; I wanted to get home.

So after getting the "gig" together, he patched a harness from the odd
pieces he found, then fitted them on to the poor horse who looked as if he
was sorry he was alive.

Finally we had everything all ready. I mounted the "gig." As I did so, I
noticed it seemed one sided, and looking at the wheels, I found one was
somewhat larger than the other, but said nothing. Taking up the lines made
up my mind to get home and fix it there. I pulled on the reins and spoke
to "Dick," but he didn't move. The old man took him by the bridle and led
him to the road remarking at the same time, "Dick never did like to go
away from home."

After we reached the road, the old man hit "Dick" with a hoe handle, and
off he started. It was four miles from his house to ours, and I reached
home NEXT DAY. Figured up what the whole thing cost me: The horse stood me
$33.50, the "gig" $7.50, and the harness, (?) 75 cents. This was my outfit
to make or break me. My brothers laughed at my trade, but I didn't care,
I had a purpose, and I was bound to accomplish it.

When I wanted to use my "rig," to harness the horse, I was obliged to take
a ladder to put his bridle on, lead him alongside of the steps to put the
saddle and breeching on, and back him up to the well-curb to put his tail
in the "crupper," and after he was hitched to the "gig," nine times out of
ten he would wait till he was ready to go.

Some time after I learned that uncle "Dan'l" was a regular horse dealer
and kept just such old plugs around him, and that they were always his
wife's favorites when the old man wanted to get one off his hands.
However, Dick and I became great friends. I fixed up the old "gig," and it
answered my purpose. I got there with it.

It became a customary daily routine for me to harness this poor animal,
start at sundown and drive all night. Where? Why to Augusta to try and get
mustered in, but I would always ride back broken hearted and disappointed,
my ardor, however, not dampened a bit. I became a guy to my brothers and
neighbors. My father and step-sister indulged me in my fancy, helping me
all they could--father by furnishing me with money, and step-sister by
putting up little lunches for my pilgrimages during the night. They
thought me partially insane, and judged it would be best to let me have my
own idea, with the hope that it would soon wear off. But it didn't. I
would not give up. The Yankee yearning for fight had possession of me, and
I could neither eat, sleep nor work. I was bound to be a soldier. I
prayed for it, and I sometimes thought, my prayers were answered; that the
war should last 'till I was big enough to be one--for it did.

I had enlisted four times in different towns, and each time I went before
a mustering officer, I was rejected. "Too small" I was every time
pronounced, but I was not discouraged or dismayed--the indomitable pluck
and energy of those downeast boys pervaded my system. I was bound to get
there, for what I didn't know, I did not care or didn't stop to think. I
only thought of the glory of being a soldier, little realizing what an
absurd-looking one I would make; but the ambition was there, the pluck was
there, and the patriotism of a man entered the breast of the wild dreamy
boy. I wanted to go to the front--and I went.

After several unsuccessful attempts to be mustered into the service at
Augusta, which was twenty-five miles from our little farm, I thought I
would enlist from the town of Freedom and thereby get before a different
mustering officer who was located in Belfast. I had grown, I thought, in
the past six weeks, and before a new officer, I thought my chances of
being accepted would improve; so on a bright morning in September I
mounted my "gig," behind my little old gray horse, who seemed to say, as
he turned his head to look at me when I jumped on to the seat, "What a
fool you are, making me haul you all that distance, when you know they
won't have you!" but kissing my little step-sister good-bye, with a wave
of my hand to father and brothers who stood in the yard and door of the
dear old home, I drove away, and as I did so I could see the expressions
of ridicule and doubt on their faces, while underneath it all there was a
tinge of sadness and fear. They did not think for a moment. I would be
mustered into the army, yet fear took possession of them when I drove off,
for they knew my determined disposition.

Well, I arrived in Belfast. Instead of driving direct to the stable and
hotel, and putting my horse up, I drove direct to the office of the
mustering officer. I did not need to fasten my trusty horse, for he knew
it would only be a few moments, and as I went to the office door, he
turned his head and whinnied as if he were laughing at me. I entered that
office like a young Napoleon. I had made up my mind to walk in before the
officer very erect and dignified, even to raising myself on tiptoe. On
telling the clerk my errand, he ushered me into an inner office, and
imagine my surprise--my consternation--when, swinging around in his chair,
I found myself in the presence of the very officer who had rejected me in
Augusta so many times.

"Damn it," said he, "will you never let up? Go home to your mother, boy,
don't pester me any more. I will not accept you, and let that end it."

I tremblingly told him "I had grown since he saw me last, and that by the
time I was mustered in I would grow some more, and that I would drum and
fight, if it should prove actually necessary."

Thus I pleaded with him for fully one hour. Finally he said, "Well, damned
if I don't muster you in, just to get rid of you. Sergeant, make out this
young devil's papers and let him go and get killed." My heart leaped into
my mouth. I tried to thank him, but he would not have it. He hurried me
through, and at 5:30 P. M., September 15, 1863, I was a United States
soldier. And when I donned that uniform, what a looking soldier! The
smallest clothes they issued looked on me as if it would make a suit for
my entire family, but in spite of the misfit, I took them and put them on,
with the pants legs rolled up to the knees, and the overcoat dragging on
the ground.

I went out of that office as proud as a peacock, but a laughing-stock for
the boys, and all who gazed at me. I think even the old horse smiled and
looked askance; he acted as if I was fooling him, and hungry as he was,
when he turned towards the stable, he dragged along as if he either were
sorry or ashamed to draw me among people; but I cared not for their jeers
and laughs. I was now a soldier and anxious to get home. I pictured the
feeling and joyous greetings of my brothers and sister as they would see
me ride up in my uniform; how the boys would envy me, and how the sister
would throw her arms about me and kiss me, and how her bosom would heave
with pride as she gazed upon the uniform that covered her hero brother.
Oh! I pictured it all in my boyish fancy, and hastened all my
arrangements, so full of joy that I could scarcely eat. I would not wait
till morning, but started home about midnight, arriving there just at
sunrise.


[Illustration]


It was on the 17th of September, 1863, one of those bright, balmy days
that we have in good old New England, seated in a "gig," might be seen the
writer of this little sketch, dressed in soldiers' clothes, covered by one
of those familiar cape overcoats that nearly covered the "gig" and poor
old horse. I felt as proud as if I was the general in command of all the
army.

Instead of giving the family a surprise, they had heard of my enlisting
from the stage-driver, and I found them all in tears. But when I made my
appearance tears changed to laughter, for the sight of me I think was
enough to give them hope. They didn't believe our government would have
such a little, ill-dressed soldier. And father said, after looking me all
over: "Well, if they have mustered you in, after they see you in that
uniform it will be muster out, my boy."

In about ten days I received orders to report in Augusta. Then the family
realized there was more in it than they at first thought, but consoled
themselves with the belief that when I reached headquarters, I would be
found useless, and sent home. I went away, leaving them with that feeling
of hope struggling behind their copious tears. And the lingering kiss of
my little step-sister, and her soft sobbing, "Don't, don't, please don't
go," as she hung around my neck, ran constantly in my mind from that time
till now. All through the nights, on the long marches, in all my troubles,
that soft, sweet voice was calling, "George, please, please, don't go."
And I could see her little form, and her ever-thoughtful face, a guiding
star and a compass that ever guided me away from the shoals and
quicksands. She was an angel companion to me all through the trials and
hardships of that awful war.

Well, I arrived in Portland, was sent to the barracks with three or four
thousand others, was allotted a hard bunk, and then for the first time did
I realize what I was doing, what I had committed myself to, and I think if
I could have caught that mustering officer I should have appealed to him
just as hard to muster me out, as I did to muster me in; but I was in it
and must stay. I will never forget the first day of my soldier experience.
With what feeling of awe and thumping of my cowardly, timid heart, I heard
the different commands of the officers. The disciplining began; the
routine of a soldier's life had really started right in Portland, far away
from the front where I had only expected to find it. I was detained in
those barracks only a few days, and the tap of the drum, and the sound of
the bugle as they sounded their different calls, had grown monotonous to
me; I no longer regarded them with awe, but with mockery. I wanted to go
to the front where the real life of a soldier was known, where glory could
be won. I wanted the reality, not boy's play.

I was glad when I was numbered among a squad of about 200 who had orders
to go to Washington. That night we marched down to the depot and were
crowded into cars. I did not care; I was overjoyed: I was delighted at the
prospects of going to the seat of war, near the front, where I thought I
might hear the booming of the cannon, and to a place where I would soon be
forwarded to my regiment. We arrived in Boston, and to my disappointment,
were laid over. We were marched to the barracks on Beach street, which in
early days was the "Beach Street Theater." The seats, benches, gallery,
stage and scenery were all there, and we were crowded into this old,
unused temple of Thespis to select a place to sleep where best we could,
on the floor, or anywhere. Here I began to grow sick of soldiering; we
were in this old musty theater with a guard over us, not allowed to go on
the street, and unable to find out how long we were to be incarcerated
there, for we were treated more like prisoners than men who had
volunteered to serve their country.

I thought it a great hardship at that time, and kicked at it loud and
hard, without any result that benefited us; but since I have been through
it all, I can see where it was absolutely necessary to use the rigid and
seemingly ungrateful discipline. Well, we were kept in the old theater
for about a week; we ware allowed out for two hours each day on passes,
and in the evening we sang songs and "acted" on the stage. Each one who
could recite or do anything did it, and it was appreciated by a deadhead
audience, something unusual nowadays. It was here in this old Beach Street
Theater that my future life was undoubtedly mapped out; from that time I
was impressed with a desire to become an actor, and there is no doubt that
the seed was planted then and grew and increased in after years.

On the 11th of November, we were ordered to Washington, and embarked on
the steamboat train via Fall River, and I shall never forget when we
arrived in New York, the demonstration, the greeting, the cheers, the
God-speeds that we received as we marched through the city to the ferry,
and it seemed to me that I was the one all this was meant for; I thought I
was a hero. It seemed that all eyes were on me, and perhaps they were, for
among all those Maine giants I belied my state, for I was a dot only, a
pigmy beside those mighty woodsmen.

We arrived in Washington without mishap. I was granted permission to go
over the city, and then to report to the commanding officer of the camp at
Alexandria. My first desire when I found myself with a privilege in the
great capital was to visit President Lincoln, have a talk with him and
also with Secretary Stanton. My admiration for those two men was almost
love, and I fancied, now that I was a soldier, that I could easily meet
them; that they would grasp me by the hand, compliment and shower me
with congratulations and advice. It is needless to say that I found out
that I had overestimated my importance; I did not discuss the war
situation with either of those gentlemen. I was a little crestfallen at
not meeting them, but contented myself by looking over the city; and
wherever I went I noticed I was scrutinized by everybody; soldiers on
guard would come to a halt, hesitate and then present arms; some officers
would pass me by, then turn and look me over from head to foot; others
would touch their caps and then turn and watch me with a kind of wondering
gaze, as much as to say, "What is it?"


[Illustration: _Our Troops Passing Through Washington to the Front._]


I forgot to mention that while in Portland I had a tailor make me a very
handsome suit of military clothes. He was as ignorant of the regulation
style as I was. He only knew the colors and knew that I wanted it nice and
handsome. He made it and so covered it over with gold braid and ornaments,
that you could not tell whether I was a drum-major or a brigadier-general;
that accounted for the salutations and looks of astonishment I received.

The first night I was tired out and started for Alexandria; arrived at
headquarters about midnight, and told the sentry I must see the colonel.
He thought I had important messages, or was some officer, and escorted me
to the colonel's quarters. I woke him up, told him I had reported and
wanted a bed.

The colonel said, "Is that all you want? Corporal, put this man in the
guard-house." He did!

That was my first experience, and I always after tried to avoid
guard-houses. The next morning I was given a broom and put to sweeping
around camp with about twenty tough-looking customers. The broom did not
look well with my uniform, and as soon as an officer noticed me, I was
summoned before the colonel in command. He asked, what I was? I told him I
didn't know yet--would not know 'till I reached my regiment. He had a
hearty laugh at my appearance; said I ought to be sent to some fair
instead of the front. However, he detailed me as his orderly. I held this
position some time, until one day there was going to be a squad of
recruits, and returned furloughed men sent on a steam-barge to the front
at City Point, where Butler was bottled up. I asked to be one of them. The
colonel told me I was foolish, and better stay with him, but I insisted;
and he allowed me to go. The barge was a kind of an open double-deck boat
without cabin or shelter, and they crowded us on to her as thick as we
could stand; we were like sardines. I secured a position against the
smoke-stack, and before we reached Chesapeake bay I was glad of it, for it
became bitterly cold, and I curled down around this smoke-stack, went to
sleep, and when I awoke in the morning I was crisp, dirty, and nearly
roasted alive. We crossed the bay in the afternoon. Oh, wasn't it rough!
This old river barge would roll and pitch out of sight at times, and we
were all wet from head to foot. Then I began to wish myself home on the
farm again; but I was in for it, and could not back out. I had one
thought that buoyed me up, the thought of meeting my brother.

That evening we passed by Fortress Monroe, up the James river. There was
not much transpired to relieve the monotony or appease our hunger or
thirst; in fact, it began to look dubious as to reaching City Point. The
monotony, however, was somewhat relieved in the morning. About daylight a
commotion was caused by the sound of distant cannonading. Every one
crowded to the front of the boat; everybody was asking questions of
everybody. Each one had some idea to offer as to the cause. Some ventured
to say it was a gunboat up the river practising. One old chap, who had
evidently been to the front, facetiously claimed that it was the corks out
of Butler's bottles. The river was very crooked at this point, and you
could not see very far; but presently we rounded a bend in the river,
which revealed to us where the cannonading came from, but for what, we
could not make out. About a mile ahead of us lay a United States gunboat,
and every few minutes a puff of smoke, and then a loud
bang--erang--erang--erang--with its long vibrations on that still morning,
awoke a sense of fear in everyone aboard that boat. No one could account
for the situation. Even the captain of the barge stood with pallid cheek,
seemingly in doubt what to do as he rang the bell to slow down; but on--on
we kept moving--nearer and nearer this most formidable war-ship, and as we
did so the shots became more frequent. Then we noticed a man on the bank
waving a flag back and forth, up and down in a wild, excited sort of a
way. I asked what that meant. An old soldier said the man was signaling
the boat to let them know they had hit the target.

Suddenly we were brought to an understanding of what it all meant, for we
could now hear the musketry very plain, and could even see the rebels on
the banks of the river. At this point a "gig" from the gunboat pulled
alongside and gave orders to the captain "to land those troops at once,"
telling him at the same time that this was Fort Powhatan landing; that
Fitzhugh Lee with his cavalry had swooped down upon the garrison, which
was only composed of two hundred negro troops, and that they must be
re-enforced. The captain protested, as the troops on board were all
unarmed, being returned furloughed men and recruits; but it was no use,
the order was imperative, and the captain headed his barge toward the
shore. There was no wharf. That had been burnt, so he was obliged to run
as far as he could onto the sand, then land us overboard. I tell you as
that boat neared toward the shore, my face felt as if it were marbleized;
sharp twinges ran up and down my whole body, and I'll bet that I was the
picture of a coward. I was not the only one. I looked them all over, every
one looked just as I felt. One man who stood near me, I know, was more
frightened than I, for he was so frightened he smelt badly. But I didn't
blame any of those poor men; it was not the pleasantest thing in the world
to be placed before the enemy as we were. However, we all landed.


[Illustration: _Battle between Monitor and Merrimack off Fortress
Monroe._]


The firing above us on the bank became more intense. An officer who was on
the boat with us, returning from a leave of absence, assumed command. He
ordered us to fall into line, and marched us into a little ravine, halted,
and told us the position and necessity of the occasion. He said the fort
was a very important position, and must be held at all hazards; that there
were only two hundred colored troops there, and they could not hold it.
Now, he proposed, as we had no arms, to go in with a rush and a yell, and
make those rebels think that re-enforcements had arrived. All this time
the musketry firing was increasing. The whizz of bullets through the air
and about our heads were becoming too frequent. I was in the front rank,
center of the line, and I tell you I think I had a little of that
frightened smell about me at this time. Whether it was that or my looks or
what, the officer probably took pity on me and told me to skirmish in the
rear. I hardly knew where the rear was, but I thought it would be safer
under the bank of the river, and there I hastened, and none too soon, for
the rebels had made a break through the lines and poured several volleys
into our poor, unarmed re-enforcements. The rebs became more cautious, and
that was what was wanted, as the only hope we had was to hold them at bay
until re-enforcements could arrive.

Well, I skirmished in the rear, and I found it hotter than the front, for
the rebs would crawl to the bank at either end of the breastworks and
kept a cross-fire up and down the river. Under and against the banking,
there was a sort of old barn; this was filled with hay. The bullets were
flying around so thickly that I squeezed myself behind this barn, and
after I was well in, the bullets just rained against that old building;
but I felt pretty secure till I looked up overhead--I saw that while I was
in safety from bullets, a worse danger threatened me. The overhanging bank
was liable to cave in and bury me alive.

The uncertainty of my position became more and more apparent. Each moment
the increased storm of bullets on the barn prevented me from even looking
out, and the constant rattling down of dirt and pebbles from above, told
me plainly what a position I was in. I tell you I wished then I had never
been mustered in. The uncertainty of my position was soon developed. I
came to myself and found I was buried to my neck; my head and face were
cut and bleeding, and a soldier was trying to wipe the sand from my eyes
and ears. I found I had not been shot, but the banking had caved in and
buried me. Gen. "Baldy" Smith, who was in command, happened to see me
behind the barn just as the bank caved in. It was he who put the soldiers
at work to rescue me. As soon as I was out, and the dust out of my eyes,
the general rode down to the beach, leading an extra horse; he called to
me. Ordered me to mount. I did so. He made me his orderly.

A new danger. I was to carry dispatches across the field, but I did not
now have the fear I did at first. I did not mind the sound of the
bullets. I became accustomed to it, and I rode back and forth all day long
without a scratch. I believe I was so small that I rode between those
bullets, and from that time forth I had no fear. I felt as though I were
bullet-proof. I felt as if it were ordained that I should go through the
war unscathed and unscarred. It did seem so, for I would go through places
where it rained bullets, and come out without a scratch. This was my
experience all through, and was commented on by comrades, who said I had a
charmed life. Well, the day wore away the rebs making feints first at one
point, then another. Finally they concentrated their forces against one
point, and would have carried it, too, but just then a steamboat loaded
with troops rounded the bend of the river. Well, the shouts that went up
from the handful of brave soldiers at the sight of that boat I never can
forget. The boys on the boat caught the sound. They took in the situation,
and answered back the shout with three long, hearty cheers. It created
consternation in the rebel lines. They knew the jig was up, but they drew
up in line, like dare-devils that they were, and with a cool deliberation,
poured volley after volley into the side of the steamer until her nose
touched the shore. Well, to see those soldiers leave that steamer was a
sight never to be forgotten. They jumped overboard from every part of her.
It did not seem five minutes from the time she touched shore until the
banks were swarming with our boys in blue. The rebels had taken to
flight--our boys followed some distance, and then returned, relieving us
and allowing us to embark again for City Point. After the rebels had
retreated, I went outside the breastworks, and the sight that met my eyes
on every side would curdle the blood of stouter hearts than mine. It
appeared that Lee, with his cavalry, had surprised the pickets, and being
negroes, every one they captured they would hang up to a tree after they
were mutilated. I saw several with fingers cut off in order to obtain a
ring quickly, and many other sickening sights which tended to make me a
hardened soldier. I was having lots of experience, even before I had
really reached my regiment, and I tell you, the heroic ardor of my boyish
dream was beginning to ooze out of me quite fast. I began to think I was
not cut for a soldier.

Well, my first battle was over, my first experience before an enemy. The
first sound of musketry had died away, and we were again steaming towards
City Point to join our regiments. We arrived there the next night about
ten o'clock. There didn't seem to be any one in command of us or any one
to direct us. It was very dark on shore, but in the distance you could see
a glaring light above the horizon, as if there was a long building on
fire. But from the occasional sound of guns from that quarter, I made up
my mind it was the advance line of our army. It was Butler's command, and
our regiment, the Eighth Maine, must be there. The Eighth Maine, Company
H, was the regiment and company to which my brother belonged, and in which
I was enlisted. I started out across the fields in the direction of the
light--on, on I tramped, into ditches, through mires, over fences. The
farther I went the faster I went. I was so impatient I could not hold
myself to a walk; it was a dog-trot all the time. I was heedless of every
obstacle, till I began to near the front. I realized the danger by the
whizzing of shell, and the zip, zip of bullets. I found myself among lots
of soldiers, and how ragged and dirty the poor fellows looked. I asked the
first man I came to where the Eighth Maine was? He looked at me in perfect
astonishment. "This is the Eighth, what's left of it." I asked him if he
knew where my brother was--Charley Ulmer? "Oh, yes," he said, and pointing
to a little group of men, who were round a wee bit of a fire; "there he
is, don't you know him?"

I hesitated, for really I could hardly tell one from the other. He saw my
bewilderment, and took me by the arm and led me over to the fire. They all
started and stared at me, and to save my life I could not tell which was
my brother; but one more ragged than the rest uttered a suppressed cry,
rushed forward, and throwing his arm about my neck, sobbed and cried like
a child. "My God! my brother! Oh George, George, why did you come here?"
His grief seemed to touch them all, for they all began to wipe their eyes
with their ragged coat-sleeves. This began to tell on me, and for the next
ten minutes it was a kind of a blubbering camp. After awhile they
reconciled themselves, and began to ply me with questions faster than I
could answer. My brother sat down with me and lectured me very soundly
for coming, as there was no need of it. He gave a graphic description of
the hardships they had endured, and I can never obliterate the picture he
presented that night. His clothes were ragged and patched, begrimed with
smoke, grease and dirt; his hat an old soft one, with part of the rim gone
and the crown perforated with bullet holes; his beard scraggly and dirty;
his big toes peeping out of a pair of old boots with the heels all run
down, in fact, he was a sight--a strong contrast to my tailor-made suit. I
will never forget the expression on my brother's face when about half an
hour after my arrival he looked up to me with his eyes half full of tears
glistening on that dirty face, and with a kind of cynical smile, asked,
after looking me over and over: "What are you, anyhow?"

I told him I didn't know.

"Well, after you have been here awhile, those pretty clothes won't look as
they do now, and you will probably find out what you are after you have
dodged a few shells."

Our conversation was brought to a climax by orders to break camp and fall
in. We learned we were going to embark somewhere on a boat; everything was
hustle-bustle now; little sheltered tents were struck, tin cups, canteens,
knapsacks were made ready, and in about fifteen minutes that begrimed,
dirty, hungry family of Uncle Sam's was on the march to the river. We were
marched on board an old ferry-boat, and crowded so thickly that we could
scarcely stand. My brother seemed now to feel that he had the
responsibility of my comfort, even my life, on his hands--and being a
favorite he elbowed me a place at the end of the boat, where we could sit
down by letting our feet hang over the end of the boat. In that position
we remained. We didn't have room to stand up and turn around. I was awful
sleepy, but dared not go to sleep for fear I would fall overboard. Finally
my brother fixed me so I could lay my head back, and he held on to me
while I slept. The next morning we landed at a place called West Point, on
the York river; why we landed there we didn't know. Of course soldiers
never did know anything of the whys and wherefores; they only obeyed
orders, stood up or laid down and got killed--they had no choice in the
matter. Well, we landed, and I tell you, we were stiff and hungry. While
they were unloading the horses, which was done by lowering them into the
water and letting them swim ashore, which took some time, they allowed us
a chance to skirmish for food. About half a mile from the river were a
dozen houses--nice-looking places. Towards these we started; they were all
closed up; they all looked deserted; there was not a sign of life, except
the cackle of hens or chickens in the hen-house. Chickens were good enough
for us, and I was one of the first to get to the pen; secured two handfuls
of chicks, and was just emerging with them when a big woman confronted me;
she stood and looked me straight in the eye, and with both hands held on
to a mastiff, that to me looked as big as an ox.

"How dare you?" said she.

"I don't," said I.

"What are you doing with my chickens, you good-for-nothing Yankee thief?"

I tried to apologize, but it was no use. Even my pretty uniform had no
more effect than my eloquence. I simply put Mr. and Mrs. Chicks down and
backed out of the yard. She was good enough to hold on to the dog, for
which I was very grateful. I think I had more respect for the dog than the
lady. However, I had to resort to pork and hard tack for my breakfast.
About noon that day we began our march. Where we were going, everybody
guessed, but none knew. I didn't care. I was now a kind of a half-settled
soldier, but from the first, I was a kind of privileged character. No one
gave me orders. No one seemed to claim me. I had never been assigned to
any company. I never had to answer roll-call. I could go and come as I
pleased. Once in awhile a guard would halt me, but not often. They didn't
know what I was, and they didn't care. All the afternoon we marched. Our
route was along the railroad, the rails of which had the appearance of
being recently torn up by the rebels. About four o'clock I was becoming
very tired. We came to a clearing, and some distance in the field was a
darky plowing with a mule. I made a break for him, and the rest of that
march I rode. No one objected, but the boys shouted as I made my
appearance on the mule; a mile or two further along we sighted a
farm-house. I drew reins on my mule and made for the house; I made the
boys glad on my return, for I secured a demijohn of applejack, a big
bundle of tobacco, and a box of eggs. That successful raid gave me
courage, and I began to think that was what I was destined for, and I
liked it first-rate, for it was a pleasure to me to see those poor, hungry
boys have any delicacy, or even enough of ordinary food.

That night we had to halt, for the rebs had burned the bridge, and we had
to wait for pontoons. The boys were tired and hungry. A guard was posted
to prevent any foraging, but I was a privileged character, and I bolted
through the lines. I had seen some pigs and calves scamper into the swamp
about half a mile back from where we halted, and thinking a bit of fresh
meat would be nice for the boys, I determined to have some. Cautiously I
stole away, till I arrived at the edge of the swamp; and such a jungle! It
was almost impossible to penetrate it, so I skirted the edge, hoping to
see a pig emerge. After tramping an hour I was rewarded by seeing a calf.
I drew my revolver, sneaked up and fired at poor bossy. It dropped--I was
a good shot--but when I reached the poor beast I found it was as poor as a
rail and covered with sores as big as my hand. I was disappointed, but cut
off as much as I could that was not sore, and took it to camp. We put the
kettles on the fires in short order, and my brother's company had fresh
meat broth--the first fresh meat in a month--and I tell you it was good,
even if it had been sore. After that episode Company H claimed me and
dubbed me their mascot. I accepted the position, and from that time forth
I devoted my time to foraging, stealing anything I could for my company,
and I doubt if there was a company in the whole army that fared better
than ours, for I was always successful in my expeditions.

After a long, tedious march across pontoons, over corduroy roads, we
confronted the Johnnies at "Cold Harbor." It was here that I found myself
in a real, genuine battle. I got lost in the scuffle. I found myself
amidst bursting shell and under heavy musketry fire. I was bewildered and
frightened. I did not know which way to go. I ran this way and that,
trying to find my brother and regiment. Every turn I made it seemed I
encountered more bullets and shells. Soldiers were shouting and running in
every direction, artillery was galloping here and there, on every side it
seemed they were fighting for dear life. On one side of me I saw horses
and men fall and pile up on top of each other. Cannon and caissons with
broken wheels were turned upside down, riderless horses were scampering
here and there, officers were riding and running in all directions, the
shells were whizzing through the air, and soldiers shouting at the top of
their voices. Everything seemed upside down. I thought the world had come
to an end. I tried to find shelter behind a tree, away from the bullets,
but as soon as I found shelter on one side it seemed as though the bullets
and shells came from all sides, and I lay down in utter despair and
fright. I don't know how long I was there, but when I awoke I thought the
war was over, it was so still. I thought every one had been killed on both
sides, excepting myself. I was just thinking I would try and find a live
horse, ride back to Washington and tell them that the war was over,
everybody was killed, when my brother tapped me on the shoulder and asked
me where I had been. He had gone through it all, escaped with the loss of
one toe, and had come to the rear to have it dressed and find me.


[Illustration: _Desperate Charge of Confederates to Capture a Union
Battery._]


The next morning I was sent with the "Stretcher Corps" under a flag of
truce to the battle field to help take the wounded to the rear and bury
the dead, and when we reached the scene, how well could I imagine what the
awful struggle had been. The worst of the great conflict had occurred in
an orchard, and there the sight was most appalling; dead and dying heroes
were lying about as thick as a slumbering camp would be, sleeping with
their guns for pillows the night before a battle; to many of those poor
fellows it was that sleep that knows no waking, while to others it was the
awaking from unconsciousness by the twinges of a mortal gaping wound,
awake just long enough to get a glimpse of the Gates Ajar, sink back and
start on that journey from which no traveler returns.

Blue and the gray were mingled together on this awful field of slaughter,
and both sides seemed to respect the solemnity by a cessation of
hostilities, and the hushed silence was only broken by the painful cry of
some helpless wounded, or dying groans of others. The little white cloth
we wore around our arms to denote, we belonged to the stretcher corps,
seemed to add to the sadness of the occasion, for to those poor wounded
souls we were like ministering angels, and as I moved from one to the
other with tear dimmed eyes offering water and assistance to those who
needed it I saw many incidents of bravery and self-sacrifice that went far
toward ameliorating the suffering and obliterating the bitterness of the
blue and the gray. I noticed one poor fellow who had spread his rubber
blanket to catch the dew of the night sharing the moisture thus gathered
with an unfortunate confederate who had lost a leg. Another, a
confederate was staying the life-blood of a union officer by winding his
suspenders around the mangled limb. Oh! the horror of such a picture can
never be penned--or told, and contemplated only by soldiers who have been
there.

One-half of our regiment had been killed or wounded. After this things
settled down into a siege. I employed my time foraging for the company.
One day I found an apple orchard, gathered as many apples as I could
carry, took them to the company and made apple-sauce without sweetening.
They ate very heartily of it, poor fellows. It was a treat for them; but
it was a bad find, for the next day the whole lot of them were unfit for
duty. That nearly put a stop to my reconnoitering. Our regiment lay here
in the advance line of breastworks for thirteen days. The sappers and
miners were constantly working our breastworks towards the enemy, and
every time I wanted to reach my company I found it in a new place and more
difficult to reach. The rebel sharpshooters, with their deadly aim, were
waiting for such chaps as me. However, under cover of night, I always
managed to find and reach the company with some palatable relish.

I will never forget one night; four men were detailed to go to the rear
for rations. The commissary was located about two miles to the rear, and
the wagon could only haul the rations within one mile of us on account of
jungle and rebel sharpshooters. Therefore these men were detailed to pack
the rations the rest of the way. I was one of the detail from my company.
We went back to the covered wagons that were waiting for us. The boys said
I was too small to walk, and they threw me into the rear end of one of the
wagons. We got to the commissary tent--a long tent open at both ends--and
from both ends they weighed out the rations of coffee, sugar, etc. While
the soldier who was doing the weighing on one end had his back turned, I
managed to fill my haversack from a full barrel of coffee that stood at
the end of the tent. I had two haversacks for that purpose, for I went
there with that intent; but I came away with only one filled. I could not
get a chance for the other; it was on the wrong side. Finally the rations
were all aboard, and we started back. The boys repeated the operation of
throwing me into the wagon again, and there was my opportunity. I would
fill my other haversack from the bags in the wagon; that's what the boys
expected I would do, and I did from the first bag I could get into. Each
company had its own bag.

When we arrived at the breastworks my company crowded around me for
plunder. I divided it up, and was looked upon as quite a hero, but when
the rations were issued it was found our company's bag was short about
thirty rations of sugar, but no one said a word. It was surmised that it
got spilled. Day after day our regiment lay there and our army did not
seem to gain anything. I was becoming disgusted and discouraged.


[Illustration: _My First Day in Front of Petersburg._]


One night the Johnnies made a charge on us. That was the only time I ever
fired a gun in the whole war, and I honestly believe I killed a dozen men,
for immediately after they stopped firing. It was only a few moments,
however; on they came, only to be repulsed. They kept that up nearly all
night, and I served my country by standing down in the trench, loading a
gun and passing it up to my brother to fire. I did this all night, but I
didn't see any less rebels in the morning. Our next order was to fall
back, under cover of darkness. We fell back about a mile and halted for
some reason, I thought to get breakfast. Anyway I built a little fire
behind a stone wall, put my coffee-pot on and the remnants of a pot of
beans. They were getting nice and hot; my brother and I stood waiting,
smacking our lips in the anticipation of a feast, when whizz came one of
those nasty little "Cohorn" mortor shells and it dropped right into our
coffee and beans. Then the bugle sounded, "fall in," and we started with
downcast hearts and empty stomachs, and a longing good-bye to the debris
of beans and coffee. It was a tiresome march. Of course, we didn't know
where we were going, and that made it all the longer.

We eventually brought up at White-House landing on the York river, where
we were put on board of a steam transport without being given time to draw
rations. From there we steamed down the York and up the James river to the
Appomattox, and up the river to Point of Rocks. We landed here on the
Bermuda Hundred side, in the rear of Butler's works, obtained some bread
and coffee, and then crossed the Appomattox on pontoons and pushed on
towards Petersburg. Our regiment belonged at that time to the 2nd brigade,
2nd division of the 18th corps, commanded by Major General "Baldy" Smith.

We soon met the enemy's pickets in front of Petersburg. They fled before
that long, serpentine file of blue-coats like deer. On, on we went. We
could see the rebels running in their shirt sleeves, throwing coats, guns
and everything in their mad flight. I don't think there was a shot fired
on either side 'till we reached a fort, Smith I think it was called. It
was just at dusk. This fort was located on a mound or hill with a ravine
in front of it. Our brigade was drawn up in line of battle in a
wheat-field on the right. A colored brigade was ordered to charge the fort
from the hill opposite, and across this ravine; then I beheld one of the
grandest and most awful sights I ever saw; those colored troops started on
a double quick, and as they descended the hill, the fort poured volley
after volley into them. The men seemed to fall like blades of grass before
a machine, but it did not stop them; they rallied and moved on; it was
only the work of a few minutes. With a yell they were up and into that
fort, and in less time than it takes to tell it, the guns were turned on
the fleeing rebels. Here was the greatest mistake of our greatest
commander. All of our army was brought to a standstill by some one's
foolish order. Not another move was made. We lay there waiting, and all
night long we could hear the trains rumbling along on the other side of
the Appomattox river. Lee had been outwitted. We had stolen a march on
him. We had arrived in front of defenseless Petersburg, and could have
gone right in and on to Richmond without a struggle. But that fatal order
to halt gave him all night to hurry his forces from Cold Harbor, and in
the morning we found plenty of determined rebels in front of us, and
thereby the war was prolonged months and hundreds and thousands of lives
lost. I swore all night. I kicked and condemned every general there was in
the army for the blunder I saw they were making. I only wished I could be
the general commanding for one hour. But it was no use; I couldn't be.

I was nothing but a boy. But I had my ideas. I thought, perhaps, more than
some of the officers did. I kept myself posted on facts and the topography
of the country. The dispositions of generals was a matter of grave
importance to me. I believed generals should be selected to command, NOT
for their qualifications in military tactics alone, NOT because they had
graduated well-dressed from "West Point," but for their indomitable pluck,
judgment and honesty of purpose. It did seem to me that some of our best
officers were invariably placed in the most unimportant positions and
commands. Take, for instance, "Custer's" Brigade of daring men, headed by
those intrepid officers, Alger and Towns, wasting their time and
imperiling the lives of thousands of good soldiers around "Emettsburg,"
"Gordonsville," "Bottom Bridge," carrying out the foolish orders of
superiors in command. Why could not these officers of cool judgment be
with us at this critical moment?--they made THEIR victories, what would
they have done had they the great opportunities that were presented to
others who failed?

All night about the camp-fire the boys would delight in nagging
me--getting me into arguments and debates. They called me the "midget
orator of the Army of the Potomac." I will never forget one night soon
after the advance on Petersburg; we were clustered about with coffee cups
and pipes; an argument waxed warm in regard to the possibilities of the
war lasting two more years; finally I was called upon for my views.
"Midget," said Col. McArthur, "if you had supreme command of our army,
what would you do?"

What would I do? If Uncle Sam would give me one regiment from each State
in the Union--give me Grant, Burnside, Sherman, Sheridan, Custer, Alger,
Hooker, Hancock, Thomas and Siegel to command them, I would take Richmond
and settle the rebellion before they had time to wire and ask Stanton if I
should. This was received with cheering and applause. But my boyish
fancies and ideas were never gratified; I never had the pleasure of seeing
my ideal army together, and Richmond was not taken for many months
afterward.

A few days after our regiment was drawn up in line of battle in a
wheatfield. It was just nightfall. I was lying down on the bank of a ditch
waiting for the move-forward. Suddenly a shell came over my head and bust
right in the center of my company. I thought I saw legs and arms flying in
all directions.

I started on the dead run for the rear. I believed I was going right, but
it seemed as if the shells were coming from our own guns in the rear. I
thought they had mistaken us for the enemy. I could see the shells coming,
and every time they would fire, I would fall on my stomach, and thought
they all went just over my head. I was soon, however, out of range, and
began to feel easy, when a new fear took possession of me. What if I had,
in my bewilderment, run into the rebel lines? I saw just ahead of me an
old-fashioned southern mansion, with a high board fence all around it, and
in the inclosure several small cabins used for the slaves to live in. I
could not remember seeing this before, so I made up my mind I was actually
inside rebeldom. However, I decided to make the best of it, and if I were
or were not I would see if I could find something to eat. With fear and
faltering steps I moved toward the big gate, swung it open, and it gave an
awful squeak as it swung on its old rusty hinges. There was not a sign of
life in or about the place, and that gave me hope and courage. In the
center of the yard was a large hen-house. Cautiously toward this I
crawled, heard the cackle of fowl, went first on one side then on the
other, looking for the door; and imagine my surprise, the fear that took
possession of me--my hair stood on end; for sitting there on a bench back
of this hen-house were two big Johnnies. I couldn't speak, I couldn't
move, till one of them said, "Good evening, sar; got anything to eat?"
"Yes, yes," I stammered, "I have some hard-tack." Finally, one of them
seeing I was most scared to death, spoke up and said, "Don't be alarmed;
we are only deserters and want to give ourselves up; show us to
headquarters." I was brave now. I gave them what hard-tack I had, and
marched them ahead of me back to the rear, till we found headquarters.
Afterward, I was offered a furlough for capturing two of the enemy. I
never told this before; I took the credit. But I was not satisfied; I'd
rather have some of those chickens than live rebels. So back I went and I
got five; started back to the rear, put a kettle on a fire and boiled
them, kept them three days, till I found my brother and the remnant of the
regiment. When I did find them I made their hearts glad by showing them
the boiled chickens. They were awful hungry and set to eating with a
ravenous appetite, but they could not eat them, hungry as they were. I had
no salt, and so put a big chunk of salt beef in the pot instead of salt,
consequently the chickens were saltier then Lot's wife.

I think I felt more disappointed than anybody, so I determined to make up
for it in some other way. The regiment finally brought up in the first or
advance line of breastwork, and I was still skirmishing in the rear for
anything that I could find that was good.

I had tramped back to the rear about three miles, my mind bent on securing
anything that would please the heart and eye, or tickle the palates of the
brave fellows who had gone to face the enemy and do the real work of our
country. About a quarter of a mile to the left of me I espied a covered
wagon moving toward the front. I wondered what it was and where it was
bound for, as from the frequent halt it made, it seemed the driver was
lost to himself. I bore down toward him and found it was a sanitary wagon,
loaded with good things sent out by the ladies of the north. The driver
was an old man--one of those long, lanky individuals who might be taken
for a parson or a horse dealer. He reminded me of the "Arkansaw Traveler."
His clothes were of the salt and pepper homespun goods, a little worse for
wear and very ill fitting, they looked as if he had lost fifty pounds of
flesh since he started from home; his pants were tucked into a pair of old
cow-hide boots; his hat was a cross between a stove pipe and a derby; his
hair was red, very long and sprinkled with grey; his eyebrows were shaggy,
nearly meeting over the nose and hanging down over a pair of faded blue
eyes. So wrinkled was his skin that you would think his face was a frozen
laugh; a little strip of red hair ran down the side of his face in front
of his ears and almost met under his chin; the space left open in his
whiskers, evidently an outlet for the tobacco juice that trickled down
from each side of his mouth. As I approached he pulled up his mules and
called to me in a rather cracked voice, "Say, Major, or Sergeant, or what
ever you are, whar's the field hospital?"

"Three miles from here," said I, pointing backward.

"What's that firin I hear? Ain't no rebs 'round yere, be thar?"

"Yes," I replied; "there's a long row of them about half a mile in front
of us, and you had better halt right where you are. What's your cargo?"

"Wall, I got most anything that is needed by you poor fellows--useful
things. I'm sent here by a society called the Northfield First Methodist
Ladies' Relief and Sanitary Association. They selected me for my courage
to go to the front and distribute this load. But I guess I'll have to go
too near that row of rebs if I'd give them out in person. I'll unhitch
here and feed my mules. You don't think thar's any danger of them
grey-coats disturbing me, do you? I should hate to have all these good
things fall into their hands."

I inquired what he had, to which he replied with apparent amazement:
"Shirts, stockins, bakin' powder, condensed milk, canned apples, peaches,
Boston beans, tobacco, hair oil, tooth powder, cathartic pills, Jamaiki
ginger, and fine tooth combs----Whoa thar--stop your infernal kickin. Them
durned mules are worse than two-year-old heifers."

The wearied animals had become all tangled up in the harness, and I
thought I'd steal some of the eatables for my company while he was freeing
and feeding the mules. He gave me a better opportunity however. There was
a patch of peanuts or groundnuts a short distance away. He asked me to
mind his mules while he went to see what they were and how they grew. When
he left me I got into the wagon and loaded myself down with everything
until I could carry no more. Then I conceived an idea, and if he would
only remain away long enough I could carry the thing out. I found a small
hatchet in the wagon, and with my tin cup began digging a hole near the
wagon. I worked like a beaver for awhile, at the same time keeping my eye
on the peanut patch. The size of the receptacle would be determined by the
length of time the old man remained away. Finally I got a hole made about
the size of a bushel basket, and thought I'd take no more chances. I
scrambled into the wagon and threw out cans of milk, etc., until the hole
was completely filled. I had just nicely covered it up when my friend
returned and asked:

"What YOU been diggin' for thar--them durned things too? Why, durn them,
I'd just as lieve eat raw beans."

I looked up in a guilty sort of way and told him, "I was digging for a
shell that lit there while he was gone."

"Ge-whiz! I guess I'd better get out of this place as quick as I can. I
say, Mister, whar's your Comp'ny?"

"What's alive of them are at the front, suffering from want and hunger," I
replied in a strong manner, thinking perhaps he would drive nearer and
distribute his load. But he was bent on going back. As he climbed to his
seat he said, "I'll tell you, Mr. Sergeant, you kin take a few of these
things to the men that are sick in your company."

"They are all sick," I said quickly, for I was greedy and wanted all I
could get. He pulled out a hospital shirt and tied up the neck. Having
filled it with condensed milk, tobacco, and other things, he asked me if I
could carry it. "Could I! I could carry all there's in your cart," I
replied. I found my load was a little heavier than I had expected it to
be, but I wouldn't say there was too much, but helped him to hitch up his
mules and he started off, after giving me a warm hand-shake. I watched him
until he disappeared from view, and then thought I would open up the
treasure I had buried and deposit some of the shirtful which he had so
kindly given me after I had robbed him. It would lighten the load and I
could return for the balance next day. I had just started to dig, when I
looked up and saw him driving back as hard as he could drive, "Say, young
fellow, I--I--I," in a wild, excited manner, reigning his mules up with a
jerk and a "Whoa, thar," loud enough to be heard in Petersburg, "I--I
thought I'd drive back and dig up that darned shell. It'll be a great
curiosity. When I get home I can show the folks the dangerous position I
was placed in while distributing these things."

I didn't stop to hear any more, but hurried away with my shirtful. I ran
hard and fast, and didn't dare to turn and look round. The shells began to
whiz pretty thickly just at this time, and I prayed and hoped that the old
man would get scared and not dig for that shell, for I wanted the boys to
have it.


[Illustration: _The Great Mine Explosion in Front of Petersburg._]


This was on the day fixed for the great mine explosion, every soldier on
the entire line was waiting with bated breath for the signal or prolonged
rumble of that expected explosion. It did not come, however. The suspense
was broken by the appearance nearly a half a mile away, of a soldier with
something white on his back, that made a good target for the rebel
sharpshooters. Down the railroad I came. I reached the first line of
earthworks. For a short distance I would keep on top. In this way I kept
on, on, first running one breastwork then another, till I reached the
front line. On top of this I ran the whole length, heedless and unmindful
of the rebel bullets that pelted about me. I almost flew along. The
soldiers shouted to me to keep down, but I heeded them not. Finally I
reached the place where my regiment was, jumped down as coolly as if I had
run no risk, deposited my bag, received the congratulations of my company,
who examined me all over to see if there were any wounds. They found none,
however, but on opening the shirt every can of milk had a bullet hole
through it, and condensed milk, extract of beef, and tobacco had to be
eaten as a soufflee.

The next day found me at the rear again. I looked for the buried
treasure--found it. Evidently the old gent had been frightened away, for
about half the dirt had been removed from the top, and the stuff was not
uncovered. There was a desperate fight going on at the right of our line.
I was pressed into the service of the stretcher corps, which is usually
composed of drummer boys. I did duty at this all the forenoon. The
onslaught was terrible, and many poor fellows did I help carry off that
field; some to live for an hour, others to lose a limb that would prove
their valor and courage for the balance of their lives.


[Illustration]


This day our regiment was relieved from the front and supposing they were
going to City Point to recruit, they came back about a half a mile, halted
for orders; I heard of it and concluded I would go with them and so
hastened to where they were, and soon after my arrival the order came to
"fall in." They did so with alacrity and bright hopes of much needed rest.
I took my drum and place at the head of the regiment and started with
them.

The road to the left led to City Point. Imagine their surprise when
nearing it, the order came, "FILE RIGHT, BY COMPANY INTO LINE, DOUBLE
QUICK MARCH."

The entire regiment seemed paralyzed for a moment, but only for a moment,
the whizzing of the shells and the zip zip of the rebel bullets plainly
told them what caused the sudden change. I was dumbfounded, I didn't know
what to do. My brother yelled to me to go to the rear quick, but I didn't;
I kept on with them until it seemed to rain bullets, but on, on they went
unmindful of the awful storm of leaden messengers of death--on, on and
into one of the fiercest charges of the entire war. I saw men fall so
thick and fast that there didn't seem as if there was any of my regiment
left, and I made up my mind it was too hot for me, so started on the dead
run to the rear for a place of safety, and I didn't stop until I was
pretty sure I was out of harm's way.

I came to a place about one mile back where evidently there had been a
battery located; here I sat down to rest and meditate. I examined myself
all over to see if I was hit, found I was unhurt but my drum had received
several bullet holes in it.

Finding a green spot I stretched myself out and listened to the awful
sound of musketry firing which was going on at the front, around me on all
sides was the debris of a deserted camp, empty tin cans, broken bayonets,
pieces of guns, fragments of bursted shell, and occasionally a whole one
that had failed to explode. I had only sat here a few moments thinking
which was the best way to go when I was joined by another Drummer Boy from
a Pennsylvania regiment. We sat down and talked over our exploits, and I
thought he was the most profane lad I had ever met. Most every other word
he uttered was an oath.

I asked him if he wasn't afraid to talk so.

"What the h--l should I be afraid of?" he asked, at the same time picking
up an old tent stake and sticking it into the ground, trying to drive it
in with the heel of his boot. Failing in this he reached over and got hold
of an unexploded shell and used this on the stake, but it was heavy and
unwieldy.

"I wonder if this was fired by those d--d rebs," he asked.

"I guess it was," I replied, "and you better look out, or it might go
off."

"Off be d--d, their shells were never worth the powder to blow 'em to
h--l, see the hole in the butt of it, it would make a G--d--d good mawl,
wouldn't it?" and looking round at the same time he found an old broom.
Stripping the brush and wire from the handle he said, "I'll make a mawl of
it and drive that d--d rebel stake into the ground with one of their own
d--d shells, be d--d if I don't." Inserting the broom handle into the end
of the shell he walked over to a stump, and taking the shell in both hands
commenced pounding onto the stick against the stump; "d--d tight fit," he
hollored to me, and the next instant I was knocked down by a terrific
explosion. I came to my senses in a minute and hastened to where he had
been standing. There the poor fellow lay unconscious and completely
covered with blood, there was hardly a shred of clothes on him, his hair
was all burned and both hands taken completely off, as if done by a
surgeon's saw.

I was excited and horror stricken for a moment. The sight was horrible,
but I quickly regained my composure, knowing that something must be done,
and done quickly. So taking the snares from my drum I wound them tightly
around his wrists to stop the flow of blood, then I hailed an ambulance,
and we took him to the held hospital about a mile to the rear.

On the way the poor fellow regained consciousness, and looking at his
mutilated wrists, and then with a quick and bewildered glance at me,
"G--d--d tough, ain't it," then the tears started in his eyes, and he
broke down and sobbed the rest of the way, "Oh, my God! What will my poor
mother say? Oh, what will she do!"

We reached the field hospital, which is only a temporary place for the
wounded where the wounds are hurriedly dressed, and then they are sent to
regular hospitals, located in Baltimore, Philadelphia, Norfolk,
Portsmouth, etc., where they have all the comforts possible.

We laid the little fellow down in one corner of the tent to wait his turn
with the surgeon, and when I left him, he cried and begged for me to stay,
but I couldn't stand his suffering longer, so I bade him good-bye with
tears streaming down my own cheeks. I hurried out, and even after I
reached the outside I could hear him cry, "Oh, my God! What will my poor
mother say? Oh, what will she do!"

In the afternoon I was detailed to wait on the amputating tables at the
field hospital.

It was a horrible task at first. My duty was to hold the sponge or "cone"
of ether to the face of the soldier who was to be operated on, and to
stand there and see the surgeons cut and saw legs and arms as if they were
cutting up swine or sheep, was an ordeal I never wish to go through again.
At intervals, when the pile became large, I was obliged to take a load of
legs or arms and place them in a trench near by for burial. I could only
stand this one day, and after that I shirked all guard duty. The monotony,
the routine of life, in front of Petersburg, was becoming distasteful to
me. I had stolen everything I could. My district or territory had given
out, so the next day I started for the front to bid my brother good-bye.

Our regiment was sometimes relieved and ordered to the rear for rest; so
it was on this occasion, they had fallen back and halted in a little
ravine. I met my brother, who always expected me to bring him some stolen
sweets or goodies of some kind, but unfortunately this time I came
empty-handed. I had failed to find anything to steal. I was hungry myself,
but when I looked at him I forgot my own hunger, for such a forlorn
appearance as he presented almost broke my heart, and I determined to find
him something to eat at all hazards. So off I started on an independent
foraging expedition. I had only gone a short distance when I espied a "pie
wagon." Usually when the paymaster was around there would be "hucksters"
or peddlers with all kinds of commodities following in his wake. This
fellow had driven to the front from City Point. They were generally
dare-devils, and this one was no exception to the rule. He had driven
right up to the front, unhitched his horse and began selling hot mince
pies. He had some kind of a stove and outfit in an old covered wagon where
he made the pies quickly and sold them hot for one dollar apiece; the pies
were about the size of a saucer. When I reached the wagon there was quite
a crowd around him; some were buying and eating them as if they were good,
while others stood looking on wistfully watching their comrades who were
fortunate enough to have the price. I was one of the unfortunates. I could
smell the cooking of the pies long before I reached the wagon, and this
only served to increase my already ravenous hunger; but all I could do
was to stand there with my hands in my pockets, smack my lips and imagine
what they tasted like--the longer I staid the better they tasted. I
believe I would have given five hundred dollars for one if I had possessed
the money, but I didn't have a cent; our regiment had not been paid. All
this time I was thinking of my poor brother, how he would like one of
those hot pies, and I began to concoct schemes how to get one. The way I
worked the old sanitary man would never do to try on this fellow, for he
was a "fakir" by birth, occupation and inclination. The fellow was doing a
lively business. "Here you are! Nice hot pies, fresh baked, right from the
oven! Walk up lively here. Only one dollar apiece! There's only a few of
them left, and I shan't be here again for a month; walk up with your
dollar! Get off that wheel, you young devil!" I had climbed up on the
wheel to make observations and see if I couldn't sneak a pie, but he was
watching and detected my motive; so down I got and stood gaping at him, my
mouth wide open; but my hungry look had no effect on him, he had no
sympathy for anything except dollars. Finally I thought my brother might
have a dollar, so back to him I ran, told him of the pies, but he had not
a cent. The knowledge of the pies added two fold to his hunger. "Gosh!" he
said, "ain't there some way? Can't you steal one?" "No," I said, "I have
tried that. I would have made his horse run away and upset his wagon, but
the darned cuss had unhitched him."


[Illustration]


"Ge!" I exclaimed, "I have it." And off I started. Charley, my brother,
owned an old-fashioned silver watch, one of those old "English levers." He
thought a great deal of it as a keep-sake and always gave it to me to keep
when he was going into action. I had this watch now, and made up my mind I
would trade it to the "fakir" and get a lot of pies for us all. Oh! such
bright anticipations of hot mince pies. I could almost see them floating
in the air as big as cart wheels, and fearing they would all be sold
before I could reach the wagon, I ran as hard as I could. The crowd had
thinned out and so had the pies. "How many have you got left?" I eagerly
asked. "Oh, plenty," he replied; "how many, do you want?" "Well," I said,
nearly out of breath, "I haven't any money, but I want all you have, and
I'll trade you a nice watch for them."

"Say, cully! what yer givin' me? I don't want no watch. Let's see it."

I quickly passed it up to him, and stood working my fingers and feet
impatiently and revolving in my mind how many pies he would give me and
how I would manage to carry them back, when he broke out into a loud,
contemptuous laugh, and passed the watch back.

"Say, young fellow, that aint no good. I'd rather have a blacking box than
that thing."

"It's silver," I replied.

"That don't make no difference. I'll give you one pie for the thing if you
want it, see!"

I turned the watch over and over in my hand, my feelings hurt and my
stomach disappointed. Then I thought of my brother, forgot that it was his
high-priced time-piece, and quickly said:

"Give me the pie and take the watch."

He did so, and away I started on the dead run, I could hardly resist the
temptation of biting the pie; but just before I reached the regiment, and
in full sight of my brother, I stumbled and fell, smashing the pie into
the dirt and mud. I picked myself up, looked at the crushed pie, and the
tears started in my eyes; but only for a moment. I brushed them away,
gathered up the pieces and hurried to my brother. We rubbed the mud from
the pieces the best we could, and devoured them with a hearty relish.
After the pie was gone, I regretted the bargain that I had made. Pie and
watch both gone. Remorse took possession of me. I felt guilty; I was
conscience-stricken. I was unsatisfied; no more time, no more pie.

"Gosh, that pie was good, wasn't it, 'Pod'?" This was a nickname my
brother was pleased to call me by.

"Jinks, I wish you had brought more. Why didn't you try and get two?"

"Well," I said, faltering, "you--you see, I--I didn't have time enough."

"Well, how did you get it, anyway?"

"Oh! I got it on tick." And then I walked over to a stump, thinking I
would get away from his questions and all the time revolving in my mind
whether I should tell him the truth, or say I had lost it. I felt ashamed
of myself and thought what a darned fool I was. I concluded I wasn't a bit
smart--the idea of giving a watch for a pie! Finally, Charley came over to
me.

"What time is it, Pod?"

"I--I don't know!"

"Why, ain't the watch going?"

"Yes-s. No, it's gone."

"Gone! What do you mean?" And then divining the truth, he exclaimed:
"Gor-ram it, did you sell the watch for that pie?"

"Yes, Charley, I did, but I couldn't help it; I knew you wanted the pie so
bad."

"Gor-rammed little fool; didn't you know better than that?"

Then I saw the great big tears come into his eyes, and I couldn't stand
it. I patted him on the back and said: "Never mind, Charley. I'll go and
get the watch back if I have to kill the pie man." So off I started on the
dead run, caught the fellow just as he was ready to go. I asked him if I
could ride to the rear with him. He answered, "Yes, and you can show me
how to get into that turnip watch." So I climbed on to the seat beside him
and we started. I took the watch apart, showed him how it was wound, set
and regulated it, and was about to hand it back to him, when a shell burst
a short way from us, which frightened his horse so that he cramped the
wagon and upset it, and in the confusion I got lost with the watch. On the
next day I gave it to my brother and told him how I had obtained it. He
laughed at me, and said he "guess I'd better keep it myself," and so put
it in his pocket. That night the regiment went into action, and my brother
was slightly wounded several times. One shot would have proved fatal, but
the watch received the bullet and the wound proved fatal only to the
watch; it was smashed all to pieces. But my brother prizes the pieces now
more than he ever did the whole watch.

The next day my regiment was ordered to the front again. I made up my mind
I would not go with them. I concluded I needed rest in order to
recuperate, so when the regiment started I bade my brother good-bye, gave
him a parting kiss and God's blessings, so off I started.

About a half a mile from my regiment I came to one of those Virginia
fences, got up on top of it, and sat thinking, and while sitting there the
shells began to fly pretty thick. I thought I had better be moving, jumped
down, and as I did so a shell struck one of the rails of the fence. A
piece of the rail struck me and was harder than I was, for when I came to
my senses I found I was in the hospital. I didn't think I was hurt very
badly, but when I tried to get up, found I couldn't. From there they moved
me to "Balfour Hospital" at Portsmouth, Virginia. I never will forget the
shame and mortification I felt at the sight I must have presented when the
boat that conveyed us to Portsmouth arrived.

An old negro came to my bunk and took me on his back, and with a boot in
each hand dangling over his shoulder he carried me pickaback through the
streets to the hospital, a large, fine building, formerly the "Balfour
Hotel," and converted into a hospital after Portsmouth was captured. They
took me up stairs into what was formerly the dining-room but now filled
with over two hundred little iron beds, and each bed occupied by a wounded
soldier. Everything in and about the place was as neat as wax. They
carried me to a vacant bed near the center of the room, and I noticed the
next bed to mine had several tin dishes hanging over it, suspended from
the ceiling. These were filled with water, and from a small hole punctured
in the bottom the water would slowly but constantly drip upon some poor
fellow's wound to keep it moist. I had just sat down on the side of my
bed, when I was startled by the sound of a familiar voice. "Hello, cully!
What you been doin', playing with one of those d--d shells, too?"

No, I replied, the shells were playing with me. Then I recognized the
occupant of the next bed as my drummer boy acquaintance who had his hands
blown off a week ago. What a strange thing that we should be brought
together side by side again, both wounded with a shell and nearly on the
same spot.

He had changed wonderfully; his little white pinched face told too plainly
the suffering he had endured. I asked him how he was getting along.

"Oh I'm getting along pretty d--d fast. I guess I'll croak in a few days."

"Oh you musn't talk that way, you'll be all right in a little while."

"Oh, no, cully, I know better. I'm a goner; I know it. I don't want to
live, anyhow. What in h--l is the good of a man without hands?" Then
turning his bandaged head towards me, his eyes filling with tears. "I aint
afraid to die, cul., but I would like to see my old mother first. Do you
think I will?"

Oh, yes, I said, no doubt of it; at the same time I felt that his days
were numbered, but I wanted to make him feel as comfortable as possible.
He was so much worse off than I, that I forgot my own injuries and was
eager to assist him all I could. After a few minutes silence--

"Say, cully, reach under my pillow and find a little book there; it's a
little Testament that my dear old mother gave me; read a little for me,
will you please? You'll find a place mother marked for me, read that,
please."

I turned the leaves over till I found a little white ribbon pinned to a
leaf, marking the verse beginning, "Suffer little children to come unto
me." I started to read for him, but the tears filled my eyes. I had to
stop, and as I did so, I noticed he seemed very quiet. I glanced at him,
and the open, staring eyes and the rigid drawn features told me too
plainly that the little fellow was out of his sufferings:--he was dead!

  "Mother" was the countersign on his lips so thin,
  And the sentry in heaven _must_ let him in.

I remained here three weeks, finally got up and around and began to think
I had enough of soldier life. I had everything I wished for; some ladies
in the town--God bless them, I never will forget them--visited the
hospital occasionally, and they always took pains to bring me flowers or
goodies of some kind. (Pardon me, but somehow I was always a favorite with
ladies.) Well, after remaining there three or four weeks I concluded I
didn't want to go to the front, so I sat down and wrote a personal letter
to Secretary Stanton, told him who, how, and what I was, and asked him to
advise me what to do; if I should go to the front or home. Soon after, a
special order came back from him to have me transferred to the "2nd
Battalion Veteran Reserve Corps."

Let me here state to those who do not understand; all soldiers who were
sick or wounded, unfit for field service were transferred to the Veteran
Reserve Corps, for the purpose of doing light guard duty in camp, or at
headquarters; they were divided into two battalions, 1st and 2nd. The 1st
battalion was supposed to be able to carry a musket for duty, while the
2nd battalion was composed of one-armed men or totally disabled soldiers,
and were supplied with a small sword; and thus I was condemned by special
order; however I liked it. I had an easy time, nothing to do, and others
to help me.

I continued here for about two months, until the hospital was ordered to
be removed to Old Point Comfort. I had become a great favorite of
Lieutenant Russell, the officer in charge of the hospital, and a nice man
he was. When the order came to move, the fixtures, furniture, in fact
everything in and about the building was ordered to be sold. I was
detailed by Lieutenant Russell to remain behind and superintend the sale
of the stuff, keep accounts, make a report when all was sold, and turn
over the proceeds. That detained me there two weeks longer. I sold the
beds, dishes, tables, everything. There remained about thirty tons of coal
in the yard to be disposed of. I sold it in any quantity to poor people;
took any price for it I could get, the same as everything else. Finally,
everything was sold off, and I was ready to depart the next day for Old
Point Comfort. In the evening, the two men I had with me and myself, used
to get our pipes and sit in front of the office and smoke. We were sitting
there talking about the sale, when it occurred to me that I had overlooked
the "deadhouse." We went back to it and found seven coffins. What was to
be done; they must be sold, as they must be accounted for, and we were
going to depart early in the morning. The street was crowded at that time
in the evening, so I took the coffins and stood them up on the sidewalk,
and everyone that passed by, I would ask him if he wanted to buy a
coffin. Finally, I struck a man who offered me seven dollars for the lot,
and I took it quick. I learned afterward he was an undertaker.

The next day I landed and reported to headquarters at Fortress Monroe. A
day or two after, Lieutenant Russell sent for me; he wanted a foreman in
the Government Printing Office. I was down for occupation on the pay-roll
as a printer. He asked me if I understood the business. I said yes, I had
some knowledge of it, so I was detailed with an extra eight dollars per
month. I took charge of the office at once. The first day I had orders to
print fifty thousand official envelopes. The press-boy brought me the
proof, I looked it over, and marked it correct; they were printed and sent
to headquarters.

A few days after Lieutenant Russell sent for me to report at his office. I
didn't know what was up. Thought perhaps I was going to be sent to
Washington to take charge of the Government Printing Office there. As I
went in, the lieutenant turned to me with a quizzical smile on his face:

"Young man, you told me you were a printer?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you 'O. K.' this job?" passing one of the envelopes he held in his
hand.

"Yes sir," I answered.

"Umph! Is it correct?"

"Yes, sir."

"It is, eh?"

"Yes-s, sir."

"Umph! how do you spell business?"


[Illustration: _Fortress Monroe where Jefferson Davis was Incarcerated._]


"B-u-i-s-n-e-ss," said I.

"You do, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well," said he in an imperative manner, "our government sees fit to
differ with you. You will go to your office and print fifty thousand more,
but see that you spell business right, and bring me the proof. The lot you
have printed we will send to Washington, and recommend that they be made
into a paper mache statue of yourself, and label it 'Buisness' or the only
government printer."

I was a little chagrined at the mistake, but did not take it to heart; but
I was soon relieved by a man who was more careful in his spelling. A week
or so after leaving the printing office, I was sent to the fort to act as
a kind of a companion to the confederate president, Jefferson Davis. I was
instructed to walk and talk with him. I presume I was intended for a sort
of guard. Perhaps our government wished to make him feel as if he were not
under surveillance, and so placed one whose insignificant appearance would
put him at his ease. However, I found it a very agreeable occupation. One
of the most pleasant weeks I ever passed was with Mr. Jefferson Davis. He
was a most agreeable man to me. He gave me lots of good advice, and I
learned more from conversation with him about national affairs than I ever
expected to know; and if I ever become president I will avail myself of
the advice and teaching of that great man. He pointed out the right and
wrong paths for young men; urged me above all things to adhere strictly
to honesty and integrity; to follow these two principles, and I would
succeed in business and become great and respected. I thanked him for his
kind advice, and pressed his hand good-bye. "Good-bye, my boy," said he.
"You have been a comfort to me in my loneliness and sorrow. God bless you,
my boy, God bless you!" A great, big something came up in my throat as I
turned and left him, and I have regretted all my life that I was not
fortunate enough to have the pleasure of meeting him again before he
passed away; for I assure you, indulgent readers and comrades, that no
matter what he had done, or what mistakes he had made, his memory will
always find a warm spot in the heart of that little Drummer Boy from
Maine.

One day, soon after this I sauntered down to the steamboat landing and was
leisurly beguiling my time with a very large cigar. I noticed some
commotion in the harbor but paid more attention to the cigar than anything
else. Finally a large ocean steamer came in sight, rounded up near the
wharf and let go her anchor. Very soon a "cutter" was lowered manned with
sailors and pulled with steady stroke toward the wharf. While watching and
wondering what they were going to do with the soldiers which I saw the
vessel was loaded with, the "gig" or "cutter" neared the wharf, then I
noticed particularly the young officer who sat in the stern, he was very
dictatorial and pompous in his orders to the sailors, so much so that I
said to myself, that fellow is putting on lots of airs; he thinks he's
some pumpkins, I wish he'd fall overboard.

They finally reached the foot of the stairs, which led to the wharf. The
young officer espied me and standing up in the boat shading his eyes with
his hand seemed carefully contemplating me. I wondered if it could be
possible that he had defined my wish and would have me arrested when he
landed; perhaps it was the cigar that attracted his attention. It was
against orders to smoke on the wharf, and such a big cigar in a boy's
mouth looked very much out of place, but I wasn't going to give it up, and
puffed more vigorously than ever. Just then the "cutter" touched the
stairs that led up to the wharf with a bump, and the young officer with
his handsome uniform turned a back-summersault overboard. It tickled me to
death; I sat down and laughed to see him floundering to reach the stairs.
I clapped my hands and cried, "Good, good!" He finally reached the stairs,
clambered up onto them, but they being very slippery from the slime left
by the ebbing tide, he lost his footing, his heels went into the air, and
down again headfirst he went into the ocean. I think he went clear to the
bottom, for when he came up he was covered over with sea grass and mud. I
laughed harder than before; everybody laughed, even the sailors, they
couldn't help it, and when they fished him out he was a sight! The starch
was out of his clothes, but not his pomposity. He roundly blamed the poor
sailors. I sang out: "It wasn't their fault; what are you blaming them
for?" He looked at me and shook his fist. "Well, it wasn't!" and I
thought to myself if I were they I would push him in again. I then made up
my mind I had better run, but I was so convulsed with laughter that I
couldn't move. Hurriedly but cautiously climbing the slippery stairs, he
made his way straight for me. I was still laughing, so hearty that my eyes
were dimmed with tears! but I still puffed away at the big cigar. He
looked at me for a moment, then hitting the cigar knocked it overboard, at
the same time exclaiming, "You're too young to smoke. What you laughing
at? Why don't you salute me? Discipline! I'll teach you discipline,
confound you," at the same time boxing my ears. "You 'gorramed' little
cuss, why don't you salute me?" At the word "Gorrame" I recovered myself,
looked up and recognized my brother; he had been promoted since I saw him,
had raised a full beard and was in command of a regiment on his way to New
Orleans and had run into Fortress Monroe for orders and hoping to find me.
I was more than pleased to see him, but wouldn't salute him until he had
soundly cuffed my ears and threatened to throw me into the water.

When he was ready to depart he gave me a cigar and told me I could smoke
it after he had gone, but I didn't; just as he was getting into the
"cutter," I gave it to the Boatswain. I don't know, but I believe that
cigar was loaded.

Soon after this episode, peace was declared, and the orders came to
discharge all soldiers and send them to their respective homes, and on the
30th day of June, 1865, the boy who had worked so hard to get mustered
into the service of Uncle Sam was discharged and mustered out. Then I went
home to my dear, anxious family. I was not all covered with glory and I
did not feel that I had saved my country, but was satisfied that I had not
killed anyone; satisfied that I had furnished some little comfort and good
cheer to my comrades during their hardships, and above all that I had
learned the glorious distinction of being entitled to wear one of those
little bronze buttons made from captured cannons and symbolic of the
G. A. R.


[Illustration: Fac-simile of a descriptive list belonging to Mr. Ulmer.
The original is six times larger and was plowed up with other documents by
an old negro on the battle field in front of Petersburg, twelve years
after the war. While Mr. Ulmer was playing an engagement at the theatre in
Norfolk, the negro presented himself with the document all in pieces. Mr.
Ulmer gave him $100 as a reward, had the pieces put together on parchment
and it is now in a good state of preservation. The document is certainly a
great relic; some portions of it are almost obliterated by mildew and
exposure. The supposition is that the officer who had it in his possession
was killed and the papers buried with him.]


Having spoken so often of my brother, some one may ask and wonder what
became of him.

During the war our soldiers would often receive little useful articles,
such as stockings, shirts, etc., made by the ladies who formed themselves
into societies all over the country and furnished these things for
distribution among the soldiers at the front. The young ladies had a great
craze at that time of marking their names or initials upon whatever they
made. One day my brother received a pair of hand-knit stockings with a
little tag sewed on each of them, and written on the tags the letters
L. A. D., Islesboro, Maine. They were so acceptable at the time that he
declared that if he lived to get out of the army, he would be "gorramed"
if he didn't find the girl that built those stockings, and kiss her for
them. He began writing to Islesboro, making inquiries, and received
several letters signed "Tab." He was determined not to give it up,
however, and when mustered out, the first thing he did, was to go to
Islesboro, Maine, to find "Tab." He found her, she was a schoolma'm, and
soon after married her, and they are now living way out in Port Angeles in
the State of Washington happy as bugs in a rug, and every meal time you
can find several little "Tabs" around the table, some large enough to tell
the story of how Pa found Ma, and a great desire to try the same thing
themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

The unhappy war was over. The soldier boy returned. I arrived home at the
little farm, found a royal, loving welcome from my father and brothers,
and more than any other, my little step-sister, who never got tired of
stories of my experience. She would sit for hours, begging me to tell her
more. She was always with me wherever I would go. She was full of
admiration for me. I was a hero in her eyes; I could not dispel her fancy,
and I didn't try, for she seemed the sunshine of my life. She plodded with
me through all my ups and downs; through the snow and ice of winter,
making summer for me the year round, and she is now my little wife.

I must stop here, or I may go too far into a history of my life, which I
did not intend. I know it would be uninteresting, but will simply add that
myself and wife adopted the stage as a profession, and still follow it. I
have just completed a play entitled, "The Volunteer" which I shall soon
submit for public approval.

       *       *       *       *       *

My recollections are finished--for they are but recollections of a time
that "tried men's souls." In looking back o'er the path of life there is a
melancholy pleasure, to me, at least, in contemplating the shattered
shards of many an air built castle,--inhaling the perfumes of flowers long
since faded and dead. If these reflections have served to beguile one
moment of "ennui" for an idle reader--if they have recalled one incident
of "derring doe" to a whilesome comrade, I am satisfied that my purpose is
accomplished.


[Illustration]




CACTUS CREAM

The Most Elegant and Delicate Preparation for the skin ever discovered.

                           { FRECKLES,
                           { BLACKHEADS,
  IT POSITIVELY REMOVES:   { PIMPLES,
                           { MORPHEW,
                           { TAN,

And all Blemishes of Cuticle.

-- -- CACTUS CREAM Is used all over the world in preference to any other
preparation for the complexion. A beautiful effect is discernible after
the first application, and its continued use only increases the beauty of
the skin until an exquisite complexion is obtained.

For Creating, Restoring, Preserving and Insuring Beauty,

Nothing has ever been found one-half so effective and satisfactory as
Cactus Cream. By its use the roughest skin is made to rival the pure
radiant texture of Youthful Beauty. Redness, Pimples and Blotches are
quickly overcome by the healing and cooling properties of Cactus Cream,
and a satin-like smoothness of the skin of great beauty is soon acquired.

Sunburn, Freckles and Tan removed by faithfully applying Cactus Cream.

Applied to the Neck, Arms and Hands, it gives an appearance of Graceful
Rotundity, as well as Pearly Blooming Purity.

Cactus Cream eradicates everything that mars the beauty of the complexion
and adds the tint of the lily. Gentlemen find it cool and refreshing when
used after shaving. All Barbers use it.

  FOR SALE BY DRUGGISTS, HAIR DRESSERS, Etc.,
  25 CENTS PER BOTTLE,

  Prepaid by Mail to any Address.

  CHILES & CO.,
  SOLE MANUFACTURERS AND PROPRIETORS.
  CHICAGO.
  718 CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.




WE COMMEND RICKSECKER'S PERFUMES.

THE BEST MADE.

  "MARTHA WASHINGTON"
  "FLORAL CHIMES"
  "GOLDEN GATE"
  "FLORIDA BREEZE"
  "DAMASK ROSE"
  "EDGEWOOD VIOLETS"

ALL DRUGGISTS KEEP THESE PERFUMES, ASK FOR THEM AND TAKE NO OTHER.




Read This Carefully.

When you arrive in Chicago, stop at the best hotel in the world, the

"SHERMAN HOUSE"

EVERY ROOM SPACIOUS AND ELEGANTLY FURNISHED!

THE CUSINE IS UNEXCELLED!

_Agreeable courteous clerks, attentive waiters, and meals served
without spoiling. In fact a hotel you feel at home in._

RATES: $3.00, $3.50, $4.00, $4.50 and $5.00.

SPECIAL RATES TO THE THEATRICAL PROFESSION.

CENTRAL LOCATION: COR. CLARK AND RANDOLPH STREETS.

J. IRVING PEARCE, PROPRIETOR.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Unpaired quotation marks have been silently matched.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "wont" corrected to "won't" (page 14)
  "everbody" corrected to "everybody" (page 36)
  "could'nt" corrected to "couldn't" (page 48)
  "a lacrity" corrected to "alacrity" (page 56)
  "the the" corrected to "the" (page 64)
  "comotion" corrected to "commotion" (page 72)
  "first" corrected to "fist" (page 74)
  "Huriedly" corrected to "Hurriedly" (page 74)
  "untill" corrected to "until" (page 74)
  "n" corrected to "in" (image between pages 74 and 75)
  "fe l" corrected to "feel" (advertisements)

Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies in
spelling, hyphenation, and apostrophe usage have been retained.

Spelling/printing errors were corrected only if the same word was used
correctly elsewhere in the text.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES AND REMINISCENCES OF A VOLUNTEER; OR, A DRUMMER BOY FROM MAINE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.