Produced by Emmy, Tor Martin Kristiansen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)








[Illustration: "At night we descended into the depths of the steamer to
worship with the steerage passengers." Page 23]




AN

AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD.

BY

ADELINE TRAFTON.

_ILLUSTRATED_

_BY MISS L. B. HUMPHREY._

          BOSTON:
          LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS.
          NEW YORK:
          LEE, SHEPARD AND DILLINGHAM.




          Entered, according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1872,
          BY LEE AND SHEPARD,
          In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.


          Electrotyped at the Boston Stereotype Foundry,
          No. 19 Spring Lane.




          I DEDICATE

          This Record of Pleasant Days

          TO MY FATHER,

          REV. MARK TRAFTON.




BOOKS FOR "OUR GIRLS."

THE GIRLHOOD SERIES.

By Popular Authors.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD.

By ADELINE F. TRAFTON. 16mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

One of the most bright, chatty, wide-awake books of travel ever written.
It abounds in information, is as pleasant reading as a story book, and
full of the wit and sparkle of "An American Girl" let loose from school
and ready for a frolic.


ONLY GIRLS.

By VIRGINIA F. TOWNSEND, Author of "That Queer Girl," &c., &c. 12mo,
cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"It is a thrilling story, written in a fascinating style, and the plot
is adroitly handled."

It might be placed in any Sabbath School library, so pure is it in tone,
and yet it is so free from the mawkishness and silliness that mar the
class of books usually found there, that the veteran novel reader is apt
to finish it at a sitting.


THE DOCTOR'S DAUGHTER.

By SOPHIE MAY, Author of "Our Helen," "The Asbury Twins," &c. 12mo,
cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"A delightful book, original and enjoyable," says the _Brownville Echo_.

"A fascinating story, unfolding, with artistic touch, the young life of
one of our impulsive, sharp-witted, transparent and pure-minded girls of
the nineteenth century," says _The Contributor_, Boston.


SALLY WILLIAMS.

=The Mountain Girl.= By Mrs. EDNA D. CHENEY, Author of "Patience,"
"Social Games," "The Child of the Tide," &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated.
$1.50.

Pure, strong, healthy, just what might be expected from the pen of so
gifted a writer as Mrs. Cheney. A very interesting picture of life among
the New Hampshire hills, enlivened by the tangle of a story of the ups
and downs of every-day life in this out-of-the-way locality. The
characters introduced are quaintly original, and the adventures are
narrated with remarkable skill.


LOTTIE EAMES.

=Or, do your best and leave the rest.= By a Popular Author. 16mo, illus.
$1.50.

"A wholesome story of home life, full of lessons of self-sacrifice, but
always bright and attractive in its varied incidents."


RHODA THORNTON'S GIRLHOOD.

By Mrs. MARY E. PRATT. 16mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

A hearty and healthy story, dealing with young folks and home scenes,
with sleighing, fishing and other frolics to make things lively.


_The above six volumes are furnished in a handsome box, for $9.00, or
sold separately by all booksellers, or sent by mail, postpaid, on
receipt of price by_

          LEE AND SHEPARD, Publishers,      Boston.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                           PAGE

  I.

  "At night we descended into the depths of the steamer
     to worship with the steerage passengers."      FRONTISPIECE.


  II.

  "A dozen umbrellas were tipped up; the rain fell
     fast upon a dozen upturned, expectant faces."           57


  III.

  "At the word of command they struck the most
     extraordinary attitudes."                              157


  IV.

  "Frowsy, sleepy, cross, and caring nothing
     whatever for the sun, moon, or stars, we stood
     like a company of Bedlamites, ankle deep in
     the wet grass upon the summit."                        176


  V.

  "Evidently the little old woman is going a
     journey."                                              196


  VI.

  "Together we stared at him with rigid and severe
     countenances."                                         240




CONTENTS.


          CHAPTER I.

          ABOARD THE STEAMER.

          We two alone.--"Good by."--"Are you the captain of this
             ship?"--Wretchedness.--The jolly Englishman and the
             Yankee.--A sail!--The Cattle-man.--The Jersey-man
             whose bark was on the sea.--Church services under
             difficulties.--The sweet young English face.--Down
             into the depths to worship.--"Beware! I stand by
             the parson."--Singing to the fishes.--Green Erin.--One
             long cheer.--Farewell, Ireland.                         13


          CHAPTER II.

          FIRST DAYS IN ENGLAND.

          Up the harbor of Liverpool.--We all emerge as
             butterflies.--The Mersey tender.--Lot's
             wife.--"Any tobacco?"--"Names, please."--St.
             George's Hall.--The fashionable promenade.--The
             coffee-room.--The military man who showed the
             purple tide of war in his face.--The railway
             carriage.--The young man with hair all
             aflame.--English villages.--London.--No place
             for us.--The H. house.--The Babes in the
             Wood.--The party from the country.--We are taken
             in charge by the Good Man.--The Golden
             Cross.--Solitary confinement.--Mrs. B.'s at last.       27


          CHAPTER III.

          EXCURSIONS FROM LONDON.

          Strange ways.--"The bears that went over to
             Charlestown."--The delights of a runaway without
             its dangers.--Flower show at the Crystal
             Palace.--Whit-Monday at Hampton Court.--A queen
             baby.--"But the carpets?"--Poor Nell Gwynne.--Vandyck
             faces.--Royal beds.--Lunch at the King's Arms.--O
             Music, how many murders have been committed in thy
             name!--Queen Victoria's home at Windsor.--A new
             "house that Jack built."--The Round Tower.--Stoke
             Pogis.--Frogmore.--The Knights of the Garter.--The
             queen's gallery.--The queen's plate.--The royal
             mews.--The wicker baby-wagons.--The state equipages.    43


          CHAPTER IV.

          SIGHT-SEEING IN LONDON.

          The Tower.--The tall Yankee of inquiring mind.--Our
             guide in gorgeous array.--War trophies.--Knights
             in armor.--A professional joke.--The crown
             jewels.--The room where the little princes were
             smothered.--The "Traitor's Gate."--The Houses of
             Parliament.--What a throne is like.--The
             "woolsack."--The Peeping Gallery for
             ladies.--Westminster Hall and the law courts.--The
             three drowsy old women.--The Great Panjandrum
             himself.--Johnson and the pump.--St.
             Paul's.--Wellington's funeral car.--The Whispering
             Gallery.--The bell.                                     55


          CHAPTER V.

          AWAY TO PARIS.

          The wedding party.--The canals.--New Haven.--Around
             the tea-table.--Separating the sheep from the
             goats.--"Will it be a rough passage?"--Gymnastic
             feats of the little steamer.--O, what were officers
             to us?--"Who ever invented earrings?"--Dieppe.--
             Fish-wives.--Train for Paris.--Fellow-passengers.--
             Rouen.--Babel.--Deliverance.                            68


          CHAPTER VI.

          THE PARIS OF 1869.

          The devil.--Cathedrals and churches.--The Louvre.--Modern
             French art.--The Beauvais clock, with its droll, little
             puppets.--Virtue in a red gown.--The Luxembourg
             Palace.--The yawning statue of Marshal Ney.--Gay life
             by gas-light.--The Imperial Circus.--The Opera.--How
             the emperor and empress rode through the streets after
             the riots.--The beautiful Spanish woman whose face was
             her fortune.--Napoleon's tomb.                          76


          CHAPTER VII.

          SIGHTS IN THE BEAUTIFUL CITY.

          The Gobelin tapestry.--How and where it is made.--Père
             La-Chaise.--Poor Rachel!--The baby establishment.--"Now
             I lay me."--The little mother.--The old woman who lived
             in a shoe.--The American chapel.--Beautiful women and
             children.--The last conference meeting.--"I'm a
             proof-reader, I am."                                    90


          CHAPTER VIII.

          SHOW PLACES IN THE SUBURBS OF PARIS.

          The river omnibuses.--Sèvres and its porcelain.--St.
             Cloud as it was.--The crooked little town.--
             Versailles.--Eugenie's "spare bedroom."--The queen
             who played she was a farmer's wife.--Seven miles of
             paintings.--The portraits of the presidents.           100


          CHAPTER IX.

          A VISIT TO BRUSSELS.

          To Brussels.--The old and new city.--The paradise and
             purgatory of dogs.--The Hôtel de Ville and Grand
             Place.--St. Gudule.--The picture galleries.--Wiertz
             and his odd paintings.--Brussels lace and an hour
             with the lace-makers.--How the girls found Charlotte
             Brontë's school.--The scene of "Villette."             109


          CHAPTER X.

          WATERLOO AND THROUGH BELGIUM.

          To Waterloo.--Beggars and guides.--The Mound.--Chateau
             Hougomont.--Victor Hugo's "sunken road."--Antwerp.--A
             visit to the cathedral.--A drive about the city.--An
             excursion to Ghent.--The funeral services in the
             cathedral.--"Poisoned? Ah, poor man!"--The
             watch-tower.--The Friday-market square.--The
             nunnery.--Longfellow's pilgrims to "the belfry of
             Bruges."                                               122


          CHAPTER XI.

          A TRIP THROUGH HOLLAND.

          Up the Meuse to Rotterdam.--Dutch sights and
             ways.--The pretty milk-carriers.--The
             tea-gardens.--Preparations for the Sabbath.--An
             English chapel.--"The Lord's barn."--From Rotterdam
             to the Hague.--The queen's "House in the
             Wood."--Pictures in private drawing-rooms.--The
             bazaar.--An evening in a Dutch tea-garden.--Amsterdam
             to a stranger.--The "sights."--The Jews' quarter.--The
             family whose home was upon the canals.--Out of the
             city.--The pilgrims.                                   134


          CHAPTER XII.

          THE RHINE AND RHENISH PRUSSIA.

          First glimpse of the Rhine.--Cologne and the
             Cathedral.--"Shosef in ter red coat."--St. Ursula
             and the eleven thousand virgins.--Up the Rhine to
             Bonn.--The German students.--Rolandseck.--A search
             for a resting-place.--Our Dutch friend and his
             Malays.--The story of Hildegund.--A quiet Sabbath.--
             Our Dutch friend's reply.--Coblentz.--The bridge of
             boats.--Ehrenbreitstein, over the river.--A scorching
             day upon the Rhine.--Romance under difficulties.--
             Mayence.--Frankfort.--Heidelberg.--The ruined
             castle.--Baden-Baden.--A glimpse at the gambling.--The
             new and the old "Schloss."--The Black Forest.--
             Strasbourg.--The mountains.                            147


          CHAPTER XIII.

          DAYS IN SWITZERLAND.

          The Lake of Lucerne.--Days of rest in the city.--An
             excursion up the Righi.--The crowd at the summit.--
             Dinner at midnight.--Rising before "the early
             worm."--The "sun-rise" according to Murray.--Animated
             scarecrows.--Off for a tour through Switzerland.--The
             lake for the last time.--Grütlii.--William Tell's
             chapel.--Fluellen.--Altorf.--Swiss haymakers.--An hour
             at Amsteg.--The rocks close in.--The Devil's Bridge.--
             The dangerous road.--"A carriage has gone over the
             precipice!"--Andermatt.--Desolate rocks.--Exquisite
             wild flowers.--The summit of the Furka.--A descent to
             the Rhone glacier.--Into the ice.--Swiss villages.--
             Brieg.--The convent inn.--The bare little chapel on the
             hill.--To Martigny.                                    168


          CHAPTER XIV.

          AMONG THE EVERLASTING HILLS.

          The quaint inn.--The Falls of the Sallenches, and the
             Gorge de Trient.--Shopping in a Swiss village.--A
             mule ride to Chamouni.--Peculiarities of the
             animals.--Entrance to the village.--Egyptian mummies
             lifted from the mules.--Rainy days.--Chamois.--The
             Mer de Glace.--"Look out of your window."--Mont
             Blanc.--Sallenches.--A diligence ride to Geneva.--Our
             little old woman.--The clownish peasant.--The fork in
             the road.--"Adieu."                                    189


          CHAPTER XV.

          LAST DAYS IN SWITZERLAND.

          Geneva.--Calvin and jewelry.--Up Lake Leman.--Ouchy and
             Lausanne.--"Sweet Clarens."--Chillon.--Freyburg.--
             Sight-seers.--The Last Judgment.--Berne and its
             bears.--The town like a story.--The Lake of Thun.--
             Interlaken.--Over the Wengern Alp.--The Falls of
             Giessbach.--The Brunig Pass.--Lucerne again.           201


          CHAPTER XVI.

          BACK TO PARIS ALONE.

          Coming home.--The breaking up of the party.--We start
             for Paris alone.--Basle, and a search for a hotel.--
             The twilight ride.--The shopkeeper whose wits had
             gone "a wool-gathering."--"Two tickets for Paris."--
             What can be the matter now?--Michel Angelo's Moses.--
             Paris at midnight.--The kind _commissionaire_.--The
             good French gentleman and his fussy little wife.--A
             search for Miss H.'s.--"Come up, come up."--"Can women
             travel through Europe alone?" A word about a woman's
             outfit.                                                220




AN

AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD.




CHAPTER I.

ABOARD THE STEAMER.

          We two alone.--"Good by."--"Are you the captain of
          this ship?"--Wretchedness.--The jolly Englishman
          and the Yankee.--A sail!--The cattle-man.--The
          Jersey-man whose bark was on the sea.--Church
          services under difficulties.--The sweet young
          English face.--Down into the depths to
          worship.--"Beware! I stand by the
          Parson."--Singing to the fishes.--Green Erin.--One
          long cheer.--Farewell Ireland.


WE were going to Europe, Mrs. K. and I--alone, with the exception of the
ship's company--unprotected, save by Him who watches over the least of
his creatures. We packed our one trunk, upon which both name and
nationality were conspicuously blazoned, with the necessaries, not
luxuries, of a woman's toilet, and made our simple preparations for
departure without a shadow of anxiety. "They who know nothing, fear
nothing," said the paterfamilias, but added his consent and blessing.
The rain poured in torrents as we drove down to the wharf. But floods
could not have dampened our enthusiasm. A wild Irishman, with a
suggestion of spirituous things in his air and general appearance,
received us at the foot of the plank, one end of which touched earth,
the other that unexplored region, the steamer. We followed the direction
of his dirty finger, and there fell from our eyes, as it were, scales.
In our ignorance, we had expected to find vast space, elegant
surroundings, glass, glare, and glitter. We peered into the contracted
quarters of the ladies' cabin. One side was filled with boxes and
bundles; the other, with the prostrate form of an old lady, her head
enveloped in a mammoth ruffle. We explored the saloon. The purser, with
a wen and a gilt-banded cap on his head, was flying about like one
distracted. An old gentleman similarly attired, with the exception of
the wen,--the surgeon as we afterwards learned,--read a large book
complacently in one corner, murmuring gently to himself. His upper teeth
lacked fixity, so to speak; and as they fell with every word, he had the
appearance of gnashing them continually at the invisible author. There
was a hurrying to and fro of round, fresh-faced stewards in short
jackets, a pushing and pulling of trunks and boxes, the sudden
appearance and disappearance of nondescript individuals in slouched hats
and water-proofs, the stirring about of heavy feet upon the deck above,
the rattling of chains, the 'yo-ing' of hoarse voices, as the sailors
pulled at the ropes, and, with it all, that sickening odor of oil, of
dead dinners--of everything, so indescribable, so never-to-be-forgotten.
Somewhat saddened, and considerably enlightened upon the subject of
ocean steamers, we sought our state-room. It boasted two berths (the
upper conveniently gained by mounting the stationary wash-stand), and a
velvet-covered sofa beneath the large, square window, which last we
learned, months later, when reduced to a port-hole for light and air, to
appreciate. A rack and half a dozen hooks against the wall completed its
furniture.

The time of departure arrived. We said the two little words that bring
so many tears and heartaches, and ran up on the deck with the rain in
our faces, and something that was not all rain in our eyes, for one last
look at our friends; but they were hidden from sight. There comes to me
a dim recollection of attempting to mount to an inaccessible place: of
clinging to wet ropes with the intention of seeing the last of the land;
of thinking it, after a time, a senseless proceeding, and of resigning
ourselves finally to our berths and inevitable circumstances. Eight
bells and the dinner bell; some one darkened our doorway.

"What's this? Don't give it up so. D'ye hear the dinner bell?"

"Are--are you the captain of this ship?" gasped Mrs. K., feebly, from
the sofa.

"To be sure, madam. Don't give it up so."

Mrs. K. groaned. There came to me one last gleam of hope. What if it
were possible to brave it out! In a moment my feet were on the floor,
but whether my name were McGregor, or not, I could not tell. I made an
abortive attempt after the pretty hood, prepared with such pleasant
anticipations, and had a dim consciousness that somebody's hands tied it
about my head. Then we started. We climbed heights, we descended depths
indescribable, in that short walk to the saloon, and there was a queer
feeling of having a windmill, instead of a head, upon my shoulders. A
number of sympathizing faces were nodding in the most remarkable manner,
as we reached the door, and the tables performed antic evolutions.

"Take me back!" and the berth and the little round stewardess received
me. There followed a night of misery. One can form no idea, save from
experience, of the horrors of the first night upon an ocean steamer.
There are the whir, and buzz, and jar, and rattle, and bang of the screw
and engine; the pitching and rolling of the ship, with the sensation of
standing upright for a moment, and then of being made to rest
comfortably upon the top of your head; the sense of undergoing internal
somersaults, to say nothing of describing every known curve externally.
You study physiology involuntarily, and doubt if your heart, your lungs,
or indeed any of your internal organs, are firmly attached, after all;
if you shall not lose them at the next lurch of the ship. Your head is
burning with fever, your hands and feet like ice, and you feel dimly,
but wretchedly, that this is but the beginning of sorrows; that there
are a dozen more days to come. You are conscious of a vague wonder (as
the night lengthens out interminably) what eternity _can_ be, since time
is so long. The bells strike the half hours, tormenting you with
calculations which amount to nothing. Everything within the room, as
well as without, swings, and rolls, and rattles. You are confident your
bottles in the rack will go next, and don't much care if they do, though
you lie and dread the crash. You are tormented with thirst, and the
ice-water is in that same rack, just beyond your reach. The candle in
its silver case, hinged against the wall, swings back and forth with
dizzy motion, throwing moving distorted shadows over everything, and
making the night like a sickly day. You long for darkness, and, when at
last the light grows dim, until only a red spark remains and the smoke
that adds its mite to your misery, long for its return. At regular
intervals you hear the tramp, tramp, overhead, of the relieving watch;
and, in the midst of fitful slumbers, the hoarse voices of the sailors,
as the wind freshens and they hoist the sails, wake you from frightful
dreams. At the first gray dawn of light come the swash of water and the
trickling down of the stream against your window, with the sound of the
holy-stones pushed back and forth upon the deck. And with the light--O,
blessed light!--came to us a dawn of better things.

There followed days when we lay contented upon the narrow sofa, or
within the contracted berths, but when to lift our heads was woe. A kind
of negative blessedness--absence from misery. We felt as if we had lost
our heart, our conscience, and almost our immortal soul, to quote Mark
Twain. There remained to us only those principles and prejudices most
firmly rooted and grounded. Even our personal vanity left us at last,
and nothing could be more forsaken and appropriate than the plain green
gown with its one row of military buttons, attired in which, day after
day, I idly watched the faces that passed our door. "That's like you
Americans," said our handsome young Irish doctor, pointing to these same
buttons. "You can't leave your country without taking the spread-eagle
with you!"

Our officers, with this one exception, were English. Our captain, a
living representative of the traditional English sailor. Not young, save
in heart; simple, unaffected, and frank in manner, but with a natural
dignity that prevented undue familiarity, he sang about the ship from
morning till night, with a voice that could carry no air correctly, but
with an enjoyment delightful to witness--always a song suggested by
existing circumstances, but with

          "Cheer, boys, cheer; my mother's sold her mangle,"

when everything else failed. He was forward among the men on the deck
with an eye to the wind, down below bringing fruit and comfort to the
sick in the steerage, dealing out apples and oranges to the children,
with an encouraging word and the first line of a song for everybody.

The life of the ship was an Englishman, with the fresh complexion almost
invariably seen upon Englishmen, and forty years upon a head that looked
twenty-five. He was going home after a short tour through the United
States, with his mind as full of prejudices as his memorandum-book was
of notes. He chanced, oddly enough, to room with the genuine Yankee of
the company--a long, lean, good-natured individual from one of the
eastern states, "close on ter Varmont," who had a way of rolling his
eyes fearfully, especially when he glared at his food. He represented a
mowing machine company, and we called him "the Mowing Machine Man." He
accosted us one day, sidling up to our door, with, "How d'ye do to-day?"

"Better, thank you," I replied from the sofa.

"That's real nice. Tell ye what, we'll be glad to see the ladies out.
How's yer mar?" nodding towards the berth from which twinkled Mrs. K.'s
eyes. I laughed, and explained that our relations were of affection
rather than consanguinity. His interest increased when he found we were
travelling alone. He gave us his London address, evidently considering
us in the light of Daniels about to enter the lions' den. "Ef ye have
any trouble," said he, as he wrote down the street and number, "there's
one Yankee'll stand up for ye." He amused the Englishman by calling out,
"Hullo. D'ye feel _good_ this morning?" "No," would be the reply, with a
burst of laughter; "I feel awful wicked; think I'll go right out and
kill somebody."

There was a shout one morning, "A sail! See the stars and stripes!" I
had not raised my head for days, but staggered across the floor at that,
and clinging to the frame, thrust my head out of the window. Yes, there
was a ship close by, with the stars and stripes floating from the
mast-head, I found, when the roll of the steamer carried my window to
its level. "Seems good ter see the old rag!" I looked up to find the
Mowing Machine Man gazing upon it with eyes all afloat. "I'd been a
thinking," said he, "all them fellers have got somebody waiting for 'em
over there,"--our passengers were mostly English,--"but there wasn't
nobody a waiting for me. Tell ye what,"--and he shook out the folds of a
red and yellow handkerchief,--"it does my heart good ter see the old
flag." There was a bond of sympathy between us from that moment.

We had another and less agreeable specimen of this free people--a tall,
tough western cattle dealer, who quarrelled if he could find an
antagonist, swore occasionally, drank liquor, and chewed tobacco
perpetually, wore his trousers tucked into his long boots, his hands
tucked into his pockets, and, to crown these attributes, believed in
Andrew Johnson!--a middle-aged man, with soft, curling brown hair above
a face that could be cruelly cold and hard. His hair should have been
wire; his blue eyes were steel. But hard as was his face, it softened
and smoothed itself a little at sight of the sick women. He paused
beside us one day with a rough attempt to interest and amuse by
displaying a knife case containing a dozen different articles. "This is
ter take a stun out of a hoss's huf, and this, d'ye see, is a
tooth-pick;" putting it to immediate use by way of explanation. At the
table he talked long and loud upon the rinderpest, and other kindred and
appetizing topics. "I've been a butcher myself," he would say. "I've cut
up hundreds o' critters. What part of an ox, now, d'ye think that was
taken from?" pointing to the joint before him, and addressing a refined,
delicate-faced old gentleman across the table, who only stared in silent
horror.

But even the "Cattle Man" was less marked in his peculiarities than the
"Jersey Man," a melancholy-eyed, curly-wigged individual from the Jersey
shore, who wore his slouched hat upon one side of his head, and looked
as though he were doing the rakish lover in some fifth-rate theatre; who
was "in the musical line myself; Smith and Jones's organs, you know;
that's me;" and who, being neither Smith nor Jones, we naturally
concluded must be the organ. He recited poetry in a loud tone at
daybreak, and discussed politics for hours together, arguing in the most
satisfactory manner with the principles, and standing most willingly
upon the platform, of everybody. He assumed a patronizing air towards
the Mowing Machine Man. "Well, you _are_ a green Yankee," he would say;
"lucky for you that you fell in with me;" to which the latter only
chuckled, "That's so." He had much to tell of himself, of his
grandmother, and of his friends generally, who came to see him off;
"felt awfully, too," which we could hardly credit; rolled out snatches
of sentimental songs, iterating and reiterating that his bark was on the
sea,--and a most disagreeable one we found it; wished we had a piano on
board, to which we murmured, "The Lord forbid;" and hoped we should soon
be well enough to join him in the "White Squall." He was constantly
reminding us that we were a very happy family party, so "congenial," and
evidently agreed with the Mowing Machine Man, who said, "They're the
best set of fellows I ever see. They'll tell ye anything."

We numbered a clergyman among us, of course. "Always a head wind when
there's a parson aboard," say the sailors. So this poor dyspeptic little
man bore the blame of our constant adverse winds. Nothing more bigoted,
more fanatical than his religious belief could be imagined. You read the
terrors of the Lord in his eye; and yet he won respect, and something
more, by his consistency and zeal. Earnestness will tell. "The parson
will have great influence over the Cattle Man," the captain said,
Sabbath morning, as we were walking the deck. "The Cattle Man?" "Yes,
the parson will get a good hold of him." Just then, as if to prove the
old proverb true, that his satanic majesty is always in the immediate
neighborhood when his character is under discussion, the Cattle Man and
Jersey came up the companion-way. "If you please, captain," said the
former, "we are a committee to ask if the parson may preach to the
steerage people to-night." "Certainly," was the reply; "I will attend
myself." They thanked him, and went below, leaving me utterly amazed.
They were the last men upon the ship whom one would have selected as a
committee upon spiritual things!

The church service for the cabin passengers was held in the saloon. A
velvet cushion upon one end of the long table constituted the pulpit,
before which the minister stood, holding fast to the rack on either
side, and bracing himself against the captain's chair in the rear. Even
then he made, involuntarily, more bows than any ritualist, and the
scripture, "What went ye out for to see? A reed shaken by the wind?"
would present itself. The sailors in their neat dress filed in and
ranged themselves in one corner. The stewards gathered about the door,
one, with face like an owl, most conspicuous. The passengers filled
their usual seats, and a delegation from the steerage crept shyly into
the unoccupied space--women with shawls over their heads and babies in
their arms, shock-headed men and toddling children, but all with an
evident attempt at appropriate dress and manner. Among them was one
sweet young English face beneath an old crape bonnet. A pair of shapely
hands, which the shabby black gloves could not disguise, held fast a
little child. Widowhood and want in the old world; what was waiting her
in the new? The captain read the service, and all the people responded.
The women's eyes grew wet at the sound of the familiar words. The little
English widow bent her face over the head of the child in her lap, and
something glistened in its hair. Our sympathies grew wide, and we joined
in the prayer for the queen, that she might have victory over her
enemies, and even murmured a response to the petition for Albert Edward
and the nobility, dimly conscious that they needed prayers. The good
captain added a petition for the president of the United States, to
which the Mowing Machine Man and I said, "Amen." Then the minister,
having poised himself carefully, read a discourse, sulphurous but
sincere; the Mowing Machine Man thrusting his elbow into my side in a
most startling manner at every particularly blue point. We were
evidently in sympathy; but I could have dispensed with the expression of
it. We closed with the doxology, standing upon our feet and swaying back
and forth as though it had been a Shaker chant, led by an improvised
choir and the Jersey Man.

At night we descended into the depths of the steamer to worship with the
steerage passengers. It was like one of Rembrandt's pictures--the
darkness, the wild, strangely-attired people, the weird light from the
lanterns piercing the gloom, and bringing out group after group with
fearful distinctness; the pale, earnest face of the preacher, made
almost unearthly by the glare of the yellow light--a face with its
thin-drawn lips, its eyes like coals of fire such as the flames of
martyrdom lit once, I imagine. Close beside him stood the Cattle Man,
towering like Saul above the people, and with an air that plainly said,
"Beware--I stand by the parson."

          "There is a land of pure delight,"

repeated the minister; and in a moment the words rolled out of the
Cattle Man's mouth while he beckoned with his long arm for the people to
rise. Throwing back his head, he sang with an unction indescribable,
verse after verse, caught doubtless at some western camp-meeting, where
he had tormented the saints. One after another took up the strain. Clear
and strong came the tones from every dark corner, until, like one mighty
voice, while the steamer rolled and the waves dashed against its sides,
rose the words

          "Not Jordan's stream, nor death's cold flood,
            Shall fright us from that shore."

A great stillness fell upon the people as the minister gave out his
text, and began his discourse. He had lacked freedom in the saloon, but
here he forgot everything save the words given him; hard words they
seemed to me, containing little of the love of God. I glanced at the
Mowing Machine Man, who had made a seat of half a barrel under the
stairs. He winked in a fearful manner, as though he would say, "Just see
how he's a goin' on!" But the people received it gladly. One after
another of the sailors crept down the stairs and stood in the shadow. I
watched them curiously. It may be that this stern, hard doctrine suited
these stern, hard men. It made me shudder.

But the record of all these days would have no end. How can I tell of
the long, happy hours, when more than strength, when perfect
exhilaration, came to us; when existence alone was a delight? To sit
upon the low wheel-house, with wraps and ribbons and hair flying in the
wind, while we sang,--

          "O, a life on the ocean wave!"

to admiring fishes; to watch the long, lazy swell of the sea, or the
spray breaking from the tops of the white caps into tiny rainbows; to
walk the rolling deck for hours with never a shadow of weariness; to
cling to the flag-staff when the stern of the ship rose in the air then
dropped like a heavy stone into the sea, sending the spray far over and
above us; to count the stars at night, watching the other gleaming
phosphorescent stars that seemed to have fallen from heaven upon the
long wake of the steamer,--all this was a delight unspeakable.

One morning, when the land seemed a forgotten dream, we awoke to find
green Erin close beside us. All the day before the sea-gulls had been
hovering over us--beautiful creatures, gray above and white beneath,
clouds with a silver lining. Tiny land birds, too, flew about us,
resting wearily upon the rigging. The sea all at once became like glass.
It seemed like the book of Revelation when the sun shone on it,--the sea
of glass mingled with fire. For a time the land was but a line of rock,
with martello towers perched upon the points. On the right, Fastnet Rock
rose out of the sea, crowned with a light-house; then the gray barren
shore of Cape Clear Island, and soon the sharp-pointed Stag Rocks. It is
a treacherous coast. "I've been here many a night," said the captain, as
he gave us his glass, "when I never expected to see morning." And all
the while he was speaking, the sea smiled and smiled, as though it could
never be cruel.

We drew nearer and nearer, until we could see the green fields bounded
by stone walls, the white, winding roads, and little villages nestling
among the hills. Towards noon the lovely harbor of Queenstown opened
before us, surrounded and almost shut in by rocky islands. Through the
glass we could see the city, with its feet in the bay. We were no longer
alone. The horizon was dotted with sails. Sometimes a steamer crossed
our wake, or a ship bore down upon us. We hoisted our signals. We dipped
our flag. The sailors were busy painting the boats, and polishing the
brass till it shone again. Now the tender steams out from Queenstown.
The steerage passengers in unwonted finery, tall hats and unearthly
bonnets, and one in a black silk gown, are running about forward,
shaking hands, gathering up boxes and bundles, and pressing towards the
side which the tender has reached. There are the shouting of orders, the
throwing of a rope, and in a moment they are crowding the plank. One
long cheer, echoed from the stern of our steamer, and they are off.

All day we walked the deck; even the sick crawled up at last to see the
panorama. We still lingered when night fell, and we had turned away from
the land to strike across the channel, and the picture rests with me
now; the purple sky with one long stretch of purple, hazy cloud, behind
which the sun went down; the long, low line of purple rock, our last
glimpse of Ireland, and the shining, purple sea, with not a ripple upon
its surface.




CHAPTER II.

FIRST DAYS IN ENGLAND.

          Up the harbor of Liverpool.--We all emerge as
          butterflies.--The Mersey tender.--Lot's
          wife.--"Any tobacco?"--"Names, please."--St.
          George's Hall.--The fashionable promenade.--The
          coffee-room.--The military man who showed the
          purple tide of war in his face.--The railway
          carriage.--The young man with hair all
          aflame.--English villages.--London.--No place for
          us.--The H. house.--The Babes in the Wood.--The
          party from the country.--We are taken in charge by
          the Good Man.--The Golden Cross.--Solitary
          confinement.--Mrs. B.'s at last.


WE steamed up the harbor of Liverpool the next morning. New Brighton,
with its green terraces, its Chinese-pagoda villas, spread out upon one
side, upon the other that solid wall of docks, the barricade that breaks
the constant charges of the sea, with the masts of ships from every land
for an abattis. The wraps and shapeless garments worn so long were laid
aside; the pretty hood which had, like charity, covered so many sins of
omission, hidden, itself, at last, the soft wool stiffened with the sea
spray, the bright colors dimmed by smoke, and soot, and burning sun. We
crept shyly upon the deck in our unaccustomed finery, as though called
at a moment's notice to play another woman's part, half-learned. Not in
us alone was the transformation. The girl in blue had blossomed into a
bell--a blue bell. The Cattle Man, his hands released at last from the
thraldom of his pockets, stalked about, funereal, in wrinkled black. A
solferino neck-tie and tall hat of a pie-Adamite formation
transmogrified our Mowing Machine friend. Nondescripts, that had lain
about the deck wrapped in cocoons of rugs and shawls, emerged
suddenly--butterflies! A painful courtesy seized us all. We had doffed
the old familiar intercourse with our sea-garments. We gathered in
knots, or stood apart singly, mindful at last of our dignity.

The Mersey tender (a tender mercy to some) puffed out to meet us, and we
descended the plank as those who turn away from home, leaving much of
our thoughts, and something of our hearts, within the ship. It had been
such a place of rest, of blessed idleness! Only when our feet touched
the wharf did we take up the burden of life again. There were the
meeting of friends, in which we had no part; the maelstrom of horses,
and carts, and struggling humanity, in which we found a most unwilling
place; and then we followed fast in the footsteps of the Mowing Machine
Man, who in his turn followed a hair-covered trunk upon the shoulders of
a stout porter, our destination the custom-house shed close by. For a
moment, as we were tossed hither and thither by the swaying mass, our
desires followed our thoughts to a certain sheltered nook, upon a still,
white deck, with the sunbeams slanting down through the furled sails
above, with the lazy, lapping sea below, and only our own idle thoughts
for company. Then we remembered Lot's wife.

There was a little meek-faced custom-house officer in waiting, with a
voice so out of proportion to his size, that he seemed to have hired it
for the occasion, or come into it with his uniform by virtue of his
office. "Any tobacco?" he asked, severely, as we lifted the lid of our
one trunk. We gave a virtuous and indignant negative. That was all. We
might go our several ways now unmolested. One fervent expression of good
wishes among our little company, while we make for a moment a network of
clasped hands, and then we pass out of the great gates into our new
world, and into the clutches of the waiting cabmen. By what stroke of
good fortune we and our belongings were consigned to one and the same
cab, in the confusion and terror of the moment, we did not know at the
time. It was clearly through the intervention of a kind
fellow-passenger, who, seeing that amazement enveloped us like a
garment, kindly took us in charge. The dazed, as well as the lame and
lazy, are cared for, it seems. By what stroke of good fortune we ever
reached our destination, we knew still less. Our cab was a triumph of
impossibilities, uncertainties, and discomfort. Our attenuated beast,
like an animated hoop skirt, whose bones were only prevented, by the
encasing skin, from flying off as we turned the corners, experienced
hardly less difficulty in drawing his breath than in drawing his load.
We descended at the entrance to the hotel as those who have escaped from
imminent peril. We mounted the steps--two lone, but by no means lorn,
damsels, two anxious, but by no means aimless females, knowing little of
the world, less of travelling, and nothing whatever of foreign ways.
Our very air, as we entered the door, was an apology for the intrusion.

"Names, please," said the smiling man in waiting, opening what appeared
to be the book of fate. We added ours to the long list of pilgrims and
strangers who had sojourned here, dotting our i's and crossing our t's
in the most elegant manner imaginable. If any one has a doubt as to our
early advantages, let him examine the record of the Washington Hotel,
Liverpool. The heading, "Remarks," upon the page, puzzled us. Were they
to be of a sacred or profane nature? Of an autobiographical character?
Were they to refer to the dear land we had just left? Through some
political throes she had just brought forth a ruler. Should we add to
the U. S. against our names, "As well as could be expected"? We
hesitated,--and wrote nothing. Up the wide stairs, past the transparency
of Washington--in the bluest of blue coats, the yellowest of top boots,
and an air of making the best of an unsought and rather ridiculous
position--we followed the doily upon the head of the pretty chambermaid
to our wide, comfortable room, with its formidable, high-curtained beds.
The satchels and parcels innumerable were propped carefully into
rectitude upon the dressing table, under the impression that the ship
would give a lurch; and then, gazing out through the great plate glass
windows upon the busy square below, we endeavored to compose our
perturbed minds and gather our scattered wits.

It is not beautiful, this great city of Liverpool, creeping up from the
sea. It has little to interest a stranger aside from its magnificent
docks and warehouses. There are mammoth truck horses from Suffolk, with
feet like cart wheels; there is St. George's Hall, the pride of the
people, standing in the busy square of the same name, with a statue of
the saint himself--a terror to all dragons--just before it. It is gray,
many columned, wide stepped, vast in its proportions. Do you care for
its measurement? Having seen that, you are ready to depart; and, indeed,
there is nothing to detain one here beyond a day of rest, a moment to
regain composure after the tossing of the sea. There are some
substantial dwellings,--for commerce has its kings,--and some fine
shops,--for commerce also has its queens,--and one fine drive, of which
we learned too late. The air of endurance, which pervades the whole
city, as it does all cities in the old world, impresses one greatly, as
though they were built for eternity, not time; the founders having
forgotten that here we are to have no continuing city. In the new world,
man tears down and builds up. Every generation moulds and fashions its
towns and cities after its own desires, or to suit its own means. Man is
master. In the old world, one generation after another surges in and out
of these grim, gray walls, leaving not so much as the mark the waves
leave upon the rocks. Unchanged, unchanging, they stand age after age,
time only softening the hard outlines, deepening the shadows it has cast
upon them, and so bringing them into a likeness of each other that they
seem to have been the design of one mind, the work of one pair of hands,
and hardly of mortal mind or hands at that. They seem to say to man, "We
have stood here ages before you were born. We shall stand here ages
after you are forgotten." They must be filled with echoes, with ghosts,
and haunting memories.

Bold Street, a tolerably narrow and winding way, in which many are found
to walk,--contrary to all precedent,--boasts the finest shops. Here the
Lancashire witches, as the beauties of the county are called, walk, and
talk, and buy gewgaws of an afternoon. It was something strange to us to
see long silken skirts entirely destitute of crinoline, ruffle, or
flounce, trailed here through mud and mire, or raised displaying low
Congress gaiters, destitute of heels. For ourselves, if we had been the
king of the Cannibal Islands, we could hardly have attracted more
attention than we did in our plain, short travelling suits and
high-heeled boots. It grew embarrassing, especially when our expression
of unqualified benevolence drew after us a train of beggars. They
crossed the street to meet us. They emerged from every side street and
alley, thrusting dirty hands into our faces, and repeating twice-told
tales in our ears, until we were thankful when oblivion and the shadow
of the hotel fell upon us.

We dined in the coffee-room,--that comfortable and often delightfully
cosy apartment fitted with little tables, and with its corner devoted to
books, to papers and conversation,--that combination of dining, tea and
reading-room unknown to an American hotel,--sacred to the sterner sex
from all time, and only opened to us within a few years,--the gates
being forced then, I imagine, by American women, who will not consent to
hide their light under a bushel, or keep to some faraway corner,
unseeing and unseen. English women, as a rule, take their meals in
their own private parlors. Perhaps because English men generally desire
the flowers intrusted to their fostering care to blush unseen. It may be
better for the gardeners; it may be better for the flowers--I cannot
tell; but we dined in the coffee-room, as Americans usually do. One of
the _clergymen_, who attend at such places, received our order. It was
not so very formidable an affair, after all, this going down by
ourselves; or would not have been, if the big-eyed waiter, who watched
our every movement, would have left us, and the military man at the next
table, who showed "the purple tide of war," or something else, in his
face, and blew his nose like a trombone, ceased to stare. As it was, we
aired our most elegant table manners. We turned in our elbows and turned
out our toes,--so to speak,--and ate our mutton with a grace that
destroyed all appetite. We tried to appear as though we had frequently
dined in the presence of a whole battalion of soldiery, under the
scrutiny of innumerable waiters,--and failed, I am sure. "With verdure
clad" was written upon every line of our faces. The occasion of this
cross fire we do not know to this day. Was it unbounded admiration? Was
it spoons?

Having brushed off the spray of the sea, having balanced ourselves upon
the solid earth, having seen St. George's Hall, there was nothing to
detain us longer, and the next morning we were on our way to London. We
had scrutinized our bill,--which might have been reckoned in pounds,
ounces, and penny-weights, for aught we knew to the contrary,--and
informed the big-eyed waiter that it was correct. We had also offered
him imploringly our largest piece of silver, which he condescended to
accept; and having been presented with a ticket and a handful of silver
and copper by the porter who accompanied us to the station across the
way, in return for two or three gold pieces, we shook off the dust of
Liverpool from our feet, turned our eyes from the splendors of St.
George's Hall, and set our faces steadfastly towards our destination.
There was a kind of luxury, notwithstanding our prejudices, in this
English railway carriage, with its cushions all about us, even beneath
our elbows; a restfulness unknown in past experience of travel, in the
ability to turn our eyes away from the flying landscape without, to the
peaceful quiet, never intruded upon, within. We did not miss the woman
who will insist upon closing the window behind you, or opening it, as
the case may be. Not one regret had we for the "B-o-s-t-o-n papers!" nor
for the last periodical or novel. The latest fashion gazette was not
thrown into our lap only to be snatched away, as we became interested in
a plan for rejuvenating our wardrobe; nor were we assailed by venders of
pop corn, apples, or gift packages of candy. Even the blind man, with
his offering of execrable poetry, was unknown, and the conductor
examined our tickets from outside the window. Settling back among our
cushions, while we mentally enumerated these blessings of omission,
there came a thought of the perils incurred by solitary females locked
into these same comfortable carriages with madmen. If the danger had
been so great for one solitary female, what must it be for two, we
thought with horror. We gave a quick glance at our fellow-passenger, a
young man with hair all aflame. Certainly his eyes did roll at that
moment, but it was only in search of a newsboy; and when he exclaimed,
like any American gentleman, "Hang the boy!" we became perfectly
reassured. He proved a most agreeable travelling companion. We exchanged
questions and opinions upon every subject of mutual interest, from the
geological formation of the earth to the Alabama claims. I can hardly
tell which astonished us most, his profound erudition or our own. Now, I
have not the least idea as to whether Lord John Russell sailed the
Alabama, or the Alabama sailed of itself, spontaneously; but, whichever
way it was, I am convinced it was a most iniquitous proceeding, and so
thought it safe to take high moral ground, and assure him that as a
nation we could not allow it to go unpunished. You have no idea what an
assistance it is, when one is somewhat ignorant and a good deal at a
loss for arguments, to take high moral ground.

When we were weary of discussion, when knowledge palled upon our taste,
we pulled aside the little blue curtain, and gave ourselves up to gazing
upon the picture from the window. I doubt if any part of England is
looked upon with more curious eyes than that lying between Liverpool and
London. It is to so many Americans the first glimpse of strange lands.
Spread out in almost imperceptible furrows were the velvet turfed
meadows, the unclipped hedges a mass of tangled greenness between. For
miles and miles they stretched away, with seldom a road, never a
solitary house. The banks on either side were tufted with broom and
yellow with gorse; the hill-sides in the distance, white with chalk, or
black with the heather that would blossom into purple beauty with the
summer. We rushed beneath arches festooned, as for a gala-day, with
hanging vines. Tiny gardens bloomed beside the track at every station,
and all along the walls, the arched bridges, and every bit of stone upon
the wayside, was a mass of clinging, glistening ivy. Not the half-dead,
straggling thing we tend and shield so carefully at home, with here and
there a leaf put forth for very shame. These, bright, clear-cut,
deep-tinted, crowded and overlapped each other, and ran riot over the
land, transforming the dingy, mildewy cottages, bits of imperishable
ugliness, into things of beauty, if not eternal joys. Not in the least
picturesque or pleasing to the eye were these English villages;
straggling rows of dull red brick houses set amidst the fields--dirty
city children upon a picnic--with a foot square garden before each door,
cared for possibly, possibly neglected. A row of flower-pots upon the
stone ledge of every little window, a row of chimney-pots upon the slate
roof of every dwelling. Sometimes a narrow road twisted and writhed
itself from one to another, edged by high brick walls, hidden beneath a
weight of ivy; sometimes romantic lanes, shaded by old elms, and green
beyond all telling. The towns were much the same,--outgrown villages.
And the glimpse we caught, as we flew by, so far above the roofs often
that we could almost peep down upon the hearths through the chimney
tops, was by no means inviting.

Dusk fell upon us with the smoke, and mist, and drizzling rain of
London, bringing no anxiety; for was there not, through the
thoughtfulness of friends, a place prepared for us? Our pleasant
acquaintance of the golden locks forsook his own boxes, and bundles, and
innumerable belongings to look for our baggage, and saw us safely
consigned to one of the dingy cabs in waiting. I trust the people of our
own country repay to wanderers there something of the kindness which
American women, travelling alone, receive at the hands of strangers
abroad. It was neither the first nor the last courtesy proffered most
respectfully, and received in the spirit in which it was offered. There
is a deal of nonsense in the touch-me-not air with which many go out to
see the world, as there is a deal of folly in the opposite extreme. But
these acquaintances of a day, the opportunity of coming face to face
with the people in whose country you chance to be, of hearing and
answering their strange questions in regard to our government, our
manners and customs, as well as in displaying our own ignorance in
regard to their institutions, in giving information and assistance when
it is in our power, and in gratefully receiving the same from
others,--all this constitutes one of the greatest pleasures of
journeying.

Our peace of mind received a rude shock, when, after rattling over the
pavings around the little park in Queen's Square, and pulling the bell
at Mr. B.'s boarding-house, we found that we were indeed expected, but
indefinitely, and no place awaited us. We had forgotten to telegraph. It
was May, the London season, and the hotels full. "X. told us you were
coming," said the most lady-like landlady, leading us into the
drawing-room from the dank darkness of the street. There was a glow of
red-hot coals in the grate, a suggestion of warmth and comfort in the
bright colors and cosy appointments of the room--but no place for us.
"I'm very sorry; if you had telegraphed--but we can take you by Monday
certainly," she said. I counted my fingers. Two days. Ah! but we might
perish in the streets before that. Everything began to grow dark and
doleful in contemplation. Some one entered the room. The landlady turned
to him: "O, here is the good man to whose care you were consigned by X."
We gave a sigh of relief, as we greeted the Good Man, for all our
courage, like the immortal Bob Acres's, had been oozing from our finger
ends. And if we possess one gift above another, it is an ability to be
taken care of. "Do you know X.?" asked another gentleman, glancing up
from his writing at the long, red-covered table. "We travelled with
him," nodding towards his daughter, whose feet touched the fender,
"through Italy, last winter." "Indeed--"

"I'll just send out to a hotel near by," interrupted kind Mrs. B., "and
see if you can be accommodated a day or two." How very bright the room
became! The world was not hollow, after all, nor our dolls stuffed with
sawdust. Even the cabman's rattle at the knocker, and demand of an extra
sixpence for waiting, could not disturb our serenity. The messenger
returned. Yes; we could be taken in (?) at the H. house; and accepting
Mrs. B.'s invitation to return and spend the evening, we mounted to our
places in the little cab, as though it had been a triumphal car, and
were whizzed around the corner at an alarming pace by the impatient
cabman.

I should be sorry to prejudice any one against the H. house--which I
might perhaps say is not the H. house at all; I hardly like to compare
it to a whited sepulchre, though that simile did occur to my mind. Very
fair in its exterior it was, with much plate glass, and ground glass,
and gilding of letters, and shining of brass. It had been two
dwelling-houses; it was now one select family hotel. But the two
dwelling-houses had never been completely merged into one; never
married, but joined, like the Siamese twins. There was a confusing
double stairway; having ascended the right one, you were morally certain
to descend the wrong. There was a confusing double hall, with doors in
every direction opening everywhere but upon the way you desired to go.
We mounted to the top of the house, followed by two porters with our
luggage, one chambermaid with the key, another to ask if we would dine,
and two more bearing large tin cans of hot water. We grew confused, and
gasped, "We--we believe we don't care for any more at present, thank
you," and so dismissed them all. The furniture was so out of proportion
to the room that I think it must have been introduced in an infant
state, and grown to its present proportions there. The one window was so
high that we were obliged to jump up to look out over the mirror upon
the bureau--a gymnastic feat we did not care to repeat. The bed curtains
were gray; indeed there was a gray chill through the whole place. We sat
down to hold a council of war. We resolved ourselves into a committee of
ways and means, our feet upon the cans of hot water. "Pleasant," I said,
as a leading remark, my heart beginning to warm under the influence of
the hot water. "Pleasant?" repeated Mrs. K.; "it's enough to make one
homesick. We can't stay here." "But," I interposed, "suppose we leave
here, and can't get in anywhere else?" A vision of the Babes in the Wood
rose before me. There was a rap at the door; the fourth chambermaid, to
announce dinner. We finished our consultation hurriedly, and descended
to the parlor, where we were to dine. It was a small room, already
occupied by a large table and a party from the country; an old lady to
play propriety, a middle-aged person of severe countenance to act it,
and a pair of incipient and insipid lovers. He was a spectacled prig in
a white necktie, a clergyman, I suppose, though he looked amazingly like
a waiter, and she a little round combination of dimples and giggle.

_He._ "Have you been out for a walk this morning?"

_She._ "No; te-he-he-he."

_He._ "You ought to, you know."

_She._ "Te-he-he-he--yes."

_He._ "You should always exercise before dinner."

_She._ "Te-he-he-he."

Here the words gave out entirely, and, it being remarkably droll, all
joined in the chorus. "We must go somewhere else, if possible," we
explained to Mrs. B., when, a little later, we found our way to her
door. "At least we shall be better contented if we make the attempt."
The Good Man offered his protection; we found a cab, and proceeded to
explore the city, asking admittance in vain at one hotel after another,
until at last the Golden Cross upon the Strand, more charitable than
its neighbor, or less full, opened its doors, and the good landlady, of
unbounded proportions, made us both welcome and comfortable. Quite
palatial did our neat bed-room, draped in white, appear. We were the
proud possessors, also, of a parlor, with a round mirror over the
mantel, a round table in the centre, a sofa, of which Pharaoh's heart is
no comparison as regards hardness, a row of stiff, proper arm-chairs,
and any amount of ornamentation in the way of works of art upon the
walls, and shining snuffers and candlesticks upon the mantel. Our
bargain completed, there remained nothing to be done but to remove our
baggage from the other house, which I am sure we could never have
attempted alone. Think of walking in and addressing the landlady, while
the chambermaids and waiters peeped from behind the doors, with, "We
don't like your house, madam. Your rooms are tucked up, your beds
uninviting, your chambermaids frowsy, your waiters stupid, and your
little parlor an abomination." How could we have done it? The Good Man
volunteered. "But do you not mind?" "Not in the least." Is it not
wonderful? How can we believe in the equality of the sexes? In less than
an hour we were temporarily settled in our new quarters, our rescued
trunks consigned to the little bed-room, our heart-felt gratitude in the
possession of the Good Man.

We took our meals now in our own parlor, trying the solitary confinement
system of the English during our two days' stay. It seemed a month. Not
a sign of life was there, save the landlady's pleasant face behind the
bar and the waiter who answered our bell, with the exception of a pair
of mammoth shoes before the next door, mornings, and the bearded face
of a man that startled us, once, upon the stairs. And yet the house was
full. It was a relief when our two days of banishment Mere over, when in
Mrs. B.'s pretty drawing-room, and around her table, we could again meet
friends, and realize that we were still in the world.




CHAPTER III.

EXCURSIONS FROM LONDON.

          Strange ways.--"The bears that went over to
          Charlestown."--The delights of a runaway without
          its dangers.--Flower show at the Crystal
          Palace.--Whit-Monday at Hampton Court.--A queen
          baby.--"But the carpets?"--Poor Nell
          Gwynne.--Vandyck faces.--Royal beds.--Lunch at the
          King's Arms.--O Music, how many murders have been
          committed in thy name!--Queen Victoria's home at
          Windsor.--A new "house that Jack built."--The
          Round Tower.--Stoke Pogis.--Frogmore.--The Knights
          of the Garter.--The queen's gallery.--The queen's
          plate.--The royal mews.--The wicker
          baby-wagons.--The state equipages.


WE bought an umbrella,--every one buys an umbrella who goes to
London,--and this, in its alpaca glory, became our constant companion.
We purchased a guide-book to complete our equipments; but so
disreputable, so yellow-covered, was its outward appearance, so
suggestive of everything but facts, that we consigned it to oblivion,
and put ourselves under the guidance of our Boston friends, the Good Man
and his family.

For two busy weeks we rattled over the flat pavings of the city in the
low, one-horse cabs. We climbed towers, we descended into crypts, we
examined tombstones, we gazed upon mummies. Everything was new,
strange, and wonderful, even to the little boys in the street, who, as
well as the omnibus drivers, were decked out in tall silk hats--a piece
of absurdity in one case, and extravagance in the other, to our minds.
The one-horse carriages rolled about upon two wheels; the occupants,
like cross children, facing in every direction but the one they were
going, and everybody, contrary to all our preconceived ideas of law and
order, turned to the left, instead of to the right,--to say nothing of
other strange and perplexing ways that came under our observation. We
had come abroad upon the same errand as the bears who "went over to
Charlestown to see what they could see," and so stared into every
window, into every passing face, as though we were seeking the lost. We
became known as the women who wanted a cab; our appearance within the
iron posts that guard the entrance to Queen's Square from Southampton
Row being the signal for a perfect Babel of unintelligible shouts and
gesticulations down the long line of waiting vehicles, with the charging
down upon us of the first half dozen in a highly dangerous manner.
Wisdom is sometimes the growth of days; and we soon learned to dart out
in an unexpected moment, utterly deaf and blind to everything and
everybody but the first man and the first horse, and thus to go off in
triumph.

But if our exit was triumphant, what was our entry to the square, when
weary, faint with seeing, hearing, and trying in vain to fix everything
seen and heard in our minds, we returned in a hansom! English ladies do
not much affect this mode of conveyance, but American women abroad
have, or take, a wide margin in matters of mere conventionality,--and so
ride in hansom cabs at will. They are grown-up baby perambulators upon
two wheels; the driver sitting up behind, where the handle would be, and
drawing the reins of interminable length over the top of the vehicle.
Picture it in your mind, and then wonder, as I did, what power of
attraction keeps the horse upon the ground; what prevents his flying
into the air when the driver settles down into his seat. A pair of low,
folding doors take the place of a lap robe; you dash through the street
at an alarming rate without any visible guide, experiencing all the
delights of a runaway without any of its dangers.


FLOWER SHOW AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE.

A ride by rail of half an hour takes one to Sydenham. It is a charming
walk from the station through the tastefully arranged grounds, with
their shrubberies, roseries, and fountains, along the pebble-strewn
paths, crowded this day with visitors. The palace itself is so like its
familiar pictures as to need no description. Much of the grandeur of its
vast proportions within is lost by its divisions and subdivisions. There
are courts representing the various nations of the earth,--America, as
usual, felicitously and truthfully shown up by a pair of scantily
attired savages under a palm tree; there are the courts of the Alhambra,
of Nineveh, and of Pompeii; there are fountains, and statues, and
bazaars innumerable, where one may purchase almost anything as a
souvenir; there are cafés where one may refresh the body, and an immense
concert hall where one may delight the soul,--and how much more I
cannot tell, for the crowd was almost beyond belief, and a much more
interesting study than Egyptian remains, or even the exquisite mass of
perfumed bloom, that made the air like summer, and the whole place a
garden. They were of the English middle class, the upper middle class,
bordering upon the nobility,--these rotund, fine-looking gentlemen in
white vests and irreproachable broadcloth, these stout, red-faced,
richly-attired ladies, with their soft-eyed, angular daughters following
in their train, or clinging to their arms. We listened for an hour to
the queen's own band in scarlet and gold, and then came back to town,
meeting train after train filled to overflowing with expensively arrayed
humanity in white kids, going out for the evening.


A DAY AT HAMPTON COURT.

It was Whit-Monday,--the workingman's holiday,--a day of sun and shower;
but we took our turn upon the outside of the private omnibus chartered
for the occasion, unmindful of the drops; our propelling power, six gray
horses. By virtue of this private establishment we were free to pass
through Hyde Park,--that breathing-place of aristocracy, where no public
vehicle, no servant without livery, is tolerated. It was early, and only
the countless hoof-prints upon Rotten Row suggested the crowd of wealth
and fashion that would throng here later in the day. One solitary
equestrian there was; perched upon a guarded saddle, held in her place
by some concealed band, serenely content, rode a queen baby in long,
white robes. A groom led the little pony. She looked at us in grave
wonder as we dashed by,--born to the purple! I cannot begin to describe
to you the rising up of London for this day of pleasure; the decking of
itself out in holiday attire; the garnishing of itself with paper
flowers; the smooth, hard roads leading into the country, all alive; the
drinking, noisy crowd about the door of every pot-house along the way.
It was a delightful drive of a dozen or more miles, through the most
charming suburbs imaginable,--past lawns, and gardens, and green old
trees shading miniature parks; past "detached" villas that had blossomed
into windows; indeed, the plate glass upon houses of most modest
pretension was almost reckless extravagance in our eyes, forgetting, as
we did, the slight duty to be paid here upon what is, with us, an
expensive luxury. No wonder the English are a healthful people,--the sun
shines upon them. I like their manner of house-building, of home-making.
They set up first a great bay-window, with a room behind it, which is of
secondary importance, with wide steps leading up to a door at the side.
They fill this window with the rarest, rosiest, most rollicksome
flowers. Then, if there remain time, and space, and means, other rooms
are added, the bay-windows increasing in direct proportion; while
shades, drawn shades, are a thing unknown. "But the carpets?" They are
so foolish as to value health above carpets.

It was high noon when we rolled up the wide avenue of Bushey Park, with
its double border of gigantic chestnuts and limes, through Richmond
Park, with its vast sweep of greensward flecked with the sunbeams,
dripping like the rain through the royal oaks, past Richmond terrace,
with its fine residences looking out upon the Thames, the translucent
stream, pure and beautiful here, before going down to the city to be
defiled--like many a life. We dismounted at the gates to the palace, in
the rambling old village that clings to its skirts, and joined the crowd
passing through its wide portals.

It is an old palace thrown aside, given over to poor relatives, by
royalty,--as we throw aside an old gown; a vast pile of dingy, red brick
that has straggled over acres of Hampton parish, and is kept within
bounds by a high wall of the same ugly material. It has pushed itself up
into towers and turrets, with pinnacles and spires rising from its
battlemented walls. It has thrust itself out into oriel and queer little
latticed windows that peep into the gardens and overhang the three
quadrangles, and is with its vast gardens and park, with its wide canal
and avenues of green old trees, the most delightfully ugly, old place
imaginable. Here kings and queens have lived and loved, suffered and
died, from Cardinal Wolsey's time down to the days of Queen Anne. It is
now one of England's show places; one portion of its vast extent, with
the grounds, being thrown open to the public, the remainder given to
decayed nobility, or wandering, homeless representatives of royalty,--a
kind of royal almshouse, in fact. A curtained window, the flutter of a
white hand, were to us the only signs of inhabitation.

Through thirty or more narrow, dark, bare rooms,--bare but for the
pictures that crowded the walls,--we wandered. There were two or three
halls of stately proportions finely decorated with frescoes by Verrio,
and one or two royal stairways, up and down which slippered feet have
passed, silken skirts trailed, and heavy hearts been carried, in days
gone by. The pictures are mostly portraits of brave men and lovely
women, of kings and queens and royal favorites,--poor Nell Gwynne among
them, who began life by selling oranges in a theatre, and ended it by
selling virtue in a palace. The Vandyck faces are wonderfully beautiful.
They gaze upon you through a mist, a golden haze,--like that which hangs
over the hills in the Indian summer,--from out deep, spiritual eyes; a
dream of fair women they are.

There were one or two royal beds, where uneasy have lain the heads that
wore a crown, and half a dozen chairs worked in tapestry by royal
fingers,--whether preserved for their questionable beauty, or because of
the rarity of royal industry, I do not know. We wandered through the
shrubberies, paid a penny to see the largest grape vine in the
world,--and wished we had given it to the heathen, so like its less
distinguished sisters did the vine appear,--and at last lunched at the
King's Arms, a queer little inn just outside the gates, edging our way
with some difficulty through the noisy, guzzling crowd around the
door--the crowd that, having reached the acme of the day's felicity, was
fast degenerating into a quarrel. In the long, bare room at the head of
the narrow, winding stairs, we found comparative quiet. The tables were
covered with joints of beef, with loaves of bread, pitchers of ale, and
the ubiquitous cheese. A red-faced young man in tight new clothes--like
a strait-jacket--occupied one end of our table with his blushing
sweetheart. A band of wandering harpers harped upon their harps to the
crowd of wrangling men and blowsy women in the open court below;
strangely out of tune were the harps, out of time the measure, according
well with the spirit of the hour. A loud-voiced girl decked out in
tawdry finery, with face like solid brass, sang "Annie Laurie" in hard,
metallic tones,--O Music, how many murders have been committed in thy
name!--then passed a cup for pennies, with many a jest and rude, bold
laugh. We were glad when the day was done,--glad when we had turned away
from it all.


QUEEN VICTORIA'S HOME AT WINDSOR.

The castle itself is a huge, battlemented structure of gray stone,--a
fortress as well as a palace,--with a home park of five hundred acres,
the private grounds of Mrs. Guelph, and, beyond that, a grand park of
eighteen hundred acres. But do not imagine that she lives here with only
her children and servants about her,--this kindly German widow, whose
throne was once in the hearts of her people. Royalty is a complicated
affair,--a wheel within a wheel,--and reminds us of nothing so much as
"the house that Jack built."

This is the Castle of Windsor.

This is the queen that lives in the Castle of Windsor.

These are the ladies that 'tend on the queen that lives in the Castle of
Windsor.

These are the pages that bow to the ladies that 'tend on the queen that
lives in the Castle of Windsor.

These are the lackeys that wait on the pages that bow to the ladies that
'tend on the queen that lives in the Castle of Windsor.

These are the soldiers, tried and sworn, that guard the crown from the
unicorn, that stand by the lackeys that wait on the pages that bow to
the ladies that 'tend on the queen that lives in the Castle of Windsor.

These are the "military knights" forlorn, founded by Edward before you
were born, that outrank the soldiers, tried and sworn, that guard the
crown from the unicorn, that stand by the lackeys that wait on the pages
that bow to the ladies that 'tend on the queen that lives in the Castle
of Windsor.

These are the knights that the garter have worn, with armorial banners
tattered and torn, that look down on the military knights forlorn,
founded by Edward before you were born, that outrank the soldiers, tried
and sworn, that guard the crown from the unicorn, that stand by the
lackeys that wait on the pages that bow to the ladies that 'tend on the
queen that lives in the Castle of Windsor.

This is the dean, all shaven and shorn, with the canons and clerks that
doze in the morn, that install the knights that the garter have worn,
with armorial banners tattered and torn, that look down on the military
knights forlorn, founded by Edward before you were born, that outrank
the soldiers, tried and sworn, that guard the crown from the unicorn,
that stand by the lackeys that wait on the pages that bow to the ladies
that 'tend on the queen that lives in the Castle of Windsor.

And so on. The train within the castle walls that follows the queen is
endless.

We passed through the great, grand, state apartments, refurnished at the
time of the marriage of the Prince of Wales, for the use of the Danish
family. We mounted to the battlements of the Round Tower by the hundred
steps, the grim cannon gazing down upon us from the top. Half a dozen
visitors were already there, gathered as closely as possible about the
angular guide, listening to his geography lesson, and looking off upon
the wonderful panorama of park, and wood, and winding river. Away to the
right rose the spire of Stoke Pogis Church, where the curfew still
"tolls the knell of parting day." To the left, in the great park below,
lay Frogmore, where sleeps Prince Albert the Good. Eton College, too,
peeped out from among the trees, its gardens touching the Thames, and in
the distance,--beyond the sleeping villages tucked in among the
trees,--the shadowy blue hills held up the sky.

St. George's Chapel is in the quadrangle below. It is the chapel of the
Knights of the Garter. And now, when you read of the chapels, or
churches, or cathedrals in the old world,--and they are all in a sense
alike,--pray don't imagine a New England meeting-house with a double row
of stiff pews and a choir in the gallery singing "Antioch"! The body of
the chapel was a great, bare space, with tablets and elaborate monuments
against the walls. Opening from this were alcoves,--also called
chapels,--each one containing the tombs and monuments of some family. As
many of the inscriptions are dated centuries back, you can imagine they
are often quaintly expressed. One old knight, who died in Catholic
times, desired an open Breviary to remain always in the niche before his
tomb, that passers might read to their comfort, and say for him an
orison. Of course this would never do in the days when the chapel fell
into Protestant hands. A Bible was substituted, chained into its place;
but the old inscription, cut deep in the stone, still remains, beginning
"Who leyde thys book here?" with a startling appropriateness of which
the author never dreamed. Over another of these chapels is rudely cut an
ox, an N, and a bow,--the owner having, in an antic manner, hardly
befitting the place, thus written his name--Oxenbow.

You enter the choir, where the installations take place, by steps,
passing under the organ. In the chancel is a fine memorial window to
Prince Albert. On either side are the stalls or seats for the knights,
with the armorial banner of each hanging over his place. Projecting over
the chancel, upon one side, is what appears to be a bay-window. This is
the queen's gallery, a little room with blue silk hangings,--for blue is
the color worn by Knights of the Garter,--where she sits during the
service. Through these curtains she looked down upon the marriage of the
Prince of Wales. Think of being thus put away from everybody, as though
one were plague-stricken. A private station awaits her when she steps
from the train at the castle gates. A private room is attached to the
green-houses, to the riding-school in the park, and even to the private
chapel. A private photograph-room, for the taking of the royal pictures,
adjoins her apartments. It must be a fine thing to be a queen,--and so
tiresome! Even the gold spoon in one's mouth could not offset the
weariness of it all, and of gold spoons she has an unbounded supply;
from ten to fifteen millions of dollars worth of gold plate for her
majesty's table being guarded within the castle! Think of it, little
women who set up house-keeping with half a dozen silver teaspoons and a
salt-spoon!

We waited before a great gate until the striking of some forgotten hour,
to visit the royal mews. You may walk through all these stables in
slippers and in your daintiest gown, without fear. A stiff young man in
black--a cross between an undertaker and an incipient clergyman in
manner--acted as guide. Other parties, led by other stiff young men,
followed or crossed our path. There were stalls and stalls, upon either
side, in room after room,--for one could not think of calling them
stables,--filled by sleek bays for carriage or saddle. And the
ponies!--the dear little shaggy browns, with sweeping tails, and
wonderful eyes peeping out from beneath moppy manes, the milk-white,
tiny steeds, with hair like softest silk,--they won our hearts. Curled
up on the back of one, fast asleep, lay a Maltese kitten; the "royal
mew" some one called it. The carriages were all plain and dark, for the
ordinary use of the court. In one corner a prim row of little yellow,
wicker, baby-wagons attracted our attention, like those used by the
poorest mother in the land. In these the royal babies have taken their
first airings.

The state equipages we saw another day at Buckingham Palace,--the
cream-colored horses, the carriages and harnesses all crimson and gold.
There they stand, weeks and months together, waiting for an occasion.
The effect upon a fine day, under favoring auspices,--the sun shining,
the bands playing, the crowd of gazers, the prancing horses, the gilded
chariots,--must almost equal the triumphal entry of a first class circus
into a New England town!




CHAPTER IV.

SIGHT-SEEING IN LONDON.

          The Tower.--The tall Yankee of inquiring
          mind.--Our guide in gorgeous array.--War
          trophies.--Knights in armor.--A professional
          joke.--The crown jewels.--The house where the
          little princes were smothered.--The "Traitor's
          Gate."--The Houses of Parliament.--What a throne
          is like.--The "woolsack."--The Peeping Gallery for
          ladies.--Westminster Hall and the law courts.--The
          three drowsy old women.--The Great Panjandrum
          himself.--Johnson and the pump.--St.
          Paul's.--Wellington's funeral car.--The Whispering
          Gallery.--The bell.


THE TOWER.

IT is not a tower at all, as we reckon towers, you must know, but a
walled town upon the banks of the Thames, in the very heart of London.
Hundreds of years ago, when what is now this great city was only moor
and marsh, the Romans built here--a castle, perhaps. Only a bit of
crumbling wall, of mouldering pavement, remain to tell the story. When
the Normans came in to possess the land, William the Conqueror erected
upon this spot a square fortress, with towers rising from its four
corners. Every succeeding monarch added a castle, a tower, a moat, to
strengthen its strength and extend its limits, until, in time, it
covered twelve acres of land, as it does to this day. Here the kings
and queens of England lived in comfortless state, until the time of
Queen Elizabeth, having need to be hedged about with something more than
royalty to insure safety. Times have changed; swords have been beaten
into ploughshares; and where the moat once encircled the tower wall,
flowers blossom now. The dungeons that for centuries held prisoners of
state do not confine any one to-day; and the strongholds that guarded
the person of England's sovereign keep in safety now the jewels and the
crown. There are round towers, and square towers, and, for anything I
know, three-cornered towers, each with its own history of horrors. There
are windows from which people were thrown, bridges over which they were
dragged, and dark holes in which they were incarcerated.

[Illustration: "A dozen umbrellas were tipped up; the rain fell fast
upon a dozen upturned, expectant faces." Page 57.]

To appreciate all this, you should see it--as we did one chilly May
morning. We huddled about the stove in the waiting-room upon the site of
the old royal menagerie, our companions a round man, with a limp gingham
cravat and shabby coat, a little old woman in a poke bonnet, and half a
dozen or more schoolboys from the country. A tall Yankee of inquiring
mind joined us as we sallied from the door, led by a guide gorgeous in
ruff and buckles, cotton velvet and gilt lace, and with all these
glories surmounted by a black hat, that swelled out at the top in a
wonderful manner. Down the narrow street within the gates, over the
slippery cobble-stones, under considerable mental excitement, and our
alpaca umbrella, we followed our guide to an archway, before which he
paused, and struck an attitude. The long Yankee darted forward. "Stand
back, my friends, stand back," said the guide. "You will please form
a circle." Immediately a dozen umbrellas surrounded him. He pointed to a
narrow window over our heads; a dozen umbrellas were tipped up; the rain
fell fast upon a dozen upturned, expectant faces. "In that room, Sir
----" (I could not catch the name) "spent the night before his
execution, in solemn meditation and prayer." There was a circular groan
of sympathy and approval from a dozen lips, the re-cant of a dozen
dripping umbrellas, and we pattered on to the next point of interest,
following our leader through pools of blood, figuratively
speaking,--literally, through pools of water,--our eyes distended, our
cheeks pale with horror. Ah, what treasures of credulity we must have
been to the guides in those days! Time brought unbelief and hardness of
heart.

We mounted stairs narrow and dark; we descended stairs dark and narrow;
we entered chambers gloomy and grim. The half I could not tell--of the
rooms filled with war trophies--scalps in the belt of the nation--from
the Spanish Armada down to the Sepoy rebellion; the long hall, with its
double row of lumbering old warriors encased in steel, as though they
had stepped into a steel tower and walked off, tower and all, some fine
morning; the armory, with its stacked arms for thirty thousand men. "We
may have occasion to use them," said the guide, facetiously, making some
reference to the speech of Mr. Sumner, just then acting the part of a
stick to stir up the British lion. The Yankee chuckled complacently, and
we, too, refused to quake. There was a room filled with instruments of
torture, diabolical inventions, recalling the days of the Inquisition.
The Yankee expressed a desire to "see how some o' them things worked."
Opening from this was an unlighted apartment, with walls of stone, a
dungeon indeed, in which we were made to believe that Sir Walter Raleigh
spent twelve years of his life. No shadow of doubt would have fallen
upon our unquestioning minds, had we been told that he amused himself
during this time by standing upon his head. "Walk in, walk in," said the
smiling guide, as we peered into its darkness. We obeyed. "Now," said
he, "that you may appreciate his situation, I will step out and close
the door." The little old woman screamed; the Yankee made one stride to
the opening; the guide laughed. It was only a professional joke; there
was no door. We saw the bare prison-room, with its rough fireplace, the
slits between the stones of the wall to admit light and air, and the
initials of Lady Jane Grey, with a host more of forgotten names, upon
the walls. Just outside, within the quadrangle, where the grass grew
green beneath the summer rain, she was beheaded,--poor little
innocent,--who had no desire to be a queen! In another tower close by,
guarded by iron bars, were the royal jewels and the crown, for which all
this blood was shed--pretty baubles of gold and precious stones, but
hardly worth so many lives.

You remember the story of the princes smothered in the Tower by command
of their cruel uncle? There was the narrow passage in the wall where the
murderers came at night; the worn step by which they entered the great,
bare room where the little victims slept; the winding stairs down which
the bodies were thrown. Beneath the great stone at the foot they were
secretly buried. Then the stairway was walled up, lest the stones should
cry out; and no one knew the story of the burial until long, long
afterwards--only a few years since--when the walled-up stairway was
discovered, the stones at the foot displaced, and a heap of dust, of
little crumbling bones, revealed it. A rosy-faced, motherly woman, the
wife of a soldier quartered in the barracks here, answered the rap of
the guide upon the nail-studded door opening from one of the courts, and
told us the old story. "The bed of the princes stood just there," she
said, pointing to one corner, where, by a curious coincidence, a little
bed was standing now. She answered the question in our eyes with, "My
boys sleep there." "But do you not fear that the murderers will come
back some night by this same winding way, and smother them?" How she
laughed! And, indeed, what had ghosts to do with such a cheery body!

Down through the "Traitors' Gate," with its spiked portcullis, we could
see the steps leading to the water. Through this gate prisoners were
brought from trial at Westminster. It is said that the Princess
Elizabeth was dragged up here when she refused to come of her own will,
knowing too well that they who entered here left hope behind. A little
later, with music and the waving of banners, and amid the shouts of the
people, she rode out of the great gates into the city, the Queen of
England.


THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.

Though they have stood barely thirty years, already the soft gray
limestone begins to crumble away,--the elements, with a sense of the
fitness of things, striving to act the part of time, and bring them into
a likeness of the adjoining abbey. There is an exquisite beauty in the
thousand gilded points and pinnacles that pierce the fog, or shine
softly through the mist that veils the city. Ethereal, shadowy, unreal
they are, like the spires of a celestial city, or the far away towers
and turrets we see sometimes at sunset in the western sky.

Here, you know, are the chambers of the Houses of Lords and Commons,
with the attendant lobbies, libraries, committee-rooms, &c., and a
withdrawing-room for the use of the queen when she is graciously pleased
to open Parliament in person. The speaker of the House of Commons, as
well as some other officials, reside here--a novel idea to us, who could
hardly imagine the speaker of our House of Representatives taking up his
abode in the Capitol! Parliament was not in session, and we walked
through the various rooms at will, even to the robing-room of the noble
lords, where the peg upon which Lord Stanley hangs his hat was pointed
out; and very like other pegs it was. At one end of the chamber of the
House of Lords is the throne. It is a simple affair enough--a gilded
arm-chair on a little platform reached by two or three steps, and with
crimson hangings. Extending down on either side are the
crimson-cushioned seats without desks. In the centre is a large square
ottoman,--the woolsack,--which might, with equal appropriateness, be
called almost anything else. Above, a narrow gallery offers a
lounging-place to the sons and friends of the peers; and at one end,
above the throne, is a high loft, a kind of uplifted amen corner, for
strangers, with a space where women may sit and look down through a
screen of lattice-work upon the proceedings below. It seems a remnant of
Eastern customs, strangely out of place in this Western world, and akin
to the shrouding of ourselves in veils, like our Oriental sisters. Or
can it be that the noble lords are more keenly sensitive to the
distracting influence of bright eyes than other men?


WESTMINSTER HALL AND THE LAW COURTS.

Adjoining the Houses of Parliament is this vast old hall. For almost
five hundred years has it stood, its curiously carved roof unsupported
by column or pillar. Here royal banquets, as well as Parliaments, have
been held, and more than one court of justice. Here was the great trial
of Warren Hastings. It was empty now of everything but echoes and the
long line of statuary on either side, except the lawyers in their long,
black gowns, who hastened up and down its length, or darted in and out
the three baize doors upon one side, opening into the Courts of
Chancery, Common Pleas, and the Exchequer. Our national curiosity was
aroused, and we mounted the steps to the second, which had won our
sympathies from its democratic name.

There were high, straight-backed pews of familiar appearance, rising one
above the other, into the last of which we climbed, a certain Sunday
solemnity stealing over us, a certain awkward consciousness that we were
the observed of all observers, since we were the only spectators--a
delusion of our vanity, however. In the high gallery before us, in
complacent comfort, sat three fat, drowsy old women (?) in white,
curling wigs, and voluminous gowns, asking all manner of distracting
questions, and requiring to be told over and over again,--after the
manner of drowsy old women,--to the utter confusion of a poor witness in
the front pew, who clung to the rail and swayed about hopelessly, while
he tried to tell his story, as if by this rotary motion he could churn
his ideas into form. Not only did he lose the thread of his
discourse,--he became hopelessly entangled in it. Scratch, scratch,
scratch, went the pens all around him. Every word, as it fell from his
lips, was pounced upon by the begowned, bewigged, bewildering judges,
was twisted and turned by the lawyers, was tossed back and forth
throughout the court-room, until there arose a question in our minds, as
to who was telling the story. All the while the lawyers were glaring
upon him as though he was perjuring himself with every word--as who
would not be, under the circumstances? And such lawyers! They dotted the
pews all around us. The long, black gowns were not so bad; they hid a
deal of awkwardness, I doubt not. But the wigs! the queer little curly
things, perched upon every head, and worn with such a perverse delight
in misfits! the small men being invariably hidden beneath the big wigs,
and the large men strutting about like the great Panjandrum himself with
the little round button at the top! The appearance of one, whose head,
through some uncommon development, rose to a ridge-pole behind, was
surprising, to say the least. It was not alone that his wig was too
small, that a fringe of straight, black hair fell below its entire white
circumference; it was not alone that it was parted upon the wrong side,
or that, being mansard in form, and his head hip-roofed, it could
never, by any process, have been shaped thereto; but I doubt if the
wearing of it upside down, added to all these little drawbacks, could
conduce to the beauty or dignity of any man. Unmindful of this reversed
order of nature, its happy possessor skipped about the court-room,
nodding to his brethren with a blithesome air, to the imminent peril of
his top-knot, which sustained about the same relation to his head as the
sword to that of Damocles. He speered down upon the poor witness. He
pretended to make notes of dreadful import with a screaming quill, and,
in fact, comported himself with an airy unconsciousness delightful to
see.

In regard to the proceedings of the court, I only know that the point
under discussion concerned one Johnson, and a pump; and Mr. Pickwick's
judge sat upon the bench. Whether he was originally round, red-faced,
with gooseberry eyes, I do not remember; but all these pleasing
characteristics he possessed at this present time, as well as a pudgy
forefinger, with which to point his remarks.

"You say," he repeated, with a solemnity of which my pen is incapable,
and impressing every word upon the poor man in the front pew with this
same forefinger, "that--Bunsen--went--to--the--pump?"

"Johnson, my lord," the witness ventured to correct him, in a low tone.

"It makes no difference," responded the judge, irate, "whether it is
Bunsen or Jillson. The question is, Did--Jillson--go--to--the--pump?"

Whom the gods destroy they first deprive of their five senses. Four, at
least, of the poor man's had departed some time since. The fifth
followed. "Johnson went, my lord," he replied, doggedly. Having found
one point upon which his mind was clear, he clung to it with the
tenacity of despair.

"Johnson! who's _Johnson_?" gasped the bewildered judge, over whose face
a net of perplexed lines spread itself upon the introduction of this new
character. In the confusion of denials and explanations that followed,
we descended from our perch, and stole away; nor are we at all sure, to
this day, as to whether Johnson did or did not really go to the pump.


ST. PAUL'S.

Imagine our surprise, one day, when admiring a pretty ribbon upon a
friend, to be told that it came from St. Paul's Churchyard. Hardly the
place for ribbons, one would think; but the narrow street which
encircles the cathedral in the form of a bow and its string goes by this
name, and contains, besides the bookstores and publishing houses, some
fine "silk mercers'" establishments.

The gray surface of the grand edifice is streaked with black, as though
time had beaten it with stripes, and a pall of smoke and dust covers the
statues in the court before it. Consecrated ground this is, indeed. From
the earliest times of the Christian religion, through all the bigotry
and fanaticism of the ages that followed, down to the present time, the
word of God has been proclaimed here--in weakness often, in bitterness
many times that belied the spirit of its message; by a priesthood more
corrupt than the people; by noble men, beyond the age in which they
lived, and whom the flames of martyrdom could not appall. Under
Diocletian the first church was destroyed. It was rebuilt, and destroyed
again by the Saxons. Twice has it been levelled to the ground by fire.
But neither sword nor flame could subdue it, and firm as a rock it
stands to-day, as it has stood for nearly two hundred years, and as it
seems likely to stand for ages to come. The sacred stillness that
invests the place was rudely broken, the morning of our visit, by the
blows from the hammers of the workmen, resounding through the dome like
a discharge of artillery. A great stage, and seats in the form of an
amphitheatre, were being erected in the nave for a children's festival,
which prevented our doing more than glance down its length. We read some
of the inscriptions upon the monuments, that one, so often quoted, of
Sir Christopher Wren, among them--"Do you seek his monument? Look around
you;" glanced into the choir, with its Gothic stalls, where the service
is performed, and then descended into the crypt beneath all this, that
labyrinth of damp darkness where so many lie entombed. Here is the
funeral car of Wellington, with candles burning around it, cast from the
conquering cannon which thundered victory to a nation, but sorrow and
death to many a home. Shrouded with velvet it is, as are the horses, in
imitation of those which bore him to his rest. All around were marble
effigies, blackened, broken, as they survived the burning of the late
cathedral, at the time of the great fire. Tombstones formed the
pavement. "Whose can this be?" I said, trying to follow with the point
of my umbrella the half-worn inscription beneath my feet. It was that of
Sir Joshua Reynolds. Strange enough it seemed to us, coming from a
country so new as to have been by no means prolific in great men, to
find them here lying about under our feet.

Having explored the crypt, we prepared to mount the endless winding
stairs, whose final termination is the ball under the cross that
surmounts the whole. Our ambition aimed only at the bell beneath the
ball. We paid an occasional sixpence for the privilege of peeping into
the library,--a most tidy and put-to-rights room, with a floor of wood
patchwork,--and for the right to look down upon the geometrical
staircase which winds around and clings to the wall upon one side, but
is without any visible support upon the other. The "whispering gallery"
was reached after a time. It is the encircling cornice within the dome,
surrounded by a railing, and forming a narrow gallery. "I will remain
here," said the guide, "while you pass around until you are exactly
opposite; wait there until I whisper." Had we possessed the spirit of
Casabianca, we should at this moment be sitting upon that narrow bench
against the wall, with our feet upon the gas-pipes. We waited and
listened, and listened and waited; but the sound of the blows from the
hammers below reverberated like thunder around us. We could not have
heard the crack of doom. Becoming conscious, after a time, that our
guide had disappeared, we came out and continued our ascent. Mrs. K.'s
curiosity, if not satisfied, was at least quenched, and she refused to
go farther. My aspirations still pointed upward. There was another
sixpence, another dizzy mount of dark, twisting stairs, with strength,
ambition, and even curiosity gradually left behind, and with only one
blind instinct remaining--to go on. There was a long, dingy passage,
through which ghostly forms were flitting; there were more stairs, with
twists and turns, forgotten now with other torments; there was the
mounting of half a dozen rickety wooden steps at last, for no object but
to descend shakily upon the other side, and then we found ourselves in a
little dark corner, peering over a dingy rail, with a great, dusky
object filling all the space below. And that was the bell! "Well, and
what of it?" I don't know; but we saw it!




CHAPTER V.

AWAY TO PARIS.

          The wedding party.--The canals.--New
          Haven.--Around the tea-table.--Separating the
          sheep from the goats.--"Will it be a rough
          passage?"--Gymnastic feats of the little
          steamer.--O, what were officers to us?--"Who ever
          invented earrings!"--Dieppe.--Fish-wives.--Train
          for
          Paris.--Fellow-passengers.--Rouen.--Babel.--Deliverance.


IT was the last week in May, and by no means the "merry, merry month of
May" had we found it. Not only was the sky weighed down with clouds, but
they dripped upon the earth continually, the sun showing his ghastly,
white, half-drowned face for a moment only to be swept from sight again
by the cloud waves. A friend was going to Paris. Would we shake the
drops from our garments, close our umbrellas, and go with him? We not
only would, we did. We gathered a lunch, packed our trunk, said our
adieus, and drove down to the station in the usual pouring rain, the
tearful accompaniment to all our movements. But one party besides our
own awaited the train upon the platform--a young man with the insignia
of bliss in the gloves of startling whiteness upon his hands, and a
middle-aged woman of seraphic expression of countenance, clad in robes
of spotless white, her feet encased in capacious white slippers. In
this airy costume, one hand grasping a huge bouquet devoid of color, the
other the arm of her companion, she paced back and forth, to the great
amusement of the laughing porters, casting upon us less fortunate ones,
who shivered meekly in our wraps, glances of triumphant pity
indescribable.

"Weddin' party, zur," explained the guard, touching his cap to our
friend. "Jus' come down in fly." They looked to us a good deal more as
if they were just going up in a "fly." The train shrieked into the
station, and we were soon rushing over the road to New Haven, from
which, in an evil moment, we had planned to cross the Channel. There was
little new or strange in the picture seen from our window. The cottages
were now of a dull, clay color, instead of the dingy red we had observed
before, as though they had been erected in sudden need, without waiting
for the burning of the bricks. There were brick-yards all along the way,
answering a vexed question in my mind as to where all the bricks came
from which were used so entirely in town and village here, in the
absence of the wood so plentiful with us. The canals added much to the
beauty of the landscape, winding through the meadows as if they were
going to no particular place, and were in no haste to reach their
destination. They turned aside for a clump of willows or a mound of
daisy-crowned earth; they went quite out of their way to peep into the
back doors of a village, and, in fact, strolled along in a lazy,
serpentine manner that would have crazed the proprietor of a Yankee
canal boat.

It was five o'clock when we reached New Haven, having dropped our
fellow-passengers along the way, the blissful couple among them.
Through some error in calculation we had taken an earlier train than we
need have, and found hours of doleful leisure awaiting us in this sleepy
little town, lying upon an arm of the sea. Its outer appearance was not
inviting. Here were the first and last houses of wood we saw in
England,--high, ugly things, that might have been built of old boats or
drift wood, with an economy that precluded all thought of grace in
architecture. The train, in a gracious spirit of accommodation, instead
of plunging into the sea, as it might have done, paused before the door
of a hotel upon the wharf. There, in a little parlor, we improvised a
home for a time. Our friend went off to explore the town. We took
possession of the faded red arm-chairs by the wide windows. Down below,
beyond the wet platform, rose the well-colored meerschaum of the little
French steamer, whose long-boats hung just above the edge of the wharf.
Through the closed window stole the breath of the salt sea, that, only a
hand-breadth here, widened out below into boundlessness, bringing
visions of the ocean and a thrill of remembered delight. The rain had
ceased. The breeze rolled the clouds into snow-balls, pure white against
the blue of the sky. Over the narrow stream came the twitter of birds,
hidden in the hawthorn hedge all abloom. Everything smiled, and beamed,
and glistened without, though far out to sea the white caps crowned the
dancing waves. When night fell, and the lights glimmered all through the
town, we drew the heavy curtains, lighted the candles in the shining
candlesticks, whose light cast a delusive glow over the dingy dustiness
of the room, bringing out cheerfully the little round tea-table in the
centre, with its bright silver and steaming urn, over which we lingered
a long hour, measuring and weighing our comfort, telling tales, seeing
visions, and dreaming dreams of home.

The clock struck nine as we crossed the plank to the Alexandra, trying
in vain to find in its toy appointments some likeness to our ocean
steamer of delightful memory. The train whizzed in from London, bringing
our fellow-voyagers. The sheep were separated from the goats by the
officer at the foot of the plank, who asked each one descending, "First
or second cabin?"--sending one to the right, the other to the left. The
wind swept in from the sea raw and cold. The foot-square deck was
cheerless and wet. Even a diagonal promenade proved short and
unsatisfactory, and in despair we descended the slippery, perpendicular
stairs between boxes and bales, and down still another flight, to the
cabin. A narrow, cushioned seat clung to its four sides, divided into
lengths for berths. "Will it be a rough night?" we carelessly asked the
young stewardess. "O, no!" was the stereotyped reply, though all the
while the wicked waves were dancing beneath the white caps just outside.
We divested ourselves of hats, and wraps, and useless ornaments,
reserving only that of a meek and quiet spirit, which, under a nameless
fear, grew every moment meeker and more quiet. We undid the interminable
buttons of our American boots, and prepared for a comfortable rest, with
an ignorance that at the time approximated bliss. There was leisure for
the working out of elaborate schemes. Something possessed the tide.
Whether it was high or low, narrow or wide, I do not know; but there at
the wharf we were to await the working of its own will, regardless of
time. Accordingly we selected our places with a deliberation that bore
no proportion to the time we were to fill them, advising with the
stewardess, who had settled herself comfortably to sleep. We tried our
heads to England and our feet to the foe, and then reversed the order,
finally compromising by taking a position across the Channel. But the
loading of the steamer overhead, with the chattering of our
fellow-passengers below,--two English girls, a pretty brunette and her
sister,--banished sleep. At three o'clock our voyage began--the
succession of quivering leaps, plunges, and somersaults which
miraculously landed us upon the French coast. I can think of no words to
describe it. The first night upon the ocean was paradise and the
perfection of peace in comparison. To this day the thought of the
swashing water, beaten white against the port-hole before my eyes, is
sickening. A calm--to me, of utter prostration--fell upon us long after
the day dawned, only to be broken by the stewardess, when sleep had
brought partial forgetfulness, with, "It's nine o'clock; we're at
Dieppe, and the officers want to come in here." We tried to raise our
heads. Officers! What officers? Had we crossed the Styx? Were they of
light or darkness? We sank back. O, what were officers to us!

"But you must get up!"--and she began an awkward attempt at the buttons
of those horrible boots. That recalled to life. American boots are of
this world, and we made a feeble attempt to don some of its vanities.
O, how senseless did the cuffs appear that went on upside down!--the
collar which was fastened under one ear!--the ribbons that were
consigned to our pockets! Making blind stabs at our ears, "Good
heavens!" we ejaculated, "who ever invented earrings? Relics of
barbarism!" We made hasty thrusts at the hair-pins, standing out from
our heads in every direction like enraged porcupine quills; being
pulled, and twisted, and scolded by the stewardess all the while;
hearing the thump, thump, upon our door as one pair of knuckles after
another awoke the echoes, as one strange voice after another shouted,
"Why don't those ladies come out?" O the trembling fingers that refused
to hold the pins!--the trembling feet that staggered up the ladder-like
stairs as we were thrust out of the cabin--out of the cruel little
steamer to take refuge in one of the waiting cabs! O the blessedness of
our thick veils and charitable wraps!

I recall, as though it were a dream, the narrow, roughly-paved street of
Dieppe; a latticed window filled with flowers, and a dark-eyed maiden
peeping through the leaves; the fish-wives in short petticoats and with
high white caps, clattering over the stones in their wooden _sabots_,
wheeling barrows of fish to the market near the station, where they
bartered, and bargained, and gossiped. Evidently it is a woman's right
in Normandy to work--to grow as withered, and hard, and old before the
time as she chooses, or as she has need; for to put away year after
year, as do these poor women, every grace and charm of womanhood, cannot
be of choice.

At the long table in the refreshment-room of the station we drank the
tasteless tea, and ate a slice from the roll four feet in length. The
English-speaking girl who attended us found a place--rough enough, to be
sure--where in the few moments of waiting we could complete our hasty
toilets. Beside us at the table, our fellow-voyagers, were two
professors from a Connecticut college of familiar name, whom we had met
in London. They joined us in the comfortable railway carriage, and added
not a little to the pleasant chat that shortened the long day and the
weary journey to Paris. Our number--for the compartment held eight--was
completed by a young American gentleman, and a Frenchman of evil
countenance, who drank wine and made love to his pretty Lizette in an
unblushing manner, strange, and by no means pleasing, to us,
demonstrating the annoyance, if nothing worse, to which one is often
subjected in these compartment cars. It needed but one glance from the
window to convince us that we were no longer in England. To be sure, the
sky is blue, the grass green, in all lands; but in place of the level
sweep of meadow through which we had passed across the Channel, the land
swelled here into hills on every side. Long rows of stiff poplars
divided the fields, or stretched away in straight avenues as far as the
eye could reach. The English remember the beauty of a curved line; the
French, with a painful rectitude, describe only right angles. Scarlet
poppies blushed among the purple, yellow, and white wild flowers along
the way. The plastered cottages with their high, thatched roofs, the
tortuous River Seine with its green islands, as we neared Paris, the
neat little stations along the way--like gingerbread houses--made for us
a new and charming panorama. Hanging over a gate at one of these
stations was an old man, white-haired, blind; his guide, an old woman,
who waited, with a kind of wondering awe stealing over her withered
face, while he played some simple air upon a little pipe--thus asking
alms. So simple was the air, the very shadow of a melody, that the scene
might have been amusing, had it not been so pitiful.

At noon we lunched in the comfortless waiting-room at Rouen, while the
professors made a hasty visit to the cathedral during our stay of half
an hour. We still suffered from the tossing of the sea, and cathedrals
possessed no charms in our eyes. It was almost night when we reached
Paris, and joined the hurrying crowd descending from the train. It was a
descent into Pandemonium. There was a confusion of unintelligible sounds
in our ears like the roll of a watchman's rattle, bringing no suggestion
of meaning. The calmness of despair fell upon our crushed spirits, with
a sense of powerlessness such as we never experienced before or since. A
dim recollection of school-days--of Ollendorff--rose above the chaos in
our minds. "Has the physician of the shoemaker the canary of the
carpenter?" we repeated mechanically; and with that our minds became a
blank.

Deliverance awaited us; and when, just outside the closed gates, first
in the expectant crowd, we espied the face of a friend, peace enveloped
us like a garment. Our troubles were over.




CHAPTER VI.

THE PARIS OF 1869.

          The devil.--Cathedrals and churches.--The
          Louvre.--Modern French art.--The Beauvais clock,
          with its droll little puppets.--Virtue in a red
          gown.--The Luxembourg Palace.--The yawning statue
          of Marshal Ney.--Gay life by gas-light.--The
          Imperial Circus.--The Opera.--How the emperor and
          empress rode through the streets after the
          riots.--The beautiful Spanish woman whose face was
          her fortune.--Napoleon's tomb.


IT may be the City of Destruction, the very gateway to depths unknown;
but with its fair, white dwellings, its fair, white streets, that
gleamed almost like gold beneath a summer sun, it seemed much more a
City Celestial. It may be, as some affirm, that the devil here walks
abroad at midday; but we saw neither the print of his hoofs upon the
asphaltum, nor the shadow of his horns upon the cream-like Caen stone.
We walked, and rode, and dwelt a time within its limits; and but for a
certain reckless gayety that gave to the Sabbath an air of Vanity Fair,
but for the mallet of the workman that disturbed our Sunday worship, we
should never have known that we were not in the most Christian of all
Christian cities. It is by no means imperative to do in Rome as the
Romans do, and one need not in Paris drink absinthe or visit the Jardin
Mabille.

Our first expedition was to the banker's and to the shops, and having
replenished our purse and wardrobe, we were prepared to besiege the
city. There was a day or two of rest in the gilded chairs, cushioned
with blue satin, of our pretty _salon_, whence we peeped down upon the
street below between the yellow satin curtains that draped its wide
French window; or rolled our eyes meditatively to the delicately tinted
ceiling, with its rose-colored clouds skimmed by tiny, impossible birds;
or made abortive attempts to penetrate the secrets of the buhl cabinets,
and to guess at the time from the pretty clocks of disordered organism;
or admired ourselves in the mirrors which gazed at each other from
morning till night, for our apartments in the little Hotel Friedland we
found most charming.

You will hardly care for a description of the dozen, more or less,
churches, old, new, and restored, with which we began and ended our
sight-seeing in Paris, where we looked upon sculptured saints without
number, and studied ecclesiastical architecture to more than our hearts'
content. There was St. Germain L'Auxerrois, the wicked old bell of which
tolled the signal for the massacre of St. Bartholomew. We stood with the
_bonnes_ and babies under the trees of the square before it, gazing up
at the belfry with most severe countenances,--and learned, afterwards,
that the bell had been long since removed! There was the Madeleine of
more recent date, built in the form of a Greek temple, and interesting
just now for having been the church of Father Hyacinthe, to which we
could for a time find no entrance. We shook the iron gate; we inquired
in excellent English of a French shopkeeper, and found at last an open
gateway, a little unlocked door, beyond which we spent a time of search
and inquiry in darkness, and among wood, and shavings, and broken
chairs, and holy dust-pans, before passing around and entering the great
bronze doors. There were the Pantheon and St. Sulpice, grand and
beautiful, erected piously from the proceeds of lotteries. There was St.
Etienne du Mont, and within one of its chapels the gilded tomb of the
patron saint of Paris--St. Genevieve. Who she was, or what she did to
gain this rather unenviable position, I failed to learn. Her name seems
to have outlived her deeds. Whether she was beautiful and beloved, and
put away earthly vanities for a holy life, or old and ugly, and bore her
lot with a patience that won saintship, I do not know. I can only tell
that tapers burn always upon her tomb, and if you buy one it will burn a
prayer for you. So we were told. There is one old church, St. Germain
des Prés, most beautifully colored within. Its pictures seem to have
melted upon the walls. But admired above all is the Sainte Chapelle, in
the Palais de Justice, a chapel fitted up by the fanatical St. Louis,
when this palace of justice, which holds now the courts of law, was a
royal residence. Of course all its brightness was dimmed long ago. Its
glories became dust, like its founder. But it has recently been
restored, and is a marvel of gilt, well-blended colors, and stained
glass. A graceful spire surmounts it, but the old, cone-capped towers,
rising from another part of the same building, possessed far greater
interest in our eyes; for here was the Conciergerie, where were confined
Marie Antoinette and so many more victims of the reign of terror.

On the "isle of the city," in the Seine, where, under the Roman rule, a
few mud huts constituted Paris, stands the church of Notre Dame, which
was three hundred years in building. With its spire and two square
towers, it may be seen from almost any part of the city. I wish you
might look upon the relics and the vestments which the priests wear upon
occasions of ceremony, hidden within this church, and displayed upon the
payment of an extra fee. I did not wonder that the Sisters of Charity,
who went into the little room with us, gazed aghast upon the gold and
silver, and precious stones.

Every one visits the galleries of the Louvre, of course. A little, worn
shoe, belonging once to Marie Antoinette, and the old gray coat of the
first emperor, were to us the most interesting objects among the relics.
From out the sea of pictures rise Murillo's Madonna, the lovely face
with a soul behind it, shining through, and the burial of the heroine of
Chateaubriand. Do you know it? The fair form, the sweeping hair of
Attila, and the dark lover with despair in his face? As for the Rubens
gallery,--his fat, red, undraped women here among the clouds, surrounded
by puffy little cherubs, had for us no charms. Rubens in Antwerp was a
revelation. We wandered through room after room, lighted from above,
crowded with paintings. To live for a time among them would be a
delight; to glance at them for a moment was tantalization. All around
were the easels of the artists who come here to sketch--sharp-featured,
heavy-browed men, with unkempt hair and flowing beards, and in shabby
coats, stood before them, pallet and brushes in hand; and women by the
score,--some of them young and pleasing, with duennas patiently waiting
near by; but more often they were neither young nor beautiful, and with
an evident renunciation of pomps and vanities. We glanced at their
copies curiously. Sometimes they seemed the original in miniature, and
sometimes,--ah well, we all fail.

We looked in upon the annual exhibition of pictures at the Palais de
l'Industrie one day, and were particularly impressed with the _nudité_
of the modern school of French art. Pink-tinted flesh may be very
beautiful, but there must be something higher! We saw there, too,
another day, the clock on exhibition for a time before being consigned
to its destined place at Beauvais. It was even more wonderful than the
one so famous at Strasbourg. This was of the size of an ordinary church
organ, and of similar shape; a mass of gilt and chocolate-colored wood;
a mass of dials, great and small--of time tables, and, indeed, of tables
for computing everything earthly and heavenly, with dials to show the
time in fifty different places, and everything else that could, by any
possible connection with time, be supposed to belong to a clock. Upon
the top, Christ, seated in an arm-chair, was represented as judging the
world, his feet upon the clouds; on either side kneeling female figures
adored him. Just below, a pair of scales bided their time. On every peak
stood little images, while fifty puppets peeped out of fifty windows.
Just below the image of the Saviour, a figure emerged through an open
door at the striking of every quarter of an hour,--coming out with a
slide and occasional jerk by no means graceful. We had an opportunity of
observing all this in the three quarters of an hour of waiting. We
viewed the clock upon every side, being especially interested in a
picture at one point representing a rocky coast, a light-house, and a
long stretch of waves upon which labored two ships attached in some way
to the works within. They pitched back and forth without making any
progress whatever, in a way very suggestive to us, who had lately
suffered from a similar motion. A dozen priests seated themselves with
us upon the bench before the clock as the hand approached the hour. They
wore the long black robes and odd little skull-caps, that fit so like a
plaster, and which are, I am sure, kept in place by some law of
attraction unknown to us. One, of a different order, or higher grade, in
a shorter robe and with very thin legs, encased in black stockings that
added to their shadowy appearance, shuffled up to his place just in time
to throw back his head and open his mouth as the clock struck, and the
last judgment began. The cock upon the front gave a preliminary and weak
flap of his wings, and emitted three feeble, squeaky crows, that must, I
am sure, have convulsed the very puppets. Certainly they all disappeared
from the windows, and something jumped into their places intended to
represent flames, but which looked so much like reversed tin petticoats,
that we supposed for a moment they were all standing on their heads. All
the figures upon the peaks turned their backs upon us. The image of
Christ began to wave its hands. The kneeling women swayed back and
forth, clasping their own. Two angels raised to their lips long, gilt
trumpets, as if to blow a blast; then dropped them; then raised them a
second time, and even made a third abortive attempt. From one of the
open doors Virtue was jerked out to be judged, Virtue in a red gown. The
scales began to dance up and down. An angel appeared playing a guitar,
and Virtue went triumphantly off to the right, to slow and appropriate
music, an invisible organ playing meanwhile. Then Vice appeared. I
confess he excited my instant and profound pity. Such a poor, naked,
wretched-looking object as he was! with his hands to his face, as though
he were heartily ashamed to come out in such a plight. I venture to say,
if he had been decked out like Virtue, he might have stolen off to the
right, and nobody been the wiser. Good clothes do a great deal in Paris.
As it was, the scales danced up and down a moment, and then the devil
appeared with a sharp stick, and drove him around the corner to the
left, with very distant and feeble thunder for an accompaniment. That
ended the show. All the little puppets jumped back into all the little
windows, and we came away.

Speaking of picture galleries, we spent a pleasant hour in the gallery
of the Luxembourg--a collection of paintings made up from the works of
living artists, and of those who have been less than a year deceased. It
is sufficiently small to be enjoyable. There is something positively
oppressive in the vastness of many of these galleries. You feel utterly
unequal to them; as though the finite were about to attempt the
comprehension of the infinite. One picture here, by Ary Scheffer, was
exhibited in America, a few years since. It is the head and bust of a
dead youth in armor--a youth with a girlish face. There are others by
Henri Scheffer, Paulin Guerin, and a host more I will not name. One, a
scene in the Conciergerie, "Reading the List of the Condemned to the
Prisoners," by Müller, haunted me long after the doors had swung
together behind us. The palace of the Luxembourg, small, remarkable for
the beauty of its architecture and charming garden, built for that
graceless regent, Marie de Medici, is now the residence of the president
of the Senate; and indeed the Senate itself meets here. We were shown
through the rooms open to the public, the private apartments of Marie de
Medici among them, in one of which was a bust of the regent. The garden,
like all gardens, is filled with trees and shrubs, flowers and
fountains, but yet with a certain charm of its own. The festooning of
vines from point to point was a novelty to us, as was the design of one
of the fountains. Approaching it from the rear, we thought it a
tomb,--perhaps the tomb of Marshal Ney, we said, whose statue we were
seeking. It proved to be an artificial grotto, and within it, sprinkled
with the spray of the fountain, embowered in a mass of glistening, green
ivy, reclined a pair of pretty, marble lovers; peering in upon them from
above, scowled a dreadful ogre--a horrible giant. The whole effect,
coming upon it unexpectedly, was startling.

We had a tiresome search for this same statue of Marshal Ney. We chased
every marble nymph in the garden, and walked and walked, over burning
pebbles and under a scorching sun, until we almost wished he had never
been shot. At last, away beyond the garden, out upon a long avenue,
longer and hotter if possible than the garden paths, we found
it,--erected upon the very spot where he was executed. He stands with
arm outstretched, and mouth opened wide, as though he were yawning with
the wearisomeness of it all. It is a pity that he should give way to his
feelings so soon, since he must stand there for hundreds of years to
come. The guide-books say he is represented in the act of encouraging
his men. They must have been easily encouraged.

Of the out-door gay life by gas-light, we saw less than we had hoped to
see in the French capital. The season was unusually cold and wet, and
most of the time it would have required the spirit of a martyr to sip
coffee upon the sidewalk. One garden concert we did attend, and found it
very bright and fairy-like, and all the other adjectives used in this
connection. We sat wrapped in shawls, our feet upon the rounds of the
chair before us, and shivered a little, and enjoyed a great deal. We
went one night--in most orthodox company--to the Cirque de
l'Impératrice, a royal amphitheatre with handsome horses, pretty
equestriennes, and a child balanced and tossed about on horseback,
showing a frightened, painful smile, which made of the man who held her
a Herod in our eyes. A girl very rich in paint and powder, but somewhat
destitute in other particulars, skipped and danced upon a slack rope in
a most joyous and airy manner. When we came out, a haggard woman, with
an old, worn face, was crouching in a little weary heap by the door that
led into the stables, wrapped in an old cloak; and that was our dancing
girl!

We went to the opera, too; it was Les Huguenots. To this day I cannot
tell who were the singers. I never knew, or thought, or cared. And the
bare shoulders flashing with jewels in the boxes around us, the
_claqueurs_ in the centre, hired to applaud, clapping their hands with
the regularity of clock-work, the empty imperial box, were nothing to
the sight of Paris portrayed within itself. You know the familiar opera;
do think how strange it was to see it in Paris; to look upon the stage
and behold the Seine and the towers of Notre Dame; the excited populace
rising up to slay and to be slain, with all the while this same fickle
French people serenely smiling, and chatting, and looking upon it--the
people who were even then ready at a word to reënact the same scenes for
a different cause. Just outside, only a day or two before, something of
the same spirit, portrayed here for our amusement, had broken out again
in the election riots. And we remembered that, as we drove around the
corner to the opera house, mounted soldiers stood upon either side,
while every other man upon the street was the eye, and ear, and arm of
the emperor, who knew that the very ground beneath his fair, white city
tottered and reeled.

We saw the emperor and empress one day, after having looked for them
long and in vain upon the Champs Elysées, and in the Bois de Boulogne
where gay Paris disports itself. It was the morning after the riot, when
they drove unattended, you will remember, through the streets where the
rioters had gathered. We were in one of the shops upon the Rue de
Rivoli. Just across the way rose the Tuileries from the sidewalk. A
crowd began to collect about the open archway through the palace, which
affords entrance and egress to the great square around which the palace
is built. "What is it?" we asked of the voluble Frenchman who was
gradually persuading us that brass was gold. "L'Empereur," he replied;
which sent us to the sidewalk, and put from our minds all thoughts of
oxidized silver and copper-colored gold. Just within the arch paced a
lackey in livery of scarlet and gold, wearing a powdered wig and general
air of importance. On either side, the sentries froze into position. The
_gendarmes_ shouted and gesticulated, clearing the streets. A mounted
attendant emerged from the archway; there followed four bay horses
attached to a plain, dark, open carriage; upon the front seat were two
gentlemen, upon the back, a gentleman with a lady by his side. His hair
was iron gray, almost silvery. He turned his face from us as he raised
his hat gravely to the crowd, displaying a very perceptible bald spot
upon the back of his head as he was whizzed around the corner and down
the street. And that was Napoleon III. We saw no American lady in Paris
dressed so simply as the empress. Something of black lace draped her
shoulders; a white straw bonnet, trimmed with black, with a few pink
roses resting upon her hair, crowned her head. She bowed low to the
right and left, with a peculiar, graceful motion, and a smile upon the
face a little worn and pale, a little faded,--but yet the face we all
know so well. Beautiful Spanish woman, whose face was your fortune,
though you smiled that day upon the people, your cheeks were pale, your
eyes were full of tears.

There is nothing more wonderful in Paris than the tomb prepared to
receive the remains of the first Napoleon, in the chapel of the Hôtel
des Invalides; fitting, it would seem to be, that he should rest here
among his old soldiers. We left the carriage at the gateway, and crossed
the open court, mounted the wide steps, followed the half dozen other
parties through the open doors, and this was what we saw. At the farther
end of the great chapel or church, an altar, approached by wide, marble
steps; gilt and candles embellished it, and a large, gilt cross upon it
bore an image of the crucified Lord. All this was not unlike what we had
seen many times. But four immense twisted columns rose from its four
corners--columns of Egyptian marble, writhing like spotted serpents.
They supported a canopy of gold, and the play of lights upon this,
through the stained windows above and on either side, was indescribable.
As we entered the door, darkness enveloped it, save where an invisible
sun seemed to touch the roof of gold and rest lightly upon the pillars;
an invisible sun, indeed, for, without, the sky was heavy with clouds.
As we advanced, this unearthly light touched new points--the gilded
candlesticks, the dying Saviour, but above all the writhings of these
monster serpents, until the whole seemed a thing of life, a something
which grew and expanded every moment, and was almost fearful to look
upon. Filling the centre of the chapel was a circular marble wall
breast-high. Do you remember, in going to the old Senate chamber at
Washington, after passing through the rotunda, the great marble
well-curb down which you could look into the room below? This was like
that, only more vast. Over it leaned a hundred people, at least, gazing
down upon what? A circular, roofless room, a crypt to hold a tomb; each
pillar around its circumference was the colossal figure of a woman;
between these hung the tattered tri-colors borne in many a fierce
conflict, beneath the burning suns of Egypt and over the dreary snows of
Russia, with seventy colors captured from the enemies of France. A
wreath of laurel in the mosaic floor surrounded the names Austerlitz,
Marengo, Friedland, Jena, Wagram, Moscow, and Pyramids, and in the
centre rose the sarcophagus of Finland granite, prepared to hold the
body of him whose ambition knew no bounds. The letter N upon one
polished side was the only inscription it bore. He who wrote his name in
blood needed no epitaph. The entrance to this crypt is through bronze
doors, behind the altar, and gained by passing under it. On either side
stood a colossal figure in bronze; kings they seemed to be, giant kings,
in long black robes and with crowns of black upon their heads. One held,
upon the black cushion in his hands, a crown of gold and a golden sword;
the other, a globe crowned with a cross and a golden sceptre. They were
so grand, and dark, and still, they gazed upon us so fixedly from out
their great, grave eyes, that I felt a chill in all my bones. They guard
his tomb. They hold his sword and sceptre while he sleeps. I almost
expected the great doors to swing open at the touch of his hand, and to
see him come forth. Over these doors were his own words: "I desire that
my ashes may repose upon the banks of the Seine, in the midst of the
French people I have loved so well." On either side, as we came out, we
read upon the tombs the names of Bertrand and Duroc,--faithful in death!
We wondered idly whose remains were guarded in the simple tomb near the
door. It was surrounded by an iron railing, and bore no inscription. Who
can it be, we said, that is nameless here among the brave? Little did we
imagine at the time that here rested the body of the great Napoleon, as
it was brought from St. Helena; but his spirit seemed to pervade the
very atmosphere, and we came out into the gloom of the day as though we
had, indeed, come from the presence of the dead.




CHAPTER VII.

SIGHTS IN THE BEAUTIFUL CITY.

          The Gobelin tapestry.--How and where it is
          made.--Père la-Chaise.--Poor Rachel!--The baby
          establishment.--"Now I lay me."--The little
          mother.--The old woman who lived in a shoe.--The
          American chapel.--Beautiful women and
          children.--The last conference-meeting.--"I'm a
          proof-reader, I am."


BY no means least among the places of interest in Paris is the
manufactory of the Gobelin tapestry which serves to adorn the walls of
the palace _salons_. O, these long, tiresome _salons_, which must be
visited, though your head is ready to burst with seeing, your feet to
drop off with sliding and slipping over the polished floors. The wicked
_stand_ upon slippery places, and nothing so convinced us of the
demoralizing effect of foreign travel as our growing ability to do the
same. When you have seen one or two, you have seen all. There may be
degrees in gorgeous splendor, but we were filled with all the
appropriate and now-forgotten emotions at sight of the first, and one
cannot be more than full. Many of the old palace apartments are dull and
dingy beyond belief, by no means the marble halls of our dreams; but of
the others let me say something once for all. Under your feet is the
treacherous, bare floor of dark wood, laid in diamonds, squares, &c.;
over your head, exquisite frescoes of gods and goddesses, and all manner
of unearthly and impossible beings enveloped in clouds by the
bale,--usually an apotheosis of some king or queen, or both, and, as a
rule, of the most wicked known at that time. The Medici were especially
glorified and raised above the flesh,--and they had need to be. On every
side pictures in Gobelin tapestry, framed into the walls, often so large
as to cover the entire space from corner to corner, from cornice to
within a few feet of the floor, and in this latter space doors, formed
of a panel sometimes, for the entrance and egress of servants. Imagine,
with all this, the gilt, and stucco, and wood-carving; the flowers, and
arabesques, and entwined initials; the massive chandeliers, with
glittering pendants; the mantels of rare marbles, of porphyry, and
malachite; the cabinets, and tables, and escritoires of marqueterie and
mosaic; the gilded chairs, stiff and stark, richly covered; the bronzes,
vases, and curious clocks: and over all the air of having never been
used from all time, and of continuing to be a bare show to all
eternity,--and you have a faint conception of the _salons_ of half the
palaces.

As for the tapestry, pray don't confound it with the worsted dogs and
Rebekahs-at-the-Well with which we sometimes adorn (?) our homes, since
one would never in any way suggest the other. In these every delicate
line is faithfully reproduced, and the effect exactly that of an oil
painting. After long years the colors fade; and we were startled
sometimes, in the old palaces, to come upon one of these gray shadows
of pictures, out from which, perhaps, a pair of wonderful eyes alone
would seem to shine. In old times the rough walls of the grim prison
palaces were hung with tapestry wrought by the fair fingers of court
ladies, the designs of tournament and battle being rudely sketched by
gay gallants. Many a bright dream was worked into the canvas, I doubt
not, never found upon the pattern; many a sweet word said over the task
that beguiled the dull hours, and kept from mischief idle hands. But in
the reign of Louis XIV. the art of weaving tapestry was brought from
Flanders, and a manufactory established on the outskirts of Paris which
still remains. To visit it a pass is required. Accordingly we addressed
a note of solicitation to some high official, and in due time came a
permit for Madame K. and family; and an ill-assorted family we must have
appeared to the official at the gate. There were the rooms, hung with
specimens of the tapestry, for which we did not care, and then the six
devoted to the weaving; long, low, and narrow they were, with hand-looms
ranged down one side. Through the threads of the warp we could see the
weavers sitting behind their work, each with his box of worsteds and
pattern beside him. The colors were wound upon quills, numbers of which
hung, each by its thread, from the half-completed work. Taking one of
these in one hand, the workman dexterously separated the threads of the
warp with the other, and passed the quill through, pressing down the one
stitch thus formed with its pointed end. You can imagine how slow this
work must be. How tiresome a task it is to delight the eyes of princes!
The making of carpets, which has been recently added, is equally
tiresome. This, too, is hand work, they being woven in some way over a
round stick, and then cut and trimmed with a pair of shears. To make one
requires from five to ten years, and their cost is from six to twenty
thousand dollars. About six hundred weavers are said to be here, though
we saw but a small proportion of that number. They receive only from
three to five hundred dollars a year, with a pension of about half as
much if they are disabled.

From the Gobelins we drove across the Seine again, and out to Père
la-Chaise, where stood once the house of the confessor of Louis XIV.,
from whom the cemetery takes its name, the Jesuit priest through whose
influence the edict of Nantes was revoked. A kind of ghastly imitation
of life it all seemed--the narrow houses on either side of the paved
streets, that were not houses at all, hung with dead flowers and
corpse-like wreaths, stained an unnatural hue. We peered through the
bars of the locked gate opening into the Jews' quarter, trying to
distinguish the tomb where lie the ashes of a life that blazed, and
burned itself out. Poor Rachel! Through the solemn streets, among the
quiet dwellings of the noiseless city, whence comes no sound of joy or
grief, where they need no candle, neither light of the sun, we walked a
while, then plucked a leaf or two, and came away.

One day, when the sun lay hot upon the white streets of the beautiful
city, we searched among the shops of the crooked Faubourg St. Honoré for
a number forgotten now, and the Créche, where the working mothers may
leave their children during the day. In another and more quiet street
we found it. We pulled the bell before a massive gateway; the wide doors
opened upon a smiling portress, who led the way across the paved court
to the house, where she pointed up some stairs, and left us to mount and
turn until it was no longer possible, until a confusion of doors barred
our way, when we rapped upon one. Another was opened, and we found
ourselves among the babies. There were, perhaps, twenty in all, the
larger children being in the school-room below; but even twenty
toddling, rolling babies, looking so very like the same image done in
putty over and over again, appears an alarming and unlimited number when
taken in a body. They rolled beneath our feet, they clung to our skirts,
they peeped out, finger in mouth, from behind the doors, they kicked
pink toes up from the swinging cradles, and in fact, like the clansmen
of Rhoderic Dhu, appeared in a most startling manner from the most
unexpected places. Plump little things they were, encased in shells of
blue-checked aprons, from the outer one of which they were
surreptitiously slipped upon our entrance to disclose a fresher one
beneath. How long this process could have continued with a similar happy
result, we did not inquire. Every head was tied up in a tight little
night-cap, giving them the appearance of so many little bag puddings.
Every face was a marvel of health and contentment, with one kicking,
screaming exception upon the floor. "Eengleesh," explained the Sister of
Charity who seemed to have them in charge, giving a sweeping wipe to the
eyes, nose, and mouth, gradually liquidizing, of this one, and trying in
vain to pacify a nature that seemed peaceless. Who was its mother, or
how the little stranger chanced to be here, we did not learn. On either
side of the long, narrow room hung the white-curtained cradles, each
with its pretty, pink quilt. At one end was an altar, most modest in its
appointments, consisting of hardly more than a crucifix and a vase of
flowers upon the mantel. As we entered the room, the sister stood before
it with a circle of white caps and blue checked aprons around her, a
circle of little clasped hands, of upturned eyes and lisping lips,
repeating what might have been, "Now I lay me," for anything we knew.
Our entrance brought wandering eyes and thoughts.

At the opposite end of the room, a wide, long window swung open,
revealing a pleasant garden down below, all green and blossoming, with
an image of the Virgin half hid among the vines. Cool, and fresh, and
green it seemed after the glare of the hot streets, a pleasant picture
for the baby eyes. Out from this window the little feet could trot upon
the guarded roof of a piazza. A little chair, a broken doll, and
limbless horse here were familiar objects to the eyes of the mothers in
our party, and when two children seized upon one block with a
determination which threatened a breach of the peace, we were convinced
that even baby nature was the same the world over. Supper time came, and
the children were gathered together in a small room, before the drollest
little table imaginable--a kind of elongated doughnut, raised a foot
from the floor, with a circular seat around it. All the little outer
shells of blue check were slipped on, all the little fat bodies lifted
over and set into their places, to roll off, or about, at will. A grace
was said, to us, I think, since all the little eyes turned towards us,
and a plate of oatmeal porridge put before each one. Some ate with a
relish, and a painful search over the face with a spoon for the open,
waiting mouth; some leaned back to stare at the company; and others
persisted in dipping into the dish of their next neighbor. One little
thing, hardly more than a year old, drew down the corners of her mouth
in a portentous manner, when the motherly one beside her, of the
advanced age of three years, perhaps, rapped on the table with her
spoon, and patted the doleful little face, smiling all the while, until
she actually drew out smiles in return. The dear little mother! An
attendant with a homely face, creased into all manner of good-natured
lines, resolved herself into the old woman who lived in a shoe, holding
two babies and the porridge dish in her lap, balancing one upon the end
of the low bench beside her, while two or three more stood at her knee,
clinging to her apron. It was like a nest of open-mouthed birdlings.
Blessings on the babies, and those, whether of our faith or not, who
teach and care for them, we thought, as we came away. "Inasmuch as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these, ye did it unto me," said
the Master.

Although I said nothing of our church-going in London, I cannot pass
over our American chapel in Paris, with its carved, umbrella-like
canopy, shading the good Dr. R., who did so much socially, as well as
spiritually, for Americans there. Here came many whose names are well
known; among them our minister to France, an elderly gentleman of
unpretending dress and manner, with a kindly, care-worn face. And here
gathered also a company of beautiful women and children, proving the
truth of all that has been said of our countrywomen. A blending of all
types were they, as our people are a blending of all nationalities, each
more lovely than the other, and all making up a picture well worth
seeing. I wish I might say as much for the opposite sex. One gentleman,
who wore a red rose always in his button-hole, and turned his back upon
the minister to stare at the women, had a handsome though _blasé_ face,
and more than one head above the pews would have been marked anywhere;
but the women and children bore away the palm. The delicate, sensitive
faces which characterize American women, whether the effect of climate,
manner of life, or of the nerves for which we are so celebrated, are
found nowhere else, I am sure.

Besides the Sabbath services a weekly prayer-meeting was held here. They
were singing some sweet familiar hymn as we entered one evening and took
our place among the pilgrims and strangers like ourselves. It was the
last gathering for the winter. Some were off for home, some for a summer
of travel; only a few, with the pastor, were to remain. One followed
another in words of retrospection, and regret at parting, until a pall
settled over the little company--until even we, who had never been there
before, wiped our eyes because of the general dolefulness. A hush and
universal mistiness pervaded the air of the dimly-lighted house; the
assembly seemed about to pass out of existence, Niobe-like. Then up rose
Dr. R., the pastor. I wondered what he could say to add to the gloom;
something like this, perhaps: "Dear people, everybody is off; let us
shut up the church, lock the door, and throw away the key. Receive the
benediction." But no; I wish you might feel the thrill that went through
the little company as his words fell from his lips. I wish I dared
attempt to repeat them. "And now to you who go," he said, at last, "who
take with you something of our hearts, be sure our prayers will follow
you. Keep us in memory; but, above all, keep in memory your church vows.
Make yourselves known as Christians among Christians. And when you have
reached home--the home to which our thoughts have so often turned
together--let this be a lesson. When summer comes and you leave the city
for the country, for the mountains, for the sea-side, take your religion
with you. Search out some struggling little church with a discouraged
pastor,--you'll not look far or long to find such a one,--and work for
that, as you have worked for us. And one thing more; send your friends
who are coming abroad to us. Send us the Christians, for we need them,
and by all means send us those who are not Christians; they may need us;
and the Lord bless you, and keep you in all your goings, and give you
peace."

Then the people gathered in knots for last words--for hand-clasps and
good-byes. Now a spirit of peace and good will having fallen upon us
with the pastor's benediction, we gazed wistfully upon the strangers in
the hope of finding one familiar face; but there was none; so we came
sorrowfully down the aisle. The door was almost reached when a sharp,
twanging voice behind us began, "I'm sent out by X. & Y., book
publishers." "O," said I to the friend at my side, "I believe I will
speak to that man. I know Mr. X., and I do so want to speak to
somebody." How he accomplished the introduction I cannot tell, but in a
moment my hand was grasped by that of a stout little man, with bushy
hair and twinkling eyes. "Know Mr. X.? Mr. Q. X.?" he began. To tell the
truth I had not that honor, my acquaintance having been with his
brother; but there was no time to explain, and retreat was equally
impossible; so I replied that my father knew him well; then thinking
that something more was necessary to explain the sudden and intense
interest manifested in his behalf, added, desperately, "indeed,
intimately." To this he paid no manner of attention,--I doubt if he
heard it,--but rattled on: "Fine man, Mr. X., Mr. Q. X. Know Mr. Y.?
Fine man, Mr. Y.; been abroad a year; I'm goin' out to meet him, I am.
He's in Switzerland, Mr. Y. is; been abroad a year. I'm a proof-reader,
I am. I s'pose you know what a proof-reader is." "Yes," I succeeded in
inserting while he took breath, remembering some amateur attempts of my
own in that direction. He began anew: "I'm sent out by X. & Y.; expect
to find Mr. Y. in Switzerland; fine man--" Will he never stop, I
thought, beginning a backward retreat from the pew down the aisle, with
all the while ringing in my ears, "I'm a proof-reader, I am," &c. "Don't
laugh, pray don't," I said to the friends waiting at the door. "It's
dreadful--is it not?" What became of him we never knew, but in all
probability the sexton removed him--still vocal--to the sidewalk that
night; where, since we do not know for how long a time he was wound up,
he may be iterating and reiterating to this day the interesting fact of
his occupation, with the eulogy upon Messrs. X. & Y.




CHAPTER VIII.

SHOW PLACES IN THE SUBURBS OF PARIS.

          The river omnibuses.--Sèvres and its
          porcelain.--St. Cloud as it was.--The crooked
          little town.--Versailles.--Eugenie's "spare
          bedroom."--The queen who played she was a farmer's
          wife.--Seven miles of paintings.--The portraits of
          the presidents.


THERE are four ways of going to St. Cloud, from Paris, says the
guide-book; we chose the fifth, and took one of the little
steamboats--the river omnibuses--that follow the course of the Seine,
stopping at the piers along the city, which occur almost as often as the
street crossings. Very insignificant little steamers they are, made up
of puff, and snort, and smoke, a miniature deck, and a man with a big
bell. Up the river we steamed through a mist that hid everything but the
green banks, the pretty villas whose lawns drabbled their skirts in the
river, and after a time the islands that seemed to have dropped cool,
wet, and green into the middle of the stream. We plunged beneath the
dark arches of the stone bridges--the Pont d'Alma not to be forgotten,
with its colossal sentinels on either side of the middle arch, calm,
white, and still, leaning upon their muskets, their feet almost dipping
into the water, their great, stony eyes gazing away down the river.
What is it they seem to see beyond the bend? What is it they watch and
wait for, gun in hand? We pulled our wraps about us, found a sheltered
place, and went on far beyond our destination, through the gray vapor
that gathered sometimes into great, plashing drops to fall upon the
deck, or, hovering in mid-air, wiped out the distance from the landscape
as effectually as the sweep of a painter's brush, while it softened and
spiritualized everything near, from the sharply outlined eaves, and
gables, and narrow windows of the village struggling up from the water,
to the shadowy span of the bridges that seemed to rest upon air. Then
down with the rain and the current we swept again, to land at the
forsaken pier of Sèvres, from which we made our way over the pavings, so
inviting in these French towns for missile or barricade, to the
porcelain factory. No fear of missing it, since it is the one object of
interest to strangers in the town; and whatever question we asked, the
reply would have been the pointing of the finger in that one direction.
Once there, we clattered and slipped over the tiled floor after a polite
attendant, through its many show-rooms, and among its wilderness of
pottery, ancient and modern. The manufactory was established by--I'm
sure I don't know whom--in seventeen hundred and--something, at
Vincennes, quite the other side of Paris; but a few years later, in the
reign of Louis XV., was transferred to Sèvres, and put under the
direction of government. It is almost impossible to gain permission to
visit the workshops, but a permit to pass through the show-rooms can
easily be obtained. There were queer old-fashioned attempts at glazed
ware here, some of them adorned with pictures like those we used to see
in our grandmothers' china closets, of puffy little pink gentlemen and
ladies ambling over a pink foreground; a pink mountain, of pyramidal
form, rising from the wide-rimmed hat of the roseate gentlemen; a pink
lake standing on end at the feet of the lady, and a little pink house,
upon which they might both have sat comfortably, with a few clouds of
jeweller's cotton completing the picture. A striking contrast were these
to the marvels of frailty and grace of later times. The rooms were hung
with paintings upon porcelain, the burial of Attila, which we had seen
at the Louvre, among them. Every conceivable model of vase, pitcher, and
jar was here--quaint, beautiful conceptions of form adorned by the hand
of skilful artists, from mammoth vases, whirling upon stationary
pedestals, to the most delicate cup that ever touched red lips.

At noon we strolled over to St. Cloud, a pleasant walk of a mile,
beginning with a shaded avenue, rough as a country road; then on, down a
street leading to the gates of the park of St. Cloud--a street so vain
of its destination that it was actually lifted up above the gardens on
either side. From the wide gates we passed into a labyrinth of shaded,
clean-swept ways, and followed one to the avenue of the fountains, where
we sat upon the edge of a stone basin to await the opening of the
palace. For do not imagine, dear reader, that you can run in and out of
palaces without ceremony and at all hours of the day. There is an
appointed time; there is the gathering outside of the curious; there is
the coming of a man with rattling, ringing keys; there is the throwing
open of wide gates and massive doors, and then--and not until then--the
entering in. As for the fountains, next to those at Versailles they have
been widely celebrated; but as they only played upon Sundays and fête
days, we did not see them. Their Sunday gowns of mist and flowing water
were laid aside, and naked and bare enough they were this day. The wide
basins, the lions and dolphins, were here, with the marble nymphs, and
fauns and satyrs, that make a shower-bath spectacle of themselves upon
gala days. When the hour refused to strike, and we grew hungry,--as one
will among the rarest and most wonderful things,--we left the park, to
find the crooked little town that sits in the dust always at the feet of
palaces. Its narrow streets ran close up to the gates, and would have
run in had they not been shut. Here in the low, smoke-stained room of an
inn that was only a wine-shop, we spent the time of waiting,--our elbows
upon the round, dark table, which, with the dirt and wooden chairs, made
up its only furnishing,--sipping the sour wine, cutting slices from the
long, melancholy stick of bread, all dust and ashes, and nibbling the
cheese that might have vied with Samson for strength. The diamond-paned
window was flung wide open, for the air seemed soiled and stained, like
the floor. Just across the narrow, empty street, an old house elbowed
our inn. The eaves of its thatched roof were tufted with moss, out from
which rose a mass of delicate pink blossoms--pretty innocents, fairly
blushing for shame of their surroundings. Through the long passage-way
came the sound of high-pitched voices--of a strange jargon from the
room opening upon the street, where a heavy-eyed maid, behind a pewter
bar, served the blue-bloused workmen gathered about the little tables.

The white palace of St. Cloud, with its Corinthian columns, stood
daintily back from its gates and the low-bred town; but its long wings
had run down, like curious children, to peep out through the bars; so,
you will see, it formed three sides of a square. It had lately been
refurnished for the prince imperial. The grand _salons_ need not be
described; one is especially noted as having been the place where a baby
was once baptized, who is now ex-emperor of France. In the same room the
civil contract of marriage between Napoleon I. and Marie Louise was
celebrated. A few elegant but less spacious rooms were interesting from
having been the private apartments of the poor queens and empresses who
have shared the throne of France. Gorgeous they were in tapestry and
gilding, filled with a gaping crowd of visitors, and echoing to the
voice of a voluble guide. Royal fingers may have touched the pretty
trinkets lying about; royal forms reclined upon the soft couches; royal
aching hearts beat to the tick of the curious gilt clock, that bore as
many faces as a woman, some one wickedly said; but it was impossible to
realize it, or to believe that high heels, and panniers, and jaunty hats
upon sweet-faced, shrill-voiced American girls had not ruled and reigned
here always, as they did this day.

Versailles lies out beyond St. Cloud, but we gave to it another day. We
were a merry party, led by Dr. R., who left the train at the station,
and filled the omnibus for the palace. There was an air of having seen
better days about the city, which was at one time the second of
importance in France; it fed and fattened upon the court, and when at
last the court went away not to return, it came to grief. The most vivid
recollection I have of the great court-yard, around which extend three
sides of the palace, is of its round paving-stones--that seemed to have
risen up preparatory to crying out--and the grove of weather-stained
statues upon high pedestals,--generals, cardinals, and statesmen who
hated and connived against each other in life, doomed now in stone to
stare each other out of countenance. I am sure we detected a wry face
here and there, to say nothing of clinched fists. It is a gloomy old
court-yard at best. The front of the main building is all that remains
of the old hunting-seat of Louis XIII., which his son would not suffer
to be destroyed. It is of dingy, mildewed brick, that can never in any
possible light appear palatial; and so blackened and purple-stained are
the statues before it that they might have been just brought from the
Morgue. The whole palace is only a show place now--a museum of painting
and statuary. As for the celebrated gardens, we walked for hours, and
still they stretched away on every side. We explored paths wide and
narrow, crooked and straight, and saw clipped trees by the mile, with
grottoes and the skeletons of the fountains that, like naughty children,
play o' Sundays, and all the wonderful trees, shrubs, and flowers
brought from the ends of the earth, and ate honey gingerbread (flavored
with extract of turpentine) before an open booth, and were ready to
faint with weariness; and when at last a broad avenue opened before us
with the Trianons, which must be seen, at the farther end, we would not
have taken the whole place as a gift. It must have been at this point
that we fortified ourselves with the gingerbread.

The Grand Trianon alone were we permitted to enter. It is in the form of
an Italian villa, with a ground floor only, and long windows opening
upon delightful gardens. Like Versailles, it is now a mere show,
although a suit of apartments was fitted up here some time since, in
anticipation of a neighborly visit from Queen Victoria to Eugenie,
making of the little palace a kind of guest chamber, a spare bedroom. As
we followed a winding path through the park, we came suddenly upon an
open glade, surrounded and shaded by forest trees. Over the tiny lake,
in the centre, swans were sailing. Half hidden among the wide-spread,
sweeping branches of the trees were the scattered farm-houses of a
deserted village--only half a dozen in all, of rude, half Swiss
architecture, made to imitate age and decay, quaintly picturesque. Here
Marie Antoinette and her court played at poverty. Do you remember how,
when she grew weary of solemn state, she came here with a few favored
ones to forget her crown, and dream she was a farmer's wife? The dairy
was empty, the marble slab bare upon which she made butter for her
guests. Just beyond was the mill, but the wheel was still. It was a
pleasant dream--a dream of Arcadia. Ah, but there was a fearful
awakening! "The poorest peasant in the land," said the queen, "has one
little spot which she can call her own; the Queen of France asks no
more." So she shut the gates upon the people who had claimed and held
the right, from all time, to wander at will through the gardens of
their kings. Then they hated her, whom they had greeted with shouts of
welcome when she came a bride from over the border. "The Austrian! the
Austrian!" they hissed through the closed gates. And one day they
dragged her out from a bare cell in the Conciergerie,--no make-believe
of rough walls, of coarse fare there,--they bound the slender hands
behind her, they thrust into a prison cart the form that had been used
to rest upon down and silken cushions, and bore her over the rough
stones to the scaffold. Ah, it makes one shudder!

To see the two hundred rooms of the palace of Versailles requires a day,
at least; but we, fearful that this might be our last opportunity,
determined to spend the remaining hour or two and our last atom of
strength in the attempt. A wandering cabman pounced upon us as we came
down the avenue from the Trianons, and bore us back to the palace, where
we toiled up and down the grand stairway, and peeped into the chapel
that had echoed to the mockery of worship in the time of the king who
built all this--the king who loved everybody's wife but his own--so
faithlessly! There was a dizzy hurrying through corridors lined with
statuary, through one _salon_ after another hung with Horace Vernet's
paintings describing the glories of France--the crowning of its kings,
the reception of its ambassadors, the signing of its treaties, the
winning of its battles; but was all this bloodshed, and all this agony
depicted upon canvas, for the glory of France? There were immense
galleries, where, on every side, from cornice to floor, one was
conscious of nothing but smoke and cannon, wounds and gore, and rolling
eyes. We walked over the prescribed three miles and a half of floors
slippery as ice, and gazed upon the seven miles of pictures, with a
feeling less of pleasure or gratified curiosity than of satisfaction at
having _done_ Versailles. Room after room was devoted to portraits, full
lengths and half lengths, side faces and full fronts; faces to be
remembered, if one had not been in such mortal haste, and faces that
would never have been missed from the ermined robes. In a quiet corner
we were startled to find some of our good presidents staring down upon
us from the wall. A mutual surprise it seemed to be. But if we Americans
must be awkward and clownish to the last degree, half civilized, and but
one remove from barbarism, don't let us put the acme of all this upon
canvas, and hang it in the palace of kings. Here was President Grant
represented in the saloon of a steamboat,--America to the last,--one leg
crossed, one heel upon the opposite knee, and his head about to sink
into his coat collar in an agony of terror at finding himself among
quality. His attitude might have been considered graceful and dignified
in a bar-room, or even in the saloon of a Mississippi steamer; but it
utterly failed in both particulars in the Palace of Versailles, among
courtly men and high-bred women.




CHAPTER IX.

A VISIT TO BRUSSELS.

          To Brussels.--The old and new city.--The paradise
          and purgatory of dogs.--The Hôtel de Ville and
          Grand Place.--St. Gudule.--The picture
          galleries.--Wiertz and his odd
          paintings.--Brussels lace and an hour with the
          lace-makers. How the girls found Charlotte
          Brontë's school.--The scene of "Villette."


THERE were one or two more excursions from Paris, and then, when we had
grasped the fat hand of Monsieur, our landlord, and kissed the dark
cheeks of Madame, his wife, and submitted to the same from Mademoiselle,
their daughter, with light hearts, serene consciences, and the ----
family we started for Brussels. It is a six hours' ride by rail.

Almost as soon as the line between France and Belgium is passed, the low
hills drop away, the thatch-roofed cottages give place to those of
whitewashed brick, with bright, red-tiled roofs. All along the way were
the straight poplars overrun with ivy, and the land was cared for,
coaxed, and fairly driven to the highest point of cultivation. Women
were at work in the fields, and more than one Maud Müller leaned upon
her rake to gaze after us. Soon, when there were only level fields
beneath a level sky, the windmills began to appear in the distance,
slowly swinging the ghostly arms that became long, narrow sails as we
neared them. At two o'clock we reached Brussels, after being nearly
resolved into our original element--dust. Nothing but a sand-hill ever
equalled the appearance we presented when we stepped from the train; nor
did we need anything so much as to be thrown over a line and beaten like
a carpet when we finally gained our hotel.

The old city of Brussels is crooked, and dull, and picturesque; but
joined to it--like an old man with a gay young wife--is the beautiful
Paris-like upper town, with its houses covered with white stucco, and a
little mirror outside of every window, placed at an angle of forty-five
degrees, so that Madame, sitting within, can see all that passes upon
the street, herself unseen. Here in the new town are the palaces, the
finest churches, the hotels, and Marie Therese's park, where young and
old walk, and chat, and make eyes at each other summer evenings. Scores
of strings, with a poodle at one extremity and a woman at the other, may
here be seen, with little rugs laid upon the ground for the pink-eyed
puff-balls to rest upon. Truly Brussels is the paradise and purgatory of
dogs. Anywhere upon the streets you may see great, hungry-eyed animals
dragging little carts pushed by women; and it is difficult to determine
which is the most forlorn--the dog, the cart, or the woman. We never
understood before what it was to "work like a dog." At one extremity of
the park was the white, new Senate-house; opposite, the gray,
barrack-like palace of the king; upon the third side, among others, our
hotel. Here we were happy in finding another family of friends. With
them we strolled down into the old town, after dinner, taking to the
middle of the street, in continental fashion, as naturally as ducks to
water; crossing back and forth to stare up at a church or into a shop
window,--straggling along one after another in a way that would have
been marked at home, but was evidently neither new nor strange here,
where the native population attended to their own affairs with a zeal
worthy of reward, and other parties of sight-seers were plying their
vocation with a perseverance that would have won eminence in any other
profession. Through crooked by-ways we wandered to the Grand Place of
the old city--a paved square shut in by high Spanish-gabled houses
ornamented with the designs of the various guilds. From the windows of
one hung the red, yellow, and black Belgian flag. There was no rattle of
carts, no clatter of hoofs. Down upon the dark paving-stones a crowd of
women, old and young, with handkerchiefs crossed over their bosoms, were
holding a flower-market. Just behind them rose the grim statues of the
two counts, Egmont and Van Horn,--who lost their heads while striving to
gain their cause against Spanish tyranny and the Spanish
Inquisition,--and the old royal palace, blackened and battered by time
and the hand of forgotten sculptors, until it seemed like the mummy of a
palace, half eaten away. Just before them was the Hôtel de Ville, with
its beautiful tower of gray stone, its roof a mass of dormer windows. It
comes to me like a picture now--the gathering shadows of a summer night,
the time-worn houses, lovely in decay, the tawdry flag, and the heads of
the old women nodding over their flowers.

Brussels has a grand church dedicated to Saints Michael and Gudule. If I
could only give to you, who have not seen them, some idea of the
vastness and beauty of these cathedrals! But descriptions are tiresome,
and dimensions nobody reads. If I could only tell you how far extending
they are, both upon earth and towards heaven--how they seem not so much
to have been built stone upon stone, as to have stood from the
foundation of the world, solitary, alone, until, after long ages, some
strolling town came to wonder, and worship, and sit at their feet in
awe! We crept in through the narrow door that shut behind us with a dull
echo. A chill like that of a tomb pervaded the air, though a summer sun
beat down upon the stones outside. A forest of clustered columns rose
all around us. Far above our heads was a gray sky, the groined arches
where little birds flew about. Stained windows gleamed down the vast
length, broken by the divisions and subdivisions,--one, far above the
grand entrance, like the wheel of a chariot of fire. All along the
walls, over the altar, and filling the chapel niches, were pictures of
saints, and martyrs, and blessed virgins, that seemed in the dim
distance like dots upon the wall. Muffled voices broke upon the
stillness. Far up the nave a little company of worshippers knelt before
the altar--workingmen who had thrown down mallet and chisel for a
moment, to creep within the shadows of the sanctuary; market-women, a
stray water-cress still clinging to the folds of their gowns; children
dropping upon the rush kneeling-chairs, to mutter a prayer God grant
they feel, with ever and anon, above the murmur of the prayer, above the
drone of white-robed priests, the low, full chant from hidden singers,
echoing through the arches and among the pillars, following us down the
aisles to where we read upon the monuments the deeds of some old knight
of heathen times, whose image has survived his dust--whose works have
followed him.

After leaving the church we wandered among and through the picture
galleries in the old palaces of the city,--galleries of modern Belgian
art, with one exception, where were numberless flat old Flemish
pictures, and dead Christs, livid, ghastly, horrible to look upon. The
best of Flemish art is not in Brussels. Among the galleries of modern
paintings, that of the odd artist, recently deceased, Wiertz, certainly
deserves mention. It contains materials for a fortune to an enterprising
Yankee. The subjects of the pictures are allegorical, parabolical, and
diabolical, the scenes being laid in heaven, hell, and mid-air. In one,
Napoleon I. is represented surrounded by the flames of hell, folding his
arms in the Napoleonic attitude, while his soldiers crowd around him to
hold up maimed limbs and ghastly wounds with a denunciatory and angry
air. Widows and orphans thrust themselves before his face with
anathematizing countenances. In fact, the situation is decidedly
unpleasant for the hero, and one longs for a bucket of cold water. Many
of the pictures were behind screens, and to be seen through
peep-holes--one of them a ghastly thing, of coffins broken open and
their risen occupants emerging in shrouds. Upon the walls around the
room were painted half-open doors and windows with pretty girls peeping
out; close down to the floor, a dog kennel, from which its savage
occupant was ready to spring; just above him, from a latticed window,
an old _concierge_ leaned out to ask our business. Even in the pictures
hanging upon the walls was something of this trickery. In one the foot
and hand of a giant were painted out upon the frame, so that he seemed
to be just stepping out from his place; and I am half inclined to think
that many of the people walking about the room were originally framed
upon the walls.

Brussels is always associated in one's mind with its laces. We visited
one of the manufactories. A dozen or twenty women were busy in a sunny,
cheerful room, working out the pretty leaves and flowers, with needle
and thread, for the _point_ lace, or twisting the bobbins among the
innumerable pins in the cushion before them to follow the pattern for
the _point appliqué_. When completed, you know, the delicate designs are
sewed upon gossamer lace. Upon a long, crimson-covered table in the room
above were spread out, in tempting array, the results of this tiresome
labor--coiffures that would almost resign one to a bald spot,
handkerchiefs insnaring as cobwebs, _barbes_ that fairly pierced our
hearts, and shawls for which there are no words. I confess that these
soft, delicate things have for women a wonderful charm--that as we
turned over and over in our hands the frail, yellow-white cobwebs, some
of us more than half forgot the tenth commandment.

_Table-d'hôte_ over, one evening, "Where shall we go? What can we do?"
queried one of the four girls in our party, two of whom had but just now
escaped from the thraldom of a French _pensionnat_.

"It would be so delightful if we could walk out for once by ourselves.
If there were only something to see--somewhere to go."

"Girls!" exclaimed Axelle, suddenly, "was not the scene of _Villette_
laid in Brussels? Is not Charlotte Brontë's boarding-school here? I am
sure it is. Suppose we seek it out--we four girls alone."

"But how, and where?" and "Wouldn't that be fine?" chorused the others.
There was a hasty search through guide-books; but alas! not a clew could
we find, not a peg upon which to hang the suspicions that were almost
certainties.

"I am sure it was here," persisted Axelle. "I wish we had a _Villette_."

"We could get one at an English library," suggested another.

"If there is any English library here," added a third, doubtfully.

Evidently that must be our first point of departure. We could ask for
information there. Accordingly we planned our crusade, as girls do,--the
elders smiling unbelief, as elders will,--and sallied out at last into
the summer sunshine, very brave in our hopes, very glad in our unwonted
liberty. A _commissionaire_ gave us the address of the bookstore we
sought as we were leaving the hotel. "There are no obstacles in the path
of the determined," we said, stepping out upon the Rue Royale. Across
the way was the grand park, a maze of winding avenues, shaded by lofty
trees, with nymphs, and fauns, and satyrs hiding among the shrubbery,
and with all the tortuous paths made into mosaic pavement by the
shimmering sunlight. But to Axelle _Villette_ was more real than that
June day.

"Do you remember," she said, "how Lucy Snow reached the city alone and
at night?--how a young English stranger conducted her across the park,
she following in his footsteps through the darkness, and hearing only
the tramp, tramp, before her, and the drip of the rain as it fell from
the soaked leaves? This must be the park."

When we had passed beyond its limits, we espied a little square, only a
kind of alcove in the street, in the centre of which was the statue of
some military hero. Behind it a quadruple flight of broad stone steps
led down into a lower and more quiet street. Facing us, as we looked
down, was a white stuccoed house, with a glimpse of a garden at one
side.

"See!" exclaimed Axelle, joyfully; "I believe this is the very place.
Don't you remember when they had come out from the park, and Lucy's
guide left her to find an inn near by, she ran,--being frightened,--and
losing her way, came at last to a flight of steps like these, which she
descended, and found, instead of the inn, the _pensionnat_ of Madame
Beck?" Only the superior discretion and worldly wisdom of the others
prevented Axelle from following in Lucy Snow's footsteps, and settling
the question of identity then and there. As it was, we went on to the
library, a stuffy little place, with a withered old man for sole
attendant, who, seated before a table in the back shop, was poring over
an old book. We darted in, making a bewildering flutter of wings, and
pecked him with a dozen questions at once, oddly inflected: "_Was_ the
scene of _Villette_ laid in Brussels?" and "_Is_ the school really
here?" and "You _don't_ say so!" though we had insisted upon it from the
first, and he had just replied in the affirmative; lastly, "O, _do_ tell
us how we may find it."

"You must go so-and-so," he said at length, when we paused.

"Yes," we replied in chorus; "we have just come from there."

"And," he went on, "you will see the statue of General Beliard."

We nudged each other significantly.

"Go down the steps in the rear, and the house facing you--"

"We knew it. We felt it," we cried, triumphantly; and his directions
ended there. We neither heeded nor interpreted the expression of
expectation that stole over his face. We poured out only a stream of
thanks which should have moistened the parched sands of his soul, and
then hastened to retrace our steps. We found the statue again. We
descended into the narrow, noiseless street, and stood,--an awe-struck
group,--before the great square house, upon the door-plate of which we
read,--

          "PENSIONNAT DE DEMOISELLES.
                HÉGER--PARENT."

"Now," said Axelle, when we had drawn in with a deep breath, the
satisfaction and content which shone out again from our glad eyes, "we
will ring the bell."

"You will not think of it," gasped the choir of startled girls.

"To be sure; what have we come for?" was her reply. "We will only ask
permission to see the garden, and as the portress will doubtless speak
nothing but French, some one of you, fresh from school, must act as
mouthpiece." They stared at Axelle, at each other, and at the steps
leading into the upper town, as though they meditated flight. "I
cannot," and "_I_ cannot," said each one of the shrinking group.

Axelle laid her hand upon the bell, and gave one long, strong pull.
"Now," she said, quietly, "some one of you must speak. You are ladies:
you will not run away."

And they accepted the situation.

We were shown into a small _salon_, where presently there entered to us
a brisk, sharp-featured little French woman,--a teacher in the
establishment,--who smiled a courteous welcome from out her black eyes
as we apologized for the intrusion, and made known our wishes.

"We are a party of American girls," we said, "who, having learned to
know and love Charlotte Brontë through her books, desire to see the
garden of which she wrote in _Villette_."

"O, certainly, certainly," was the gracious response. "Americans often
come to visit the school and the garden."

"Then this _is_ the school where she was for so long a time?" we burst
out simultaneously, forgetting our little prepared speeches.

"Yes, _mesdemoiselles_; I also was a pupil at that time," was the
reply. We viewed the dark little woman with sudden awe.

"But tell us," we said, crowding around her, "was she like--like--" We
could think of no comparison that would do justice to the subject.

The reply was a shrug of the shoulders, and, "She was just a quiet
little thing, in no way remarkable. I am sure," she added, "we did not
think her a genius; and indeed, though I have read her books, I can see
nothing in them to admire or praise so highly!"

"But they are _so_ wonderful!" ventured one of our number, gushingly.

"They are very untrue," she replied, while something like a spark shot
from the dark eyes.

O, shades of departed story-tellers, is it thus ye are to be judged?

"Madame Héger," she went on, "who still has charge of the school, is a
most excellent lady, and not at all the person described as 'Madame
Beck.'"

"And M. Paul Emmanuel,--Lucy Snow's teacher-lover,"--we ventured to
suggest with some timidity.

"Is Madame Héger's husband, and was at that time," she replied, with a
little angry toss of the head. After this terrible revelation there was
nothing more to be said.

She led the way through a narrow passage, and opening a door at the end,
we stepped into the garden. We had passed the class-rooms on our
right--where, "on the last row, in the quietest corner," Charlotte and
Emily used to sit. We could almost see the pale faces, the shy figures
bending over the desk in the gathering dusk.

The garden is less spacious than it was in Charlotte's time, new
class-rooms having been added, which cut off something from its length.
But the whole place was strangely familiar and pleasant to our eyes.
Shut in by surrounding houses, more than one window overlooks its narrow
space. Down its length upon one side extends the shaded walk, the
"_allée défendue_," which Charlotte paced alone so many weary hours,
when Emily had returned to England. Parallel to this is the row of giant
pear trees,--huge, misshapen, gnarled,--that bore no fruit to us but
associations vivid as memories. From behind these, in the summer
twilight, the ghost of _Villette_ was wont to steal, and buried at the
foot of "Methuselah," the oldest, we knew poor Lucy's love-letters were
hidden to-day. A seat here and there, a few scattered shrubs, evergreen,
laurel, and yew, scant blossoms, paths damp, green-crusted--that was
all. Not a cheerful place at its brightest; not a sunny spot associated
in one's mind with summer and girlish voices. It was very still that
day; the pupils were off for the long vacation, and yet how full the
place was to us! The very leaves overhead, the stones in the walls
around us, whispered a story, as we walked to and fro where little feet,
that tired even then of life's rough way, had gone long years before.

"May we take one leaf--only one?" we asked, as we turned away.

"As many as you please;" and the little French woman grasped at the
leaves growing thick and dark above her head. We plucked them with our
own hands, tenderly, almost reverently; then, with many thanks, and our
adieus, we came away.

"We have found it!" we exclaimed, when we had returned to the hotel and
our friends. They only smiled their unbelief.

"Do you not know--can you not see--O, do you not feel?" we cried,
displaying our glistening trophies, "that these could have grown nowhere
but upon the pear trees in the old garden where Charlotte Brontë used to
walk and dream?"

And our words carried conviction to their hearts.




CHAPTER X.

WATERLOO AND THROUGH BELGIUM.

          To Waterloo.--Beggars and guides.--The
          Mound.--Chateau Hougomont.--Victor Hugo's "sunken
          road."--Antwerp.--A visit to the cathedral.--A
          drive about the city.--An excursion to Ghent.--The
          funeral services in the cathedral.--"Poisoned? Ah,
          poor man!"--The watch-tower.--The Friday-market
          square.--The nunnery.--Longfellow's pilgrims to
          "the belfry of Bruges."


WE could not leave the city without driving out to the battle-field of
Waterloo. It is about a dozen miles to The Mound, and you may take the
public coach if you choose--it runs daily. Our party being large, we
preferred to engage a carriage.

We left the house after breakfast, and passed through the wide,
delightful avenues of the Forêt de Soignes,--the Bois de Boulogne of
Brussels,--then across the peaceful country which seemed never to have
known anything so disturbing as war. Beyond the park lies the village
which gave its name to the battle-field though the thickest of the fight
was not there. In an old brick church, surmounted by a dome, lie
intombed many minor heroes of the conflict. But heroes soon pall upon
the taste, and nothing less than Wellington or Napoleon himself could
have awakened a spark of interest in us by this time. Then, too, the
vivid present blinded us to the past. The air was sweet with summer
scents. Mowers were busy in the hayfields. A swarm of little barefooted
beggars importuned us, turning dizzy somersaults until we could see only
a maze of flying, dusty feet on either side. One troop, satisfied or
despairing, gave way to another, and the guides were almost as annoying
as the beggars. They walk for miles out of their villages to forestall
each other, and meet the carriages that are sure to come from Brussels
on pleasant days. They drive sharp bargains. As you near the centre of
interest, competition is greater, and their demands proportionately
less. We refused the extortionate overtures of two or three, and finally
picked up a shrewd-faced young fellow in a blue blouse, who hung upon
the step of the carriage, or ran beside it for the last mile or two of
the distance. The village of Mont St. Jean follows that of Waterloo. It
is only a scant collection of whitewashed farm buildings of brick. We
rolled through it without stopping, and out again between the quiet,
smiling fields, our minds utterly refusing to grasp the idea that they
had swarmed once with an army; that in this little village we had just
left--dull, half asleep in the sunshine--dreadful slaughter had held
high carnival one July day, not many years before. Even when the guide,
clinging to the door of the carriage, rattled over the story of the
struggle in a _patois_ all his own, hardly a shadow of the scene was
presented to us.

As our horses slackened their pace, he stepped down from his perch to
gather a nosegay of the flowers by the road-side, making no pause in his
mechanical narrative--of how the Anglo-Belgian army were gathered upon
this road and the fields back to the wood, on the last day of the fight;
how many of the officers had been called at a moment's notice from the
gayeties at Brussels, and more than one was found dead upon the field
the next day, under the soaking rain, dressed as for a ball. He pushed
back his visorless cap, uttering an exclamation over the heat, and
adding, in the same breath, that just here, about Mont St. Jean, the
battle waged fiercely in the afternoon, when Ney, with his brave
cuirassiers, tried in vain to carry the position; and all the time, the
summer sounds of twittering birds and hum of locusts were in our ears;
the barefooted children still turned upon their axles beside the
carriage wheels as we rolled along, and that other day seemed so far
away, that we could neither bring it near nor realize it. One grim
reminder of the past rose in the distance, and, as we drew near, swelled
and grew before our eyes. It was the huge mound of earth raised two
hundred feet, to commemorate the victory of the allies. Hills were cut
down, the very face of nature changed for miles around, to rear this
monument to pride and vain-glory. Upon its summit crouches the Belgian
lion.

We turn from the paved road, when we have reached what seems to be a
mass of unsightly ruins, with only a tumbling outbuilding left here and
there. The whole is enclosed by a wall, which skirts also an orchard,
neglected, grown to weeds. The carriage stops before the great gates. It
is very cool and quiet in the shaded angle of the battered wall as we
step down. It has been broken and chipped as if by pick-axes. Ah! the
shot struck hardest here. The top of the low wall is irregular; the
bricks have been knocked out; the dust has sifted down; the mosses have
gathered, and a fringe of grass follows all its length. Even sweet wild
flowers blossom where the muskets rested in those dreadful days. At
intervals, half way up its height, a brick is missing. Accident? Ah, no;
hastily constructed loopholes, through which the English fired at first,
before the horrible time when they beat each other down with the butts
of their guns while they fought hand to hand here, like wild beasts.

We enter the court-yard. Only a roughly plastered room or two remain,
where the greed that gloats even over the field of blood offers
_souvenirs_ of the place importunately. In the centre of this court-yard
may still be seen the well that was filled with corpses. It must have
given out blood for many a day. Upon one side are the remains of the
building used for a hospital in the beginning of the fight, but where
the wounded and dying perished in torment, when the French succeeded in
firing the chateau; for this is _Hougomont_.

We came out at the gateway where we had entered; crossed the slope under
the shadow of the branches from the apple trees, and followed the road
winding through wheat-fields to The Mound. Breast-high on either side
rose the nodding crests; and among them wild flowers, purple, scarlet,
and blue, fairly dazzled our eyes, as they waved with the golden grain
in the sunshine. "O, smiling harvest-fields," we said, "you have been
sown with heroes; you have been enriched with blood!"

It was a long, dizzy climb up the face of The Mound to the narrow
foothold beside the platform where rests that grim, gigantic lion. Once
there, we held to every possible support in the hurricane of wind that
seized us, while the guide gave a name to each historic farm and village
spread out before our eyes. Only a couple of miles cover all the
battle-field--the smallest where grand armies ever met; but the
slaughter was the more terrible.

Connected with an inn at the foot of The Mound is a museum of
curiosities. Here are queer old helmets worn by the cuirassiers, hacked
and rust-stained; broken swords, and old-fashioned muskets; buttons, and
bullets even--everything that could be garnered after such a sowing of
the earth.

In unquestioning faith we bought buttons stained with mildew, and
bearing upon them, in raised letters, the number of a regiment. Alas!
reason told us, later, that the buttons disposed of annually here would
supply an ordinary army. And rumor added, that they are buried now in
quantities, to be exhumed as often as the supply fails.

I remembered Victor Hugo to have said in _Les Misérables_ something in
regard to a sunken road here, which proved a pitfall to the French, and
helped, in his judgment, to turn the fortunes of the day. But we had
seen no sunken road. I mentioned it to the guide, who said that Victor
Hugo spent a fortnight examining the ground before writing that
description of the battle. "He lodged at our house," he added. "My
father was his guide. What he wrote was all quite true. There is now no
road such as he described; that was all changed when the earth was
scraped together to form The Mound."

We lunched at the inn, surrounded by mementos and trophies, and served
by an elderly woman, whose father had been a sergeant in the Belgian
army, then late in the afternoon drove back to town.

The pleasant days at Brussels soon slipped by, and then we were off to
Antwerp--only an hour's ride. I will tell you nothing about the former
wealth and commercial activity of the city--that in the sixteenth
century it was the wealthiest city in Europe, &c, &c. For all these
interesting particulars, see Murray's Handbook of Northern Germany. As
soon as we had secured rooms at the hotel, dropped our satchels and
umbrellas, we followed the chimes to the cathedral. The houses of the
people have crept close to it, until many of them, old and gray, have
fairly grown to it, like barnacles to a ship; or it seemed as though
they had built their nests, like the rooks, under the moss-grown eaves.
The interior of the cathedral was singularly grand and open. As we threw
our shawls about us--a precaution never omitted--an old man shuffled out
from a dark corner to show the church, take our _francs_, and pull aside
the curtains from before the principal pictures, if so dignified a name
as curtain can be applied to the dusty, brown cambric that obstructed
our vision. Rubens's finest pictures are here, and indeed the city
abounds in all that is best of Flemish art,--most justly, since it was
the birthplace of its master. Rubens in the flesh we had seen at the
Louvre; the spiritual manifestation was reserved for Antwerp; and to
recall the city is to recall a series of visions of which one may not
speak lightly.

Across, from the cathedral, upon a wide wooden bench in the market-place
we sat a moment to consider our ways--the signal for the immediate
swooping down upon us of guides and carriages, and the result of which
was, our departure in a couple of dingy open vehicles to finish the
city. We crawled about the town like a diminutive funeral procession,
dismounting at the Church of St. Jacques to see the pictures, with which
it is filled. In one of the chapels was a young American artist, copying
Rubens's picture of "A Holy Family"--the one in which his two wives and
others of his family enact the part of Mary, Martha, St. Jerome, &c.
Behind the high altar is the tomb of Rubens, with an inscription of
sufficient length to extinguish an ordinary man. There was a museum,
too, in the city, rich in the works of Rubens and Vandyck, and the fine
park in the new part of the town, as well as the massive docks built by
the first Napoleon, were yet to be seen. The older members of the party
were in the first carriage, and received any amount of valuable
information, which was transmitted to us who followed in a succession of
shouts sounding as much like "fire!" as anything else, with all manner
of beckoning, and pointing, and wild throwing up of arms, that
undoubtedly gave vent to their feelings, but brought only confusion and
distraction to our minds. Not to be outdone, our driver began a series
of utterly unintelligible explanations, the only part of which we
understood in the least was, when pointing to the docks, he ejaculated,
"Napoleon!" At that we nodded our heads frantically, which only
encouraged him to go on. Pausing before a low, black house, exactly like
all the others, he pointed to it with his whip. It said "Hydraulics"
upon a rickety sign over the door. There were old casks, and anchors,
and ropes, and rotting wood all around, for it was down upon the
wharves. We tried to look enlightened, gratified even, and succeeded so
well that he entered upon an elaborate dissertation in an unknown
tongue. What do you suppose it was all about? Can it be that he was
explaining the principles of hydraulics?

We made, one clay, an excursion from Antwerp to Ghent and Bruges. We
left the train at Ghent to walk up through the narrow streets, that have
no sidewalks, to the cathedral. There was a funeral within. The driver
of the hearse profusely decorated with inverted feather dusters, was
comfortably smoking his pipe outside. A little hunchbacked guide, with
great, glassy eyes, and teeth like yellow fangs, led us up the aisle to
the screen beside the high altar, where we looked between the tombs and
the monuments, upon the long procession of men circling around the
coffin in the choir, each with a lighted candle in hand. As there were
only about a dozen candles in all, and each must hold one while he
passed the coffin, it was a piece of dexterity, at least, to manage
them, which so engrossed our attention, that we caught but an occasional
sentence from our guide's whispered story of the seventh bishop of
Ghent, who donated the pulpit to the cathedral, and around whose marble
feet we were trying to peep; of the ninth, who was poisoned as he went
upon some mission ("Poisoned? Ah, poor man!" we ejaculated, absently,
our eyes anxiously fixed upon one man to whom had been given no candle
as yet); of the tall brass candlesticks, supposed to have been brought
from England in the time of Cromwell, and a host more of fragmentary
information, forgotten now. The whole interior of the church is rich in
decoration, black and white marble predominating, with pictures of the
early Flemish school filling every available space. Once out of the
church, we climbed into an ark of a carriage, and drove about the city,
our little guide standing beside the driver, back to the horses most of
the time, to pour out a torrent of history and romance. A most edifying
spectacle it would have been anywhere else. Do read Henry Taylor's
"Philip von Artevelde" before going to Ghent: the mingled romance and
history throw a charm about the place and people which bare history can
never give. Veritable Yankees these old Flemish weavers seem to have
been, with a touch of the Irish in their composition--always up in arms
for their rights, and striking out wherever they saw a head. There is a
new part to the city, with a grand opera-house, shaded promenades and
palatial dwellings, but one cares only for the narrow, dingy streets,
and the old market squares, in which every stone could tell a story.

We saw the tall, brick watch-tower, where still hangs the bell that
tolled,--

          "I am Roland, I am Roland! There is victory in the land,"

and the old Hôtel de Ville, of conglomerate architecture, one side of
which, in the loveliest flamboyant Gothic imaginable, seems crumbling
away from its very richness. In the Friday-market square--it chancing to
be Friday--was a score of bustling busybodies, swarming like bees.
Here, in the old, quarrelsome times, battles were fought between the
different guilds. I say battles, because at one time fifteen hundred
were slain in this very square. Such a peaceful old square as it seemed
to be the day of our visit! the old gray houses, that have echoed to the
sound of strife, fairly smiling in the sunshine, and the market women
kneeling upon the stones which have run with blood. At one corner rose a
tower, and half way up its height may still be seen the iron rod, over
which was hung imperfect linen, to shame the weaver who had dared to
offer it in the market.

There is a great nunnery here in Ghent--a town of itself, surrounded by
a moat and a wall, where are six hundred or more sisters, from families
high and low, who tend the sick, weave lace, and mortify the flesh in
black robes and white veils. When they become weary of it, they may
return to the world, the flesh, and--their homes: no vows bind them. We
drove along the streets past the cell-like houses where they dwell. Over
the door of each was the name of her patron saint. It seemed a quiet
retreat, a noiseless city, notwithstanding the six hundred women! But by
far the most interesting sight, because the most ancient in the quaint
old city, was the archway and turret of the old royal castle, erected a
thousand years ago; only this gateway remains. Here John o' Gaunt was
born. Built all round, and joined to it, are houses of more recent date,
themselves old and tottering, and the arch beneath which kings and
queens rode once, is now the entrance to a cotton factory.

We had only a few hours at Bruges--the city once more powerful than
Antwerp even, but where not a house has been raised for a hundred years,
and where nearly a third of its inhabitants are paupers. But decay and
dilapidation are strong elements of the picturesque, and nothing seen
that day was more charming than a piece of wall, still standing,
belonging to the old Charles V.'s palace--honey-combed, black, of florid
Gothic architecture, rising from the quiet waters of the canal. At one
end it threw an arch over the street, with a latticed window above it,
beneath which we passed, after crossing the bridge. More than one
picture of Bruges rests within my memory--its canals spanned by the
picturesque bridges, and overhung with willows that dipped their long
branches into the water, and the quaint old houses with many-stepped
gables, rising sheer from the stream.

But with all its past grandeur, the old city is best known to us
Americans through the chimes from its belfry tower, and we were some of
Longfellow's pilgrims. We drove into the great paved Place under the
shadow of the belfry tower when its shadows were growing long, and
watched the stragglers across the square--women in queer black-hooded
cloaks; chubby little blue-eyed maidens with school-books in hand; a
party of tourists; and last, but by no means least, the ubiquitous
American girl, with an immense bow on the back of her dress, and her eye
fixed steadily upon the milliner's shop just visible around the corner.
Almost three hundred feet the dingy brick tower rose above us, with low
wings on either side, where were once the halls of some guilds, in the
days when the tower was a lookout to warn of coming foes,--when the
square was planned for defence. In a little court-yard, gained by
passing under its arch, we watched and listened, until at last the sweet
tinkle of the silver-toned bells broke the hush of waiting--so far away,
so heavenly, we held our breath, lest we should lose the sound that fell

  "Like the psalms from some old cloister when the nuns sing in the choir,
   And the great bell tolled among them like the chanting of a friar."

We came back to Antwerp that night, tired, but triumphant, feeling as
though we had read a page from an old book, or sung a strain from an old
song.




CHAPTER XI.

A TRIP THROUGH HOLLAND.

          Up the Meuse to Rotterdam.--Dutch sights and
          ways.--The pretty milk-carriers.--The
          tea-gardens.--Preparations for the Sabbath.--An
          English chapel.--"The Lord's barn."--From
          Rotterdam to the Hague.--The queen's "House in the
          Wood."--Pictures in private drawing-rooms.--The
          bazaar.--An evening in a Dutch
          tea-garden.--Amsterdam to a stranger.--The
          "sights."--The Jews' quarter.--The family whose
          home was upon the canals.--Out of the city.--The
          pilgrims.


AT nine o'clock, the next morning, we left Antwerp for Rotterdam. Two
hours by rail brought us to a place with an unpronounceable name, ending
in "djk," where we were to take a steamer. How delightful, after the
dust and heat of the railway carriage, were the two hours that followed!
The day was charming, the passengers numerous, but scattered about the
clean, white deck, picturesquely, upon the little camp stools, drinking
brandy and water as a preventive to what seemed impossible, eating
fruit, reading, chatting, or pleased, like ourselves, with the panorama
before their eyes. In and out of the intricate passages to the sea we
steamed, the land and water all around us level as a floor; the only
sign of life the slow-revolving arms of the windmills, near and far,
with here and there a solitary mansion shut in by tall trees; or, as we
wound in and out among the islands fringed with green rushes, and waving
grasses that fairly came out into the water to meet us, and sailed up
the Meuse, the odd Dutch villages that had turned their backs to the
river, though their feet were still in the water over which hung rude
wooden balconies, or still ruder bay-windows, filled with pots of
flowers. This monotonous stretch of sea and land might grow tiresome
after a while, but there was something peculiarly restful in that sail
up the wide mouth of the river, beckoned on by the solemn arms of the
windmills.

When we reached Rotterdam, how strange it was to find, instead of a row
of houses across from our hotel, a wharf and a row of ships! Such a
great, comfortable room as awaited us! with deep, wide arm-chairs, a
heavy round table suggesting endless teas, and toast unlimited, and
everything else after the same hearty, substantial manner. There was no
paper upon the walls, but, in its place, paintings upon canvas. Delilah
sat over the mantel, with the head of the sleeping Samson in her lap,
and Rebekah and the thirsty camels were behind our bed curtains. From
the wide windows we watched the loading and unloading of the ships,
while the song of the sailors came in on the evening breeze, and with
it, we half-fancied, the odor of sandal-wood and spices from the East
Indiamen anchored across the way. Our hotel was upon the Boompjes, the
quay that borders the river; but through nearly all the streets flow the
canals, deep enough to float large ships. You can appreciate the
advantage of sailing a ship to the very door of one's warehouse, as you
might drive a cart up to unload; and you can imagine, perhaps, the
peculiar appearance of the city, with its mingled masts and chimneys,
its irregular, but by no means picturesque, houses, and the inhabitants
equally at home upon water or land. Among the women of the lower classes
may still be seen some national peculiarities in dress, shown
principally in the startling ornaments--twisted gold wire horns, and
balls, and rings of mammoth size thrust out from their caps just above
their ears. Whether their bare red arms would come under the head of
dress, might be questioned; but a national peculiarity they certainly
were, and unlike anything ever seen before in the way of human flesh.
Was that painfully deep magenta hue nature or art? We could never tell.
There were some very pretty faces among the girls carrying milk about
the city in bright brass cans, or in pails suspended from a yoke over
their shoulders--faces of one type, round, red-cheeked, blue-eyed, with
the mouth called rosebud by poets, and bewitching little brown noses of
an upward tendency. As they all wore clean purple calico gowns, and had
each a small white cap on their heads, the resemblance among them was
rather striking. These caps left the whole top of the head exposed to
the sun. Only an iron-clad, fire-proof brain could endure it, I am sure.

Not a beggar did we see anywhere in Holland. The people seemed
thoroughly industrious and thrifty. A gentleman connected with the civil
service there--an agreeable, cultivated man, who had been half over the
world, written a book or two, and parted his hair in the middle--gave
the people credit for all these, with many more good qualities, and
added, "They are the simplest minded people in the world. Why, would you
believe it, one of the canal bridges was run into and broken down, the
other day,--a fortnight ago,--and it has been town talk ever since. No
two men meet upon the street without, 'Have you heard about the
bridge?'" And sure enough, when we reached the scene of the accident, in
our after-dinner walk through the city, quite a crowd was collected to
watch the passage of a temporary ferry-boat, the simplest contrivance
imaginable, only an old barge pulled back and forth by ropes. Still
later we found the entrance to a narrow street choked with people,
though nothing more unusual seemed to be taking place than the bringing
out of a table and a few chairs.

Upon the outskirts of the city are pleasant tea-gardens, often attached
to club-rooms, where concerts are held Sunday evenings, attended by the
upper classes. We walked through one, over the pebbled paths, and among
the deserted tables, and then returned to see more of the town. It was
Saturday night. All the little girls upon the street had their locks
twisted up in papers so tight and fast that they could shut neither eyes
nor mouth, but seemed to be in a continual state of wonderment. All
their mothers were down upon their hands and knees, scrubbing the
doorsteps and sidewalk, in preparation for the Sabbath. The streets were
dirty and uninviting with a few exceptions, yet hardly more so than
could be expected, when you remember that nearly the whole city is a
line of wharves; but we felt no disposition to walk through it in our
slippers, as the guide book in praising its cleanliness, says you may.
What an advantage it would be to the world if the compilers of
guide-books would only visit the places they describe so graphically! We
spent a quiet Sabbath here--the fourth of July--with not so much as a
torpedo to disturb its serenity or mark the day, attending church at the
English chapel, and joining in the responses led by a clear soprano
voice behind us, which we had some desire to locate; but when we turned,
at the conclusion of the service, there was only a row of horrible
chignons to be seen, to none of which, I am sure, the voice belonged.

There is nothing to be seen in Rotterdam but its shipping. One great,
bare church we did visit--"the Lord's barn;" for these cathedrals,
stripped of altar, and image, and stained glass, and boarded into stiff
pews, without the least regard to the eternal fitness of things, are
ugly enough. There is somewhere here a collection of Ary Scheffer's
works,--in the city I mean,--but we did not see it. It is less than an
hour's ride by rail from Rotterdam to the Hague, with the same
delightfully monotonous scenery all along the way--meadows smooth and
green, and fields white for the harvest, separated by the almost
invisible canals. No wonder the Spaniards held the Low Countries with a
grasp of iron--the whole land is a garden. The Hague, being the
residence of the court, is much after the pattern of all continental
capitals, with wide, white streets, white stuccoed houses of regular and
beautiful appearance, and fine, large parks and pleasure-grounds filled
with deer, and shaded by grand old elms as large as those in our own
land, but lacking the long, sweeping branches. A mile from the city is
"The House in the Wood," the private residence of the queen of the
Netherlands. The wood is heavy and of funereal air, but the little
palace is quite charming within, though upon the exterior only a plain
brick country-house. The rooms are small, and hung with rice-paper, or
embroidered white satin, with which also much of the furniture is
covered. The bare floors are of polished wood, with a square of carpet
in the centre, the border of which was worked by hand. "Please step over
it," said the neat little old woman who was showing us through, which we
accordingly did. There was a home-like air, very unpalatial, about it
all,--as though the lady of the house might have been entertaining
callers, or having a dress-maker in the next room. Delicate trinkets
were scattered about--pretty, rare things worth a fortune, with any
amount of old Dutch china in the cosy dining-room. In one of the rooms
hung the portrait of a handsome young man,--just as there hang portraits
of handsome young men in our houses. This was the eldest son of the
queen,--heir to the throne,--who, rumor says, is still engaged in that
agricultural pursuit so fascinating to young men--the sowing of wild
oats. In the next room was a portrait of Queen Sophie herself--a
delicate, queenly face--a face of character. The walls of the ball-room
are entirely covered with paintings upon wood by Rubens and his pupils.
"Speak low, if you please," said our little old woman; "the queen is in
the next room, and she has a bad headache to-day." I am sure she had a
dress-maker! As we stooped to examine a rug worked by the royal
fingers, an attendant passed, bearing upon a silver salver the remains
of her majesty's lunch.

From the palace we drove back to town to visit two private collections
of paintings. It seemed odd, if not impertinent, to walk through the
drawing-rooms of strangers, criticise their pictures, and fee their
servants. Upon the table, in one, were thrown down carelessly the bonnet
and gloves of the lady of the house. I was tempted to carry them off.
Only a vigorous early training, and the thought of a long line of pious
ancestors, prevented. Here were pictures from most of the earlier and
some of the later Dutch artists--Paul Potter's animals, Jan Steen's pots
and pans, Vandervelde's quays and luggers, and green, foaming seas, and
even a touch or two from the brush of the master of Dutch art. We
stopped on our way back to the hotel, at a bazaar,--a place of
beguilement, with long rooms full of everything beautiful in art,
everything tempting to the eye,--and after dinner went out to one of the
adjacent tea-gardens. It was filled with family parties drinking tea
around little tables. The music was fine, though unexpected at times,
as, for instance, when a trumpet blew a startling blast, and a little
man in its range sprang from his seat as though blown out of his place.
It was amusing and interesting to watch the stream of promenaders
circling around the musicians' stand--broad, heavily-built men, long of
body, short of limbs; women "square-rigged," of easy, good-natured
countenance. I doubt if there was a nerve in the whole assembly.

At noon the next day, we took the train for Amsterdam--another two
hours' ride. The land began to undulate as we went towards the sea,
with the shifting hillocks of sand raised by wind and wave. We passed
Leyden, famous for its resistance to the Spaniards, as well as for
having been the birthplace of Rembrandt and a score of lesser lights,
and Haarlem, known for its great organ, and still the sand-hills rose
one above the other, until they shut out everything beyond. It was only
when we made a sharp turn, and struck out in a straight line for the
city, that the Zuyder Zee opened before us, the curving line of land
along its edge alive with windmills. We counted a hundred and twenty in
sight at one time, and still did not exhaust them; so many skipped and
whirled about, and refused to be counted. It hardly seems possible that
the city of Amsterdam is built upon piles driven into the sand and mud.
Certainly, when you have been jolted and shaken until your teeth
chatter, for a long mile, in one of the hotel omnibuses from the station
through the narrow streets and over the rough pavements, you will think
there must be a tolerably firm foundation. Such a peaceful, sleepy,
free-from-danger air, these slimy canals give to the cities! You forget
that just beyond the dikes the mighty, restless sea lurks, and watches
day and night for a chance to rush in and claim its own. The canals run
in a succession of curves, one within the other, all through the city.
Upon the quays are the dwellings and warehouses. In the narrow streets,
crossing them by means of endless bridges, are the shops and dwellings
of the lower classes. Looking down a street, no two houses present an
unbroken line. They have all settled in their places until they nod, and
leer, and wink at each other, in a decidedly sociable, intoxicated
manner. The whole city, to a stranger, is a curious sight--the arched
bridges over the interminable canals; the clumsy boats (for the canals
are too shallow to admit anything but coasters and river boats); the
antic and antiquated houses with high gables, rising in steps, to the
street; the women of the lower classes, with yokes over their shoulders,
and long-eared white caps on their heads, surmounted by naked straw
bonnets of obsolete fashion and coal-scuttle shape, and out and from
which, on either side, protruded all the wonderful tinkling ornaments of
which the prophet speaks; the long quays and streets utterly bare of
trees; the iron rods thrust out from the houses half way up their
height, upon which all manner of garments, freshly washed, hang over the
street to dry. Down in an open Place stands the dark, square palace,
grand and grim, where Hortense played queen a little time while Louis
Bonaparte was king of Holland. Near the palace is a national monument,
for the Dutch, too, remember their brave. There are old and new churches
also to be seen, but churches bare of everything which clothes
cathedrals with beauty, having been stripped in the time of the
reformation. I suppose one should rejoice; but we did miss the high
altar, the old carved saints, and the pictures in the chapels.

Some of the finest paintings of the Dutch school are in the national
museum here; _genre_ pictures, many, if not most of them, but pleasant
to look at, if not of the highest art; and we visited another collection
of the same, left by a M. Van der Hoop. There are several other private
collections thrown open to the public. But after all, the most charming
picture was the Jews' quarter of the city. I know it was horribly
filthy, and so crowded that we could hardly make our way; I know it was
filled with squalor and rags, and great dark eyes, and breathed an odor
by no means of sanctity. The dusky, luminous-eyed people seemed to move,
and breathe, and hold a constant bazaar in the lane-like streets filled
with everything known and unknown in merchandise, or leaning out from
the windows of the tottering houses, their arms crossed over the sill,
to dream away a lifetime. Still there was a fascination about it all, a
suggestion of vagabondism, of Ishmaelitish wanderings, of having "here
no continuing city," that touched the heart of a certain Methodist
minister's daughter in our party.

Sometimes the houses rise directly from the water, as did our hotel, the
entrance being gained from another street in front. Our room was like a
town hall, with mediæval bed furniture and sofa, high chest of drawers,
and great round table that might have come in with the Dutch when they
took Holland. The deep windows looked down upon a canal. Across from
them, anchored to the quay as if for a lifetime, was one of the river
boats. Early in the morning the wife of the skipper--a square woman,
brown-faced, with faded, braided hair--ran out bareheaded into the town,
coming back with her arms mysteriously full. Down into the cabin she
disappeared, from whence directly came a sound of sputtering and frying,
with a most savory odor. Up she would come again--frying pan in hand to
corroborate her statement--to call her husband to breakfast. He was
never ready to respond, never, though he was doing nothing to support
his energetic family at the time, but coiling and uncoiling old ropes,
or rubbing at invisible spots with a handful of rope-yarn. I know he
only delayed to add to his own dignity and the importance of his final
advent. Breakfast over, there followed such a commotion in the little
world as I cannot describe--a shaking out of garments, a scraping out of
plates, and throwing into the canal the refuse of the feast, a flying up
with pots and pans for no object whatever but to clatter down again with
the same, and all in the face and eyes of the town, with nevertheless
the most absorbed and unconscious air imaginable. When it was over,
somewhat what red in the face, but serene, the wife would appear upon
the deck, to sit in the shadow of a sail and mend her husband's
stockings, or put on a needed patch. We left the boat still fast to the
quay; but I know that some day, when it was filled with scented oils,
and rouge, and borax, and all the other things exported from the
manufactories here, our skipper and his wife went sailing out of the
canals and along the edge of the sea or up the Rhine, the stockings all
mended, and the good woman not above giving a strong pull at the ropes.

To drive about the streets of Amsterdam is slow torture, so rough are
the pavings, so springless the carriages; but to roll along the smooth,
wide roads in the suburbs is delightful. Upon one side is a canal,
stagnant, lifeless, with a green weed growing upon its still surface,
which often for a long distance entirely hides the water; beyond the
canal are pleasant little gardens and a row of low, comfortable-looking
wooden houses with green doors. Before each door is a narrow bridge--a
neatly-painted plank with hand-rails--thrown over the canal, to be swung
around or raised like a drawbridge at night, making every man's house a
moated castle. We passed a fine zoölogical garden here upon the
outskirts of the city, a garden of animals that ranks next to the famous
one in London; but had no time to visit it, nor did we see any of the
charitable institutions in which Amsterdam excels.

"You know the pilgrim fathers?" said Emmie--whose family had preceded us
by a day or two--the night after our arrival. "O, yes; had not our whole
lives been straightened out after their maxims?" "Well, we've found the
house where it is said they held meetings before they embarked for
America. Wouldn't you like to see it?" Of course we would; in fact, it
would be showing no more than proper respect to our forefathers. So six
of us--women and girls--put ourselves under her guidance. We found a
narrow, dirty street, the dwellers in which stared after us curiously.
Between two old houses was an opening, hardly wide enough to be called
an alley, hardly narrow enough to be looked upon as a gutter. Into this
we crowded. "There; this is the house," said Emmie, laying her slight
fingers upon the old stone wall before us. It was quite bare, and devoid
of ornament or entrance, being evidently the back or side of a house.
Down from the peak of the gable looked a solitary window. A rude
balcony, holding a few plants, was below it, with freshly-washed clothes
hanging from its rail. We rolled our eyes, experienced a shiver that may
have been caused by awe or the damp chill of the spot, and came out to
find the narrow street half filled with staring men and women crowding
about the point of our disappearance, while from the upper end of the
street, and even around the corner, others hastened to join the
whispering, wondering crowd. How could we explain? It was utterly
impossible; so we came quickly and quietly away; but whether this house
had ever been a church, whether the pilgrim fathers ever saw it, or
indeed whether there ever were any pilgrim fathers, are questions I
cannot undertake to answer.




CHAPTER XII.

THE RHINE AND RHENISH PRUSSIA.

          First glimpse of the Rhine.--Cologne and the
          Cathedral.--"Shosef in ter red coat."--St. Ursula
          and the eleven thousand virgins.--Up the Rhine to
          Bonn.--The German students.--Rolandseck.--A search
          for a resting-place.--Our Dutch friend and his
          Malays.--The story of Hildegund.--A quiet
          Sabbath.--Our Dutch friend's
          reply.--Coblentz.--The bridge of
          boats.--Ehrenbreitstein, over the river.--A
          scorching day upon the Rhine.--Romance under
          difficulties.--Mayence.--Frankfort.--Heidelberg.--The
          ruined castle.--Baden-Baden.--A glimpse at the
          gambling.--The new, and the old "Schloss."--The
          Black Forest.--Strasbourg.--The mountains.


WE had made a sweep through Belgium and Holland, intending to return by
way of the Rhine and Switzerland. Accordingly, in leaving Amsterdam, we
struck across the country to Arnhem, where we found a pleasant hotel
near the station, outside of the town. Here we spent the night in order
to break the monotony of the ride to Cologne. After climbing stairs to
gain our room, wide, but so perpendicular that we were really afraid to
descend by them, we had, from a rickety, upper piazza, our first glimpse
of the Rhine, winding through flat, green meadows, with hardly more than
a suggestion of hills in the distance. There is nothing of interest to
detain one at Arnhem. The guide-book informed us that it was the scene
of Sir Philip Sidney's death; but no one in the hotel seemed ever to
have heard of that gentle knight--_sans peur et sans reproche_.

We reached Cologne at noon the next day. The road makes a _détour_
through the plain, so that, for some time before gaining it, we could
see the city nestling under the wings of the great cathedral. How can I
tell you anything about it? If I say that it is five times the length of
any church you know, and that the towers, when completed, are to be the
same height as the length, will my words bring to you any conception of
its size? If I say that it was partially built a couple of centuries
before the discovery of America; that it was worked upon for three
hundred years, and then suffered to remain untouched until recently;
that the architect who planned it has been forgotten for centuries, so
that the idea embodied in its form is like some beautiful old tradition,
whose origin is unknown,--will this give you any idea of its age? The
new part, seen from our hotel, was so white and beautiful, that, when we
had passed around to the farther side, it was like waking from a sleep
of a thousand years. The blackened, broken Gothic front told its own
story of age and decay. Ah, the interminable dusky length of its
interior, when we had crept within the doors! It was a very world in
itself, full of voices, and echoes, and shadows of its own. We followed
the guide over the rough stone floor, giving no heed to the tiresome
details that fell in broken words and monotonous tones from his lips. I
recall nothing now but the fact (!) that behind the choir lie buried,
in all their magnificence, the Three Wise Men of the East. As we came
down one of the shadowy aisles, we paused before a fine, old, stained
window. Our guide immediately became prolix again. "Dis," he said,
pointing to one of the figures upon the glass, "is Shosef, in ter red
coat; and dis is Shon ter Baptised; and dis, ter Holy Ghos' in ter form
off a duff."

When the old woman at the door offered pictures of the cathedral, he
assured us that they were quite correct, having been taken "from
_nature_, _outzide_ and _inzide_."

You must see the old Roman remains of towers and crumbling walls, sniff
the vile odors of the streets, which have become proverbial, and be
sprinkled with cologne--then your duty to the city is done. But almost
everybody visits the Church of St. Ursula, which is lined with the
skulls of that unfortunate young woman and her eleven thousand virgin
followers.

The story is, that she was an English princess, who lived--nobody knows
at what remote period of antiquity. For some reason equally obscure, she
started with her lover and eleven thousand maidens to make a pilgrimage
to Rome. Fancy this lover undertaking a continental tour with eleven
thousand and one young women under his care! Even modern travel presents
no analogy to the case. "And they staid over night at my aunt's," droned
the sleepy guide, who was telling the story. The girls looked at each
other. "Good gracious! what unbounded hospitality!" whispered one. "At
his _aunt's_!" exclaimed a second, somewhat puzzled by the anachronism.
"Don't interrupt," said a third interested listener; "he means
_Mayence_;" and he proceeded with the narrative. They accomplished their
pilgrimage in safety; but, upon their return, were "fetched up py ter
parparians," as the guide expressed it, which means, in English, that
they were murdered, here at Cologne. If you doubt the story, behold the
skulls! We turned suddenly upon the guide.

"Do _you_ believe this?"

"I mus; sinz I tells it to you," was his enigmatical reply, dropping his
eyes.

The scenery along the Rhine from Cologne, for twenty miles, is
uninteresting; just now, too, the weather was uncomfortably hot, and we
were glad to leave the steamer for a few hours at Bonn. Upon the balcony
of a hotel, looking out upon the river, we found a score of young men in
bright-colored caps--students from the university here. When dinner was
announced, they crowded in and filled the table, at which the ladies of
our party were the only ones present. Such a noisy, loud-talking set as
they were! When each one had dined, he coolly leaned back in his chair,
and lighted his pipe! Before we had finished our almonds and raisins the
room was quite beclouded. Then they adjourned with pipe and wine-glass
to the balcony again, where we left them when we went out to see the
town.

The university was formerly a palace, the guide-book had told us; but
all our childish conceptions of palaces had been rudely destroyed before
now, so that we were not surprised to find it without any especial
beauty of architecture--only a pile of brown stone, three quarters of a
mile long. I think we had left all the students drinking wine upon the
balcony, for we saw none here,--though we went through the library,
museum, and various halls,--except one party outside, who stared
unblushingly at the girls remaining in the carriage.

Somewhere in the town we found a lovely old minster, through the aisles
of which we wandered for a while, happy in having no guide and knowing
nothing whatever about it. Outside, in a little park, was a statue of
Beethoven, and in a quiet street near the water the musical girls of our
party found the house where he was born. In the cool of the day we took
another steamer, and went on towards the beckoning hills, at nightfall
reaching Rolandseck. There was no town in sight, only a pier and three
quiet hotels upon the bank, with a narrow road between their gardens and
the water. We chose the one farthest away, and were rowed down to it,
dabbling our hands in the water, and saying over and over again, "It is
the _Rhine_!"

But the hotel was full; so we filled our arms with luggage, and walked
back, up the dusty road to the second. A complacent waiter stood in the
doorway, with nothing of that hungry, eager air about him which betokens
an empty house; cool, comfortable-looking tourists, in enviable, fresh
toilets, stared at us from the windows; a pretty German girl upon the
balcony overhead was sketching the river and the Seven Mountains just
below, uttering little womanly exclamations at times, ending in "_ach_"
and "_ich_." After some delay, four single rooms were offered us; our
party numbered twelve; we left a portion of our company here; the others
went on--to the pier where we had landed, in fact, and with all meekness
and humility sued for accommodations of the little hotel here, which we
had at first looked upon with disdain. Fortunately, we were not refused.

When we came down the next morning, the sole occupant of the piazza
opening upon the garden--where our breakfast was spread--was a stout,
red-faced gentleman of general sleek appearance, who smiled a courteous
"good morning." He proved to be a Dutchman from Rotterdam, who had in
charge a couple of Malay youths sent to Holland to be
educated--bright-faced boys, with straight, blue-black hair, olive
complexions, and eyes like velvet. They were below us, walking in the
garden now.

"We have but just come from Holland," we said, after some conversation;
and, with a desire to be sociable, added that it was a very charming,
garden-like _little_ (!) country. (O dreadful American spirit!)

He smiled, showing his gums above his short teeth, and with a kind of
enraged humility replied,--

"It is nothing."

"It is indeed wonderful," we went on, trying to improve upon our former
attempt, and quoting a sentiment from the guide-book, "how your people
have rescued the land from the clutch of the sea!"

But his only reply was the same smile, and the "Yes?" so fatal to
sentiment.

"We visited your queen's 'House in the Wood,'" we ventured, presently.
"Is it true that the domestic relations of the royal family are so
unhappy?"

"O, the king and the queen are most happy," he replied. "You may always
be sure that when _he_ is in town _she_ will be in the country."

This was a phase of domestic bliss so new to us that we were fain to
consider it for a moment. Various other attempts we made at gaining
information, with equally questionable success. Our Dutch acquaintance,
though disposed to conversation, avoided the topic of his own country.
Still he sought our society persistently, asking at dinner that his
plate might be laid at the same table. Our vanity was considerably
flattered, until he chanced to remark that he embraced every opportunity
of conversing with English and American travellers, _it did so improve
his English_. From that time we found him tiresome. Think of being used
as an exercise-book!

It is here at Rolandseck that the romance of the Rhine, as well as its
world-renowned scenery, commences. Across the river is the
Drachenfels--the crag upon which the remains of a castle may still be
seen, where, "in the most ancient time," dwelt Hildegund, a maiden
beautiful as those of all stories, and beloved by Roland, a nephew of
Charlemagne. When he went away to the wars, she waited and watched at
home--as other maidens have done; but alas! instead of her lover, came
after a time only the news of his death. Then Hildegund laid aside her
gay attire and happy heart, with her hopes, and leaving her father's
castle, came down to bury her young life in the nunnery upon the island
at its foot. But the rumor was false; and in time Roland returned, only
to find himself too late, for Hildegund was bound by vows which could
not be broken. Then, upon the rock called now Rolandseck, the unhappy
lover built a castle opposite the Drachenfels and overlooking the
Island of Nonnenworth. Here he could watch the nuns as they walked in
the convent garden, and perhaps among them distinguish the form of
Hildegund.

On our way down from the arch, which, with a few crumbling stones is all
that remains now of Roland's castle, we passed through one of the
vineyards for which the banks of this river are so noted. Do you imagine
them to be picturesque? They are almost ugly. The vines are planted in
regular order and pruned closely. They are not suffered to grow above
three feet in height, and each one is fastened to a stout stake until
the wood itself becomes self-supporting.

We spent a quiet Sabbath at Rolandseck. There was no church, no church
service at either of the hotels. We rested and wrote letters, sitting in
the grape arbors of the garden; only a low hedge and narrow, grass-grown
road between us and the river. Down below, the rocks and the island shut
out the world; across, the hills rose to the sky, their slopes covered
with yellow grain, or dotted with red-roofed farm-houses, while tiny
villages had curled up and gone to sleep at their feet. It was
impossible to write. The breeze that rippled the yellow water blew away
our paper and our thoughts; and when the steamer, puffing, and evidently
breathless from stemming the current, touched at the little pier, we
left everything and ran out to see the passengers disembark. A band
played at the railroad station just above our hotel, and the park
attached to it swarmed with excursionists during the afternoon. At dusk,
when they had all gone, we wandered up the magnificent road which
follows the course of the river; built originally by the Romans, and
said to extend for a long distance--five hundred miles or more--into
Germany, returning with our hands full of wild flowers. When we went on
board the steamer, Monday morning, we were closely followed by our Dutch
friend and his Malays. They strolled off by themselves, as they seemed
always to do; he joined our group under the awning spread over the deck.
An English tourist seized upon him immediately, and when he had
disclosed his nationality, proceeded with a glance towards us, to quiz
him upon Dutch ways.

"Now, really," said the tourist, tilting back against the rail in his
camp chair, "how dreadful it must be to live in a country where there
are no mountains! nothing but a stretch of flat land, you know. I fancy
it would be unendurable."

"Yes?" was the Dutchman's sole response.

"You still keep up your peculiar customs, I observe from Murray," the
Englishman went on, loftily. "Your women carry the same old foot-stoves
to church, I fancy. They hang up, you know, in every house."

"Ah!" and the Dutchman only smiled that same incomprehensible smile that
had so puzzled us.

"And you smoke constantly," continued the inquisitor, growing dogmatic;
"a pipe is seldom out of your mouths. Really, you are a nation of
perpetual smokers."

"Yes," assented the Dutchman; "but then--" and here his eyes, and indeed
his whole round, rosy face twinkled with irresistible humor, "_you know
we have no mountains_."

A shout went up from the listeners, and our English acquaintance became
at once intensely interested in the scenery.

[Illustration: "At the word of command they struck the most
extraordinary attitudes." Page 157.]

The sail of half an hour to Coblentz was a continual delight. The rocky
mountains rose abruptly from the water, terraced to their peaks with
vineyards, or stood back to give place to modest towns and villages that
dipped their skirts in the stream. At their wharves we touched for a
moment, to make an exchange of passengers or baggage. Often from the
lesser villages a boat shot out, the oars held by a brown-armed maiden,
who boarded us to take, perhaps, a single box or bale, or, it might be,
some bearded tourist with sketch-book under his arm. The passengers
walked the deck, or gathered in groups to eat ices and drink the wines
made from the grapes grown in these vineyards, with the pictured maps of
the river spread out upon their laps, and the ubiquitous Murray in their
hands.

As we neared Coblentz the villages increased as the hills vanished. Each
had its point of interest, or monkish legend--the palace of a duke, a
bit of crumbling Roman wall rising from the water--something to invest
it with a charm. One--Neuwied--is noted for holding harmoniously within
its limits, Jews, Moravians, Anabaptists, and Catholics. The Millennium
will doubtless begin at Neuwied.

At Coblentz we remained a day, in order to visit the fortress of
Ehrenbreitstein. From our windows at the hotel we could look directly
across to this grim giant of rock, as well as down upon the bridge of
boats which crosses the Rhine here. It was endless amusement to watch
the approach of the steamers, when, as if impelled by invisible boatmen,
a part of the bridge would swing slowly round to make an opening,
while the crowd of soldiers, market-women, and towns-people, waiting
impatiently, furnished a constant and interesting study.

An hour or two after noon we too crossed the bridge in an open carriage,
nearly overcome by the stifling heat, and after passing through the
village of Ehrenbreitstein, ascended the winding road--a steep ascent,
leading under great arches of solid masonry, through massive gateways,
and shut in by the rock which forms the fortress. At various points,
guards of Prussian soldiers, as immovable as the stone under their feet,
were stationed. Suddenly in the gloomy silence, as we toiled slowly up,
echoed a sharp tramp, tramp, and a line of soldiers filed by in grim
silence, each one with a couple of loaves of bread slung by a cord over
his shoulder. In a moment another line followed with a quantity of iron
bedsteads, each borne solemnly upon the shoulders of four men. The
guards accompanying them were armed, and wore queer, shining helmets.
Still another company came swinging down to meet us, with fixed,
imperturbable countenances, each bearing a towel in one hand, with
military precision. They were on their way to the bathing-house upon the
bridge.

Scattered about upon the broad esplanade at the summit, or rather
arranged in lines upon the breezy, grass-grown space, were squads of
recruits being drilled. At the word of command they struck the most
extraordinary attitudes. Taking a tremendous stride, they endeavored to
poise themselves on one foot, while they threw the other leg straight
out behind into the air. Being of all sizes, forms, and degrees of
grace in movement, the effect, to say the least, was surprising;
especially as the most intense silence and seriousness prevailed. A
second stride and fling followed, then a third, when a pert young
officer, of the bantam species, seized a gun, and strutting to the
front, proceeded to illustrate the idea more perfectly. At this point
our gravity gave way.

A young sergeant, with a stupid but good-natured face, attached himself
to us in the capacity of guide. He could speak nothing but German, of
which not one of us understood a word. We followed him from point to
point, politely attending to all his elaborate explanations, and were
surprised to find how many ideas we had finally gained by means of the
patient and painful pantomimic accompaniment to his words.

The view from the summit is wonderfully extensive. All the kingdoms of
the earth and the glory of them seemed spread out at our feet; and our
fat little guide grew fairly red in the face in his efforts to make us
comprehend the names of the various points of interest.

When we returned to the carriage the animated jumping-Jacks were still
engaged in their remarkable evolutions; and as we came down we had a
last glimpse of our Dutch friend and his Malays, who were making the
ascent on foot.

The next day, though passed upon the beautiful river, was a day of
torment. The stream narrowed; the frowning rocks closed in upon us,
shutting out every breath of air; the sun beat down upon the water and
the low awning over our heads with fiery fury; in a moment of idiocy we
answered the call to _table d'hôte_, which was served upon deck with a
refinement of imbecility just as the climax of the striking scenery
approached. For one mortal hour we were wedged in at that table, peering
between heads and under the awning which cut off every peak, making
frantic attempts to turn in our places, as parties across the table
exclaimed over the scenery behind us, and consoling ourselves with
reading up the legends in the guide-book held open by the rim of our
soup-plates,--of the Seven Sisters, for instance, who were turned into
seven stones which stand in the stream to this day, because they refused
to smile upon their lovers (fortunately for navigation, maidens in these
days are less obdurate); of the bishop who shut his starving peasants
into his barn and set fire to it, though his granaries were full, and
who, in poetic justice, was afterwards devoured by rats; of the Lurlei
siren, who lured men to destruction, and became historical from the
individuality of the case; of various maidens bereft of lovers by cruel
fathers, and of various lovers bereft of maidens by cruel fate, &c.,
while storied ruins crowned the crags on every hand, always half hidden
under a weight of ivy, and often indistinguishable from the rock on
which they seemed to have grown.

At Bingen, which is not especially "fair" from the river, the precipices
drop away, the stream spreads out in nearly twice its former width, and
is dotted with islands. At Mayence you may leave the steamer; the
beauties of the Rhine are passed.

From Mayence we made an excursion to Wiesbaden; then on to
Frankfort-on-the-Maine, to rest only a few hours, _doing_ the city
hastily and imperfectly; and finally reached Heidelberg at night, in
time for _table d'hôte_. A talkative young Irishman sat beside us at the
table, who spoke five or six languages "with different degrees of
badness," he informed us; had travelled half the world over, but held in
reserve the pleasure of visiting America.

"I have a friend there," he added, "though he is in _South_ America."

"Ah?"

"Yes; at _Mobile_," he replied. "He held some office under government
for a number of years, but during your recent war--for some reason which
I do not understand--he seems to have lost it."

It did not seem so inexplicable to us.

Our conception of Heidelberg had been most imperfect. We knew simply
that it held a university and a ruin. The former did not especially
attract us, and we were sated with ruins. So, when we took possession of
our lovely room,--a charming _salon_, converted temporarily into a
bedroom,--it was with a kind of listless indifference that we stepped
out upon the balcony before the window. And, behold! down below, an old,
paved square, walled in by delightfully dingy old houses; a stone
fountain; a string of waiting landaus (for Landau itself is near by),
with scarlet linings to their tops--giving a bit of color to the
picture; a party of German students crossing the square, wearing the
caps of different colors to betoken different societies or clubs, and
almost every one with a scarred cheek or suggestive patch upon his nose;
and, lastly, on the right hand, and so precipitous as almost to overhang
the square, a hill crowned with the castle, grand, though in ruins,
which nature vainly tries to conceal. There are ruins, and ruins.
Except the Alhambra, in Spain, none in the world equal these.

What this castle must have been in the days of its glory, when it was
the residence of a court, we could only faintly imagine. It is of red
sandstone, and was a succession of palaces, built to enclose a square,
or great court-yard, each of entirely different architecture and design,
the _façade_ of one being covered with statues, another having pointed
gables, &c.; all having been erected at periods fifty or a hundred years
remote from each other. At each corner were watch-towers to apprise of
coming foes. You may still ascend the winding stairs of one, though the
steps have been hollowed into bowls by dripping rain and mounting feet.
Between these towers, upon one side, and on the verge of the hill, still
remains the grand stone terrace,--where a hundred couples might
promenade in solitude on moonlight evenings,--with summer-houses at each
end; and beautiful gardens are still connected with the ruins. For all
these palaces are in ruins. A few habitable rooms only remain among them
all. Several sieges, and partial demolition at times, the castle
suffered, and at last, a hundred years ago, lightning completed the
work, since which time no efforts at restoration have been made.

The whole is overgrown with ivy, and embowered in shrubbery. Great trees
spread their branches in the midst of the walls that still remain
standing, and crumbling earth and drifting dust have filled many parts,
even up to the broken window ledges of the second story. Across the
broad stone steps leading to one of these palaces, tangled vines
disputed right of way, and a neglected cherry-tree had scattered with
wanton hand its over-ripe fruitage. Thrust through a casement was an ivy
that might have vied with many of the trees around in the size of its
trunk, and no artistic hand could have trailed its creepers with the
grace Nature alone had displayed.

There was a grand banqueting-hall, with the blue heavens for a ceiling
overhead. There was a drawing-room, the floor long since crumbled away,
and only the broken walls remaining. Standing upon the loose earth, you
may see the blackened fireplace far above your head, before which fair
faces grew rosy centuries ago, and where white hands were outspread that
have been dust and mould for ages. There was-- But words cannot describe
it, though I should speak of the winding ways like a labyrinth beneath
it all; of the queer paved court-yard, from whence the knights sallied
out in the olden time; of the great tower, split in twain by an
explosion during the last siege; of the wine-cellars and the "Great
Tun," upon which the servants of the castle danced when the vintage was
gathered. In all attempts at word-painting there remains something that
defies description, that will not be portrayed by language. And, alas!
in that the charm lies.

We turned away from it with regret. One might linger here for days; but
we had little time for dreaming.

The road from Heidelberg to Baden-Baden led through a charming country:
indeed, we ceased to exclaim after a time over the cultivation of the
land. So far as we saw it, the whole of Europe was a market-garden,
with prize meadows interspersed. Not a foot of neglected or
carelessly-tilled ground did we see anywhere.

We chanced to spend the Sabbath in this most un-Sabbath-like city of
Baden-Baden. But so far as we knew to the contrary, it might have been a
Puritan village. There was a little English chapel out in the fields
beyond the city, where morning service was held, and our windows,
overlooking a quiet square, told nothing of the gayeties of the town. It
is an interesting old city in itself, built upon a side hill, full of
unexpected stone steps leading from one street to another, and by and
crooked ways, that were my especial delight. It being just now "the
season," the town was full of visitors. The hot springs are of course
the nominal attraction; the shops, parks, and new parts of the city,
fine; but, after all, the interest centres at the Kursaal, or
Conversation-haus. It is a great white structure, with a colonnade where
it fronts an open square, and contains reading-rooms, _cafés_, a grand
ball-room, and the gambling _salons_. Government has at length
interfered, and these last, hired by companies paying a certain sum for
the privilege of beguiling and beggaring visitors, were to be closed now
in two years, I think, or less. In front of the Kursaal a band plays
every afternoon; the colonnade and square are thronged with people
promenading or occupying the chairs placed there, eating ices, drinking
wine, and enjoying the fine music, but all perfectly quiet in manner and
plain of dress. No one was gaudily or even strikingly attired. The
Hanoverian women were the most marked for their queer head-dresses,
consisting of an enormous bow and ends of wide, black ribbon perched
upon their crowns, and giving their heads a peculiar, bat-like
appearance. And in this connection I might say that national
peculiarities in dress are seldom met with in the ordinary course of
continental travel. They still exist to some extent among the lower
classes, and are often assumed and perpetuated to attract the attention
of travellers; but ordinarily you will find people whom you meet
anywhere and everywhere to be costumed much alike. Paris fashions, with
modifications (and in America with _intensifications_), have prevailed
universally, until there are few outward dissimilarities to be observed
among the people of different nationalities. Nothing strikes the
attention of the traveller more than this universal homogeneousness; and
not in dress alone. In Bruges, under the shadow of the belfry tower,
little girls trot off to school in water-proofs, just as they do at home
with us; and at the entrance to Stirling Castle, we passed a sturdy
little boy with his hands in his pockets, whistling, "Not for Jo,"
exactly like other sturdy little boys we know at home.

But to return to Baden-Baden.

We almost fancied a sulphurous odor hung about the gambling _salons_.
Not a footfall echoed upon the softly-carpeted floors as we entered. The
most breathless silence hung over everything. In the centre, a crowd,
three in depth at least, surrounded and hid the table covered with green
cloth, before which sat the _croupier_, with a kind of little rake in
his hand. In our eyes he was the incarnation of evil, though to
unprejudiced vision he would appear simply a well-dressed--not
flashily-arrayed--gentleman, of a rather intellectual countenance, who
might have passed upon the street as a lawyer in good practice, or
possibly a doctor somewhat overworked.

One after another of the bystanders covered the figures stamped upon the
table with gold or silver. The ball in the centre, spinning in its
circle, fell into a pocket with a "click." The _croupier_ called the
winning number I think (though confessing that the game is a hidden
mystery). That quick, sharp utterance was the only sound breaking the
silence. At the same time, with wonderful dexterity, he raked the money
into a pile, and pushed it towards the winner, or, more frequently,
added it to the pile before himself.

I looked in vain for any exhibition of excitement or anxiety among the
players sitting or standing around the table. All were serious, silent;
some few absorbed. Both sexes were equally represented, and old as well
as young. Beside us was standing a woman with a worn, though still fine
face, unobtrusive in dress and manner; a traveller and spectator, I
judged, like ourselves. It was something of a surprise, not to say a
shock, to see her suddenly stretch out her hand, and lay down a handful
of gold pieces, selecting the numbers with an air that proved her to be
no novice. "Click," fell the ball. The _croupier_, with a sweep of the
rake, gathered up her Napoleons. The bank had won. Again she laid down
her gold, placing each piece with thoughtful deliberation. Again they
were swept away; and even the third time. She made no exclamation. She
did not so much as raise her eyes from the table as she prepared to make
a fourth attempt. There was no change in her face, except a certain
fixedness which came over it, and a faint tinge of color rising in her
cheeks.

We breathed more freely when we had gained the open air. I am sure there
was an odor of sulphur about the place.

The scenery around Baden-Baden is striking and wild. Gloomy valleys
abound, and dark forests cover many of the hills. We took a kind of
wagonet one morning, and climbed the mountain behind the city, passing
what is known as the "New Schloss," or castle, before leaving its
limits. It is anything but _new_, however, having been erected some four
or five hundred years. Its horrible dungeons, where all manner of
torments were inflicted, and tortures suffered by the unfortunate
wretches incarcerated here, attract scores of visitors. We went on, by
the zigzag road up the mountain, to the Old Schloss upon its summit.
This was the residence of the reigning family of Baden before the
erection of the New Schloss. Hardly anything remains of it now but the
walls of a square tower, from the battlements of which, by mounting to
an encircling gallery, you may obtain a view well worth the effort. As
far as the eye can see in one direction, extends the Black Forest--the
very name of which brings to mind elfish legends innumerable. But,
though our way led along its edge, so that we were shut in by the chill
and gloom of the evergreens which give it its name, we saw neither elves
nor gnomes, nor the traditional "wood-cutter, named Hans, who lived upon
the borders of the Black Forest," about whom we used to read when we
were children.

From Baden-Baden we took the railroad, following the course of the
Rhine to Strasbourg, spending only a night here, in order to visit the
beautiful cathedral; then on to Lucerne, waiting an hour or two to break
the long day's ride, at Basle. Here the mountains began to grow before
our eyes. We shot through tunnel after tunnel, cut in the solid rock,
and suddenly sweeping around a curve, the everlasting hills wrapped in
perpetual snows, greeted our astonished sight. We had reached the Mecca
of our hopes at last.




CHAPTER XIII.

DAYS IN SWITZERLAND.

          The Lake of Lucerne.--Days of rest in the
          city.--An excursion up the Righi.--The crowd at
          the summit.--Dinner at midnight.--Rising before
          "the early worm."--The "sun-rise" according to
          Murray.--Animated scarecrows.--Off for a tour
          through Switzerland.--The lake for the last
          time.--Grütlii.--William Tell's
          chapel.--Fluellen.--Altorf.--Swiss haymakers.--An
          hour at Amsteg.--The rocks close in.--The Devil's
          Bridge.--The dangerous road.--"A carriage has gone
          over the precipice!"--Andermatt.--Desolate
          rocks.--Exquisite wild flowers.--The summit of the
          Furka.--A descent to the Rhone glacier.--Into the
          ice.--Swiss villages.--Brieg.--The convent
          inn.--The bare little chapel on the hill.--To
          Martigny.


WHEN we forget the scene before our dazzled eyes as we stepped out upon
the balcony of the hotel Bellevue at Lucerne, earth will have passed
away. There lay the fair lake, the emerald hills rising from its blue
depths on every side, save where the queer old town sweeps around its
curve, or beyond Pilatus, where the chain is broken, and a strip of
level land lies along the water's edge, sprinkled with red-roofed
farm-houses set in the midst of grain-fields, and with rows of tall,
straight poplars extending to the water. This sight of peaceful homes
among the heavenly hills is like a vision of earth in mid-heaven.
Beyond, above, overlapping each other, rise these delectable hills. No
earthly air envelops them. No earthly feet tread their fair summits.
Upon the highest, among the eternal snows, rest the clouds. Truly, the
heavens declare the glory of God; but Switzerland showeth his handiwork!

Beautiful was the lake in the hazy morning light, when the hills cast
purple and green shadows over its bosom, when the breeze rippled its
surface, and the path in the wake of the little steamer widened into an
endless way; beautiful in the glare of the noonday sun, when a veil of
mist half hid the far-off mountains, and the water gleamed like molten
gold; but most beautiful of all when the mountains wrapped themselves in
the shadows of night, and stole away into the darkness, while upon their
white, still faces shone the rays of the setting sun. Then grim Pilatus
stepped forth; the moon, like a burnished globe, hung over the water,
across which the little steamer ploughed silver furrows, or tiny boats,
impelled by flashing oars, shot over the still surface, now near, now
far away; but dim, unreal, always.

It was a place of rest to us--this city of Lucerne; the "House
Beautiful," where we tarried for a time before setting out again upon
our pilgrimage. We wandered about the narrow streets, visited the dingy
shops full of wood carvings or ornaments cut in the many-hued crystals;
strayed over the low hills behind the town, through fields set with
painted shrines; paused before Thorwaldsen's Dying Lion, cut in the
living rock--the grandest monument that heroes ever won; and once, in
the stillness of a summer morning, sat in the cathedral and heard the
angels sing, when the old organist laid his hands upon the keys. Sabbath
mornings we sang the old versified psalms, and listened to the
exposition of a rigid faith from the lips of a Scotch Presbyterian
minister, in an old Roman Catholic church--the walls hung with pictured
saints and martyrs, the high altar only partially concealed, and a
company of women kneeling by the door to tell their beads. Not only
rest, but Christian charity, had we found here.

Almost every one who spends any time at Lucerne ascends the Righi to see
the sun rise. Accordingly, five of our number prepared to follow the
universal custom. In one of the little shops of the town we found some
light, straw hats, with wide rims, for which we gave the extravagant
price of three cents apiece, trimming them afterwards to suit individual
taste, with ribbons, soft white lawn, and even mountain ferns and
grasses. We slung our wraps over our shoulders by a strap,--a most
uncomfortable arrangement by the way,--discarded crinoline, brought into
use the shabbiest gowns in our possession, packed hand-satchels with
whatever was necessary for a night upon the mountain, and then declared
ourselves ready for any disclosures of the future or the Righi.

A little steamer bore us from Lucerne to Weggis--a half hour's sail. We
found Weggis to be only an insignificant village, almost pushed into the
lake by the crowding mountain, and seeming to contain nothing but guides
and shabby horses. As we left the steamer, the open space between the
pier and the hotel facing it was crowded with tourists, waiting for or
bargaining with the guides for these sorry-looking beasts. No matter of
what age, sex, or condition in life you may be, if you visit
Switzerland, you will make, at least one, equestrian attempt; but in
truth, there is nothing to fear for even the most inexperienced, as a
guide usually leads each horse. The saddles for the use of ladies are
provided with a rail upon one side, and the nature of the paths are
such, that it would be impossible to go beyond a walk. The only danger
is from over-fatigue in descending the rocky, slippery way, often like
flights of stairs; then, exhausted from trying to hold back in the
saddle, dizzy from gazing into frightful depths, one might easily become
unseated.

When our guides were secured, one dejected beast after another was led
to the wooden steps, always provided for mounting and dismounting; we
climbed to our several elevations with some inward quaking, fell into
line,--for single file is the invariable rule,--and passed out of the
village by immediately beginning the ascent, describing, in our saddles
every known curve and angle, as the path became more and more rough and
precipitous. For guides we had a man with a rakish air, and--we judged
from his gait--a wooden leg, who tragically wrung the perspiration from
his red flannel shirt at intervals; a boy, with one of those open
countenances only saved from complete lateral division by the merciful
interposition of the ears, and a wizen-faced old man of so feeble an
appearance as to excite my constant sympathy, since his place chanced to
be by my side. He assured me continually that he was not tired, though
before half of the three hours of the ascent had passed, his pale face
belied his words. He was quite ready to converse, but I could with
difficulty understand his English. We had paused at a wayside shed to
rest the horses, and offer some refreshment to the guides, when I
addressed him with,--

"What is that you are drinking? Is it goat's milk?"

"Noo, leddy," was his reply. "It is coo's;" at the same time, and with
the utmost simplicity and good will, offering me the glass from which he
had been drinking, that I might taste and judge for myself.

It is nearly nine miles to the summit, or Righi-Kulm. The bridle-path is
rocky, rough, and steep, with a grassy slope upon either side, sprinkled
at this season with dandelions, blue-bells, and odd yellow butter-cups.
Often this slope changed to a precipice, still smiling with flowers.
Upon every level spot orchards of pear trees and apricots had been
planted, while evergreens and shrubs innumerable clung to the mountain
sides, or sprang from among the rocks.

Tossed about wherever they could find a resting-place, were great
boulders of pudding-stone, overhanging the path, rising in our way, or
rolling in broken masses under the horses' feet. Sometimes, perched upon
a natural terrace, was a _châlet_, sheltered from sweep of wind or
avalanche by overhanging rocks half covered with ivy and dainty
clematis. Occasionally a beggar barred the way with outstretched hand,
or offered for sale some worthless trinket, as an excuse for asking
alms. We hugged the rocks upon one side, as other lines of tourists
wound down to meet us, upon horseback or afoot with alpenstocks to aid
their steps. Peasants, laden like beasts of burden, passed as we paused
to rest, with trunks, provisions, and even the red tiles for the new
hotel above, strapped upon their backs, or resting there on wooden
frames. They came and went; but ever present were the wonderful glimpses
of earth, and sky, and shimmering lake far down below.

At the half-way house we turn to climb a gentle slope upon the mountain
face. On either side the land spreads out smooth and green. It had been
hot below. The air strikes us here with an icy chill. A party of young
Englishmen in knickerbockers, with blue veils tied about their hats,
lean over the railing of the piazza, and scan us as we pass. A Spaniard,
with his dark-faced wife, step out of the path--all manner of oily words
dropping from their lips. We reach the Righi-Staffel. Suddenly, upon one
side, the land falls away. Among the reverberating hills echoes the
_jödel_, and from a terrace far below, where a herd of dun cows are
feeding, rises the tinkle of sweet-toned bells. From every path--and
there are many now--winds a slow procession. The grassy slopes are all
alive with people; the hotel piazza, as we pass, is crowded with
travellers. Still they pour in from every side. Still the mountain-peak
rises above us as we go on joining other trains, and leading others in
turn. We pass through a rough gateway, ascend the broken rocks that rise
like steps, follow again the narrow path, and reach at last the hotel,
just before which rises the Kulm.

Talk of the solitude of nature! It is not found among these mountain
peaks, grand though they are. We dismounted in the midst of a noisy
crowd. Exclamations in seemingly every known tongue echoed about us, as
one party after another arrived to swell the confusion. The hill before
us swarmed with tourists, who had come, like ourselves, to see the sun
rise. The hotel, and even the adjoining house into which the former
overflows, were more than full. Since we had taken the precaution to
telegraph,--for telegraphic communication is held with most of these
mountain resorts,--some show of civility awaited us. A single room was
given to the four ladies of our party, where, a few hours later, we
disposed ourselves as best we could. It was only a rough place, with
bare plastered walls, and unpainted wooden floor; but we were not
disposed to be fastidious. Dropping our satchels, we hastened up the
hill before the house. It fell in a precipice upon the other side--to
what frightful depth I know not. Down below, the hills spread out like
level land, with lakes where every valley should be, and villages, like
white dots only, upon the universal green, among which the River Reuss
wound like a silver thread. But above and over all, against the sky,
rose the mountains--the Bernese Alps, like alabaster walls, the gates of
which, flung back, would open heavenward.

We wandered over the hillocks, which make up the summit, until the sun
was gone. Gradually the darkness gathered--a thickening of the shadows
until they seemed almost tangible. There was no flame of gold and
crimson where the sun had disappeared; there were no clouds to reflect
the warm yellow light that hung about the west. But when the night
wrapped us in, the little lakes down below gleamed out like stars.

The crowd that pushed and fairly wedged itself into the _salle à
manger_, when dinner was announced at eight o'clock, was quite beyond
belief or computation. Everybody was tired, hungry, and impatient, after
the ride to the summit. For once, silver was at a discount. One of the
waiters was finally bribed to give us a private room, and slyly edged
our party into a pantry, where he brought us, at immense intervals, a
spoonful of soup and a hot plate apiece, after which, his resources
utterly failing, he acknowledged that he could do no more. The second
_table d'hôte_ was served between the hours of ten and eleven at night,
and consisted of numerous courses, with a similarity of flavor,
suggesting one universal saucepan.

It was midnight when we finally gained our rooms, and threw ourselves
upon the uncomfortable beds. The linen was wet, rather than damp. The
only covering consisted of a single blanket, and the _duvet_ or down
pillow, always found upon the foot of continental beds.

We imagined that the sun would appear with the very earliest known worm,
and at least an hour before the most ambitious lark, and dared not close
our eyes, lest they should not open in time to greet him. At last,
however, sleep overpowered our fears. Katie's voice roused us.

"It is three o'clock," she said, "and growing light, and I believe
people are hurrying up the hill."

Profane persons should avoid the Righi; it is a place of terrible
temptation. "Good heavens!" we responded, "what kind of a sun can it be
to rise at such an hour?"

[Illustration: "Frowsy, sleepy, cross, and caring nothing whatever for
the sun, moon, or stars, we stood like a company of Bedlamites, ankle
deep in the wet grass upon the summit." Page 176.]

Our room was upon the ground floor. We pushed open the shutters and
peered out, facing an untimely Gabriel, just raising to his lips an
Alpine horn some six feet in length. Evidently the hour had arrived. We
thrust our feet into our boots, tied our hats under our chins, and ran
out to join a most ridiculous collection of animated scarecrows like
ourselves. Frowsy, sleepy, cross, and caring nothing whatever for the
sun, moon, or stars, we stood like a company of Bedlamites, ankle deep
in the wet grass upon the summit. No sun of irreproachable moral
character and well-regulated habits would appear at such an hour, we
knew. The light strengthened with our impatience. Every half-closed eye
was fixed upon that corner of the heavens from which the sun would sally
forth. The golden gates had opened. A red banner floated out. Tiny
clouds on either side awaited his coming, dressed in crimson and yellow
livery. Every one of us stood upon tiptoe--the heels of our unbuttoned
boots thereupon dropping down. One collarless tourist, in whose outward
adorning suspenders played a conspicuous part, gravely opened his
guide-book, found the place with some difficulty, and buried his head in
the pages, to assure himself that everything was proceeding according to
Murray. Suddenly the white faces of the distant mountains grew purple
with a rage which we all shared; the flaming banner streamed out across
the east, and the king of day, with most majestic step, but frightfully
swollen, tell-tale countenance, rose in the heavens. I am sure he had
been out all night.

The light grew clearer now. The mountains rose reluctantly, and shook
off their wrappings of mist. The little clouds doffed their crimson
finery. The man held together by the marvellous complication of
shoulder-straps, closed his guide-book with an air of entire
satisfaction. Evidently the programme, as laid down by Murray, had been
accurately carried out. Everybody exclaimed, "Wonderful!" in his or her
native tongue. All the knickerbockers, and woollen shirts, and lank
water-proofs, without any back hair to speak of, trotted off down the
hill to be metamorphosed into human beings, and prepare for breakfast,
even to the individual who had been stalking about in a white bed
blanket, with a striped border--though printed notices in every room
expressly forbade the using of bed blankets as morning wraps.

When breakfast was over, there was nothing to do but to make the descent
to Weggis, and return to Lucerne.

After a time, when weariness could no longer be made an excuse for
lingering, we prepared for a tour through Switzerland. Engaging
carriages to meet us at Fluellen, we embarked for the last time upon the
beautiful lake, winding in and out its intricate ways, shut in by the
towering cliffs that closed before us, only to re-open, revealing new
charms as we rounded some promontory, and the lake widened again. Upon
the bays thus formed, villages lean against the mountain-side. Where the
rocks fall abruptly to the water, an occasional _châlet_ is perched upon
some natural terrace, in the midst of an orchard or scanty garden. As we
touched at these lake villages, brown-faced girls, in scant blue
petticoats and black bodices, and with faded hair braided in their
necks, offered us fruits--apricots and cherries--in pretty, rustic
baskets.

One of these green spots, high among the rocks, forms a sloping meadow,
touching the water at last. It is an oasis in the surrounding desert of
barren rock. Do you know why the grass is greener here than elsewhere?
why the sun bestows its kisses more warmly? why the foliage upon the
scattered walnut and chestnut trees is thicker, darker, than upon those
on other mountain-sides? It is because this is Grütlii--the birthplace
of Swiss liberty. Here, more than five hundred years ago, the three
confederates met at night to plan the throwing off of the Austrian yoke.

Not far from Grütlii, resting apparently upon the water, at the base of
one of these cliffs, is what appears at first sight to be a pretty green
and white summer-house, open towards the lake. It is Tell's Chapel,
built upon a shelf of rock, and only approachable from the water.
Here--so the story runs--William Tell sprang ashore, and escaped the
tyrant Gessler. We sweep around this promontory and gain the last bay
where lies Fluellen--a ragged village, swarming with tourists,
vetturinos, and diligences. Among the carriages we find our own. It is a
roomy landau, luxuriously lined with scarlet velvet, drawn by three
horses which wear tinkling bells, and is capable of carrying six
passengers. The top is thrown back, but a kind of calash-shade screens
from the sun the occupants of what we should call the driver's seat. Our
driver's place is a narrow board behind the horses. One crack of a long
whip, and we are off at a rattling pace over the hard road, smooth as a
floor.

For the first day we are to follow the pass of St. Gothard--that
well-travelled highway which leads through mountain defiles into Italy.
We dashed by Altorf, where the family of Queen Victoria's husband
originated, passing the open square in which William Tell shot the apple
from the head of his son. An old man is watering a horse at the basin of
the stone fountain which marks the spot where the father stood. All this
valley is sacred to the memory of William Tell. In a village near by he
was born; in the mountain stream, just beyond, he is said to have lost
his life in the attempt to save a drowning child. After Altorf, the road
winds among the meadows, though the mountains rise on every side, with
_châlets_ perched upon points which seem inaccessible, so steep are
their sides. It is haying time, and men and women are at work in the
fields and upon the mountain-sides, carefully securing every blade of
grass. Once, when we had begun to wind up the mountains, where a
grass-grown precipice fell almost sheer to the valley below, a girl
clung to its side, and pulled with one hand the grass from between the
rocks, thrusting it into a bag that hung about her neck. She paused to
gaze after us as we dashed by, a kind of dull awe that never rose to
envy lighting her face for an instant. O, the hungry, pitiful faces of
these dwellers upon the heights! the pinched, starved faces of the
little ones especially, who forgot to smile--how they haunted us! At
noon we sweep up to the post-house at Amsteg, with a jingle of bells, a
crack of the whip, and an annunciatory shout from the driver. There is
no village that we can see. The piazza of the post-house is filled with
travellers, lunching before a long table; half a dozen waiting carriages
stand in the open space before it; as many hostlers, with knit caps
upon their heads, from which hang long, bright-colored tassels, are busy
among the horses. At a short distance the Reuss River rushes past the
house; upon its bank is a little shop, with its store of Swiss
curiosities and trinkets. A couple of girls fill a tray with the dainty
wares, and cross the space to tempt us. One has a scarlet handkerchief
knotted under her handsome, dark face. She turns her brown cheek to her
shoulder, tossing a word back as the young hostlers contrive to stand in
her way.

One by one the carriages take up their loads and go on. We soon follow
and overtake them, winding slowly up among the rocks, which seem ready
to fall upon us. We form a long train, a strange procession, bound by no
tie but that of common humanity. The meadows and soft, green
mountain-slopes are left behind as we ascend, crossing from one side to
the other by arched bridges thrown over the chasm, at the foot of which
foams the torrent. Higher and higher rise the rent rocks--bare, black
walls, seamed, and scarred, and riven, their summits reaching to the
sky. They close about us, shutting out everything of earth and heaven,
save a narrow strip of blue far above all. Even the sweet light of day
departs, and a gloom and darkness as of a brooding tempest falls upon us
as the way narrows. Suddenly a mad, foaming torrent, with angry roar,
leaps from the rocks above, to toss, and writhe, and moan upon the rocks
below the arch upon which we stand. The water rushes over them, and
dashes against them. It swirls, and pants, and foams, while high above
it all we stand, our faces wet with the spray, our ears deafened by the
terrible roar. Truly, this _is_ "The Devil's Bridge."

Think of armies meeting here, as they did in the old Napoleonic wars,
contending for the passage of the bridge below. Think of the shrieks of
the wounded and dying, mingling with the raging of the waters. Think of
the white foam surging red among the rocks; of the angry torrent beating
out the ebbing life of those who checked its flow. Think of the meeting
of hosts in mortal conflict where no eye but God's could witness it,
upon which not even bird or startled beast looked down. It was like a
dreadful dream from which we passed--as through deep sleep--by a way cut
in the solid rock out into God's world again. Still, from one side of
the road rose the rocks that began to show signs of scanty vegetation
now; from the other fell the precipice to the torrent. We had left the
carriages at the bridge, and singly or in companies toiled up the road
that doubled back upon itself continually. Often we climbed from one of
these windings to the next above, by paths among the rocks, leaving the
carriages to make the turn and follow more slowly. Often our way was the
bed of a last year's torrent, or our feet touched the borders of the
stream, as we pulled ourselves up by the shrubs that grew among the
rocks. The ice-chill in the air brought strength for the time, and
perfect exhilaration. It seemed as if we could go on forever, scaling
these mountain heights.

At last the carriages overtake us, and we reluctantly resume our places.
The road is built out upon the mountain-side. It offers no protection
against the fall of the precipice. It narrows here. We look down, and
say, "How dreadful a careless driver might make this place!" and,
shuddering, draw back. Suddenly the train pauses, and down the long
hill runs a shout, "A carriage has gone over." We spring out, and run to
the front. "Is any one killed?" "No; thank God, no one is harmed." We
gather upon the edge of the precipice. Upon the rocks below lies the
body of a horse--dead, with his fore feet raised, as though pawing the
air; and mingling with the white waters, and tossed about in the raging
stream, are the shattered remains of a carriage and its contents.

It seems that two young men from Canton Zurich essayed to make a tour of
the mountains with their own horse and carriage--a foolhardy experiment,
since none but tried horses, used to these passes, are considered safe
here. All went well, however, until they reached this point, where a
torrent falls down the mountain-side to the road, under which it passes
with a fearful noise. It might, indeed, startle the strongest nerves.
The horse, young and high-spirited, shied to the edge of the precipice,
then reared high in the air. They saw that he must go over when his fore
feet came down, and springing out, barely escaped a similar fate. We all
passed the spot with some trepidation, the most of us preferring to
walk; but our horses, accustomed to the road, were utterly unmoved by
the swooping torrent. At night we reached Andermatt--only an untidy
little village, lying in one of these upper valleys, bustling and all
alive around the door of its one inn; but how green and beautiful were
the mountains, shutting us in all around, after the desolation through
which much of our way had led! Upon the side of the nearest was a
triangular patch of wood-land,--firs and spruces,--said to divide and
break the force of the avalanches that sweep down here in the spring.
It can be nothing but a story of what had been true formerly, when the
wood was more extensive. Down these mountains, as night closed in,
straggled a herd of goats to the milking, tinkling countless little
bells, while the roar of the Reuss, which we had followed until it was
now hardly more than a mountain brook, mingled with our dreams as it ran
noisily through the village.

On we went the next morning, wrapping ourselves warmly, for the air was
chill as November, though at Lucerne, only twenty-four hours before, we
had suffered a torrid heat. Just beyond Andermatt, at Hospenthal, we
left the St. Gothard, to follow the Furka pass. All around was barren
desolation, as we went on, still ascending, leaving every sign of human
life behind. Rocky and black the mountains rose, bearing only lichens
and ferns. Occasional patches of snow appeared, lying in the beds of the
last year's torrents, or scattered along beside the road. But here,
where Nature had bestowed little to soften and beautify, she had spread
upon the barren land, and tucked in among the rocks, a covering of
exquisitely delicate flowers. You cannot realize, until you have seen
them, the variety, beauty, and profusion of the Alpine flowers. Looking
back in memory upon the bare rocks, doomed to stand here through all
time in solitude and in the midst of desolation, as though in expiation
of some sin, it is pleasant to remember that at their feet and in their
clefts these little flowers nestle and bloom.

We gathered nosegays and made snowballs, and at noon gained the summit
of the Furka, and rested an hour or two at the inn--the only sign of
house or hut we had seen since morning. The rough _salons_, the passage,
the doorway, even the space outside, were alive with tourists. It is a
continual jar upon one's sense of the fitness of things, something to
which you never become thoroughly accustomed, until all freshness of
sight-seeing is passed--this coming suddenly upon the world in the midst
of the unutterable solitude of nature; this plunging into a crowd
dressed in the latest style, and discussing universal frivolities where
the very rocks and hills seem to stand in silent adoration. But after
the first moment you, too, form one of the frivolous throng, the sight
and sound of which shock the sensibilities of the next comer.

From the inn a tongue of land, green and dotted with flowers, falls into
the valley below. On either side rises a mountain, scarred by the
torrents dried away now, and stained this day with the last year's snow,
while beyond--ever beyond, like some heavenly heights we vainly strove
to gain--rose the Bernese Alps.

From the summit of the Furka we descended to the Rhone glacier by one of
the zigzag mountain roads. Looking down over the edge, we could see
below, the ways we were yet to follow on the mountain face before
accomplishing the descent. The horses dashed down at a flying pace. The
inclination of the road was not sufficient to alarm; but the turns are
always so frightfully abrupt as to make it seem as though the leader
must dash off. But no; he invariably swung around just upon the outer
edge, held, it seemed sometimes, by the traces, and with a crack of the
driver's whip was off again before our fears, if we had any, could find
words.

One of these abrupt turns fairly hangs over the glacier, where the icy
river has fallen into broken masses from a higher point, before
spreading out in the narrow valley just here where it ends. Only a short
distance from the foot of the glacier is the inn, with its scattered
out-buildings, where we were to spend the night. The sheer descent from
the summit of the Furka is only about half a mile; but though our horses
had galloped the whole distance, and the inn was in sight all the time,
we were three hours reaching it; so many turns did the road make upon
the face of the mountain.

It was a gloomy valley, shut in by mountains, and surrounded by lesser
hills all soaked and dripping with icy streams that chilled the air. We
gained the foot of the glacier from the inn by a rough path over and
among the rocks, and stones, and heaps of gravel it had brought down and
deposited here. From beneath the solid mass of ice flowed a hundred
shallow streams, which, uniting, form the beginning of the River Rhone.
We penetrated for a short distance the gallery cut into the glacier,
surrounded and shut down upon by the walls and ceiling, of a deep blue
color, and were preceded by an old man, who awoke the echoes by uttering
a series of broken cries. What with the echoes and horrible chill, the
place seemed most unearthly, and we were glad to retreat.

The roar of torrents, and hardly less thunderous noise of departing
diligences, awakened us the next morning. We were soon off upon the
road, skirting the mountains, rolling through the pleasant valleys, and
passing village after village now. They seemed silent and deserted,
their occupants perhaps busy in the fields, or serving at the inns, or
among the mountains as guides. One was a mass of ruins, thrown down in
the bed of a torrent, among which a few dull-faced peasants were at
work, with a hopeless, aimless air, that promised little. A mountain
stream, swollen to a flood by melting snows, had swept it away in a
night.

At noon we lunched at Viesch--a slipshod, unwashed village, by the side
of the young Rhone, which so far, in its dirty, chalk-white color, was
not unlike the white-headed children that played upon its banks. Some of
the party left the horses to their noon rest, and strayed out upon the
road beyond the village. On its outskirts was a fine new church, of
stone. If only something of its beauty could but come into the every-day
lives of the poor people here! We sat down upon the steps to wait.
Across the road was an orchard, roughly fenced in; beside it one of the
picturesque Swiss peasant houses--all steps, and queer old galleries,
from which a little tow-headed girl stared out at us in open-eyed
wonder, as we blew the down from the dried dandelions we had pulled
along the way, and questioned if, in our far-off homes, our mothers
wanted us!

It seemed as though we could descend no farther; and yet, after sweeping
through a valley, a sudden turn would disclose another, far below, to
which this was as a mountain. So down we sped the whole day long; once
by a frightfully-narrow zigzag road, the worst by far of any we had
seen; passing still through the villages so charming in the distance,
but dirty, and full of odors by no means pleasing, as we drew near. At
night we rattled into the paved square before the inn at Brieg, just as
the first drops of a coming shower wet its stones.

This was evidently something more than a village. The houses were
plastered, instead of being of wood with a rich, burnt-sienna color,
like those we had seen along the road through the day. They were thickly
clustered together, and from their midst rose the four turrets of a
chateau. Our inn was a delightfully-dingy old place. It had been an
Ursuline convent, and abounded in queer, dark passages, rough stone
stairways, and old wooden galleries overlooking the square. One of our
rooms had been a part of the convent chapel, and was still lighted by a
window just beneath the groined roof. Here we braided our hair, and
knotted our ribbons, and dreamed, in the twilight that followed the
rain, of the hopeless ones who had sought comfort in other days within
these walls, and fell asleep at last, knowing full well that the fringe
of many an old prayer was still caught and held in the arches high over
our heads. We walked up through the town the next morning, to the
beginning of the Simplon Pass. Somewhere in the narrow streets we passed
the old chateau, and pressed our faces against the bars of a gate, in
order to gain some idea as to the domestic economy of the family which
had bestowed upon Brieg its air of importance. But the chateau had
degenerated into a brewery, and the court-yard was filled with old
carts, clumsy and broken.

Farther up the hill the door of a little chapel stood invitingly open,
waiting for stray worshippers, or a chance-burdened heart (for even so
far away as Brieg, hearts do grow heavy, I doubt not). Something in its
narrow, whitewashed poverty touched our sympathies. It is rare indeed in
these countries to find a chapel without at least some votive offering
to make it beautiful in the eyes of the simple people: here was only a
crucifix, and we pleased ourselves with the fancy that when the ships
come in that we sent out as children--laden with hopes that were to be
bartered for treasures--we would return, and hang the walls with
pictures, and make the whole place wonderful in the eyes that had seen
only its bareness. The shower the night before had laid the dust, and
the drive that morning was most enjoyable. Following the course of the
noisy Rhone, we reached Sierre at noon, where we left the carriages with
regret, and took the railway train to Martigny.




CHAPTER XIV.

AMONG THE EVERLASTING HILLS.

          The quaint inn.--The Falls of the Sallenches, and
          the Gorge de Trient.--Shopping in a Swiss
          village.--A mule ride to Chamouni.--Peculiarities
          of the animals.--Entrance to the
          village.--Egyptian mummies lifted from the
          mules.--Rainy days.--Chamois.--The Mer de
          Glace.--"Look out of your window."--Mont
          Blanc.--Sallenches.--A diligence ride to
          Geneva.--Our little old woman.--The clownish
          peasant.--The fork in the road.--"Adieu."


OUR hotel here at Martigny, was even more suggestive of romance than the
one at Brieg. It had been a monastery, and was an old, yellow-washed
structure facing the street, with a rambling garden surrounded by high
walls, clinging to it in the rear. Low, dark rooms, with bare, unpainted
floors, like the waves of the sea in smoothness, were given to some of
our party, while Mrs. K. and I were consigned again, with singular
appropriateness, to what had been the chapel. Its windows overlooked the
straggling, half-dead trees, and bare, hard-baked earth of the open
space before the door, which was always being crossed by strings of
mules ornamented with bright saddle-cloths, and still further with the
ubiquitous tourist arrayed in every known costume of the period.
Village girls, too, passed under the trees, knitting as they went, and
horrible creatures afflicted with the _goître_--that curse of this
region--which we met at every turn now.

To gain the long, low refectory where we dined, or to pass from one room
to another, necessitated crossing the brick-paved cloisters, upon which
all the doors of the second story opened. Here a row of columns
encircled a narrow, inner court-yard--so narrow as to be nothing more
than a slit in the walls, yet wide enough to allow the shimmering
sunlight to drop down upon the vines twined around the columns, and
light the whole dingy interior into a weird, strange beauty.

We rode out to the Falls of the Sallenches,--one of the mist veils left
hanging from many of these Swiss mountains by the water-sprites,--and
penetrated the Gorge de Trient upon the shaky gallery that follows its
windings; wandered about and beyond the town; stole into an old church,
and brought away the memory of a lovely virgin face; and haunted the
dingy shops in the vain hope of making a few necessary purchases. These
shops were not unlike our New England country stores in their combined
odors and confused incapabilities. Behind the counters, or more likely
sitting in the doorway with the inevitable blue knitting in hand, were
old women, of hard, baked-apple faces, whose ideas of the luxuries of a
woman's wardrobe were so far below what we considered its necessaries,
that we parted in mutual surprise, to say the least, and without gain on
either side.

Sabbath morning, English church service was held in the parlor of one of
the hotels; after which a clergyman in gown and bands discoursed from
the text, "And there shall be no more sea,"--a peculiarly comforting
hope to some of us.

Monday morning, we mounted the horses and mules waiting in dejected
impatience before the door, and started upon the long ride of twenty-two
miles to Chamouni by the Tête Noir Pass. A wide, pleasant avenue, shaded
by walnut trees, led out of the town; after which we began to ascend the
gently-sloping mountain-sides, passing occasional villages, and besieged
by beggars and venders of fruit, as usual. Indeed, these beggars are so
constant in their attendance and importunity that one forgets to mention
them, unless recalling flies and similar swarming annoyances.

The scenery, as we went on, was often grand, always interesting; the sky
overcast, but at times the clouds, drifting apart, disclosed peaks or
"needles" so far above the mountains about us as to seem a revelation of
heaven. The path was treacherous and rough--skirting precipices,
descending in rocky steps or slippery mire, and crossing mountain
streams by narrow, insecure bridges. Single file is the invariable rule
in all these mountain excursions, and after a time the isolations of
this mode of travelling adds to its wearisomeness. Solitude is
delightful; but as some one has said, "How pleasant it is to have a
friend near by to whom you may remark, 'How delightful is solitude!'"

As you follow the windings of the narrow, steep path, you have a choice
between addressing the back of the one who precedes you, and throwing a
remark over your shoulder to those who come after. Involuntarily you
fall to studying the curves of the former, and are utterly indifferent
to the fact that the latter are probably meditating upon the intricacies
of your back hair. Mule-riding is conducive to grace of neither soul nor
body; still you know you are not making such a spectacle of yourself as
did the woman just passed--who twisted about in the saddle as though
worked along by rotary motion. Perhaps not.

As you leave the villages to plunge into the woods, the flies swarm like
beggars; and it is only when the guides have cut boughs from the trees,
which you wave before you, wickedly suggesting palm branches, that you
can proceed with tolerable comfort, and without the fear of an
unexpected toss in the air, as one kick after another runs down the
line.

Each horse or mule has his own slight peculiarities of habit and
disposition. I recall one whose inordinate curiosity led him to walk
always upon the verge of the precipices, so that the rider's feet
overhung the frightful depths. Murray says it is best to allow these
animals to choose their own paths. But to hang suspended between heaven
and earth at the mercy of a strap and a mule, will shake one's faith,
even in Murray.

My horse this day was possessed of the dreamy, melancholy nature of a
poet, with the attendant lack of ambition. Every time we wound
funereally through a village, he would walk deliberately to the
mounting-steps, and wait most suggestively. Indeed, an air of
abstraction characterized all his movements; even when, as we approached
these villages, raising his head, he would seem to sniff the odors of
Araby the Blest; which was a mistake, a delusion of his fancy shared by
none of the others of the party. That he was without pride I must
confess. No stable did we pass so poor, none so mean, that he was
ashamed to pause and offer to enter with meek obdurateness.

Poetic as was his temperament, his appetites were developed in a
remarkable degree. Once upon a narrow bridge we met two walking
haystacks, out from which peered great, blue eyes. If the size of his
mouth had corresponded at all to his desires, they would have vanished
from sight in a twinkling; as it was, they barely escaped. Whether or
not insatiable thirst is an attribute of a poet, I do not know; but each
stream which crossed the path,--and the whole country seemed
liquidizing,--each drinking-trough beside the way,--and to my excited
imagination they seemed to form an unbroken line,--was an irresistible
temptation. It was only by shouting, "Yeep! Yeep!" in staccato chorus,
and vigorously applying the palm branches, thus engaging his attention
and diverting his thoughts into less watery channels, that we succeeded
in making any progress whatever. Under this disciplinary process his
nature was at last so far subdued that he would have passed the ocean
itself without a sigh, I am sure.

There was a rest of an hour at the Tête Noir inn at noon, shut in by the
firs, and rocks, and mountains, then we went on to Argentière, where we
gladly exchanged the horses and mules for some low, open carts with a
couple of villagers in blue blouses for drivers. In these we
accomplished the remaining three or four miles, and made a triumphal
entry into Chamouni.

It was late in the afternoon when we crawled up the narrow, thronged
street to the Hôtel Royal, from which the English, French, and American
flags were flying. The clouds had dropped lower and lower, until a fine
mist was beginning to deepen into rain, and the guides and tourists
detained in the village fairly jostled each other at the intersection of
the two principal streets, which seemed to form the village Exchange.
The mire of the streets was thickly stamped with hoof-prints and the
marks from the nails that stud the shoe-soles of the mountain climbers.
Line after line of doleful looking objects, which might prove Egyptian
mummies when unwrapped, were being lifted from still more sorry looking
beasts before the door of the hotel, and assaying to mount the steps,
with a stiffness and angularity of movement in which we all sympathized.

Indeed, after dinner, when a bright fire was lighted in the long _salon_
where the various parties gathered to read, write, look over
stereoscopic views, or chat among themselves, it was amusing, as well as
pitiable to observe the abortive attempts at ease and flexibility as
these individuals crossed the polished floor, to hear the groans
smothered to sighs as they resumed their seats. "Mules!" whispered the
girls, nudging each other, and mindful of the delight which misery is
said to find in company.

All the next day the rain dripped down upon the village from the heavy
clouds that hid the mountains. Everybody improved the opportunity to
write letters, or yawned over the books scattered about the _salon_.
Among them was a well-thumbed copy of "Artemus Ward, His Book." At the
foot of each page the local allusions of the jokes were explained, I
remember. Out in the street, umbrellas were dodging about from one shop
to another. These rainy days, though a loss to the guides, are harvest
times for the shopkeepers. Photographs and stereoscopic views of the
mountains, the glaciers, and daring climbers hanging on by their
eyelids, abound here, with any amount of wood and chamois (?) horn
carving and crystal ornaments. Speaking of chamois-horn, if you expect
to see in Switzerland--as you do in geographies--chamois perched upon
every crag, preparatory to bounding from peak to peak, you will be
grievously disappointed. Not a chamois will greet your eyes. We
passed--I have forgotten where--a pen in which, by paying a certain sum,
we might look upon a veritable live chamois; but we had no desire to see
the incarnation of liberty thus degraded.

We waited two days for the uplifting of the clouds, making, in the mean
time, an excursion up the Montanvert to overlook the Mer de Glace--which
is not a sea, but a river of ice, like all the glaciers that have worked
themselves down into these valleys. We retired one night with the cloud
curtains spread low over our heads; the next morning a voice from
outside of our door called, "Look out of your window." We sprang up,
seized the cord of the shutters, and behold! a new heaven and new earth!
Every vestige of cloud was gone. The mountains were bathed in sunlight,
vivid green were the peaks before us, which had never met our gaze until
now, while behind the nearest, against the deep blue of the summer sky,
rose the three vast white steps which lead heavenward, the highest of
which men call Mont Blanc. All that morning, as we descended from the
valley of Chamouni to Sallenches, we turned continually to look back;
and still, white and beautiful, but growing less in the distance, rose
the triple domes.

We had taken a carriage to Sallenches: here we find places in the open
diligence for Geneva. We pause in the first village through which we
pass, where a knot of people gathers about a round little old woman. She
wears a wide-rimmed hat over her neat frilled cap, and carries another
upon her arm. Her waist is dimly defined by the strings of a voluminous
apron, and her mind entirely distracted by the cares attendant upon the
disposal of a cotton bag, a wicker basket, an old umbrella, and a box,
which half a dozen men seize upon with clumsy hands, in good-natured
officiousness, and thrust into the baggage compartment, while the women
and children press about her, kissing the rough, ruddy cheeks, and
uttering what we are sure must be blessings--odds and ends of which
float up to us. Evidently the little, old woman is going a journey.
Aided by a dozen rough, helpful hands, she climbs the ladder to her
place beside us, with a deprecatory though cheerful "_Bon jour_" to us
all, subsiding into a corner, where she is immediately submerged as her
belongings are showered down upon her; last of all a crumpled letter is
tossed into her lap.

The driver mounts to his place; she leans over; a perfect gust of
blessings, and kisses, and adieus follow us, as with a crack of the whip
the horses spring away, and we leave the village far behind.

Suddenly--for we have turned away our faces--the little old woman's hand
is plunged into the cotton bag under our feet. We venture to look
around. The tears have gone; her face beams like the sun, as she brings
out of the depths a couple of eggs. Another dive, and she emerges with a
piece of bread. A pinch of salt is added from the basket, and her
breakfast is complete. She hospitably offers a share to each of us. We
decline; and as a shadow dims the brightness of her face, Katie adds
quickly,--

"We have had two breakfasts already."

The little old woman rolls her round, blue eyes to heaven, with a pious
ejaculation. Such lavish extravagance is beyond her comprehension.

"That is like you rich people," she says. "We are only too happy if the
good God sends us _one_." And she relapses into a wondering silence.

"Does madame travel far?" we venture presently.

"Ah, yes." And she shakes her head slowly. Words cannot express the
distance, it is so great.

"But she has been this way before?" we go on.

"No, never before." And again the round, blue eyes seek heaven, and
again a deep sigh follows the words. She has finished her lunch, and,
diving under our feet, emerges after a time with a box, which, opened,
discloses a small store of peppermints. This she offers with some
hesitation, and we each hasten to accept one, her countenance beaming
more and more as they disappear. "Given to hospitality," the little old
woman has been, we know.

When the box is with difficulty replaced, the string of the bag drawn,
the basket arranged to her satisfaction, the umbrella placed at a
pleasing angle, she balances herself upon the edge of the seat, and
glances fearfully from side to side as we swing along the smooth road.
Once, when the wheel passes over a stone, she seems to murmur a prayer.

"Madame is not afraid?" we say.

"O, very much. These diligences are most dangerous." And now she is
glancing over her shoulder at a rocky wall of mountains which follows
the road at a distance. "They might fall." And she shudders with the
thought. We assure her that it is impossible; but she has heard of a
rock falling upon a diligence, and thinks it was upon this road. And all
the horror of the fearful catastrophe is depicted upon her face.
Gradually we learn that the little old woman has never travelled in a
diligence before; that she has never before made any journey, in fact.
For forty years she has kept the house of the _curé_ in her native
village. Now, she tells us with a sigh, and uplifted eyes, he has
"become dead," and she is obliged to seek a home elsewhere among
strangers. Here she turns away her eyes, which grow dim as her smile,
and for a moment forgets her fears.

We are approaching a village. She hastily searches her basket and brings
out the crumpled letter which had been thrown into her lap. As we dart
through the narrow street and across an open square, she leans out,
utters a word in a sharp, excited tone, and, to our surprise, throws the
letter far out into the dust of the street. An idle lounger in the
square starts at her voice, runs heavily across the street, and picks it
up. She sinks back, all cheerful smiles again. She has chanced upon the
very man to whom the letter was addressed.

The dust rolls up from the great wheels. She exchanges the hat upon her
head for the one over her arm, covering the former carefully with a
corner of her apron. This, she tells us, as she arranges the second
upon her head, she was accustomed to wear when she picked vegetables of
a morning in the garden of the good _curé_. And the sighs return with
the recollection of her master.

The day wears on with heat and sifting dust. By and by, at another
village, a filthy, dull-faced peasant clambers up the ladder and
stumbles into a vacant place. We shrink away from him in disgust. Our
little old woman only furtively draws aside her neat petticoats. Soon
she engages him in conversation. We see her lean far forward with
intense, questioning gaze upon the distance where he points with
dirt-begrimed finger. Then with a sigh which seems to come from the
baggage compartment beneath us, so very deep and long-drawn it is, she
turns to us. She, too, points to a range of hills, very dark and gloomy
now, for they are covered with woods, and the shadow of a cloud lies
upon them.

"It is there, beyond the mountains, I am going;" and the shadow of the
cloud has fallen upon her face. All the sunshine has faded out of it.
Then, with something warmer, brighter than any sunshine gleaming in her
eyes, she adds, "But the good God takes care of us wherever we go."

We have reached a fork in the road. There is no village, no house even,
in sight. Why, then, do we pause? The ladder is raised.

[Illustration: "Evidently the little old woman is going a journey." Page
195.]

"It must be for me!" gasps the little old woman, casting one bewildered
glance over to where the shadows are creeping, and then calmly gathering
together her possessions. We grasp the hands she extends, we pour out
confused, unintelligible blessings. Is it the dust which blinds our
eyes? Even the clownish peasant stumbles down the ladder, and lifts out
her box. The driver remounts. The whip cracks. We lean far out. We wave
our hands. Again the dust fills our eyes so that our sight for a moment
is dim, as we dash away, leaving her sitting there alone upon her box,
where the two roads meet. But beyond the hills where the shadows rested,
we know that the sun still shines for our little old woman whose master
"became dead."




CHAPTER XV.

LAST DAYS IN SWITZERLAND.

          Geneva.--Calvin and jewelry.--Up Lake
          Leman.--Ouchy and Lausanne.--"Sweet
          Clarens."--Chillon.--Freyburg.--Sight-seers.--The
          Last Judgment.--Berne and its bears.--The town
          like a story.--The Lake of
          Thun.--Interlaken.--Over the Wengern Alp.--The
          Falls of Giessbach.--The Brunig Pass.--Lucerne
          again.


WE dashed up to the hotel upon one of the fine quays at Geneva, and
descended from the open diligence with all the appearance of travellers
who had crossed a sandy desert. There is an air of experienced travel
which only dust can impart.

The most charming sight in the city, to us, was our own names upon the
waiting letters here. In truth, there are no sights in Geneva. Tourists
visit the city because they have been or are going elsewhere, beyond. If
they pause, it is to rest or buy the jewelry so far-famed. To be sure
the view from almost any window opening upon the blue Rhone is pleasing,
crossed by various bridges as it is, one of which touches Rousseau's
Island. But our heads by this time were as full of views as that of a
Boston woman.

Calvinists and Arminians alike visit the Cathedral, and sit for a moment
in the old reformer's chair, or at least look upon the canopy of carved
wood from beneath which he used to preach. There are few monuments here.
The interior is bare, and boarded into the stiff pews, which belong by
right and the fitness of things, not to these grand, Gothic cathedrals,
but to the Puritan meeting-houses, where we gather less to breathe a
prayer than to sit solemnly apart and listen to a denunciation of each
other's sins.

It is a little remarkable that the city where Calvin made and enforced
such rigid laws against luxury and the vanities of the world should, in
these latter days, be noted for the manufacture of jewelry. But so it
is; and to walk the streets and gaze in at the shop windows would turn
the head of any but the strongest-minded woman. Two or three addresses
had been given us of manufactories where we could be served at more
reasonable rates than at the grand shops. We climbed flight after flight
of dingy stone stairs, in dingier buildings, to reach them, and found
ourselves at last in little dark rooms, almost filled by a counter, a
desk, and a safe or two. Certainly no one would think of looking for
beautiful things here! But we had become tolerably accustomed to such
places in Paris, and were not at all surprised when one shallow drawer
after another was produced from behind the counter, and a blaze of gems
and bewildering show of delicately executed gold work met our eyes. If
you care for a _souvenir_ only, there are pretty little finger-rings
encircled by blue forget-me-nots in enamel, which are a specialty of
Geneva. But if you possess the means and disposition, you may gratify
the most extravagant desires, and rival Solomon in magnificence.

Twice a day steamers leave Geneva to ascend the lake. It was a bright,
summer afternoon when we embarked from the pier beyond our hotel, and
steamed away past the villages that lie along its edge. Among them is
Coppet, the home of Madame de Staël, the towers of which rise up behind
the town. The deck of the steamer was alive with tourists. One party,
from meeting at every turn, rests even yet in memory; the ladies stout,
red-faced, and showily dressed, with immense "charms" pendent from their
_chatelaines_--shovels, tongs, and pokers, _life-size_--the result of a
sojourn at Geneva, doubtless.

For some time after leaving the city, we could look back upon Mont
Blanc, white and beautiful, rising above the dark mountains, and lying
close against the sky blue as the waters of the lake. The likeness of a
recumbent figure of Napoleon--the head and shoulders alone,--in the garb
of a grenadier was startling, haunting us even after it had changed
again to a snow-white mountain. As though the hero slept, like those in
German legends, until his country called him to awake and lead its hosts
to battle.

At Ouchy we leave the steamer, where the gardens of the grand hotel
Beaurivage come down to meet us. How delightful are these Swiss hotels!
with their pleasant gardens, many balconies, wide windows, and the
flying flags outside; and within, scrupulous neatness, and even elegant
appointments. The rooms vary in size rather than in degree of comfort,
there being none of the sudden leaps or plunges between luxury and utter
discomfort, found in so many hotels--elsewhere. The floors are bare, the
strips of wood forming squares or diamonds, waxed, and highly polished.
A rug here and there invites bare feet. A couple of neatly-spread beds
stand foot to foot upon one side of the room, sometimes with silk or
lace coverlets, but with always the _duvet_, or large down pillow, at
the foot. There is no stint of toilet arrangements. A lounge and
easy-chairs tempt to idleness and repose; and a round table, of generous
proportions, awaits the chocolate, rolls, fresh butter, and amber honey,
when the last curl is in order, the last ribbon knotted, and you have
rung for your breakfast. Of course the rooms vary in degree of
ornamentation. The walls are often beautifully tinted or frescoed, and
the furniture elegant; but the neatness and comfort among these summer
hotels are almost universal. Sometimes, in one corner, or built into the
wall, stands the high, white porcelain stove, so like a stray monument
that has forgotten its inscription, and is sacred to many memories; and
the long, plate-glass windows, swinging back, open often upon a balcony
and a charming view. No wonder that half the hotels in Switzerland are
named _Bellevue_.

An omnibus bears you from Ouchy, which is simply the port of Lausanne,
back into the city, past pretty country residences, walled in, over the
gates of which the owners have placed suggestive names: "My Rest;"
"Heart's Desire;" "Good Luck;" "Beautiful Situation;" anything which
fancy or individual taste may dictate. Of Lausanne I recall little but
an endless mounting and descending of stairs. The city is built upon a
hill, intersected by ravines, which accounts for this peculiar method of
gaining many streets from others above and below. We made but a hurried
visit. It was market day, and ugly women, old and young, were sitting
upon the sidewalks in the narrow streets, knitting, with the yarn held
over the fore-finger of the left hand, and selling fruits and vegetables
between times. In the honey market the air fairly buzzed and swarmed;
yet still these women knit, and gossiped, and bargained complacently,
unmindful of the bees in their bonnets. From Ouchy we made an excursion
to the head of the lake. It is a short voyage of two hours to
Villeneuve, the last town. Clouds hid the distant mountains; but those
lesser and nearer, upon our right, as we went on, were bare, and broken,
and rocky, contrasting strangely with the gently swelling slopes upon
the other side, covered with vineyards, and with quiet little villages
at their feet. Each of these villages has its romantic association; or,
failing in that, a grand hotel to attract summer visitors. Vevay boasts
the largest hotel, but nothing more. Just beyond Vevay is "Clarens,
sweet Clarens," the willows of which dip into the lake. Here, if
Rousseau and Byron are to be believed, Love was born; possibly in some
one of the mean little houses which border the narrow streets.

Soon after leaving Clarens, the gray, stained tower of Chillon rises
from the water, near enough to the shore to be reached by a bridge. With
the "little isle" and its three tall trees marked by the prisoner as he
paced his lonely cell, ends the romance of the lake. Poets have sung its
beauties, but Lucerne had stolen away our hearts, and we gazed upon the
rocks, and vineyards, and villages, with cold, critical eyes. It was
only later, when the summer twilight fell as we lingered upon the
balcony before our windows at Ouchy that we acknowledged its charm. The
witching sound of music came up from the garden below. Upon the silver
lake before us, the lateen sails, like the white wings of great
sea-birds, gleamed out from the darkness; the tiny wavelets rippled and
plashed softly against the breakwater; and where the clouds had parted
overhead, a horned moon hung low in the sky, while the mountains
resolved themselves into shadows or other waiting clouds.

There was a little church between Ouchy and Lausanne, gained by crossing
the fields, where we remembered the Sabbath day, and joined in the
church service led by an English clergyman. These Sabbaths are like
green spots now in memory,--restful, cool, refreshing, and pleasant to
recall,--when the world, and all haste and perplexity of strange sights,
and sounds, and ways, were rolled off like a heavy burden, while we
gathered, a little company of strangers in a strange land, yet of one
family, to unite in the familiar prayers, and hymns, and grand old
chants.

Monday morning the "American cars" bore us away from Lausanne to
Freyburg. But such a caricature are they upon our railway carriages,
that we were inclined to resent the appellation. Low, bare, box-like,
with only three or four seats upon each side, they hardly suggested the
original.

We had chosen the route through Freyburg that we might visit the
suspension bridge, and hear the celebrated organ. The city clings to the
sides of a ravine after the perverse manner of cities, instead of
spreading itself out comfortably upon level land. So steep is the
declivity that the roofs of some of the houses form the pavement for
the street above. At the foot of the ravine flows a river crossed by
bridges, and the towns-people have for centuries descended from the
summit on one side to climb to that upon the other, until some humane
individual planned and perfected this suspension bridge,--the longest in
the world save one,--which is thrown across the chasm. In order to test
its strength, when completed, the inhabitants of the city, or a portion
of them, gathered in a mass, with artillery and horses, _and stood upon
it_! Then they marched over it, preceded by a band of music, with all
the dignitaries of the town at the head of the column. Since it did not
bend or break beneath their weight, it is deemed entirely safe.

Through the most closely-built portion of the city runs the old city
wall, with its high, cone-capped watch-towers, and the narrow, crooked,
and often steep streets are very quaint. The sense of satisfaction which
returns with the memory of these streets is perhaps partly due to the
fact, that the girls of the party surveyed them from above great squares
of gingerbread bought at a _pâtisserie_ near the station, and ate as
they strolled through the town over the pavings of these crooked ways.
The bread of dependence is said to be exceedingly bitter; but the
gingerbread of Freyburg is uncommonly sweet, in memory.

When the suspension bridge has been crossed and commented upon, every
one strikes a bee-line to the Cathedral, which rises conspicuously above
its surroundings. It would be very amusing to watch the professional
sight-seers at all these places, if one did not belong to the
fraternity, which makes of it quite another affair. There is no air of
pleasuring about them; no placid expression of content and
sweet-to-do-nothing. They seldom are found meandering along the tortuous
streets, the milk of human kindness moistening every feature, beams of
satisfaction irradiating every countenance. They never spend long hours
wandering among the cloisters of old cathedrals, or dream away days by
storied shrines, as friends at home, who read of these places, fondly
imagine. By no means. The sight-seer is a man of business. He has
undertaken a certain amount of work, to be done in a given time. He will
do or die. And since it is a serious matter, involving doubt, he wears
an appropriately solemn and preoccupied expression of countenance. He
darts from point to point. He climbs stairs as though impatient Fame
waited for him at the top. His emotions of wonder, admiration, or
delight, must bestir themselves. He drives to the first point of
interest, strikes a bee-line to the second, cuts every corner between
that and the third, and then, consulting his watch, desires to know if
there is anything more, and experiences his only moment of satisfaction
when the reply is in the negative. And the most remarkable part of all
is, that he goes abroad to enjoy himself.

But even if one is less ambitious, if you are so fortunate as to be
naturally indolent, and to delight to dwell in the shadow of dreams, you
will shake off dull sloth here. You live and move in a bustling crowd.
Every storied spot is thronged with visitors. Far from musing by
yourself, you can at best but follow in the wake of the crowd, with the
drone of an endless story from the lips of a stupid guide in your ears,
bringing only confusion and weariness.

A notice upon the door of the Cathedral informed us that the organ would
not be played until evening. We held a council of war, and decided to go
on. Just over our heads, as we stood before the entrance, was a
representation of the Last Judgment, cut in the stone, in which the
good, very scantily attired, and of most self-satisfied countenances,
trotted off after St. Peter, who carried the father of all keys, to the
door of a castle representing heaven, while the poor wicked were borne
away in a Swiss basket, strapped upon the back of a pig-headed devil, to
a great pot over a blazing fire, which a little imp was vigorously
blowing up with a pair of bellows. The wicked seeming to outnumber the
good (this was designed many centuries ago), and the pot not being large
enough to hold them all, the surplus were thrust into the jaws of a
patient crocodile near by. Seated in an arm-chair, above all this, the
devil looked down with an expression of entire satisfaction.

The interior of the Cathedral was in no way remarkable. In the choir
(which you know, perhaps, is not a place where girls stand in their best
bonnets to sing on Sundays, but the corner of these great cathedrals in
which the church service is held) were some fine stained glass windows;
but even here, horrible monkeys and hideous animal figures, life-size,
were cut from the wood, and made to stand or crouch above the stalls
where the priests sit. Those old ecclesiastic artists must have believed
in a personal devil, who assumed many forms.

A threatened shower hastened our steps to the station some time before
the arrival of the train, which seemed to come and go without regard to
the hour appointed. While waiting, we read the advertisements framed and
hanging upon the walls, of hotels, shops, &c. One of the latter, in a
triumph of English, ran,--

          WOOD CARWINGS;
          CHOOSE AS NOWHERE ELSE.

We reached Berne before night, and drove to the Hotel ----. If it could
by some happy chance have been turned inside out, how comfortable we
might have been! The exterior was most inviting. A German waiter of
Irish face, who had a polyglot manner of speech, difficult to be
understood, showed us to our rooms; and the _table d'hôte_, to which we
descended an hour later, was made up of an uncommon array of
prim-visaged individuals. Dickens's Mr. Chadband, in a very stiff, white
neckcloth, was my _vis-à-vis_. I looked every moment for his lips to
open, and--"Wherefore air we gathered here, my friends?" to issue forth.

The guide-book had informed us that the greatest attraction of Berne to
strangers was the fine view of the Bernese Alps to be gained from here;
but a curtain of cloud hung before them during all our stay. Still we
were interested in the queer old city, with the second story of the
houses, through many of the streets, projecting over the sidewalk,
forming gloomy arcades, and bright red cushions in the window seats,
where pretty girls sat and sewed, and watched the passers down below. I
remember it rained, and there was a market held out in the square before
the hotel windows in the early morning, where the umbrellas made every
old woman to dwell in her own tent for the time. When it was over, and
the rain had ceased to fall, we waited in front of the old clock-tower
before driving out through the pleasant suburbs, with market women,
baskets on their arms, stray children, idle loungers, and alert
tourists, for the feeble puppet-show heralded by the asthmatic crow of a
rheumatic cock. Of course it was a procession of bears. Everything in
Berne is, or has to do with, a bear, since the city was founded upon the
spot where somebody killed a bear. Bears surmount most of the stone
fountains in the streets; they ornament the monuments erected to heroes.
Cut from wood, they are offered for sale as _souvenirs_; stuffed, they
are exhibited at the zoölogical gardens; and, to crown all, government
supports in luxury a whole family of bruins. We left the carriage upon
the Nydeck bridge, to look down into the immense circular basin where
they are kept. It must be a dull life, even for a bear. They are ugly
creatures, with reddish fur, and spend their time climbing a leafless
semblance of a tree, with no object but to descend again, or in sitting
up to beg for biscuits of visitors. So universal has the custom of
begging become in Switzerland, that even the bears take to it quite
naturally.

The mountains obstinately refusing to appear, we left Berne for Thun,
passing through a lovely country. Only occasionally did a road appear;
then it would seem to extend for long miles, bordered by immense,
close-planted trees. Neither fences nor hedges were there to divide the
fields; but patches of grain were thrown down anywhere and at any angle.
Potatoes were sown like grass instead of being planted in hills, and
were devoured this year by rot--the worst feature in the landscape. All
through the early summer we had seen hemp growing everywhere. Now it was
cut, and lying outspread upon the ground in odd regularity, an
occasional head only being left to run to seed.

There was nothing to visit in Thun. But the whole town is like a story.
Not an elegant, high-toned story, to be sure, though a picturesque old
castle and church lifted themselves aristocratically above the more
humble town. The streets are narrow, and as picturesque as they are
dirty, with a sidewalk sometimes above the first, low, projecting story
of the houses.

It is a mile from the town to the lake of the same name. Close by the
steamer landing, where we were to embark for Newhaus, is the hotel
Bellevue. Within the garden enclosure were several little _châlets_; one
to serve as reading-room, another as _salle à manger_, while a third,
beyond the pond, where swan were sailing, displayed Swiss wares for
sale. Here we lunched and rested for an hour, before going up the lake.
It is a voyage of an hour and a half to its head, past beautiful villas
upon one side, and precipitous rocks upon the other. Once landed at
Newhaus,--where there was not a _new house_ that we could see, but only
a scanty collection of little huts,--we searched about, with the mud
ankle deep, among the crowd of waiting vehicles, for the omnibus which
was to bear us the two miles and a half to Interlaken and the hotel Jung
Frau. If you recall your geography lessons, you will perhaps know that
the two lakes, Thun and Brienz, are separated by a strip of land, upon
which is this village of Interlaken. It is hardly more than one long
street, with green fields and a row of trees upon one side, and a line
of houses standing back upon the other. In full view from the windows of
these summer hotels, when the sky is clear, rises the Jung Frau, between
two great mountain peaks. This is the only _sight_ in Interlaken, and
yet the town throngs with visitors. It must be intolerably hot here at
times, lying low among the mountains as does this valley. In the fields,
behind the grand hotels, is a long, low Kursaal, a rustic affair, with a
wide piazza. You may lunch, and read the newspapers; but government has
prohibited the gambling. There are delightful excursions to be made from
here, which accounts, perhaps, for the crowded hotels. And there are
several fine shops, where you may buy all or any of the curiosities for
which the country is well known.

A rainy day crowded these shops and the hotel parlors, and made a busy
scene the length of the street, which is very like a country road. But
the second morning after our arrival, we rose early, to prepare for an
excursion over the Wengern Alp. The Jung Frau, hidden the day before,
appeared in full view with the rolling away of the clouds, and we
desired to approach nearer to the shy maiden. All the listlessness of
the day before was past. As we stepped out of the little _châlet_, in
the hotel garden, where--the hotel being full--we had slept in a room
only vacated for the night, with a pair of immense red slippers behind
the door, and Madame's gowns hanging from pegs on the wall, everybody
was astir. More than one party was sipping their scalding coffee as we
entered the hotel breakfast-room, while, under the great trees outside,
guides and saddled horses waited impatiently.

When we had tied on our wide-rimmed hats, and gathered our shawls, we
found a roomy carriage, an open landau, waiting for us at the side-door
of the hotel. We drove quickly out of the town, followed by and
following other carriages, until we formed a long procession by the time
we had reached the valley of Lauterbrunnen and began the ascent. It is a
deep, dark valley, shut in by innumerable overhanging rocks, from which
thread-like waterfalls hang suspended in air, or are lost in spray.
Hardly does the sun seem to penetrate its depth, and an indescribable
gloom, as well as chill, pervades the place. From a few scattered
cottages women and children emerged to follow the carriages, begging
mutely or offering fruits, while at one point a man awaited our approach
to awake the echoes with an Alpine horn.

After an hour we reach Lauterbrunnen, and leave the carriage at the door
of an inn, where a crowd bargains and waits for guides and horses. We
swell the number. When we are served, we mount to our places, and file
out of the straggling village, turning before we reach the Staubach
Falls--a stream of silvery spray that never touches earth, but swings
and waves in mid-air. The ascent grows more and more steep. The recent
rain has added to the icy streams, which filter constantly from snows
above, and the horses sink in the mire, or slide and slip in a way by no
means reassuring. Often the path is mounted by steps of slippery logs;
when added to this is a precipice upon one side, we hold our breath--and
pass in safety. We commend each other as we perform feats of valor and
intrepidity which would make our fortune in the ring, we fancy. The
guides, insolent and careless, stroll on in advance, leaving the most
timid to their own devices. Presently, as we enter a perfect slough of
despond, we see a man before us scraping the mire with a hoe vigorously,
as we come in sight.

"You should give this poor man something," says one of the guides. "He
keeps the road in order." I wish you might have seen the _orderly_ road!

Suddenly we gain a point where the land spreads out into green knolls
before us and on either side--a strip of almost level verdure, with, on
one hand, peak on peak, rising till they touch heaven; upon the other,
the Jung Frau, draped in snow. It seems so near, so very near,--though
the land drops between us and it into a deep ravine, and the snow-clad
peaks and needles are a mile away,--I almost thought I might guide my
horse to the verge of the chasm, and reaching out, gather the snow in my
hand. Across the summit, the clouds, white as itself, drifted
constantly, hiding it completely at times. It had been a tiresome climb
of two hours and a half, and we were glad to rest an hour before
descending. As we turned the corner of the Jung Frau inn, having
dismounted from our horses, we were met by our ubiquitous, stout friends
of Lake Leman memory, to whom, I presume, we seemed equally omnipresent.
_Table d'hôte_ was served here, one party following another, until the
long table was full. Occasionally the noise of an avalanche, like the
sound of distant thunder, aroused and startled us, and caused us to
vacate every seat. But though the mountain appeared to be so near, these
avalanches, which sweep with tremendous force, carrying tons of ice and
snow, seen from this distance, seemed like nothing more than tiny
mountain streams let loose.

From the inn, we mounted and went on half a mile, before reaching the
summit and beginning the uncomfortable descent. We thought every bad
place must be the worst, as the horses slid down the slippery stones, or
descended the log steps with a peculiar jerky motion, suggesting
imminent and unpleasant possibilities. But, after fording torrents
swollen by the rain, crossing narrow, treacherous bridges, sliding down
inclined planes, and whole flights of stairs, the guides informed us
that we should reach a _dangerous place_ presently!

When, finally, we came to it, we were quite willing to dismount, and
make our way down over the rocks for a mile, trusting to our own feet,
and beset continually by women and children, who appeared most
unexpectedly at every turn, to thrust little baskets of fruit or flowers
into our hands. The very youngest child toddled after us with a withered
field-flower, if nothing more. So early do they begin to learn the trade
of a lifetime.

We entered Grindelwald late in the afternoon. The shadows of night,
which fall earlier in these valleys than elsewhere, were already
gathering. The few, scattered cottages, walled in by the everlasting
hills, with the snow-covered Wetterhorn in full view, and the glacier
behind it, wore a cheerless and gloomy air in the quick-coming twilight.
Train after train of tourists, upon horses and mules, or dragging weary
feet, descended from among the mountains, to find carriages here and
hasten away. Only these arrivals and departures gave a momentary life to
the spot. What must it be when the summer sun and the last visitor have
left it?

We, too, sought out our waiting carriage, and rolled away in the summer
twilight, down the beautiful road, wide and smooth enough to lead to
more dreadful places than the pleasant valley of Interlaken, where, for
a day at least, was our home.

The next afternoon, instead of spending the Sabbath here, we decided to
go on to Giessbach, on the Lake of Brienz, to visit the celebrated
falls. We had rested comfortably in the hope of a quiet day in the
little _châlet_, where more permanent arrangements had been made for our
disposal. But the enterprising member of the party, to whom we owed not
a little, in a happy moment of leisure, gave herself to the study of the
guide-book, the result of which was--Giessbach. We gathered our personal
effects together, under the pressure of great excitement and limited
time, reached the little steamer, fairly breathless, and then sat and
waited half an hour for it to move. It was not, however, a tedious time;
for there occurred an incident which engaged our attention.

"What do you suppose they're going to do with that calf?" asked the boy
of the party, who, like all boys, was of an inquiring turn of mind.
"They've got him into the water, and are poking him with sticks."

Upon this we all became immensely interested. A calf had fallen into the
water, between the pier and the steamer; but the fruitless efforts made
by everybody, interested or disinterested, were to rescue, not drown,
the creature, as a bystander would have inferred. Suddenly, as his own
struggles carried him away from the wharf and he was about to sink, a
white, delicate hand, bound with rings, and an arm daintily draped, were
thrust out from one of the cabin windows, seized upon the head
disappearing in a final _bob_, and held on until assistance came, when
the poor animal, half dead with fright, was drawn from the water.

At last the steamer moved away from the wharf, and in an hour or less
the little pier at Giessbach received us. There is a tiny valley, one
hotel, and a series of pretty cascades here. But all these are reached
by a smooth road, winding back upon itself continually, and so steep
that carriages do not ascend it. You must walk, or rather climb it, for
twenty minutes, or accept the disagreeable alternative of being carried
up by two men in a chair, resting on poles. The day was warm; our arms
were weighed down with satchels, &c.; but we pressed on, while,
commenting upon our personal peculiarities in dress, gait, and general
air, as they looked down upon us from the height we almost despaired of
gaining, were the complacent, comfortable souls, who always reach these
desirable places the day before any one else, and, in the freshest
possible toilets, sit, like Mordecai, in the gates.

It may have been droll to them; it was a most serious matter to us. It
was Saturday afternoon, and each one felt and acted upon the realized
necessity of outstripping his neighbor, in order to secure rooms.
Finally the gentlemen hastened on, our ambition failing with our
strength, and we were happy in finding comfortable quarters awaiting us
when we had gained the hotel at last.

It was the most delightful little nook imaginable when we were rested
and refreshed. Until then it possessed no charms in our eyes. It is a
little valley, high above the lake, towards which it opens, but shut in
on three sides by precipitous hills. Down the face of one the cascades
fall. Back against another the hotel is built, facing the lake; its
_dépendance_, and the inevitable shops for the sale of Swiss
wood-carving and crystals, being ranged along the third side. The whole
place is not larger than a flower-garden of moderate size.

We were served at our meals by pretty, red-cheeked girls, in charming
Swiss costumes; and when we had been out after dark to see the falls
illuminated in different colors, while the rustic bridges, which span
the cascades at various heights, were crossed by these picturesque
figures, I felt as if we were all part of a travelling show, for whom
this dear little level spot was the stage, and that a vast audience
waited outside, where the walls of hills opened upon the lake, for the
curtain to fall. It was like the Happy Valley of Rasselas, which we left
with regret when the peaceful Sabbath was over.

Across the lake, at Brienz, Monday morning, a carriage waited to bear us
on, over the Brunig Pass, into the clouds and out again; then down,
down, past village, and lake, and towering hills, resting again at
Sarnen, then on to Lucerne, into which we swept, with tinkling bells and
cracking whip, to find the city gay with streaming flags and flowery
arches, erected for some singing _fête_, but which to us were all signs
of a happy welcoming.




CHAPTER XVI.

BACK TO PARIS ALONE.

          Coming home.--The breaking up of the party.--We
          start for Paris alone.--Basle, and a search for a
          hotel.--The twilight ride.--The shopkeeper whose
          wits had gone "a wool-gathering."--"Two tickets
          for Paris."--What can be the matter now?--'Michel
          Angelo's Moses.--Paris at midnight.--The kind
          _commissionaire_.--The good French gentleman, and
          his fussy little wife.--A search for Miss
          H.'s.--"Come up, come up."--"Can women travel
          through Europe alone?"--A word about a woman's
          outfit.


TO dash through the town, along the quay where we had walked so many
times beneath the trees or leaning over the low parapet fed the fishes,
past the two-spired cathedral, the cloisters of which had become so
familiar, to mount the hill and draw up before the door of the Bellevue
again, welcomed by the innkeeper, and greeted with outstretched hands by
"Charles," who had served our chocolate, while familiar faces met us at
every window or upon the stairs, to pull up the shutters, throw wide
open the windows, and drink in the glorious beauty of the scene before
our eyes--all this was delightful, but fleeting, like all earthly joys,
and mixed with pain; for here we were to say "good by."

Our pleasant party was to break up. The friends in whose care we had
been so long, were off for Germany, and Mrs. K. and I must turn our
faces towards home. We were to renew our early and brief experience in
travelling alone. It had been as limited as our French, which consisted
principally of "_Est-ce que vous avez?_" followed by a pantomimic
display that would have done credit to a professional, and "_Quel est le
prix?_" succeeded by the blankest amazement, since we could seldom, if
ever, understand a reply.

"Are you afraid?" queried our friends.

"No; O, no." The state of our minds transcended fear.

It was a hot day when we took our last view of the lake, as we rode down
the hill from the hotel, past the cathedral, past the shaded promenade
upon the quay, to the station; but we heeded neither the heat nor the
landscape when we were once in the train and on the way. Our hearts were
heavy with grief at parting from friends, our spirits weighed down by
nameless fears. It was a wicked world, we suddenly remembered. Wolves in
sheep's clothing doubtless awaited us at every turn. Roaring lions
guarded every station. We clutched our travelling-bags, umbrellas, and
wraps, with a grasp only attained by grim fate or lone women. Gradually,
however, as the uneventful hours wore away, we forgot that in eternal
vigilance lay our safety, and relaxed our hold.

We had left Lucerne at noon; at five o'clock we reached Basle. Here we
were to spend the night at the hotel _Les Trois Rois_. Every step of the
way to Paris had been made plain to us by our kind friends.

"Let me see; the hotel is close by the station?" queried Mrs. K., when
we had left our trunks, as our friends had advised, and followed the
crowd to the sidewalk.

"Yes," I replied with assurance, "close by, they said; I am sure."

Accordingly we turned away from the long line of hotel omnibuses backed
up against the curb-stone, to the fine hotels on each side of the
straight avenue, extending as far as the eye could see. Alas! among
their blazing names was no "_Trois Rois_." We read them over and over
again. We even tried to pronounce them. Not a king was there, to say
nothing of _three_.

In a kind of bewilderment we strayed down the avenue. Might not some one
of the fair dwellings gleaming out from the shrubbery prove the house we
sought? There was a rattle and clatter behind us; a passing omnibus.
Another, and still another followed. Serene faces beamed out upon our
perplexity. A cloud of dust enveloped us as the last rolled cheerfully
by, upon the end of which we read, with staring eyes, "_Les Trois
Rois_."

"Ah!" gasped Mrs. K.

"Sure enough," I replied.

"Why, suppose we take it?" said she, slowly.

"Suppose we do," I assented, with equal deliberation. But by this time
the little red omnibus was a speck in the distance.

"At least we can follow it." And we quickened our steps, when, with
almost human perversity, it turned a distant corner, and vanished from
sight.

Fixing our eyes steadily upon the point of disappearance, we hastened
on, and on, and on! I have a faint recollection of green trees, of
stately houses, of an immense fountain swaying its white arms in the
distance--mirage-like, for we never approached it; of the sun pouring
its fierce rays upon us as we toiled on, with our wraps and satchels
turning to lead in our arms.

We reached the corner at last. There was no omnibus; no hotel in sight;
only the meeting of half a dozen narrow, crooked streets, crowded with
carriages, and alive with humanity. All settled purpose left us then;
our wits, never very firmly attached, followed. We became completely
demoralized.

"Suppose you inquire," suggested Mrs. K., after a period of inaction,
during which we were pushed, and jostled, and trampled under foot by the
crowd.

If I possessed one capability above another, it was that of asking
questions, especially in a strange language. Upon this corner where we
were standing, rose an imposing building, in the open doorway of which
stood a portly gentleman, with a countenance like the setting sun, in
glow and warmth. A heavy mane flowed over his shoulders. Evidently this
was the first of the roaring lions! Taking our lives in our hands, we
approached him.

"Do you speak English?" I ventured.

"_Nein_," was his reply, with a shrug of the leonine shoulders.

I drew a long breath and began again.

"_Parlez-vous Français?_"

His reply to this was as singular as unprecedented. He turned his back
and disappeared up the wide stairs in the rear.

"This _may_ be foreign politeness," I was beginning, doubtfully, when he
reappeared, accompanied by an intensified counterpart of himself. The
setting sun in the face of this man gave promise of a scorching day.

"_Parlez-vous Français, monsieur?_" I began again, when we had bowed and
"_bon-jour_"-ed for some time.

"_Oui, oui, mademoiselle._"

Here was an unexpected dilemma. A terrible pause ensued. Then, with an
effort which in some minds would have produced a poem at least, I
attempted to make known the object of our quest. I cannot begin to tell
of the facial contortions which accompanied this sentence, nor of the
ineffable peace which followed its conclusion. It made no manner of
difference that his reply was a jargon of unintelligible sounds. Virtue
is its own reward. One sentence alone I caught, as the indistinguishable
tones flew by. We were to take the first street, and then turn to the
right.

"What did he say?" asked Mrs. K., when we had _merci_-d ourselves out of
their radiant presences.

I explained the direction we were to follow.

"Horrible countenance he had," she remarked, as we pursued our way.

"O, dreadful," I assented.

"Nobody knows where he may send us," she continued.

Sure enough! In our alarm we stopped short in the street, and stared at
each other with horrified countenances.

"I have heard--" I began.

"Yes; and so have I," she went on, shaking her head, and expressing by
that gesture most fearful possibilities.

A bright thought seized me. "He told us to turn to the _right_; we will
turn to the _left_!" And with that happy, womanly instinct, said to
transcend all judgment, _we did_. Strange as it may appear, though we
went on for a long half hour, no "_Trois Rois_" gladdened our eyes.

Suddenly Mrs. K. struck an attitude. "A fine appearance we shall
present," said she; "two lone women, dusty and heated, our arms full of
baggage, straggling up to a hotel two mortal hours after the arrival of
the train. We'll take a carriage."

To me this inglorious advent was so distant in prospect that it held no
terrors, nothing of mortification even. "_Les Trois Rois_" had become a
myth, an idea towards which we vainly struggled.

"If it were only across the street," she went on, rising to the occasion
and warming with the subject, "we would go in a carriage."

One approached at that moment. We motioned to it _à la Mandarin_, with
our heads, our hands and arms being full. The driver raised his whip and
pointed solemnly into the distance. We turned to gaze, seeing nothing
but the heavens in that direction. When we looked back, he was gone. We
should not like to affirm--we hardly dare suggest--we are sure of
nothing but that he vanished from before our eyes.

A second appeared in the distance. We began in time. We pawed the air
wildly with our umbrellas. The very satchels and wraps upon our arms
nodded and beckoned. In serene unconsciousness the driver held to his
course.

"Well!" I exclaimed, indignantly.

"I should think so," added Mrs. K., with emphasis.

"Is there anything peculiar, anything unusual in our personal
appearance?" I asked, glancing down upon our dusty appointments. As we
concentrated our energies and belongings for one final effort, a
benignant countenance smiled out upon us from above a _cipher_. We were
storming a private carriage!

The third attempt was more successful. The driver paused. We requested
him, in English, to take us to "The Three Kings." He only stared and
shook his head. We tried him with "_Les Trois Rois_." He seemed still
more mystified.

"What can be done with people who do not understand their own language!"
I exclaimed in despair.

We tried it again with our purest Parisian accent. An inkling of our
meaning pierced his dull understanding. He rolled heavily down from his
seat, and opened the door with the usual "_Oui, oui_." We entered and
were driven away.

"Do you think he understood you?" queried Mrs. K.

"No-o."

"Well, where do you suppose he will take us?"

"I don't know, and I don't much care," I responded, in desperation.

We settled back upon the cushions. The peace that follows resignation
possessed our souls. O, the luxury of that jolting, rattling ride, as we
wound in and out among the tortuous streets! A full half hour passed
before the dusky old hotel darkened above us, surmounted by "The Three
Kings" arrayed in Eastern magnificence, and wearing gilded crowns upon
their heads.

Fate had been propitious. This was our destination, without doubt,
though we had made a grand mistake as to its location. We descended at
the entrance with the air, I trust, of being equal to the occasion. We
calmly surveyed the assembled porters, who hastened to seize our
satchels and wraps. We demanded a room, and inquired the hour of _table
d'hôte_, as though we had done the same thing a thousand times before.
Mrs. K. was right; there was a moral support in that blessed carriage.

_Table d'hôte_ over, we strayed into a pretty _salon_ opening from the
_salle à manger_. Both were crowded--over doors and windows, and within
cabinets filling every niche and corner--with quaint specimens of
pottery--pitchers, vases, and jars, ancient enough in appearance to have
graced the domestic establishment of the original "Three Kings." The
glass doors thrown back enticed us upon a long, low balcony, almost
swept by the rushing river below--the beautiful Rhine hastening on to
its hills and vineyards. We leaned over, smitten with sudden
homesickness, and sent a message back to Rolandseck of happy memory.

With the faint shadows of coming twilight we wandered out into the
square before the hotel. A line of _voitures_ extended down one side,
every one of which was quickened into life at our approach. We paused,
with foot upon the step of the first, for the _carte_ always proffered,
upon which is the number of the driver and the established rate of
fares. He only touched his shiny hat and prepared to gather up his
reins.

"O, dear!" we said; "this will never do; we must not go." And we
stepped down. The porters upon the hotel steps began to cast inquiring
glances. One or two stray passers added their mite of curiosity, when
the knight-errant, who always breaks a lance for distressed womanhood,
appeared upon the scene. We recognized him at once, though his armor was
only a suit of gray tweed, and he wore a fashionable round-topped hat
for a casque.

Almost before we knew it, we were seated in the carriage, the _carte_ in
our hands, and were slowly crawling out of the square--for a subdued
snail-pace is the highest point of speed attained by these public
vehicles.

The memory of Basle is as shadowy, dim, delightful, as was that twilight
ride. Where we were going, we neither knew nor cared; nor, later, where
we had been. We wound in and out the close streets of the old part of
the city, full of a busy life so far removed from our own, that it
seemed a show, a picture; below the surface we could not penetrate. We
rolled along wide avenues where the houses on either side were white as
the dust under the wheels. Once in a quiet square, we paused before an
old _Hôtel de Ville_, frescoed in warm, rich colors. Again upon the
outskirts of the city, before a monument; but whether it had been
erected to hero or saint I cannot now recall. And somewhere, when the
dusk was deepening, we found an old church, gray as the shadows
enveloping it, with a horseman, spear in hand, cut in _bas relief_ upon
one side. What dragon he made tilt against in the darkness we never
knew.

Even our driver seemed to warm beneath the influences which subdued and
dissipated our cares. He nodded gently and complacently to
acquaintances, eliciting greetings in return, in which we, in a measure,
shared. He hummed a guttural, though cheerful song, which found an echo
in our hearts. He stood up in his place to point the way to misguided
strangers, in whose perplexities we could so well sympathize. And once,
having laid down the reins, and paused in our slow advance, he held a
long and seemingly enjoyable conversation with a passing friend. To all
this we made no manner of objection, rather we entered into the spirit
of the hour, and were filled with a complacency which was hastily
banished upon our return to the hotel, where, as we put into the hand of
our benevolent driver his due, and the generous _pour boire_ which gave
always such a twinge to our temperance principles, he demanded more.

"He claims," said the porter, who was assisting our descent, "that he
has been driving with the carriage lamps lighted. There is an extra
charge for that."

"But he left his seat to light them this moment, just before we turned
into the square," we replied, indignantly.

The porter shrugged his shoulders. That is the end of an argument. There
is never anything more to be said. We submitted at once, though our
faith in benevolent humanity went to the winds.

Somewhat dispirited, we climbed the stairs to our room. "One day more,"
we said, "and our troubles will be at an end." But, alas! one day was as
a thousand years!

It was to be an all-day's ride to Paris, from nine o'clock in the
morning until half past nine or ten at night. So, while waiting for
breakfast, we hastened out into the town, in search of a bookstore, and
something to while away the dull hours before us.

A young man, of preternaturally serious countenance, was removing the
shutters as we entered a musty little shop. We turned over the
Tauchnitz's editions of English novels until we had made a choice, the
value of our purchases amounting to four or five francs, and gave him a
napoleon. With profuse apologies he left us to get it changed. Returning
presently, he threw the silver into a drawer, and handed the books to
us, with a "_Merci_."

"Yes," we said; "but--" Arithmetic had never been my strength; still
something was clearly wrong here.

"The change," said Mrs. K. "He has given us no change." Sure enough; but
still he continued to bow and thank us, evidently expecting us to go.

We tried to explain; eliciting only one of the blank stares that usually
followed our attempts at explanation.

"The man must be an idiot," Mrs. K. said, gravely.

"He certainly has an imbecile expression of countenance," I assented. He
stood still, bowing at intervals, while we calmly weighed and balanced
his wits before his eyes. We tried signs; having through much practice
developed a system to which the deaf and dumb alphabet is as nothing. We
attempted to convince him that a part of the money was ours.

He smiled, and assured us, in a similar way, that the books belonged to
us, the money to him.

There was so much justice in this, that we should doubtless have
assented, had not his own wits finally asserted themselves. Blushing
like a bashful boy, he suddenly exclaimed, counted out the change, and
poured it into our hands with so many apologies, that we were glad to
retreat.

It was a discouraging beginning for the new day. Still we would not
despair. We had assured our anxious friends that we were quite able to
take care of ourselves. We would triumphantly prove our own words.
Breakfast over, and our bill settled without mishap or misunderstanding,
we started for the station in the hotel omnibus, in company with a
stout, genial Frenchman, who spoke a little English, and his fussy
little wife. When we entered the station, the line formed before the
ticket-window was already formidable. It lacked fifteen minutes of the
hour when the train would start, and our baggage was--where? We seized a
_commissionaire_, slipped a piece of money into his hand in a very
bungling, shamefaced way, and, presto! in a moment our trunks appeared
among the other baggage, though we had looked in vain for them before.
Then, with a sensation of self-consciousness approaching guilt, I
stepped to the foot of the line before the ticket-window.

"Two tickets for Paris," I gasped, finding myself, after a time, brought
face to face with the sharp-eyed official. "What is the price?" But
before I could utter the words, the reply rattled through my head like a
discharge of grape-shot. Every finger resolved itself into ten, as I
essayed to open my purse and count out the gold pieces. What should I
do! I had not enough into ten francs; it might as well have been ten
thousand! Mrs. K. was waiting at a little distance; but the place once
lost in the line could not be regained, and there was our baggage yet to
be weighed, and the hands of the clock frightfully near the hour of
departure. There was an impatient stamping of feet behind me, as I stood
for a moment dizzy, bewildered, with an angry buzz of voices ringing
with the din and roar in my ears. Then I rushed down the room to Mrs.
K., and explained as hastily as possible. She filled my purse, and I
flew back to find the line pushed forward and my place gone. One glance
at the hands of the clock, at the discouraging line of ticket-seekers
yet to be served,--how could I go to the foot again! Then I walked
straight to the window with the courage of despair. A low growl ran down
the line, the _gendarme_ on guard stepped forward, expostulating
excitedly; but, blessings on the man at the head of the line, who pushed
the others back, and gave me a place, and even upon the grim official
behind the window, who smiled encouragement, and gave me the tickets,
while the _gendarme_ stormed. I stepped out again, conscious only of the
wish--strong as a prayer--that we were safe again in Lucerne, or--some
other place of peaceful rest.

Wedged in among the crowd, we saw one trunk after another weighed and
removed, while ours remained untouched. I pulled the sleeve of a porter.
My hand held my purse. The suggestion was enough. In a moment our trunks
were weighed, and the little paper ticket corresponding to our "check"
safe in our possession. I turned, conscientiously, to reward the
porter; but we were jostled by a score of elbows, each encased in the
sleeve of a blue blouse. Which was the one I sought? I could not tell.
Each answered my glance of puzzled inquiry with one of expectation.
Diving to the depths of my purse, I found it to contain one solitary
centime--nothing more. I slipped it into the hand nearest, and from the
start of surprise and delight was immediately convinced that it was the
wrong man. However, it did not matter. There was no time to explain. The
doors opening upon the platform, which remain locked until the last
moment, were thrown open, and we hurried away, found places upon the
train, and sank back upon the cushions exhausted, but happy. For ten
hours at least, nothing could happen to us. The guard passed the window,
examining the tickets, and slamming the doors, making our safety doubly
sure. A moment more, and with a noiseless motion we were off. Hardly had
the train started before it stopped again. One after another our
companions left us--for we were not alone in the compartment. "Strange,"
we said, yet too thoroughly exhausted to be curious. It was still more
strange when, after a short time, they each and all returned. They began
to whisper among themselves, pointing to us. "What _can_ be the matter
_now_?" we queried, suddenly mindful that life is a warfare, and roused
to interest.

Our fellow-travellers proceeded to enlighten us in chorus, and in the
confusion of the outburst, we caught--by inspiration--at their meaning.
We had crossed the frontier into France, and the baggage was examined
here. We hastened out and into the station. All the trunks but our own
had been checked. With his hand upon one of these, an official demanded
the key, upon our appearance. Remembering an episode in its packing, we
demurred, and proffered the key of another. Already vexed by the delay,
his suspicions were roused now. He demanded the key of the first, which
we gave up with wicked delight. The by-standers drew near. Indeed, a
crowd was the embarrassing accompaniment to all our unfortunate
experiences. The official turned the key with the air of doing his duty
if he perished in the attempt, when the lid flew open, and a hoop-skirt,
compressed to the final degree, sprang up into his startled face, like a
Jack-in-the-box. The spectators laughed--French though they were--as,
very red in the face, he vainly tried to replace it, entirely forgetting
to search for contraband articles.

No other incident disturbed the quiet of that long day's ride to Paris.
At some queer little station we descended to lunch, and returned to our
places, laden, like the spies of Eschol, with luscious grapes. Our
fellow-travellers dropped out along the way, only, however, to be
replaced by others. We had not succeeded in securing places in the
compartment reserved for ladies alone; but the French gentlemen who were
our companions proved most courteous in their polite indifference to our
movements. An old gentleman among these, elicited our outspoken
admiration for his grand head. We were secure in our native language, we
knew.

"Lovely face!" we exclaimed, unblushingly. "What a head for a sculptor!
Quite like Michel Angelo's Moses, I declare."

Before the day was over, "Michel Angelo's Moses" addressed us in
excellent English.

When the darkness gathered, when the night settled down, something of
its gloom oppressed us. Once safely housed in Paris, we should be at
rest; but there were still difficulties to be overcome. Our friends had
telegraphed to Miss H. that we should arrive by this train; but the
number of her house we did not know, nor did they. We were only sure
that her apartments were over the _Magasin au Printemps_. Still that was
tolerably exact; we would not be uneasy. At ten o'clock at night we
stepped down from the train into a confusion of tongues and elbows which
I cannot describe, and followed the crowd into the baggage-room. I say
_followed_--we were literally lifted from our feet and borne along.
There was no baggage in sight. We waited until an hour seemed to have
passed, and still no trunks appeared.

"Suppose we leave them, and send a porter from the house in the morning
to find them;" and acting upon this, we struggled out of the station
into the great paved square at one side. The night was dark; but the
gas-lights dimly lighted up a line of carriages at the farther side,
towards which we hastened, and had seated ourselves in one, when a
_commissionaire_ came running across the square, and putting his head in
at the carriage window, asked if we had any baggage.

"Yes," we replied; but the rattling words that followed brought only
confusion to us. Our minds, already overtaxed, gave way at once. It is
pleasant to recall the patience and good-nature of that official. It is
pleasant, when old things have so entirely passed away, to remember the
Paris of 1869 as, at least, a city into which women might come at
midnight, alone, unprotected, and be not only free from insult and
imposition, but actually cared for, and sent to their rightful
destination, in spite of their own ignorance and incompetence.

"Stay here," said our friend in uniform; and he disappeared, to return
in a moment with the stout French gentleman who had been our companion
in the hotel omnibus at Basle. We met with mutual surprise, and pleasure
on our side at least.

"_Do_ any one look for your baggage?" he asked.

"No," we replied. "We thought we might leave it."

"You must go," he said.

The _commissionaire_ took possession of our check and the driver's
_carte_, and I followed the two back to the station, leaving Mrs. K. to
guard our satchels, &c., in the carriage.

"Wait one leetle moment," said the kind French gentleman; "I bring
madame." And in a moment he dragged the fussy little woman from the
crowd, handing her over with the triumphant air of having now settled
all difficulties.

"Madame speak ze Eengleesh fine," he said.

Looking down from an immeasurable height, the little madam condescended
to remark that their servant was looking for their baggage.

"Ah!" I responded. "Then we are not permitted to leave our trunks."

"I am sure I don't know," she replied, looking so greatly bored, not to
say exhausted, that I did not think it best to press the matter. "Our
servant is attending to it," she repeated.

Her husband's face fairly glowed with satisfaction while this side
conversation was being carried on. Evidently he believed the whole
French baggage system to have been elucidated for my benefit. I thanked
him heartily, as we exchanged cordial adieus. Even the fussy little
woman gathered, for the moment, sufficient life to attempt to bow;
which, alas! never got beyond a stare. The _commissionaire_ seized upon
a blue-bloused porter, and gave me to him with the check, the _carte_,
and a few sharply-spoken directions. Clinging to that blue sleeve, I was
borne through the swaying, surging mass of humanity, into the
baggage-room--how, I never knew. Our trunks were identified, lifted, not
thrown, by my porter upon a hand-truck, which dragged for itself and us
an opening in the crowd. Once out upon the platform, the porter pushed
doggedly on into the darkness, though I had left Mrs. K. and the
carriage in the square at one side. I expostulated. He held persistently
to his course. I gave one thought to poor Mrs. K., resigned to what fate
I knew not, and then, woman-like, followed my trunks.

It was all explained, when, dimly outlined in the darkness before the
station, we espied a sea of shiny hats and shadowy cabs; and when, after
long shouting of the number of our own, by the porter and everybody
else, it finally crawled up to the steps where we were standing, Mrs.
K.'s anxious face looking out of the window.

"I began to think you were lost," she said. "You can fancy my feelings
when the driver gathered up the reins and drove out of that square."

We made a thank-offering upon the palm of every grimy hand, suddenly
outstretched; then the driver paused, whip in the air, for the address
of our destination.

"_Magasin au Printemps_, Boulevard Haussman." He stared, as everybody
had, and did, along the way. If they only wouldn't! We repeated it. He
conferred, in a low tone, with the man on the next box, who got down
from his place, and came around to our window to look at us. One or two
lounging porters joined him. The _Magasin au Printemps_ is a large dry
and fancy goods establishment, which had been closed, of course, for
hours, since it was now nearly midnight. It was as though we had reached
New York late at night, and insisted upon being driven to _Stewart's_.
The little crowd stared at us solemnly, in a kind of pitiful curiosity,
I fancied. I think, by this time, our countenances may have expressed
incipient idiocy. We attempted to explain that Miss H.'s apartments were
over the _Magasin_, and the driver mounted to his seat, though, I am
obliged to confess, with an ominous shake of his head.

As we rolled out into the wide boulevards our spirits rose. The
sidewalks were crowded with promenaders, the streets with carriages. The
light of a glorious day seemed to have burst upon our dazzled eyes.
Paris, gay, beautiful Paris, which never sleeps, was out, disporting
herself.

"We will not be anxious," we said; nor were we in the least. "Even if we
cannot find Miss H.'s, some hotel will take us in. Or, failing in that,
we can drive about until morning."

A thought of our respective and respectable families did cross our minds
with this lawless suggestion. In happy unconsciousness, they believed us
still safe with our friends.

We crawled up the Boulevard Haussman. There were the closed doors and
shutters of the _Magasin au Printemps_. Two or three other doors met our
gaze. The driver paused before one. We descended, and pulled the bell.
You must know there are no doorsteps, in Paris, leading to front doors,
as with us. The first floor is, almost without exception, given up to
shops; and dwellings, unless pretentious enough to be houses enclosing a
court-yard and entered from the street by passing through great gates,
are simply apartments in the two, three, and four stories above these
shops.

Some invisible mechanism swung back the great double doors as we pulled
the bell, disclosing a pretty, paved court-yard, with a fountain in the
centre, surrounded by pots of flowers. A glass door at one side,
revealed wide marble stairs, down which a charming little portress was
tripping.

"Is this Miss H.'s?" we asked in English. She only shook her head. We
paraded our French. She seemed lost in thought for a moment, then, with
a "_Oui, oui_," ran past us to the carriage, and gave some directions to
the driver, emphasizing her words with a pair of plump little hands.
Then, with a "_bon nuit_," she disappeared, and the great doors closed
again. Evidently we were being taken care of, we thought, as we settled
back again in the carriage. We stopped before another door, already
open, and disclosing a flight of wide, stone stairs, ascending almost
from the sidewalk. Immediately upon pulling the bell--as though the wire
had been attached to it--a long, loose-jointed, grotesque, yet horrible
figure appeared at the head of the stairs, half-stooping to bring
himself within the range of my vision, swinging his arms like a Dutch
windmill, and grinning in a way which seemed to open his whole head.

[Illustration: "Together we stared at him with rigid and severe
countenances." Page 240.]

"Is--is this Miss H.'s?" I ventured from the sidewalk.

He only beckoned still more wildly for me to ascend. I drew back. Good
Heavens! What was the matter with him? And still, while I stared
fascinated, yet horror-stricken, he continued, without intermission,
these speechless contortions and evolutions. Although he uttered not a
sound, he seemed to say with every cracking joint, "Come up, come up,"
while he scooped the air with his bony hands.

I remembered that it was midnight; that we were alone, and in wicked
Paris; that we had been religiously brought up; that Mrs. K.'s husband
was the superintendent of a large and flourishing Sunday school; that my
father was a minister of the gospel. I planted my feet firmly upon the
sidewalk. I folded my arms rigidly. I shook my head virtuously. Come up?
Chains should not drag me. Then I turned to the carriage.

"Mrs. K., do come and see this man."

She came. Together we stared at him with rigid and severe countenances.

"Dreadful!" said I, remembering the Sunday school.

"Awful!" said she, recalling the pious ancestors. And again we shook our
heads at his blandishments to the point of dislocation. The driver, who
had been all this time tipped back against a tree, began to show
symptoms of impatience. Something must be done.

"Suppose you ask for some one who can speak English," suggested Mrs. K.

"Sure enough." And I did. With one last, terrible grimace the ogre's
heels disappeared up the second flight of stairs.

There came down in a moment a thoroughly respectable appearing porter,
who informed us, in English, that we were expected, our telegram having
been received; though, through the ambiguity of its address, it had been
sent first to a house below. The people there had promised to forward
us, however, in case we followed the telegram. This accounted for the
movements of the little portress.

The _ogre_ proved to be a most good-natured _concierge_, who had been
instructed to keep the door open in anticipation of our arrival.

So our fears had been but feathers, after all, blown away by a breath;
our troubles only a dream, to be laughed over in the awakening.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here the story of our journeying may end. The remaining distance,
through the kindness of friends, new and old, was accomplished without
difficulty or annoyance. We reached our own homes in due time, and like
the princess in the fairy tales, "lived happily forever afterwards."

A few practical words suggest themselves here which would pass unnoticed
in a preface--where, perhaps, they belong. First, in regard to the
question often asked, "Can women travel alone through Europe?" Recalling
our own experience,--too brief to serve as a criterion,--I should still
say, "_Yes_." We met, frequently, parties of ladies who had made the
whole grand tour alone. In Switzerland we found English women,
constantly, without escort. The care of choosing routes, of looking
after baggage and buying tickets, of managing the sometimes complicated
affairs attendant upon sight-seeing, with the vexations and impositions
met with and suffered on every hand, no woman would voluntarily accept
without great compensation, I am sure. But if she prefers even these
cares to seeing nothing of the world, they can be borne, and the
annoyances, to a great extent overcome, through patience and growing
experience.

Then, if you start alone, or without being consigned to friends upon the
other side,--which no _young_ woman would think of doing,--you are
almost sure to join, at different times, other parties, whose way is
your own; and far preferable this is to making up a large company before
leaving home--the members of which usually disagree before reaching the
continent, and often part in mutual disgust. "There is nothing like
travelling to bring out a person's real nature," say some. But this is
untrue. Travelling develops, rather than reveals, I think, and under
conditions favorable only to the worse side of one's nature. You are
bewildered by the multitude of strange sights and ways; the very
foundation of usages is broken up; you are putting forth physical
exertions that would seem superhuman at home, and are mentally racked
until utterly exhausted,--for there is nothing so exhausting as
continued sight-seeing,--and at this point people say they begin "to
find each other out."

An occasional period of rest--not staying within doors to study up the
guide-books, but entire cessation from seeing, hearing, or doing--and a
scrap from the mantle of charity, will save many a threatened friendship
at these times. We learned to know our strength--how weak it was; and to
await in some delightful spot, chosen for the purpose, returning energy,
courage, and _interest_; for even that would be banished at times by
utter weariness and exhaustion.

In former times, Americans fitted themselves out for Europe as though
bound to a desert island. Wider intelligence and experience have opened
their eyes and reformed their judgment; still, a word upon this subject
will not be unwelcome, I am sure, to girls especially, who contemplate a
trip over the ocean.

In the first place, your steamer outfit is a distinct affair. You are
allowed to take any baggage you wish for into your state-room; but, if
wise, you will not fill the narrow space, nor encumber yourself with
anything larger than a lady's _hat box_, which may offer a tolerable
seat to the stewardess, or visitors of condolence, in case seasickness
confines you to berth or sofa. Even preferable to this is a flat,
English portmanteau, which can be slipped under the lower berth. If you
sail for Liverpool, you can leave this at your hotel there in charge of
the head waiter until you return, and thus avoid the expense and care of
useless baggage.

Its contents your own good sense will in a measure suggest. Let me
add--a double gown or woollen wrapper, in which you may sleep, flannels
(even though you cross the ocean in summer), merino stockings, warm
gloves or mittens, as pretty a hood as you please, only be sure that it
covers the back of your head, since you will ignore all cunning craft of
hair dressing, for a few days at least, and even after you are well
enough to appear at the table, perhaps. Bear in mind that the Northern
Atlantic is a cold place, and horribly open to the wind _at all seasons
of the year_; that you will live on the deck when not in your berth or
at your meals, and that the deck of an ocean steamer partakes of the
nature of a whirlwind. Fur is by no means out of place, and skirts
should be sufficiently heavy to defy the gales, which convert everything
into a sail. Take as many wraps as you choose--and then you will wish
you had one more. A large shawl, or, better, a carriage-robe, is
indispensable, as you will very likely lie rolled up like a cocoon much
of the time. A low sea-chair, or common camp-chair, is useful to older
people; but almost any girl will prefer a seat upon the deck itself;
there are comfortable crannies into which no chair can be wedged.

By all means avoid elaborate fastenings to garments. A multiplicity of
unmanageable "hooks and eyes" is untold torment at sea; and let these
garments be few, but warm. You will appreciate the wisdom of this
suggestion, when you have accomplished the herculean task of making your
first state-room toilet.

If you are really going abroad for a season of _travel_, take almost
nothing. You can never know what you will need until the necessity
arises. If you anticipate, you misjudge. Your American outfit will
render you an oddity in England. But do not change there, or you will
be still more singular in Paris. It is as well to start with but one
dress besides the one you wear on the steamer--anything you chance to
have; a black alpaca, or half-worn black silk, is very serviceable. When
you reach Paris, circumstances and the season will govern your
purchases; and this same dress will be almost a necessity for constant
railway journeys, rainy-day sight-seeing, and mule-riding in
Switzerland. A little care and brushing, fresh linen, and a pretty
French tie, will make it presentable--if not more--at any hotel dinner
table.

A warm shawl or wrap of some kind you will need for evenings,--even
though you travel in summer,--for visiting the cathedrals, which are
chill as a tomb; and for weeks together among the mountains you will
never throw it aside. But if you can take but one, _don't_ provide
yourself with a _water-proof_. They are too undeniably ugly, and not
sufficiently warm for constant wear. If it rains slightly, the umbrella,
which you will buy from force of necessity and example in England, will
protect you; if in torrents, you will ride. Indeed, you will always
ride, time is so precious, cab-hire so cheap, and distances so great in
most foreign cities.

Lastly, let me beg of you to provide yourself with an abundant supply of
patience and good-nature. Without these, no outfit is complete. Try to
laugh at annoyances. Smile, at least. And do not anticipate
difficulties. Above all, enjoy yourself, and then everybody you meet
will enjoy you. And so good by, and "God bless us every one."




LEE AND SHEPARD'S HANDBOOKS.


"JUST AS THE TWIG IS BENT, THE TREE'S INCLINED."

          =LESSONS ON MANNERS.= For home and school use. A
          Manual by EDITH E. WIGGIN. Cloth, 50 cents; school
          edition, boards, 30 cents net.

This little book is being rapidly introduced into schools as a
text-book.


SHOWS WHY THE WINDS BLOW.

          =WHIRLWINDS, CYCLONES, AND TORNADOES.= By Prof. W.
          M. DAVIS of Harvard University. Illustrated. 50
          cents.

The cyclones of our great West, the whirlwinds of the desert, every
thing in the shape of storms, scientifically and popularly treated.


"THIS VOLUME IS SUBLIME POETRY"

          =THE STARS AND THE EARTH;= or, Thoughts upon
          Space, Time, and Eternity. With an Introduction by
          THOMAS HILL, D.D., LL.D., late President of
          Harvard University. Cloth. 50 cents.

"It cannot but be valuable to the student of science as well as to the
professors of religion, and tends to bring them closer together, and
reconcile them."--_Potter's Monthly._


KNOW WHAT YOU ARE DRINKING.

          =HANDBOOK OF WATER ANALYSIS.= By Dr. GEORGE L.
          AUSTIN. Cloth. 50 cents.

"It condenses into fifty pages what one would have to wander through a
small chemical library to find. We commend the book as worthy of a wide
circulation."--_Independent._


EVERY LADY HER OWN FLORIST.

          =THE PARLOR GARDENER.= A Treatise on the
          House-Culture of Ornamental Plants. Translated
          from the French, and adapted to American use. By
          CORNELIA J. RANDOLPH. With eleven illustrative
          cuts. 50 cents.

It contains minute directions for the "mantel-piece garden," the
"_étagère_-garden," the "flower-stand garden," the "portable
green-house," the "house-aquarium," the garden upon the balcony, the
terrace, and the double window, besides describing many curious and
interesting experiments in grafting.


"HELLO, CENTRAL!"

          =THE TELEPHONE.= An Account of the Phenomena of
          Electricity, Magnetism, and Sound, as involved in
          its action, with directions for making a
          Speaking-Telephone. By Professor A. E. DOLBEAR of
          Tufts College. 16mo. Illustrated. Price 50 cents.

"An interesting little book upon this most fascinating subject, which is
treated in a very clear and methodical way. First we have a thorough
review of the discoveries in electricity, then of magnetism, then of
those in the study of sound,--pitch, velocity, timbre, tone, resonance,
sympathetic vibrations, etc. From these the telephone is reached, and by
them in a measure explained."--_Hartford Courant._


A PRACTICAL PROOF-READER'S ADVICE.

          =HANDBOOK OF PUNCTUATION=, and other Typographical
          Matters. For the use of Printers, Authors,
          Teachers, and Scholars. By MARSHALL T. BIGELOW,
          Corrector at the University Press, Cambridge,
          Mass. 18mo. Cloth. 50 cts.

"It is intended for the use of authors and teachers; while business men
who have occasion to print circulars, advertisements, etc., can hardly
afford to be without a copy of it for reference."--_Schenectady Daily
Union._


"A USEFUL LITTLE MANUAL."

          =HANDBOOK OF LIGHT GYMNASTICS.= By LUCY B. HUNT,
          Instructor in Gymnastics at Smith (Female)
          College, Northampton, Mass. 50 cents.

"It is designed as a guide to teachers of girls; but it will be found of
use, also, to such as wish to practise the exercises at
home."--_New-York World._


LOOK OUT FOR SQUALLS.

          =PRACTICAL BOAT-SAILING.= By DOUGLAS FRAZAR.
          Classic size. $1.00. With numerous diagrams and
          illustrations.

"Its directions are so plain, that, with the aid of the accompanying
pictorial illustrations and diagrams given in the book, it does seem as
if 'anybody,' after reading it, could safely handle a sailboat in a
squall."--_Times, Hartford._


"A HELPFUL LITTLE BOOK."--_Springfield Republican._

          =HANDBOOK OF WOOD-ENGRAVING.= With Practical
          Instructions in the Art for Persons wishing to
          learn without an Instructor. By WILLIAM A.
          EMERSON, Wood-Engraver. New Edition. Illustrated.
          $1.00.

"A valuable handbook, explanatory of an art which is gradually
attracting the attention of amateurs more and more, and which affords,
not only a pleasing pastime, but an excellent means of procuring a
livelihood."--_Cleveland Sun._


"A LITERARY TIDBIT."

          =SHORT STUDIES OF AMERICAN AUTHORS.= By THOMAS
          WENTWORTH HIGGINSON. 50 cents.

"These 'Studies' are rather those of the characters themselves than of
their works, and, written in Mr. Higginson's best analytical style, fill
up a leisure hour charmingly."--_Toledo Journal._


"NO LITTLE BOOK IS CAPABLE OF DOING BETTER SERVICE."

          =HANDBOOK OF ELOCUTION SIMPLIFIED.= By WALTER K.
          FOBES, with an Introduction by GEORGE M. BAKER.
          Cloth. 50 cents.

"This valuable little book occupies a place heretofore left vacant, as a
digest of elocution that is both practical and methodical, and low in
price."--_New-York Tribune._


SHORT-HAND WITHOUT A MASTER.

          =HANDBOOK OF UNIVERSAL PHONOGRAPHY;= or,
          Short-hand by the "Allen Method." A
          self-instructor, whereby more speed than long-hand
          writing is gained at the first lesson, and
          additional speed at each subsequent lesson. By G.
          G. ALLEN, Principal of the Allen Stenographic
          Institute, Boston. 50 cents.

"By this method one can, in an hour a day for two or three months,
become so expert as to report a lecture _verbatim_."


THE STUDY OF GEOGRAPHY MADE PRACTICAL.

          =HANDBOOK OF THE EARTH.= Natural methods in
          geography. By LOUISA PARSONS HOPKINS, Teacher of
          Normal Methods in the Swain Free School, New
          Bedford. 50 cents.

The work is designed for the use of teachers and normal-school classes
as a review and generalization of geographical facts, and for general
readers as a guide to right methods of study and instruction.


DAILY FOOD FOR THE MIND.

          =PRONOUNCING HANDBOOK= of 3,000 words often
          mispronounced, and of words as to which a choice
          of pronunciation is allowed. By RICHARD SOULE and
          LOOMIS J. CAMPBELL. 50 cts.

"This book can be carried in a gentleman's vest-pocket, or tucked in a
lady's belt, and we wish several hundred thousand copies might thus be
disposed of, with a view to daily consultation."--_Congregationalist._


ABOUT 40,000 SYNONYMOUS WORDS.

          =HANDBOOK OF ENGLISH SYNONYMS=, with an appendix
          showing the correct use of prepositions, also a
          collection of foreign phrases. By LOOMIS J.
          CAMPBELL. Cloth. 50 cents.

"Clearly printed, well arranged, adapted to help any one who writes much
to enrich his vocabulary, vary his expressions, and secure accuracy in
conveying his thoughts."--_Boston Journal._


"A BOOK OF INCALCULABLE VALUE."

          =HANDBOOK OF CONVERSATION.= Its Faults and its
          Graces. Compiled by ANDREW P. PEABODY, D.D., LL.D.
          Comprising: 1. Dr. Peabody's Lecture. 2. Mr.
          Trench's Lecture. 3. Mr. Perry Gwynn's "A Word to
          the Wise; or, Hints on the Current Improprieties
          of Expression in Writing and Speaking." 4.
          Mistakes and Improprieties in Speaking and Writing
          Corrected. Cloth. 50 cents.

"It is worth owning, and ought to be studied by many who heedlessly
misuse their mother tongue."--_Boston Beacon._


"WE COMMEND IT HIGHLY."--_Chicago Herald._

          =HINTS AND HELPS= for those who Write, Print, or
          Read. By BENJAMIN DREW, Proof-reader. 50 cents.

"The information is imparted in a very lively and remembering
way."--_Boston Commonwealth._


ARE YOU INTERESTED IN BUGS?

          =INSECTS;= How to Catch and how to Prepare them
          for the Cabinet. Comprising a Manual of
          Instruction for the Field Naturalist. By WALTER P.
          MANTON. Illustrated. Cloth, 50 cents.

"Nothing essential is omitted: every boy who has any taste for natural
history should have this neat little volume. The many 'Agassiz Clubs'
which have sprung up amid the youth of the country, should add it to
their libraries."--_Chicago Advance._


"OF INESTIMABLE VALUE TO YOUNG BOTANISTS."--_Rural New-Yorker._

          =FIELD BOTANY.= A Handbook for the Collector.
          Containing Instructions for Gathering and
          Preserving Plants, and the Formation of a
          Herbarium. Also Complete Instructions in Leaf
          Photography, Plant Printing, and the Skeletonizing
          of Leaves. By WALTER P. MANTON. Illustrated. 50
          cents.

"A most valuable companion. The amount of information conveyed in the
small compass is surprising."--_Demorest's Monthly._


"EVERY NATURALIST OUGHT TO HAVE A COPY FOR IMMEDIATE USE."

          =TAXIDERMY WITHOUT A TEACHER.= Comprising a
          Complete Manual of Instruction for Preparing and
          Preserving Birds, Animals, and Fishes; with a
          Chapter on Hunting and Hygiene; together with
          Instructions for Preserving Eggs and Making
          Skeletons, and a number of valuable Recipes. By
          _Walter P. Manton_. Illustrated. 50 cents.

"We would be glad if all teachers would take this little book, study it
faithfully, become interested themselves, and interest their pupils in
this wonderful art."--_Practical Teacher._


HOW TO ENLARGE THE ANT TO THE SIZE OF AN ELEPHANT.

          =BEGINNINGS WITH THE MICROSCOPE.= A Working
          Handbook, containing simple Instructions in the
          Art and Method of using the Microscope and
          preparing Objects for Examination. By WALTER P.
          MANTON, M.D. Small 4to. Cloth, 50 cents.

Uniform with the author's "Handbooks of Natural History," and equally
valuable.


PARLEZ VOUS FRANCAIS?

          =BROKEN ENGLISH.= A Frenchman's Struggles with the
          English Language. By Professor E. C. DUBOIS,
          author of "The French Teacher." Cloth, 50 cents;
          cheap edition, paper, 30 cents.

The Professor's famous lecture, delivered all over the country. Amusing
as a narrative, instructive as a handbook of French conversation.


AN EMERGENCY HANDBOOK.

          =WHAT IS TO BE DONE.= A Handbook for the Nursery,
          with useful Hints for Children and Adults. By
          ROBERT B. DIXON, M.D. Small 4to. Cloth, 50 cents.

Dr. Dixon has produced a work that will be gladly welcomed by parents.
His "remedies" are indorsed by many prominent medical men.


_Sold by all booksellers, or sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price._

=LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.=




TROPHIES OF TRAVEL.


          =DRIFTING ROUND THE WORLD;= A Boy's Adventures by
          Sea and Land. By CAPT. CHARLES W. HALL, author of
          "Adrift in the Ice-Fields," "The Great Bonanza,"
          etc. With numerous full-page and letter-press
          illustrations. Royal 8vo. Handsome cover. $1.75.
          Cloth. Gilt. $2.50.

"Out of the beaten track" in its course of travel, record of adventures,
and descriptions of life in Greenland, Labrador, Ireland, Scotland,
England, France, Holland, Russia, Asia, Siberia, and Alaska. Its hero is
young, bold, and adventurous; and the book is in every way interesting
and attractive.


EDWARD GREÉY'S JAPANESE SERIES.

          =YOUNG AMERICANS IN JAPAN;= or, The Adventures of
          the Jewett Family and their Friend Oto Nambo. With
          170 full-page and letter-press illustrations. Royal
          8vo, 7 x 9½ inches. Handsomely illuminated cover.
          $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

This story, though essentially a work of fiction, is filled with
interesting and truthful descriptions of the curious ways of living of
the good people of the land of the rising sun.

          =THE WONDERFUL CITY OF TOKIO;= or, The Further
          Adventures of the Jewett Family and their Friend
          Oto Nambo. With 169 illustrations. Royal 8vo, 7 x
          9½ inches. With cover in gold and colors, designed
          by the author. $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

"A book full of delightful information. The author has the happy gift of
permitting the reader to view things as he saw them. The illustrations
are mostly drawn by a Japanese artist, and are very unique."--_Chicago
Herald._

          =THE BEAR WORSHIPPERS OF YEZO AND THE ISLAND OF
          KARAFUTO;= being the further Adventures of the
          Jewett Family and their Friend Oto Nambo. 180
          illustrations. Boards. $1.75. Cloth, $2.50.

Graphic pen and pencil pictures of the remarkable bearded people who
live in the north of Japan. The illustrations are by native Japanese
artists, and give queer pictures of a queer people, who have been seldom
visited.


HARRY W. FRENCH'S BOOKS.

          =OUR BOYS IN INDIA.= The wanderings of two young
          Americans in Hindustan, with their exciting
          adventures on the sacred rivers and wild mountains.
          With 145 illustrations. Royal 8vo, 7 x 9½ inches.
          Bound in emblematic covers of Oriental design,
          $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

While it has all the exciting interest of a romance, it is remarkably
vivid in its pictures of manners and customs in the land of the Hindu.
The illustrations are many and excellent.

          =OUR BOYS IN CHINA.= The adventures of two young
          Americans, wrecked in the China Sea on their
          return from India, with their strange wanderings
          through the Chinese Empire. 188 illustrations.
          Boards, ornamental covers in colors and gold.
          $1.75. Cloth, $2.50.

This gives the further adventures of "Our Boys" of India fame in the
land of Teas and Queues.


_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price._

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




HARRY W. FRENCH'S BOOKS.


          =THE ONLY ONE.= A Novel. 16mo. Cloth. $1.00.

"The Only One" is a powerful story, dealing with the lights and shadows
of life in America, Naples, and Persia. Written in a dashing style,
sometimes deeply tragic, at others humorous in the extreme, it presents
pictures of human life that attract and interest by their naturalness
and vividness.


          =CASTLE FOAM;= or, The Pauper Prince. A story of
          real life, true love, and intrigue in the
          brilliant capital of Prussia. 12mo. $1.50.

"A novel of remarkable power, and strangely unlike any yet written by an
American. There is something in the beauty and intensity of expression
that reminds one of Bulwer in his best days."--_Cincinnati Commercial._


          =NUNA, THE BRAMIN GIRL.= 16mo. Cloth. $1.25.

"This book is beautifully written, and abounds in novel and dramatic
incidents."--_St. Louis Globe Democrat._


          =EGO=, The Life Struggles of Lawrence Edwards.
          16mo. Cloth. $1.00.

"Both an interesting and an exciting work, written with freedom,
effectiveness, and power."--_Philadelphia Item._

          =GEMS OF GENIUS.= 4to. Illuminated covers. Gilt.
          $2.00.

"Fifty full-page illustrations, selected from the art-works of as many
foreign painters, with text descriptive of each, from the pen of one of
our native Ruskins."--_New-York Mail._


          ART AND ARTISTS. A history of the birth of art in
          America, with biographical studies of many
          prominent American artists, and nearly one hundred
          illus. from their studios. Cloth. Gilt. $3.00.

"A work that will grow in value every year, showing the most patient
research and elaboration, skilfully executed, and admirably worked up.
An honor to the author, an honor to the publishers, an honor to the
country."--_New-York Evening Post._


          =OUR BOYS IN INDIA.= The wanderings of two young
          Americans in Hindustan, with their exciting
          adventures on the sacred rivers and wild mountains.
          With 145 illustrations. Royal octavo, 7 x 9½
          inches. Bound in emblematical covers of Oriental
          design, $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

A new edition of the most popular of books of travel for young folks,
issued last season. While it has all the exciting interest of a romance,
it is remarkably vivid in its pictures of manners and customs in the
land of the Hindu. The illustrations are many and excellent.


          =OUR BOYS IN CHINA.= The adventures of two young
          Americans, wrecked in the China Sea on their
          return from India, with their strange wanderings
          through the Chinese Empire. 188 Illustrations.
          Boards, ornamental covers in colors and gold,
          $1.75. Cloth, $2.50.

After successfully starting the young heroes of his previous book, "Our
Boys in India," on their homeward trip, the popular lecturer, extensive
traveller, and remarkable story-teller, has them wrecked in the China
Sea, saved, and transported across China: giving him an opportunity to
spread for young folks an appetizing feast of good things.


_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price._

=LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.=



MISS VIRGINIA F. TOWNSEND'S BOOKS.

Uniform Edition. Cloth. $1.50 Each.


BUT A PHILISTINE.

"Another novel by the author of 'A Woman's Word' and 'Lenox Dare,' will
be warmly welcomed by hosts of readers of Miss Townsend's stories. There
is nothing of the 'sensational,' or so-called realistic, school in her
writings. On the contrary, they are noted for their healthy moral tone
and pure sentiment, and yet are not wanting in STRIKING SITUATIONS AND
DRAMATIC INCIDENTS."--_Chicago Journal._


LENOX DARE.

"Her stories, always sunny and healthful, touch the springs of social
life, and make the reader better acquainted with this great human
organization of which we all form a part, and tend to bring him into
more intimate sympathy with what is most pure and noble in our nature.
Among the best of her productions we place the volume here under notice.
In temper and tone the volume is calculated to exert a healthful and
elevating influence."--_New-England Methodist._


DARYLL GAP; or, Whether it Paid.

A story of the petroleum days, and of a family who struck oil. "Miss
Townsend is a very entertaining writer, and, while she entertains, at
the same time instructs. Her plots are well arranged, and her characters
are clearly and strongly drawn. The present volume will not detract from
the reputation she has heretofore enjoyed."--_Pittsburg Recorder._


A WOMAN'S WORD, AND HOW SHE KEPT IT.

"The celebrity of Virginia F. Townsend as an authoress, her brilliant
descriptive powers, and pure, vigorous imagination, will insure a hearty
welcome for the above-entitled volume in the writer's happiest vein.
Every woman will understand the self-sacrifice of Genevieve Weir, and
will entertain only scorn for the miserable man who imbittered her life
to hide his own wrong-doing."--_Fashion Quarterly._


THAT QUEER GIRL.

"A fresh, wholesome book about good men and good women, bright and
cheery in style, and pure in morals. Just the book to take a young
girl's fancy, and help her to grow up, like Madeline and Argia, into the
sweetness of real girlhood; there being more of that same sweetness
under the fuss and feathers of the present day than a casual observer
might suppose."--_People's Monthly._


ONLY GIRLS.

"This volume shows how two persons, 'only girls,' saved two men from
crime, even from ruin of body and soul; and all this came about in their
lives without their purpose or knowledge at the time, and not at all as
they or anybody else would have planned it; but it comes about well and
naturally enough. The story is ingenious and graphic, and kept the
writer of this notice up far into the small hours of yesterday
morning."--_Washington Chronicle._


_Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, postpaid on
receipt of price._

=LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.=




LEE AND SHEPARD'S DOLLAR NOVELS.


          =JOHN THORN'S FOLKS.= By ANGELINE TEAL. Cloth.
          $1.00.


          =BARBARA THAYER.= By MISS ANNIE JENNESS. Cloth.
          $1.00. Popular Edition. Paper. 50 cents.


          =THE ONLY ONE.= A Novel by HARRY W. FRENCH, author
          of "Castle Foam," "Nuna, the Bramin Girl," "Our
          Boys in China," "Our Boys in India," etc. 16mo.
          Cloth. $1.00.

This work was published as a serial in "The Boston Globe," and made a
sensation. It will have a large sale in its new dress.


          =LORD OF HIMSELF.= A Novel by FRANCIS H.
          UNDERWOOD, author of "Handbook of English
          Literature," etc. A new edition. 16mo. Cloth.
          $1.00.

"This novel is one that has come into American literature to
stay."--_Boston Post._

"Spirited, fresh, clean-cut, and deeply thoughtful."--_Boston Gazette._


          =DORA DARLING:= The Daughter of the Regiment. By
          J. G. AUSTIN. 16mo. Cloth, $l.00. A thrilling
          story of the great Rebellion.


          =OUTPOST.= By J. G. AUSTIN. 16mo. Cloth. $1.00. A
          Sequel to "Dora Darling," but each story complete
          in itself.


          =NUMA ROUMESTAN.= By ALPHONSE DAUDET. Translated
          from the French by Virginia Champlin. With ten
          illustrations. Cloth. $1.00.

The latest work of fiction from the pen of Alphonse Daudet, and derives
its main interest from the generally accepted belief that the hero of
the novel is really Gambetta, the French statesman.


          =KINGS IN EXILE.= By ALPHONSE DAUDET. A new
          edition. 16mo. Cloth. $1.00.


          =LIKE A GENTLEMAN.= By Mrs. MARY A. DENISON. A
          Temperance Novel, by a well-known author. Cloth.
          $1.00.

Mrs. Denison is well known as the author of "That Husband of Mine," a
summer book which exceeded in sale any thing published in America. This
book is in a more thoughtful vein, but is very entertaining. The style
is bright and witty.

          =HIS TRIUMPH.= By the author of "That Husband of
          Mine," "Like a Gentleman," etc. Cloth. $1.00.


          =A TIGHT SQUEEZE.= The adventures of a gentleman,
          who, on a wager of ten thousand dollars, undertook
          to go from New York to New Orleans in three weeks,
          without money or the assistance of friends. Cloth,
          $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.


          =PUDDLEFORD PAPERS;= or, Humors of the West. By H.
          R. RILEY. Illustrated. A new edition. $1.00.

"This is a rich book. Any one who wants a genuine, hearty laugh, should
purchase this volume."--_Columbus Gazette._


          =THE FORTUNATE ISLAND=, and other Stories. By MAX
          ADELER. Illustrated. Cloth. $1.00.

"Max Adeler is a fellow of infinite humor."--_Albany Evening Journal._

"Extravagant, of course, are these stories, but entertaining and
amusing, and instructive too."--MARGERY DEANE, _Newport News._


_Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on
receipt of price._

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




YOUNG FOLKS' HEROES OF HISTORY.

By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE.

Handsomely Illustrated. Price per vol., $1.25. Sets in neat boxes.


VASCO DA GAMA: HIS VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES.

"Da Gama's history is full of striking adventures, thrilling incidents,
and perilous situations; and Mr. Towle, while not sacrificing historical
accuracy, has so skilfully used his materials, that we have a charmingly
romantic tale."--_Rural New-Yorker._


PIZARRO: HIS ADVENTURES AND CONQUESTS.

"No hero of romance possesses greater power to charm the youthful reader
than the conqueror of Peru. Not even King Arthur, or Thaddeus of Warsaw,
has the power to captivate the imagination of the growing boy. Mr. Towle
has handled his subject in a glowing but truthful manner; and we venture
the assertion, that, were our children led to read such books as this,
the taste for unwholesome, exciting, wrong-teaching boys' books--dime
novels in books' clothing--would be greatly diminished, to the great
gain of mental force and moral purpose in the rising generation."--_Chicago
Alliance._


MAGELLAN; OR, THE FIRST VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.

"What more of romantic and spirited adventures any bright boy could want
than is to be found in this series of historical biography, it is
difficult to imagine. This volume is written in a most sprightly manner;
and the life of its hero, Fernan Magellan, with its rapid stride from
the softness of a petted youth to the sturdy courage and persevering
fortitude of manhood, makes a tale of marvellous fascination."--_Christian
Union._


MARCO POLO: HIS TRAVELS AND ADVENTURES.

"The story of the adventurous Venetian, who six hundred years ago
penetrated into India and Cathay and Thibet and Abyssinia, is pleasantly
and clearly told; and nothing better can be put into the hands of the
school boy or girl than this series of the records of noted travellers.
The heroism displayed by these men was certainly as great as that ever
shown by conquering warrior; and it was exercised in a far nobler
cause,--the cause of knowledge and discovery, which has made the
nineteenth century what it is."--_Graphic._


RALEGH: HIS EXPLOITS AND VOYAGES.

"This belongs to the 'Young Folks' Heroes of History' series, and deals
with a greater and more interesting man than any of its predecessors.
With all the black spots on his fame, there are few more brilliant and
striking figures in English history than the soldier, sailor, courtier,
author, and explorer, Sir Walter Ralegh. Even at this distance of time,
more than two hundred and fifty years after his head fell on the
scaffold, we cannot read his story without emotion. It is graphically
written, and is pleasant reading, not only for young folks, but for old
folks with young hearts."--_Woman's Journal._


DRAKE: THE SEA-LION OF DEVON.

Drake was the foremost sea-captain of his age, the first English admiral
to send a ship completely round the world, the hero of the magnificent
victory which the English won over the Invincible Armada. His career was
stirring, bold, and adventurous, from early youth to old age.


_Sold by all Booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price._

=LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers BOSTON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Varied hyphenation was retained. Boldface type is depicted by = and
italic by _.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 28, repeated word "a" removed from text (blossomed into a bell)

Page 35, "iniquitious" changed to "iniquitous" (most iniquitous
proceeding)

Page 39, "beginnnig" changed to "beginning" (my heart beginning)

Page 82, "heartly" changed to "heartily" (were heartily ashamed)

Page 101, "Sevres" changed to "Sèvres" (pier of Sèvres)

Page 101, "Sevres" changed to "Sèvres" (transferred to Sèvres)

Page 130, "Hotel" changed to "Hôtel" (and the old Hôtel de Ville)

Page 212, "beautifull" changed to "beautiful" (head, past beautiful)

Page 216, "momentry" changed to "momentary" (a momentary life)





End of Project Gutenberg's An American Girl Abroad, by Adeline Trafton



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.