Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Adventures of Hans Sterk, by Captain A.W. Drayson, R.A..

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
ADVENTURES OF HANS STERK, BY CAPTAIN A.W. DRAYSON, R.A..



PREFACE.

In the history of colonisation there is probably no example on record so
extraordinary as that of the emigration from the colony of the Cape of
Good Hope, in 1835, of nearly six thousand souls, who, without guides or
any definite knowledge of where they were going or what obstacles they
would encounter, yet placed their all in the lottery and journeyed into
the wilderness.

The cause of this emigration was to avoid what the emigrants considered
the oppression of the ruling Government, and the object was to found an
independent nationality in the interior of Africa.

These emigrants, shortly after quitting the neighbourhood of the Cape
colony, were attacked by the chief of a powerful tribe called the
Matabili, into whose country they had trespassed.  Severe battles, in
which overwhelming numbers were brought against them, were fought by the
emigrants, the general results being victory to the white man.

Not satisfied with the situation which these victories might have
enabled them to secure, a party of the emigrants journeyed on towards
the east, in order to obtain a better position near the present district
of Natal.  This party were shortly afterwards either treacherously
massacred by a Zulu chief named Dingaan, or were compelled to fight for
their lives and property during many months.

It is mainly amidst these scenes that the hero of the following tale
passed--scenes which brought out many cases of individual courage,
daring, and perseverance rarely equalled in any part of the world.

Around the bivouac fire, or in the ride over the far-spreading plains,
or whilst resting after a successful hunting track in the tangled
forest, the principal events of this tale have been recorded.  From Zulu
and Boer, English emigrant and Hottentot driver, we have had various
accounts, each varying according to the peculiar views of the relater,
but all agreeing as regards the main facts here blended and interwoven
into a tale.



CHAPTER ONE.

INTRODUCTION TO THE HUNTERS--DEATH OF THE LION--DISCOVERY OF THE
ELEPHANTS BY HANS STERK.

Near the outskirts of a far-extending African forest, and close beside
some deep shady-pools, the only remnants of a once rapidly flowing
river, were seen one glowing summer's evening, shortly after sunset, a
party of some ten men; bronzed workmen-like fellows they were too, their
dress and equipment proclaiming them hunters of the first class.  This
party were reclining on the turf, smoking, or giving the finishing touch
to their rifles and smooth-bore guns, which they had been engaged in
cleaning.  Among this party there were two black men, fine,
stalwart-looking fellows, whose calm demeanour and bright steady gazing
eyes, proclaimed them men of nerve and energy.  One tiny yellow man, a
Hottentot, was remarkable among the group on account of his smallness,
as he stood scarcely more than five feet in height, whereas all his
companions were tall heavy men.  A fire was brightly blazing, and
several small tin vessels on this fire were steaming as their contents
hissed and bubbled.  The white men who composed this party were Dutch
South African Boers, who were making an excursion into the favourite
feeding-grounds of the Elephant, in order to supply themselves with
ivory, this valuable commodity being to them a source of considerable
wealth.

"It will soon be very dark," exclaimed Bernhard, one of the Boers, "and
Hans will have difficulty in finding our lager; I will go on to the
headland and shoot."

"You may leave Sterk to take care of himself," said Heinrich, another
Boer, "for no man is less likely to lose himself than he is."

"I will go and shoot at all events," said Bernhard, "for it can do no
harm; and though Hans is quick and keen, watchful and careful, he may
for once be overtaken by a fog or the darkness, and he does not well
know this country."

With this excuse for his proceeding, the man called Bernhard grasped his
large-bored gun, and ascended a krantz which overhung the resting-place
of his party, when, having reached the summit, he placed the muzzle of
his gun within a foot of the ground, and fired both barrels in quick
succession.  This is a common signal amongst African hunters, it being
understood to mean, that the resting-place at night is where the double
shot is fired from.

There being no reply to this double shot, Bernhard returned to his
companions, and the whole party then commenced their evening meal.

"So your sweetheart did not reply to you, Bernhard," said one of the
Boers, "though you did speak so loudly."

"Hans Sterk is my sworn friend, good and true," replied Bernhard; "and
no man speaks lightly of him before me."

"Quite right, Bernhard, stand to your friends, and they will stand to
you; and Hans is a good friend to all, and few of us have not been
indebted to him for some good turn or other; but what is Tembili the
Kaffir doing?"

At this remark, all eyes were directed towards one of the Kaffir men,
who had risen to his feet, and stood grasping his musket and looking
eagerly into the forest near, whilst his dark companion was gazing
fixedly in the same direction.  It was a fine sight to observe this
bronzed son of the desert at home and on the watch, for he did seem at
home amidst the scenes around him.  After a minute's intent watching, he
raised his hand, and in a low whisper said, "Leuew, Tao," (the Dutch and
Matabili names for a lion).  "Leuew!" exclaimed each Boer, as he seized
his weapons, which were close at hand and stood ready for an emergency.

"Make up the fire, Piet," said Heinrich: "let us illuminate the
visitor."  And a mass of dried grass and sticks thrown on the fire
caused a brilliant flame, which lighted up the branches and creepers of
the ancient forest.

As the flame rose and the sticks crackled, a low grumbling growl came
from the underwood in the forest, which at once indicated to the hunters
that the Kaffir's instincts had not misled him, but that a lion was
crouching in the bush near.

"Fire a shot, Karl," said one of the Dutchmen; "drive him away with
fear; we must not let him remain near us."  And Karl, aiming among the
brushwood, fired.  Amidst the noise and echoes of the Boer's musket, a
loud savage roar was audible, as the lion, thus disturbed, moved
sullenly away from what he had expected would have been a feast; whilst
the hunters, hearing him retreat, proceeded without any alarm with their
meal, the Kaffirs alone of the party occasionally stopping in their
eating to listen, and to watch the neighbouring bush.

The sun had set about three hours, and the moon, a few days past the
full, had risen; whilst the Boers, having finished their meal, were
rolled up in their sheepskin carosses, and sleeping on the ground as
calmly as though they were each in a comfortable bed.  The Kaffirs,
however, were still quietly but steadily eating, and conversing in a low
tone, scarcely above a whisper.

"The lion will not leave us during the night," said the Kaffir called
Tembili, "I will not sleep unless you watch, 'Nquane."

"Yes, I will watch whilst you sleep, then you sleep whilst I watch,"
replied the Kaffir addressed as 'Nquane.  "We shall shoot elephants
to-morrow, I think; and the young chief must be now close to them, that
is why he does not return."

"No: he would return to tell us if he could, I fear he must have lost
himself," replied Tembili.

"The `strong' lose himself," exclaimed 'Nquane, "no, as soon the vulture
lose his way in the air, or the springbok on the plains, or the elephant
in the forest, as the strong lose himself any where.  He sees without
eyes and hears without ears.  Hark! is that the lion?"

Both Kaffirs listened attentively for some minutes, when 'Nquane said,
"It is the lion moving up the krantz: he smells something or hears
something; he must have tasted man's flesh, to have stopped here so long
close to us.  What can he hear now?  Ah, there is something up high in
the bushes, a buck perhaps, the lion will soon feast on it, and that
will be the better for us, as when his belly is full he will not want to
eat you or me."

Attentively as the Kaffirs watched the bushes, and listened for some
sound indicative of the lion's position, they yet could hear nothing; so
quietly did the creature move, they had almost given up their attention
to eating, when a sudden flash of light burst from the bushes on the top
of the kloof, followed by a thundering roar which was succeeded by a
silence, broken only at intervals by the distant echoes of the report of
the gun, which at first had scarcely been audible in the midst of the
lion's roar, for such it proved to be.

As these sounds burst over the camp, each hunter started from his
slumber, and stood waiting for some fresh indication of danger, or cause
for action; for half a minute no man spoke, but then Bernhard
exclaimed--

"That must have been Hans, he must have met the lion in the dark;" and,
"Oh, Hans!  Hans!" he shouted:

"Here so," replied a voice from the summit of the kloof; "is that
Bernhard?"

"Yes, Hans: are you hurt?"

"No, but the lion is: he is dying in a bush not far off.  I don't like
to move, as I can't see him: could you bring some lighted branches
here?"

'Nquane, the Kaffir, and Bernhard each seized a large blazing branch,
and grasping their guns, ascended the steep slope to the position
occupied by Hans.

"Up this way," said Hans, "the lion is to your right, and I think dead;
but we had better not go near him till we are certain.  Now give me a
branch, I can light this grass, and go look for him."  Saying this, Hans
advanced to some bushes and cast a handful of blazing grass before him.
"He's dead," exclaimed Hans, "so come, and we will skin him: he's a fine
fellow!"

"Come down to the camp and eat first, Hans," urged Bernhard, "and tell
us where you have been, then come and skin the lion."

"No, business first," exclaimed Hans.  "The jackalls might spoil the
skin in a few minutes, and before the lion was cold; so we will first
free him of his coat, then I will eat."

It took Hans and his two companions only a short time to divest the lion
of its skin, when the three returned to camp, where the new-comer was
heartily welcomed, and where he was soon fully occupied in making a meal
from the remains of the supper left by his companions.  Hans Sterk, as
he sat quietly eating his meal with an appetite that seemed to indicate
a long previous fast, did not give one the idea of a very remarkable
man.  He was quite young--probably not more than two-and-twenty, and not
of very great size; he was, however, what is called well put together,
and seemed more framed for activity than strength; his eyes were
deep-set and small, with that earnest look about them which seemed to
plainly indicate that they saw a great deal more than most eyes.  His
companions seemed quite to understand Hans' peculiarities, for they did
not address a word to him whilst he was eating, being fully aware that
had they done so they would have obtained no answer.  When, however, he
had completely satisfied his hunger, Bernhard said--

"What have you seen and done, Hans? and why are you so late?  We feared
you had lost the line for our resting-place before it got dark, and
would not reach us to-night."

"Lost the line," replied Hans; "that was not easy, considering you
stopped at the only river for ten miles round; but I was nearly stopping
away all night, only I remembered you had such good fat eland for
supper, and so I returned."

"And what made you nearly stop away, Hans?"

"Few men like to walk about among bushes and krantzes when man-eating
lions are on the look-out, and the sun has set for two hours," replied
Hans.

"Was there nothing else that kept you?" inquired Bernhard.  "You left us
all of a sudden."

"Yes, there was something else kept me away."

"And that was--"

"This," said Hans, as he pulled from his coat pocket a small brown lump
like India-rubber, from which two or three long wire-like bristles
protruded.

"You came on elephants!" exclaimed several of the Boers.  "What luck!
The first we have seen.  Were they bulls or cows?"

"I came on fresh elephant's spoor soon after I left you," said Hans.  "I
dared not come back to call you, and feared to miss you; so I went on
alone, and saw the spoor of four large bull elephants.  This spoor I
followed for some distance, and then found that the creatures had
entered the forest.  But the place was good; there were large trees, and
but little underwood; so I could see far, and walk easily.  I came upon
the elephants; they were together, and knew not I was near till I had
fired, and the big bull dropped dead."

"Where did you hit him, Hans?"

"Between the eye and the ear, and he fell to the shot."

"The others escaped, then, Hans," said Heinrich.

"Not before I had hit one with fine tusks behind the shoulder."

"Then he escaped?"

"No, he went for two miles, then separated from the others, and stood in
the thick bush.  I becrouped (stalked him) and gave him my bullet
between the eye and the ear, and he fell."

"Where's his tail, Hans?" said one of the Boers.

Hans drew from his pocket a second small black bristly lump, and placed
it beside the first, saying, "There is the tail of the elephant in the
thick bush."

"What weight are the tusks, Hans?" said Bernhard.

"About sixty to eighty pounds each.  They are old bulls with sound
teeth."

"And ivory is fetching five shillings a pound.  A sixty pound business.
Oh, Hans, you are lucky!  Are there more there, do you think?  Was there
other spoor, or were these wanderers?"

"To-morrow," replied Hans, "we may come upon a large herd of bulls, for
before sundown I crossed fresh spoor of a herd of about twenty.  They
were tracking south, so we shall not have far to go."

"But tell us," said Victor, another Boer, "about the lion above there.
How did you see him?  It was dark, was it not?"

"Not very dark; the moon gave me light, and the creature whisked its
tail just as it was going to spring, and so I saw it.  I knew the place
was one likely for a lion, and so had my eyes about me.  It does not do
to think too much when you walk in the veldt by night, or you may be
taken unawares.  I shot the lion between the eyes; and had he been any
thing but a lion, he would have dropped dead; but a lion's life is too
big to go all at once out of so small a hole as a bullet makes, and so
he did not die for ten minutes."

"Where are the other two bull elephants, Hans?" inquired Victor.  "Did
they go far, do you think, or would they stop?"

"One is beside the Vlei near the Bavians Kloof; the other is in the
thorn-bushes a mile from it."

"But they won't stop there.  Where think you they will be to-morrow?"

"Where they are now," replied Hans, as he quietly brought from his
pocket the ends of two more elephants' tails, and placed them beside
those already on the ground.

"You have not killed all four bull elephants, Hans?" said Bernhard, with
a look of astonishment.  "Will a bull elephant let you cut off the end
of his tail when he is alive, Bernhard?  You taught me first how to
spoor an elephant, and you never told me that he would let you do that;
so I killed mine first, and then cut his tail off afterwards.  I shot
all four bull elephants, and expended but thirteen bullets altogether on
them.  The teeth will weigh nearly five hundred pounds, and so I think I
have a good excuse for coming late to supper.  But now, good-night.  We
must be up early, and so sleep is good for a steady hand in the morning,
and we shall want it, for game is near and plentiful.  Good-night, and
sleep well."



CHAPTER TWO.

FOLLOWING THE ELEPHANTS--CUTTING OUT THE TUSKS--HUNTING THE HERD OF
ELEPHANTS.

The sun's rays had scarcely commenced illuminating the eastern horizon,
when the hunters were up, and making their preparations for the start.
The plan of hunting which they had adopted, was to enter the country
with waggons, oxen, and horses; to leave their waggons at a good
outspanning-place where there was plenty of water and forage for the
cattle; then to scour the country round and search for game, or spoor,
which if found, the horses, oxen, and waggons were brought up, and the
elephants hunted on horseback.  The elephant is so formidable an animal,
and usually is so fierce, especially when wounded and hunted, that few
African sportsmen venture to follow him on foot into his dense woody
retreats.  It is customary to drive the herd, when discovered, into the
most open country, this driving being accomplished either by setting
fire to the dried grass, by making large bonfires, or by discharging
fire-arms, and thus causing the herds to leave a secure retreat for one
less sheltered.  It is not unfrequently a matter of two or three days,
to drive elephants into a good and favourable country; and upon this
driving being judiciously carried out, much of the success of the hunt
depends.  There are very many men whose livelihood depends entirely on
elephant hunting.  They farm but little, have few cattle, but devote
their time mainly to hunting; and in a country so untrodden as was
Africa some years ago, there was no want of game, and thus a man
provided with horse, gun, powder, and lead, might live independent of
almost all else.

Hans Sterk was a man who had been devoted to sport from his childhood.
His father was a Dutchman who had early in his colonial career gone upon
the outskirts of civilisation, and had been one of the pioneers to slay
the wild beasts, and teach the savage man that the white man is the
master over the black.  Hans' mother was an English woman, an emigrant
who had ventured into Africa, and had there found a home.  But both his
parents had been cruelly murdered by the Kaffirs in one of their attacks
upon the colonists; and at a very early age he had found himself owner
of a waggon, some spans of oxen, a few head of cattle and horses, and
had thus every means at his disposal for indulging in hunting; and as
his taste led him in pursuit of the elephant, he soon became famed as an
unerring marksman, an expert spoorer, and one of the most determined
elephant hunters.  On more than one occasion also he had distinguished
himself in commandoes against the Kaffir tribes.  Thus before he was
twenty he had obtained a reputation for skill and bravery, and at that
age was known as Hans Sterk, the elephant hunter.  How well he deserved
the title, the result of his day's sport just related amply shows.

The morning after Hans' return to the sleeping-place was fine, and well
suited for spooring or shooting.  There had been a heavy dew, and the
wind was light, so that no extra noises disturbed the bushes, and
rendered the feeding of an elephant inaudible, or the rush of a wild
beast undistinguishable from the rustling of the forest branches.  Hans
had sent one of his Kaffirs to the waggons, to announce to the men there
the death of four elephants, and to bring such aid as was requisite to
cut out the tusks, and convey them to the waggons.  He then with his
white companions started on his footsteps of the previous night towards
the ground where his elephants had fallen.  Having with him a hatchet
and knife, and aided by 'Nquane and his friend Bernhard, he proceeded to
extract the tusks of his first elephant.  The animal had fallen
backwards, so that it lay in a very good attitude to be operated on; and
Hans, taking his hatchet, cut down each side of the elephant's trunk, so
that at last this appendage could be turned completely over its head.
The roots of the tusks were thus exposed to view, and were next attacked
with the hatchet, the ends fixed in the jaws being loosened and cut off,
by means of a fulcrum made from a large branch of a tree.  The tusks
were then worked up and down, and the hatchet applied to sever those
parts which held most tenaciously, until the tusks were quite loose in
the jaw, and could then be extracted with a good pull.  About one-third
of an elephant's tusk is embedded in its jaw, and this part being filled
up with muscles and nerves is hollow, and has to be cleaned out before
it is inserted in the waggon.  A tooth, as a tusk is called by elephant
hunters, weighs about ten per cent, heavier when it is first taken from
an elephant's jaw, than when it becomes dry from keeping.  Very few
elephants' tusks exceed 100 pounds in weight each, the average size of a
good pair of tusks being from 100 to 150 pounds.  Sometimes, however, a
marvellous old bull, or one who has developed his teeth in a wonderful
way, is found, whose teeth weigh nearly 130 pounds each; but such
patriarchs are rarely met with.

The country in which elephants are found in abundance is usually thinly
inhabited, and the natives are not possessed of fire-arms in great
abundance or of much value.  Thus the elephant, being a dangerous animal
to hunt and hard to kill, often remains in forests when the more timid
game of the open country has been driven away.  But when English or
Dutch sportsmen have visited a country, they usually wound mortally many
more elephants than they kill and find, and thus the Kaffirs, who follow
up and find the wounded animals, drive a very fair trade in elephants'
tusks, of which they soon understand the true value.  Thus a party of
hunters not unfrequently return from a three or four months'
shooting-trip into the interior with from two to three thousand pounds'
weight of ivory.  There is, however, considerable risk in this sport
when looked at from its mercantile point of view.  It may happen that
the country to which the hunters have travelled has been temporarily
deserted by elephants in consequence of hunters having just previously
hunted that ground, or from a scarcity of water.  The horse or cattle
sickness may attack the hunter's quadrupeds, and thus, even if his
waggons be full, he may have to leave them behind whilst he returns some
four or five hundred miles to re-purchase cattle, again enter the
country, and find his waggons probably pillaged and burnt he knows not
by whom, his followers murdered, and he left to make the best of his way
home again.  Thus a hunter's life is one of excitement and risk; and
though the profits are great at times, and the life one which has
irresistible charms, yet it is one not to be rashly undertaken by all
men.  There are, too, very many small chiefs, whose friendship it is
necessary to gain by presents, or they will not allow you to journey
through their country; and sometimes small wars take place between these
potentates, when each party considers himself entitled to pillage all
travellers who have been on friendly terms with his enemy.

There are, then, a goodly array of dangers and difficulties surrounding
the African hunter, to say nothing of those which threaten him from wild
beasts, such as lions, leopards, etc., or poisonous snakes.  So that it
is not difficult for a man as young even as Hans Sterk to gain a wide
reputation for skill and bravery in surmounting those obstacles to which
he had been frequently opposed.

The teeth of the various elephants slain by Hans having been extracted
from the jaws of the animals, placed on the shoulders of Kaffirs, marked
with Hans' mark, and despatched to the waggons, Hans led the way over
some bushy country towards a range of low hills near which a bright
silvery streak indicated that a stream of water was flowing.

"Before I look for spoor where I expect it," said Hans to his Dutch
companions, "I will look through my `far-seer'" (as he termed his
telescope), "to see what wilde there is in the open country."

Adjusting his telescope to suit his focus, Hans took a careful look all
round, and at length rested his glass against a tree and looked steadily
down near the stream of which we have spoken.  After a careful
examination he offered his glass to a companion, and said, "I see eight
or nine large bull elephants near the mimosas beside those yellow-wood
trees.  Can you see more?"



CHAPTER THREE.

THE BULL ELEPHANT--THE CHARGE OF THE ELEPHANTS--COUNTING THE SPOILS.

O ye lovers of true sport, men of nerve and skill, ye who prize a
reality and are not satisfied with a feeble imitation, have you ever
attempted to realise the excitement and glory of combating with a herd
of lordly elephants, fierce and powerful, and monarchs in their own
forests?  Ye, who consider that _the_ only sport is pursuing a fleeing
fox over the grass-lands of your own country, can but feebly imagine the
effect produced by measuring your skill and daring against the giant
strength and cunning of a mighty elephant, who has braved his hundred
summers, and has been able to withstand the bullets or spears of a
hundred foes; who has won his way among his rivals by fierce and hardly
contested battles; and who dreads no enemy, but is ever ready to try
conclusions with the most formidable of all, viz. man.  To stand alone
and on foot, amidst the tangled luxuriant foliage of an African forest,
within a few yards of one of these watchful monsters, whose foot could
crush you as easily as could your foot a mouse or rat, and whose
headlong rush through the forest would carry away every obstacle, is a
proceeding which causes the blood to course through one's veins like
quicksilver.  To hide near a troop of these animals, watching their
strange movements and taking advantage of favourable opportunities for
deadly shots, which are answered by the most savage and unearthly
shrieks, is another phase of sport which is spirit-stirring in the
extreme.  Add to these scenes the most glowing landscape, covered with
brilliant flowers, and ornamented with gorgeously-tinted birds, whilst
various rare and graceful antelopes are bounding away in all directions
to escape the tumult which has disturbed them, and there is an
explanation of the mystery of that so-called hunter's fever, which
induces those who have once tasted such sport to ever afterwards thirst
for it as the parched stag thirsts for water.

Surrounding Hans Sterk there were men who had slain lions and buffaloes,
had brought to the earth the lofty cameleopard, and had frequently
gathered tusks from their elephants slain in fair fight.  Yet with these
men the excitement had not worn off; and they, one and all, seemed to be
endowed with additional life-power as they recognised with the
`far-seer' the largest of African game browsing calmly in his native
wilderness.  "We must not show ourselves," said Hans, "or the alarm will
spread.  See those ostriches in the `open;' they suspect us; and though
they are two miles off, they can distinguish us among these thorns.  Let
us lie down, and we will make our plans for attacking those elephants."

The whole party at once sank to the ground, and were thus completely
concealed from the keen sight of all except the vultures, which were
sailing about overhead.  Each of the hunters then took a careful survey
of the nature of the ground between his position and the river near
which the elephants were browsing.  After an interval of a few minutes,
one of the eldest men asked the rest what plan they had made.

"You speak first, Piet," was the answer of Hans; "then we will all give
our opinions."

"I think," said Piet, "we should go down to the right, enter that bush,
and so keep near the stream till we stalk on to the elephants; for the
ground is very good where they are, and they will not move far whilst
they can feed there."

Nearly every one agreed with this remark except Hans, who, when his
opinion was asked, said that he had two reasons why he should prefer
another plan.  First, the wind would not quite suit, but would blow from
them to the elephants when they first entered the thorn-bushes.  Then,
in front of the elephants, and about a mile off, was a large dense
forest.  "If they enter that," said Hans, "we shall not see them again.
I should like to go down to the left, get in front of the elephants, and
either wait for them to feed up to us, or stalk them up wind.  Then when
they run, they will go towards our waggons, and we shall be able to hunt
those which are not killed to-day, with the aid of our horses
to-morrow."  After a slight hesitation the hunters decided that this was
the better plan, and determined at once to put it into execution.  Each
man examined the priming of his rifle, put on fresh caps, felt the
position of his cartridges, powder-flask, and bullets, so as to be
certain all was ready for use; and then, following each other in Indian
file, the party strode forward in the direction agreed upon.

When hunters are in the neighbourhood of large game, it is an understood
rule that a shot is not to be fired at any small animal.  Thus, if a
party were out in search of elephants, and had separated from each
other, a shot from one party would at once bring the others to it, for
it would be understood that elephants had been fired at.  Thus antelopes
of various kinds were allowed to gallop off without a shot being fired
at them.  A fat eland, whose appearance made the Kaffirs' mouth almost
water, was allowed to stand under a tree, and gaze with astonishment at
the novel spectacle of a herd of two-legged creatures moving over its
domain.  For to have fired a shot would have not only disturbed the
country, but would have been a reckless destruction of life, a
proceeding which every true sportsman abhors.  Taking advantage of the
slopes of ground, the cover of trees, etc., Hans and his party turned
the position of the elephants, and halted about five hundred yards in
advance of them, without having caused these watchful, keen-scented
animals any suspicion of their presence.

Each hunter took up a position behind a tree, immediately he came in
front of the elephants, and there waited for some signal from the leader
before advancing.  It was soon evident that the elephants were feeding
towards the hunters, and thus if they remained quiet, they would soon
have their game within range.  Twelve majestic bull elephants were in
the herd, each with tusks of large size.  Such game being close to them
caused each man of the party to feel excited with the anticipation of
the coming sport, and to reserve himself for his first shot.  On came
the troop, scarcely staying now to feed, for they had by some instinct
or power of observation become slightly alarmed.  The scent of the
hunters, or the screech of some bird had indicated to them that an enemy
was near, and thus they ceased feeding.  A majestic twelve-foot bull
elephant led the party, and seemed well qualified for a leader.  He
strode forward some dozen yards with trunk erect and ears wide-spread,
then stopped and drew the air through his trunk with great rapidity,
turning from side to side with a quickness which seemed surprising in so
vast an animal.  That lazy, stupid appearance which those who have seen
caged animals only, are disposed to attribute to elephants, was very
different from the activity of this leader, as his restless eye watched
each bush or tree; and his threatening attitude occasionally indicated
that he was ready to charge an enemy.  Suddenly, as though a fresh cause
for suspicion had arisen, the mighty bull raised his trunk, and gave
three sharp, shrill, and powerful trumpet-notes, which might have been
heard at a distance of two miles.  Immediately a deep rumbling sound was
uttered by all the other members of the herd, who stood instantly like
so many bronze figures, the only indications of life being the shaking
of their huge ears, which from time to time were erected, and then
depressed.  During fully two minutes this watchful attitude was
maintained, after which one deep note was sounded by the leading bull,
and the whole party strode onwards.  They were, unluckily for them,
advancing to destruction; for each hunter was now within fifty yards of
the leader, and several rifles were already aiming at various parts of
the grand-looking animal.  A moment's silence, broken only by the heavy
tread of the elephants, and then the stillness of the wilderness was
broken by the report of half-a-dozen heavy rifles.  In an instant the
scene was changed.  The leading bull elephant reeled as he received the
leaden hail; but his strong frame yet retained plenty of life, and,
uttering a fearful shriek, he charged headlong at the tree behind which
two of the hunters were concealed.  The tree was large and strong, and
the men trusted that it would stand even the rush of the elephant; but
so great was the momentum of the vast bull, that the tree snapped as
though it were a mere sapling, and the two hunters narrowly escaped
being crushed by the tree, or trodden under foot by the enraged monster.
As he charged onward, blinded with rage, he received another volley
from the second barrel of the Boers' rifles; bleeding from a dozen
wounds, he still held on his mad career, until he could no longer
withstand the shock to his system; he then suddenly stopped, threw up
his trunk as though signalling his defeat, and sank back on the ground,
the earth shaking and resounding with the fall.  Following their leader
until the smell of blood warned them that it was dangerous to pursue his
course, the remaining elephants spread out on each side, and formed two
parties; but their course was undecided, for their leader had been
slain, and for a time they had no confidence in a successor.  The
hunters, having almost instantly reloaded their rifles, ran forward in
order to intercept the elephants and cut them off from the dense bush
towards which they were wending their way.  Closing with one of the
nearmost, Hans and two of his companions fired at the heavy shoulder,
which for an instant was exposed to their aim.  Responding to the report
of the guns, the elephant trumpeted his defiance; and turning with
rapidity he rushed at the assailants.  Small trees and underwood gave
way before the mountain of flesh which was urged against them, and any
inexperienced men would have been in a dangerous position.  To be
charged by a savage bull elephant was not, however, any thing very novel
either to Hans or his companions, who at once keeping close together ran
to the more open part of the forest, but where large trees were
abundant.  For about forty yards, the three men ran shoulder to
shoulder; but the elephant, with his giant strides, was gaining on them,
and would, it appeared, soon reach his tiny enemies, whose fate would
then be decided.  But a hunter is full of expedients, and knows when to
practise them; thus, as the elephant was rushing onwards in a straight
course, Hans shouted, "Now," when instantly the party separated, Hans
turning sharp to the right, his two companions to the left, and each
slipping behind a broad-stemmed tree.  The elephant, either undecided
which to pursue, or not seeing the artifice of his enemies, continued
his rush onwards; but before he had gone many yards, the forest again
echoed back the report of the hunters' rifles, and three more bullets
lodged behind the elephant's ear caused him to pitch forward on his
head, his tusks snapping off with a sharp crack, and he rolling to the
ground harmless as the trees around him.  Three other elephants that
were badly wounded effected their escape; but the elephant hunters knew
their death warrant had been signed; and so, assembling near the great
elephant's carcass, the successful men drank a "Soupe" of brandy, cut
off the tail of the "game," and for awhile talked over the events of the
hunt.  It was then decided to return to the waggons, bring them, with
oxen and horses, near the stream by which they were then seated, and to
hunt the remainder of the herd on horseback; for it was seen that if the
country were not very favourable, but little success would be obtained
if the elephants were pursued on foot.  Now that the country had been
alarmed by the report of fire-arms, there was no longer any need for
concealment, so the hunters spread out instead of following in Indian
file, for hunger began to remind them that the sun was past the
meridian, and thus a slice from an antelope or an eland would not be
objected to.  It was not long before an eland and her calf were seen
reclining beneath some acacia-trees; and the plan being arranged, the
pair were soon surrounded, when the hunters, closing in, rendered their
escape impossible, and both were shot by the hungry travellers.  The
elephants, having been feeding for some days in this neighbourhood, had
deposited the fuel for a fire, which, dried by the sun, ignited rapidly,
and in a few minutes was blazing beneath the strips of alternate fat and
lean, which had been strung on two or three ramrods.  And thus, in less
than an hour from the sighting of the elands, their flesh was being
eaten by the sportsmen, who, provided only with a paper of salt and a
clasp-knife, were yet able to make an excellent dinner, which was washed
down with some of the water from the stream, flavoured by a dash of
brandy from the flasks carried by each hunter.  It was near sunset when
the party reached their waggons; but orders were given to inspan the
oxen before daybreak, to have the horses ready, and to prepare for an
early "_trek_" towards the clear stream and luxuriant forest in which
the elephants had been hunted.

"There," said Hans, "we have good water, plenty of wood and other stuff
for fires, game in abundance and so we shall have nothing to do but eat,
drink, sleep, and shoot; we shall kill the game that will yield us
money, and so we need have no care.  A hunter's life is happy, and who
would not be a hunter?  Can you believe it, that Karl Zeitsman has gone
down to Cape Town to write in a shop or something, because he wants to
make money?  Why our fore-looper's life is a better one than his; and as
to ours, one day in the veldt after game is worth a year in a town,
where all is dirty, smoky, and bad.  There is nothing like a free life,
Bernhard, is there? and elephant hunting is the very best of all.
Good-night, and sleep well, Bernhard," said Hans as he crawled into his
waggon; and, undisturbed by the roars of a distant lion, or the snores
of his companions, he slept soundly and peacefully till near daybreak.



CHAPTER FOUR.

SEEKING THE DEAD ELEPHANTS--AMBUSCADE OF THE MATABILI WARRIORS--ESCAPE
OF HANS STERK AND HIS PARTY--BATTLE WITH THE MATABILI--THE SLAUGHTER OF
SIEDENBERG.

"The waggons can follow," said Hans; "that will be best.  The Kaffir can
show where the dead elephants are lying, and we will ride on.  Shall we
follow the spoor, Victor, or try and cut off the track?"

"Better follow the spoor, Hans, I think," replied Victor; "but what does
Heinrich say?"

"Follow the spoor from where we last saw the elephants; we are sure to
find them there."

It being thus agreed among the most experienced to follow the spoor, the
whole party mounted their horses and rode on their journey, little
expecting what was before them.

There was but little game visible to the hunters as they rode towards
the locality on which their yesterday's sport had been enjoyed; but this
they believed was due to the alarm which their firing had caused; for so
wide, is the country in Africa, that the animals can, if necessary,
journey their forty miles during the night, and yet obtain a good
grazing-ground free from interruption; so that a hunter rarely expects
to find game in any district which has been hunted on the day
previously, but looks for it some thirty miles distant.  As the hunters
rode forward the sun rose, and dried up the heavy dew which had covered
the herbage during the night.  The fog and mist were scattered before
his burning rays, and the country once more exhibited its tropical
appearance.

Hans, who had taken out his telescope to examine the country in various
directions, at length exclaimed, "There is one of the Kaffirs near the
elephants.  How could he get there before us?"

"It is 'Nquane, perhaps; he is very quick, and may have passed us in the
fog."

"No," replied Hans; "'Nquane, like all Kaffirs, does not like going a
journey before the sun has dried and warmed the air.  Can the man be a
stray Matabili?"

"No matter if he is," said one of the Boers.  "Let us canter on; we
shall soon see."

The hunters increased their speed, and rode on towards their dead
elephants, but saw, as they approached, no Kaffirs; and all except Hans
began to doubt whether the figure he had seen really was a Kaffir, or
only a stump burned and blackened so as to resemble a man.  The party
left the open country, and rode into the forest, being obliged to ride
in file along the paths made by the elephants.  They had penetrated
about two hundred yards into the forest, when a shrill whistle was
uttered from the wood behind, and instantly from all parts of the bush
an armed Matabili warrior sprang to his feet.  Two hundred men at least
appeared, forming a ring, in the midst of which were the hunters.  These
warriors did not leave the white men long in doubt as to their
intentions; but beating their shields, and waving their assagies, they
rushed in towards their supposed victims.

With that readiness of expedient which a long training in such hunting
expeditions as those we have described is likely to produce, the
Dutchmen saw their only chance for escape.  They turned their horses,
and firing a destructive volley at the Matabili who blocked the path in
their rear, spurred their horses, and charged at the opening which their
bullets and slugs had cleared.  Each man retained a charge in one
barrel; and as each neared the enemy he fired from the saddle, and
mostly killed or disabled his foe.  So sudden had been the attack, and
so rapid the retreat, that in five minutes from the first alarm the
hunters found themselves clear of the bush, and with no further loss
than two horses severely gashed by the assagies of their enemies, who
fortunately possessed no fire-arms.

"The men belong to the old villain Moselekatse," said Hans; "we must
fight them in the open and not spare a man, or our waggon and oxen will
be captured; let us halt and try to draw them out into this open bush.
Are you all loaded, men?" inquired Hans, who, though nearly the youngest
of the party, seemed at once to assume the position of leader.

"Yes, we are all, I think," replied several...  "And here come the
Matabili, thinking to close with us.  Now, for not wasting a single
charge, give them the bullet in the distance, buckshot when nearer, the
treacherous villains;" as he finished speaking he fired, and a dozen
bullets were discharged; immediately afterwards, the dull thud of the
bullets and the falling bodies of the enemy indicating the accuracy of
the aims.  The party were waiting for the Matabili to approach within
range of buckshot and slugs; but Victor, luckily looking round, saw that
two detachments had been sent round on the flanks in an endeavour to
surround the horsemen, so that an immediate retreat was necessary.
Every one of the hunters was, however, able to load his weapon whilst
proceeding at full gallop; so that, having retreated far enough to
escape being surrounded, the Boers halted, faced about, and again
discharged their deadly weapons at the foe.

The leader of the Matabili soon saw that this system of fighting was not
likely to lead to satisfactory results, so he whistled a signal to his
men, who halted and began a retreat.  The hunters however were not the
men to spare their foe, but followed on their traces, shooting down
their enemy with a fatal accuracy, until they reached the denser part of
the forest, where the hunters dared not enter on foot against at least
ten times their number, and where they could not enter on horseback.  A
short council of war decided them to leave half their number to watch
the Matabili, whilst the remainder rode with all speed to the waggons,
to stop them in their advance, and to make preparations for their
defence in case an attack should be made upon them; for to defend
waggons was very much more difficult than to carry on the light cavalry
manoeuvres which had been so successful in the late attack of the black
warriors.

There are few incidents of greater interest in connexion with our
colonies than the desertion from our eastern frontier of the Cape of
Good Hope of a body of about 5000 souls, who, dissatisfied with the
Government to which they were compelled to own allegiance, departed with
wives, children, goods, cattle, and horses into the wilderness, there to
find a new home, far away from English dominion.  It was in 1836 that
this singular emigration took place, and it was just previous to that
date that our tale commences.

Ruling over a large portion of country in about the twenty-sixth
parallel of latitude, there was a chief named Moselekatse, whose tribe
was termed Matabili.  He was a renegade from the Zulu nation, and had by
his talents formed a nation of soldiers.  Between the warriors of
Moselekatse and some Griquas, near the Orange River, several encounters
had taken place, the latter being usually the assailants, their object
being the capture of cattle, the Matabili being rich in herds.  The
Griquas are a tribe of bastard Hottentots, many of them being nearly
white; and thus, in a Matabili's opinion, nearly every white man was an
enemy.

Believing that the ground on which they were hunting was too far from
the dominions of the Matabili chieftain to make the position a dangerous
one, Hans and his party had neither sent ambassadors to announce their
purpose of hunting, nor had they expected to meet any bipeds in the
district in which they had decided to hunt elephants.  They probably
would not even have been heard of by the soldiers of Moselekatse, and
therefore not molested, had not a large party of the Matabili been
ordered to make a reconnaissance in the neighbourhood of Natal where the
Zulus were in force, and where it was said preparations were being made
for an invasion of the Matabili territory.  These men on their return
heard the report of the white men's rifles, and at once believed it
would please their king if these rifles were brought into his presence.
Concealing themselves carefully from their intended victims, and sending
out a few spies to watch what was going on, the Matabili discovered
where the elephants had been shot, and at once knew that on the
following day the hunters would come to procure their ivory, so that an
ambuscade could be arranged and the hunters surrounded and taken at a
disadvantage.  All was very carefully planned by the Matabili; but in
consequence of the rapid decision and skill of the hunters, their plot
was a failure.  The Matabili were, however, formidable as enemies; they
plotted deeply before they acted; and had the hunters been aware of the
cunning of their foes, they would scarcely have felt as satisfied as
they did when they had driven their assailants into a dense cover, and
had thus compelled them to keep close, and change their attack into a
defence.

Five of the hunters remained near the bush to watch the enemy, whilst
five rode back towards the waggons; and thus the white men's forces were
divided.  Following their back trail, the hunters rode at a canter in
the direction of their last night's outspan, eager to get to their
waggons, and either put them into a state of defence, or start them in a
direction away from that likely to be followed by the Matabili.

Hans Sterk, Victor, and three other Dutchmen formed the party that were
returning to the waggons.  After riding at a canter for some miles, they
drew up and walked their horses, in order to allow them to regain their
wind.

"This will be a bad day's work for Moselekatse," said Victor, "for we
are too strong for him on the Orange river now; and if we make up a
commando and attack him, he would be sure to be defeated.  He has enough
on his hands now with the Zulus, who will certainly make an attack on
him very shortly."

"We should have no difficulty in getting up a large party to attack the
Matabili; for they have thousands of cattle, and there would be much to
divide among those who ventured," replied one of the Boers.

"They nearly succeeded this morning in finishing us," said Hans.  "Had
we not been very quick, and ready with our guns, they would have
surrounded us successfully; it is lucky they did not attack us last
night at the waggons; we should all have been slaughtered if they had
done so, as we should have been taken by surprise."

"Yes, it is lucky," said Victor; "and I don't see how we could have
escaped better than we have done, for, except that cut on your horse's
flank and a stab in Heinrich's horse's neck, we were untouched, whilst
we must have killed and wounded nearly fifty of the Matabili."

"Yes, we were fortunate," replied Hans; "but I wish we were two hundred
miles from here, with our waggons safely across the mountains.  Here
comes 'Nquane, and he seems in a hurry."

No sooner did the Kaffir recognise the hunters than he ran towards them
with the greatest eagerness, making all manner of signals.  As soon as
he came within speaking distance, he said--

"Chiefs, the Matabili came upon us at the waggons; they have killed
Copen and Jack, and carried off all the oxen and horses.  Oh, it is bad
for us?"

Exclamations of anger and surprise were uttered by the hunters as they
heard this intelligence; for they knew that without oxen all the wealth
in their waggons was worthless, and could be carried off at any time by
Moselekatse's warriors, whenever they chose to come.

"How many Matabili were there?" inquired Hans.

The Kaffir opened and closed his two hands five times, thus indicating
there were about fifty men.

"Only fifty!" exclaimed Hans.  "Let us after them at once; surely we can
beat away fifty Matabili; it is only ten apiece.  You go back to the
waggons, 'Nquane, and wait there; we will soon bring you back the oxen."

The hunters immediately spurred on their horses, and rode rapidly in the
direction which the marauders had taken; and having ascended a conical
hill, Hans by the aid of his telescope discovered the oxen and their
capturers moving rapidly over the open country, and distant scarcely two
miles.

"A beautiful open country," exclaimed Hans; "just the place for a fight
on horseback, and we will give them a lesson of what we `Mensch' can
do."

Seeing that there was little or no bush before the Matabili, into which
they could effect their escape, the hunters did not distress their
steeds by too great a speed; but cantering steadily onwards they were
soon seen by the Matabili, who, leaving two of their number to drive the
horses and oxen, then spread out in open order, beating their shields
and shouting their defiance.

The horses ridden by the hunters were trained shooting horses, and were
not therefore likely to be alarmed by the noises made by these men.
Each animal also would allow its rider to fire from its back without
moving a muscle; and thus the five hunters, armed as they were, well
supplied with ammunition, and deadly as shots, were most formidable
enemies, more so than the Matabili seemed to think; for these men had
hitherto been opposed only to Hottentots and Griquas, whose courage and
skill they despised.  When, therefore, the Dutchmen halted, and each,
selecting a victim, raised his rifle or smooth-bore to fire, the
Matabili uttered taunting yells, dodged from side to side to distract
their enemies' aim, and charged towards their foes.

Suddenly the five guns were discharged, and five Matabili rolled over on
the plain, each either killed or mortally wounded.  The hunters
instantly turned their horses, and, galloping at speed, avoided the
charge of their enemies and the numerous assagies that were hurled after
them.  Adopting the same plan as on the former occasion, the hunters
loaded as they rode away; and as soon as each man was ready, the signal
was given for a halt, when it was found that the Matabili, finding
pursuit useless, were returning after their stolen oxen.  They did not
seem to suspect the style of warfare which the Dutchmen practised, as
they retreated very slowly, believing that their enemies were only
anxious to escape; they soon, however, found, their mistake, as their
enemies galloped up to within a hundred yards, and discharged their
barrels into the crowded mass, a dozen men either falling or limping
away badly wounded; for the heavy bullets and heavy charge of powder had
caused one shot, in some cases, to bring down two victims.

The Matabili, finding by experience the power and skill of their few
enemies, were now bent only on making their escape; and therefore,
separating, they ran in all directions, leaving the oxen to be
recaptured.  Bent upon revenge, and upon freeing themselves from their
enemies, the hunters followed their foes, shooting them like so many
buck, until, finding their ammunition growing short, they returned to
their oxen, which had been quietly grazing, unconscious of the battle
that was being fought for their ownership.  The animals being collected,
were soon driven off towards the waggons; and before the sun had long
passed the meridian, the oxen were inspanned, and the five Dutchmen and
one Kaffir were urging forward the spans in a direction the opposite to
that in which the Matabili's country lay.  The two Hottentot drivers
were found dead, having been assagied by their enemies without mercy;
but few articles had been taken from the waggons, for the thieves did
not like to encumber themselves with much booty, as they hoped to escape
by speed before the hunters discovered their loss.  The two parties of
Matabili had acted also in concert, one having been left to watch the
waggons and attack them as soon as the Dutchmen had started for their
morning's hunt, the remainder having been moved forward to surprise the
hunters when they were in the bush near the dead elephants.  Both
attacks had been unsuccessful; and now the only danger that the hunters
feared was, that the Matabili, having been thus defeated, would return
in a day or two with a large force, and, knowing that waggons can move
but slowly, and rarely more than twenty-five miles a day, thus would
soon overtake them and probably be able to ensure their capture and to
revenge their late defeat.  Before leaving the outspan, Hans wrote a few
words on a paper, which he inserted in a split stick, planting this
stick in the ground, so that it pointed at the sun.  He rejoined his
companions, who had each dismounted, and was either leading his horse,
or allowing it to follow the waggons.

Hans had left a short account on the paper, of his proceedings, and had
pointed the stick at the sun, in order to let his companions know when
he had started, for they, he knew, would shortly return to the outspan,
and would then follow the spoor of the waggons; but seeing the bodies of
the Hottentots would be puzzled to account for every thing unless they
were informed by some means.

"It will be bad for us if the rivers are swollen," said Hans to Victor,
as the two followed the rear waggon; "a day's delay might cost us all
our property here."

"And our lives too," said Victor.

"Scarcely our lives," said Hans, "if we are watchful, our horses live,
and our ammunition lasts.  We can fight these Matabili in any numbers as
long as they don't possess fire-arms; when the day comes that they use
guns and powder, it will be bad for us hunters, for then their numbers
will render them very dangerous."

"The English traders are supplying them as fast as they can with guns,"
rejoined Victor; "it is hard for us that they do so, for we or our
children may be shot by the guns these men supply, and yet we can do
nothing, however much we may suffer from this money-making feeling."

The oxen having treked for fully two hours, began to show signs of
distress, so the hunters agreed to halt and to dine, for they did not
consider any immediate attack was probable.  They had scarcely lighted a
fire and began to prepare for cooking, than the welcome sight of their
companions greeted them.  Two of the hunters were riding one horse, in
consequence of one having died from the effects of an assagy wound; but
there being five additional horses among the recaptured oxen, this loss
was not a very severe one.

The new-comers announced that the Matabili had retreated farther into
the forest, and did not appear disposed again to try their strength
against their white enemies.  The whole party exclaimed loudly against
the treachery of the Matabili in attacking them when there was peace
between Moselekatse and themselves.  They were not aware that a savage
is not very discriminating; and a raid having been made into
Moselekatse's country, some two months previously, by a party of
Griquas, the warriors could not distinguish any great difference between
a Dutchman and a Griqua, both being of a different colour to himself,
and both being strangers in his land.  A speedy revenge was decided on
by the whole party as soon as they could collect a sufficient force for
the purpose.

That no time was to be lost in escaping from that part of the country,
was the unanimous opinion of the hunters; and so the oxen were inspanned
again, and the journey continued without any delay.  Thus for two days
the party retreated without seeing any thing of an enemy.  Game of
various kinds was abundant; but except to supply themselves with food
the hunters did not shoot, for they knew not how soon their lives might
depend upon a plentiful supply of ammunition being at hand.  So that
each bar of lead was at once converted into bullets or slugs, the loose
powder was made up into cartridges, and every gun cleaned and carefully
loaded, so as to be as efficient as possible.

It was on the morning of the third day that the hunters observed in the
distance what appeared to be a broken-down waggon, but no oxen or human
beings seemed to be near it.  Such a sight, however, as a wreck in the
desert at once excited the curiosity of the travellers, who, leaving the
waggons in charge of half the party, rode off to examine the scene on
which the waggon appeared to have broken-down.  As they approached the
spot, they saw a man limp from out of a clump of bush and make signs to
them, and this man they found to be a Hottentot, who was badly wounded
in several places, and seemed almost famished with hunger.

Having supplied him with food, he informed them that he was the driver
of one of three waggons belonging to a Dutchman, who, with his wife and
two daughters, was travelling over the country in search of elands, when
they were attacked by a party of Matabili, who came upon them at
daybreak, and carried off oxen, wife, and daughters, killed the Dutchman
and another Hottentot, and would have also killed him, had he not
shammed to be dead.

Hans Sterk, who had been watching attentively the waggon and debris
around, whilst he listened to the Hottentot's remarks, suddenly and
eagerly inquired what was the Dutchman's name.

"Siedenberg," said the Hottentot.

"Siedenberg!" shrieked Hans, as he grasped his rifle like a vice; "and
Katrine was with him?"

"Ja," said the Hottentot; "the Mooi Katrine has been carried off by the
Matabili, and her little sister too."

"Men," said Hans, as he turned to his companions, "Katrine Siedenberg
was to have been my wife in two months' time.  I swear she shall be
freed from the Matabili, or I will die in the attempt.  Which of you
will aid me in my work, with your rifles, horses, and skill?"

"I will," replied Victor.

"And I," said Heinrich.

"And I," said all those with him; "but we must get more men."

It was immediately agreed that the journey should be continued until the
waggons and their contents were placed in safety, for the Matabili had
two days' start, and therefore could not be overtaken by the poor
half-starved horses, which now alone belonged to the hunters.  Fresh
horses, more people, and more ammunition were necessary, and then a
successful expedition might be carried on against Moselekatse and his
warriors.  The Hottentot was helped back to the hunter's waggons and
allowed to ride in one of them; and the onward journey was continued
with all speed, so that in three days after finding the broken-down
waggon, the hunters had crossed the Nama Hari river, and had joined a
large party of the emigrant farmers, who were encamped south of this
river.

The news of the attack on the hunters, the slaughter of Siedenberg, and
the carrying off of his daughters, scarcely required to be detailed with
the eloquence which Hans brought to bear upon it, in order to raise the
anger and thirst for vengeance of the Dutchmen.  Those who could were at
once eager to bear arms against their savage and treacherous foe, whose
proceedings caused a feeling of insecurity to pervade the Boers'
encampment; and thus the expediency of inflicting a lesson on the black
chieftain was considered advisable.  And also there was a strong
temptation to inflict this lesson, when it was remembered that enormous
herds of sleek cattle belonged to the Matabili, and would of course
become the property of the conquerors; and who those conquerors would be
was not doubtful, considering the relative value of assagies and
double-barrelled guns.



CHAPTER FIVE.

COMMANDO AGAINST THE MATABILI AND MOSELEKATSE, THE CHIEF OF THE
MATABILI.

To men who lived the life of the farmer in Africa, surrounded on all
sides by savage animals, or those creatures which were hunted for the
sake of their flesh, obliged to be watchful at all times on account of
their enemies--the Kaffirs of the old colony and the tribes to the north
of them--their preparations for a campaign were speedily made; and on
the morning following that on which Hans Sterk's party had rejoined his
companions, more than eighty Dutchmen, with as many after riders, all
well-armed and mounted, were ready to start on their expedition against
the Matabili.

The foe against which this party was being led was known to be both
cunning and daring, and so it was considered expedient to place the camp
in a state of defence, lest the enemy, taking advantage of the absence
of the greater number of the fighting men, should select that time for
their attack; for such is the usual proceeding of African chieftains
against their enemies.  The waggons were therefore drawn together and
brushwood placed so as to prevent an easy entrance among them, regular
watches were set, so that a surprise would have been difficult, had it
been attempted; and a regular attack when the Boers were prepared would
have ended in a fearful slaughter of the assailants.  Matters being thus
satisfactorily arranged at home, the expedition started, amidst great
firing of guns, this being among the Africanders the substitute for
cheering.

A leader having been chosen from among the Boers, the party started full
of hope, and during the first day had travelled nearly forty miles.
Every precaution was taken to avoid being surprised and also to ensure
surprising the enemy, for the Boers were well aware of the advantages to
be gained from surprising such an enemy as the Matabili.  Game was
abundant in the country through which the commando passed, and thus it
was not necessary for the men to burden themselves with much weight in
the form of food; water was at this time of the year plentiful, and thus
the two essentials of life, food and water, were to be obtained with
ease.  To men who loved adventure as much as did these men, such an
expedition as this was sport; and had any stranger come to the bivouac
at night, seen the jovial, free-from-care manner of the Boers, and heard
their spirit-stirring tales, he would scarcely have imagined that these
men were bound on a matter of life and death, and were shortly to be
engaged with a brave and powerful enemy, who, though badly armed, still
outnumbered them in the ratio of twenty to one.  Of all the party, Hans
Sterk alone seemed quiet and thoughtful; but his look of determination
indicated that his thoughts were certainly not pacific; and when the
evening arrived, and the men halted until the moon rose and enabled them
to continue their journey, none were more active or watchful than Hans
Sterk the elephant hunter.

Five days and nights of rapid travelling brought the Boers within a few
hours' journey of the head-quarters of the Matabili, when it was decided
to halt in order to refresh both men and horses, and to endeavour to
gain such information as to the disposition of the fighting men of the
Matabili, as would enable them to attack the enemy at the weakest point.
Whilst the Boers were thus undecided, they were joined by a party of
about a dozen of their countrymen, who had been on an exploring
expedition, and having left their wives and children with some men as
escort, whilst they departed on a few days' journey, returned to find
their waggons destroyed and their relatives murdered.  Hastening with
all speed to their companions, they heard of their departure to attack
the Matabili, and immediately started to join them.  On their journey
they had come up with and surprised a party of Matabili, whom they at
once attacked, killing all except one man, whom they made prisoner; this
one man being capable, they thought, of being eventually of use.

Moselekatse had made it law, that any man who was either taken prisoner
or who lost his weapons in a battle, and did not bring those of an
enemy, was no more to be seen in his country.  Thus the captured
Matabili considered it the better plan to turn traitor, and endeavour to
make himself useful to his captors.  He therefore informed them that if
they journeyed up westward of North, they might enter Moselekatse's
country from a position where they were not expected, and where no spies
were on the look out; and thus, if the attack were made at daybreak, a
fearful slaughter must ensue.

Acting on this advice, the Boers started in the required direction, and
were ready to dash upon their foes as soon as the first streaks of
daylight illumined the land.  Their attack was entirely unexpected, for
the Matabili who had committed the slaughter on the wandering farmers,
and who had attacked the hunters, had only just returned, and were
rejoicing in their successes and in the trophies they had brought to the
feet of their king.  Before, however, the sun had risen more than ten
times its height above the horizon, about 400 of the Matabili warriors
were lying dead on the plains around their huts.

Hans Sterk had not, like many of his companions, been entirely occupied
with slaughtering the enemy, he had been searching in all directions to
find some traces of the prisoners who had been carried off by the
Matabili; but he failed in doing so, until he found a wounded enemy, to
whom he promised life if he would inform him where the white maidens
were hidden.  It was with difficulty that the two communicated, for Hans
was but imperfectly acquainted with the half-Kaffir dialect spoken by
the Matabili, and the wounded man understood but a few words of Dutch.
Still, from him Hans learnt that Katrine and her sister were prisoners
at Kapain, where Moselekatse then was; this place being a day's journey
from Mosega, where the battle, or rather slaughter, had just taken
place.

Hans' interests were not the same as those of the other Dutchmen; he was
mainly bent upon recovering Katrine from her barbarous jailor, and
immediately making her his wife; whilst his companions were only anxious
to capture and carry off the large herds of cattle which were grazing
around, and to take with them the waggons lately taken from the
travellers.  It was in vain that Hans pointed out to the commander of
the expedition the advantages to be derived from following up with
rapidity the successes already obtained, and to attack the chief of the
Matabili where it was impossible he could escape.  Carried away by his
brief success, and uninfluenced by the arguments of one as young as Hans
Sterk, the commander of the expedition refused to advance, and ordered
the immediate retreat of the whole party, with about seven thousand head
of cattle.  This plan, having gained the approval of the majority of the
men who formed the commando, was at once put into execution, and the
retreat was commenced; and in a few days the wives, daughters, and
children left at the waggons were rejoiced at the return of the
expedition, with such a valuable capture as many thousand head of
cattle.  The news of this success spread among the colonists with
magical effect, and many who had at first hesitated to follow the desert
wanderers, now used the greatest expedition to do so, and thus the ranks
of the wanderers were increased by some hundreds of souls.  But one
drawback existed, however, amidst the rejoicings, and that was, that
Hans Sterk, Bernhard, and Victor, had undertaken what was considered a
foolhardy expedition; for they had left the main body on the day after
the battle, and were intent upon trying to effect the escape of two
prisoners from the kraals of Moselekatse himself; such an attempt being
almost reckless, and unlikely to succeed, considering the power and
watchfulness of the enemy against whom they were about to try their
skill.  But we will return to Hans and his two companions.



CHAPTER SIX.

HANS DETERMINES TO FOLLOW KATRINE--HE JOURNEYS BY NIGHT--HANS WATCHES
THE ENEMY.

No sooner had Hans discovered that the Matabili had taken the two Dutch
girls to a distant kraal, than he determined at all risks to attempt
their release.  During the first halt that occurred after the slaughter
of the Matabili, he called his two great friends, Victor and Bernhard,
to him, and said--

"I have failed to persuade the Governor-General to attack the enemy
where he would be able utterly to defeat him and prevent him from again
attacking us; for this defeat at Mosega is only like cutting off one of
his fingers, whereas, if we went on to Kapain, we should attack his
body.  But I am going to try to release Katrine; and I have a plan in my
head which may succeed, so to-night I shall leave the camp."

Victor and Bernhard looked at one another for some time; and then, as
though reading each other's thoughts, they turned to Hans, when Victor,
speaking first, said--

"I don't know what your plans are, Hans; but you shall not go alone.  I
will go with you, and I think Bernhard will go also."

"Yes, I will go," said Bernhard, "so let us talk over your plans."

The three friends, having thus agreed to share each other's fate,
separated themselves from their companions, and sat down beneath a tree
whose wide-spreading branches sheltered them from the heavy dew that was
falling.  Each having lighted his pipe and remained quiet for several
minutes, was ready to listen or speak, according to circumstances.

"My plans," said Hans, are these: "to travel to the northward, and
conceal ourselves and our horses in the range of hills that overlook
Kapain.  With my telescope I can observe all that goes on in the kraals,
while we run no risk of being seen.  Our spoor will scarcely be
recognised, because so many horses have been travelling here lately; and
the attention of all the Matabili will be occupied in either watching
the main body of our people or in making preparations for an expedition
against them.  They would never suspect that two or three of us would
remain in their country; and thus we, by daring, may avoid detection.
If we are discovered, we can ride away from the Matabili; and thus,
though at first it seems a great risk, yet it is not so bad after all.
These are my ideas."

"But," inquired Victor, "how are you going to get Katrine away, or her
sister?"

"I will take two spare horses with me, and they can then ride with us."

"You can't let Katrine know where you are, even if she is in the kraal
at Kapain," said Victor; "and without we can get to her, our journey
will be useless."

"Victor," said Hans, "will you trust me?  I know what I am about, and
will not do any thing without seeing to what the spoor is leading; we
will start in half an hour."

A few words from Hans to the leader of the Boers informed him of his
intention of leaving the party; and though the chief urged upon Hans the
recklessness of his proceedings, he had yet no actual authority to
prevent him and his two companions from acting as they wished; so,
cautioning him of the risk he ran, he wished him success, and bade him
good-bye.

It was about midnight when Hans and his companions left the Boers'
encampment and started on their perilous journey.  They rode for a
considerable distance on the back spoor of their track, then, turning
northward, they followed the course of some streams which flowed from
the ranges of hills in the North-East.  They continued their journey
with rapidity, for the moon shone brightly and enabled them to see
clearly for some distance around them.  Many strange forms were seen
during their journey, for Africa is full of night wanderers, and
occasionally the deep growl of the lion, or the cry of the leopard was
audible, within a few yards of them; but Hans and his companions were
bent upon an expedition, and against foes of such importance, that even
lions and leopards were looked upon as creatures not to be noticed,
unless they seemed disposed to attack the travellers.  The rapidity with
which Hans and his companions rode, the silence maintained by them, and
the purpose-like manner in which they continued a straight course,
turning neither to the right nor left, even though a lion roared before
them, gave to their journey a weirdlike character and reminded them of
the dangers to which they were exposed; for, the Matabili, smarting as
they just were from the defeat at Mosega, were not likely to delay the
slaughter of any white men who might fall into their hands.  Hans and
his companions knew that the expedition was one for life or death; but
it was not the first time that these men had looked on death calmly; and
they were so confident in their own expedients that there were few
circumstances for which they were not prepared.

As soon as the first light of morning began to appear, the three hunters
rode into a ravine covered with brushwood and trees; having ascended
this for some distance they found that it was possible to ride out of it
in three directions besides that in which they had entered, and thus
that a retreat was easily effected, should they be attacked from any one
direction.  They then dismounted, slackened the girths and took off the
saddles, removed the bits from their horses' mouths, and allowed the
animals to enjoy a roll in the grass, this being a proceeding which
invariably refreshes an African steed, and without it he seems only half
capable of enjoying his feed of grass; no sooner, however, had the
animals rolled, than each was again saddled, and with the exception of
loosened girths, was ready to be mounted in half a minute.  The guns
were examined, to see whether the night dew had rendered a miss fire
probable; and then, having made a careful examination of the surrounding
country with his telescope, Hans announced that after eating some of the
_beltong_, [Meat dried in the sun], with which each was provided, two
had better sleep whilst one watched, and so they could all have enough
rest to fit them for the journey of the following night; having
volunteered to watch first, Hans requested his companions to go to
sleep, a request with which every thoroughly trained hunter should be
able to comply; for he should always eat, drink, and sleep when he can,
for when he wants to perhaps he may not be able.  And when a hunter has
nothing to do, he should sleep, for then he will be ready to dispense
with his rest when it may be of importance that he should be watchful.

In a very few minutes Victor and Bernhard were snoring as though they
were sleeping on a down bed instead of on the ground in an enemy's
country, whilst the horses were making the best use of their time by
filling themselves with the sweet grass in the ravine.

Hans had not been on watch more than an hour, when by the aid of his
telescope he discovered a large body of Matabili who were following the
spoor of his horses, and seemed as though bent on pursuing him.  This
sight caused him considerable anxiety, not on account of the numbers of
his enemies, but because a fight with them, or a retreat from them,
would defeat his plans for liberating Katrine.  Hans therefore watched
his enemies with the greatest interest, and could distinguish them
distinctly, though they were distant nearly three miles.  They
approached to within two miles, and he was about to awaken his
companions when he noticed the Matabili halted, and the chiefs' seemed
to be talking about the spoor, as they pointed to the ground several
times and then at different parts of the surrounding country.  The
ground was so hard and the dew had fallen so heavily immediately before
sunrise, that Hans hoped the hesitation on the part of his enemies might
be in consequence of a dispute or difference of opinion as regarded the
date of the horses' footprints; for the probability was, that those left
by his own and his companions' horses might be supposed to be those of
stragglers of the expedition which had attacked the Matabili at Mosega.
This he believed to be the case when he found that the numerous body of
enemies, after a long consultation, quitted his spoor and turned away
towards the West, moving with rapidity in the direction in which the
main body of the Boers had retreated, and thus almost taking his back
trail, instead of following him to his retreat.  Several other small
parties of armed Matabili were seen during the day; but none approached
the ravine in which Hans was concealed, and the day passed and night
arrived without any adventure.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

EXPEDITION OF THE MATABILI--HANS TELEGRAPHS TO KATRINE, AND RECEIVES HIS
ANSWER.

Immediately daylight enabled Hans to see the surrounding country, he
examined with his glass the kraals of the Matabili, both far and near.
Several objects attracted his attention, among which were some which
threatened the safety of himself and party.  Several armed bodies of the
natives we're leaving the villages and departing hastily in various
directions, as though engaged on business of importance.  Hans, aware of
the craftiness of his enemies, felt considerable uneasiness at these
numerous departures; for he was well aware that if the Matabili had by
chance discovered his hiding-place, they would not venture to attack him
except in overwhelming numbers, but would first ascertain for certain
that he was in the ravine; a fact which they would prove by examining
the ground in all directions and finding footmarks which led into the
kloof, but none which led out of it; then they would despatch several
small parties with orders to assemble at certain parts of the ravine and
there to form an ambuscade which was to intercept the retreat of Hans
and his companions.

The Matabili, like most of the natives of South Africa, were accustomed
to hunt the largest, most cunning, and fiercest animals, and from these
they had taken many hints; the buffalo, for example, when wounded would
retreat rapidly until out of sight, would then return and hide itself in
the bush not far from the place from which it originally started; the
hunter, unacquainted with the cunning of this creature, would probably
follow it rapidly in its first retreat and would be suddenly surprised
at finding himself within a few yards of the creature, which would
probably be in the act of charging him.  Although Hans observed that all
the parties of the Matabili left their kraals, and moved in a contrary
direction to the kloof in which he was concealed, yet he was not
satisfied that they did not, when out of sight, turn, and make their way
back, so as to be ready to attack him immediately he and his companions
moved from their concealment.  "The Matabili are moving early," said
Victor, as he joined Hans and watched the various armed parties
spreading over the country; "they must be going to attack our people."

"Some of them may possibly be sent to watch us; for they rarely give up
a spoor as plain as ours must have been.  Still I have a plan which may
defeat them, if they think to trap us here.  But look, Victor, with my
glass, and tell me, do my eyes deceive me; is not that white object near
that large kraal, a woman's dress? and is not that Katrine?  But I
forget, _you_ would not recognise her so far off, though I can; but tell
me if it is not a white woman's dress and manner."

Victor took the telescope, and making a slight alteration in the focus,
directed it at the object indicated.  After a very brief examination,
Victor said--

"That, Hans, is a white woman without doubt; and following her, I see
another and a smaller woman, who I think also is white."

Hans, who had been solely occupied in examining the first female figure,
had not observed the second; but now, taking the glass, he at once found
that Victor's observation was correct.

"I know now that must be Katrine, and her sister is behind her.  I will
let her know I am here."

"How can you do that, Hans?" inquired Victor with surprise; "she is more
than a mile from us."

"I will show you, Victor; it is an old way of letting her know, that I
practised for months, and she is accustomed to it.  See this!"

Hans took from his pocket a small looking-glass, which was protected in
a tin case; examining the direction of the sun, he then held the
hand-glass so that its flash should be cast towards the plains; this he
did very cautiously, having placed himself so that some leaves of a tree
served to guide him as to the direction in which the reflection should
be cast.  As soon as he had made these preparations to his satisfaction,
he said--

"Now, Victor, rest the telescope on the branch of that tree, and tell me
what Katrine does."

Victor arranged the telescope as requested, whilst Hans slightly moved
his mirror, so as to cast the flash in the direction of Katrine.  During
the first few minutes no effect seemed to result from Hans' performance.
Katrine was walking slowly over the plain, her head cast down as though
she were in deep thought, and looking neither to the right nor left.
Her sister was, when first seen by Victor, nearly a hundred yards behind
her; but shortly afterwards she ran to her elder sister and took her
hand.  All this Victor saw with his telescope and described to Hans, who
still flashed the mirror in what he believed to be the right direction.

"Now they see it," exclaimed Victor.  "The little one has seen it and
drags her sister round; points here at us, and now they are both looking
this way!  See, Hans, the tall one is waving a handkerchief!  Heavens,
if a Matabili sees her, we shall be defeated in our plans! but now she
has stopped waving her handkerchief, and is kissing her sister."

"Watch her now, Victor, and tell me every thing she does."

Victor looked eagerly through the telescope, and shortly saw what he
described in the following words--"She seems to be looking all round,
Hans, and uncertain where to go to: now she is walking quickly towards
us, and her sister with her; she still comes on, and now she stops."

"Watch now, Victor, and see if she stoops and picks up any thing, and
tell me how often she stoops."

"She does stoop," said Victor.  "The girl is clever if this is a signal;
she has picked up something and is looking at it; she stoops again and
picks up something else; now she stands up and shakes her hankerchief,
as though knocking off a fly; now she walks slowly back towards the
kraal.  Hans, I fear she has not seen your signal."

"She has seen it, and has answered it, Victor," said Hans; "and in two
hours she will come to this ravine; that is what she tells me."

A look of half wonder, half incredulity passed across the face of Victor
at this remark of Hans.

"You don't understand, I see, Victor, but I will explain.  Since I have
been courting Katrine, I have been accustomed to ride to the krantz
about two miles from her father's house, when there I would flash my
mirror to let her know where I was; this soon attracted her attention,
and she had been taught by me to stoop and pick up something, as a
signal.  If I was to meet her at once, she only waved her handkerchief;
but if she stooped and picked up something, I was to meet her in one
hour; if she stooped twice, in two hours,--and so on.  Now you say, and
I just distinguished, that she stooped twice; so our meeting will be in
two hours."

"But why will she come to us in this ravine?"

"We agreed, that if I was to come to her house, she was to walk towards
it, but if I was to meet her near some yellow-wood trees, where we often
met, she was to walk in that direction; so I think I am not wrong in
believing she means to come to this place by her walking in this
direction.  There were not many days during the last few months that
Katrine did not see the flash of my mirror, and so it is not wonderful
that she at once responded to the signal.  There, she has gone, Victor--
has she not?--into the kraal.  Now, you look to the horses, I will watch
here, and we shall soon have a report from Bernhard as to what he has
seen high up the ravine; then, if all be safe and well, we may soon be
on horseback, and on our way back to our friends; and then we need not
fear any number of Matabili, for we can ride away from them with ease,
for both Katrine and her sister ride like Amazons.  Ah, Bernhard, what
news?"

"I don't like so many small parties of the Matabili disappearing in the
bush behind us; at least a hundred have gone in there this morning, and
the bush runs quite up to our ravine; these men might stalk to within a
few yards of us, and we not know of their approach; it is necessary that
we should be watchful, for the horses have more than once snorted as
though they smelt something strange and unpleasant, and my horse has
reason to dread a Matabili ever since the gash he got in the flank in
our last expedition against these people.  How long will you stay here,
Hans?"

"Only two hours more, Bernhard, so I trust."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE ATTEMPTED RESCUE--HANS OUTWITTED AND CAPTURED BY THE MATABILI.

The two hours which Hans had to wait before he believed Katrine would
come to the kloof passed very slowly.  Each minute seemed longer than
would an hour pleasantly passed; and when only half the time had elapsed
he began to feel uneasy, and to fear that he might be mistaken as
regards the signals which Victor had seen.  Long before the time had
elapsed, however, Hans saw Katrine and her sister stroll out from the
kraal and walk slowly along the paths which led in the direction of the
ravine in which were her friends.  She did not hurry, or seem at all
eager, as though bent on an expedition of importance, but stopped
occasionally as though undecided in which way to journey, and as though
not engaged on any special purpose.  Hans and his companions watched
with the greatest interest every movement of the two girls, and also
every group of Matabili that from time to time were seen moving from
kraal to kraal.  Several armed men had left the various little villages
and had walked rapidly from one to the other, as though some business of
war were on hand.  About a dozen of these armed men were assembled, and
seemed to be engaged in talking, near the kraal from which Katrine and
her sister had first appeared; they took, apparently, no notice of the
two girls, who seemed at full liberty to wander where they chose.  These
men, after a short time, followed the same path as that which Katrine
had chosen, but they appeared merely idling, for occasionally they
stopped, sat down, and took snuff, whilst now and then one or two would
engage in a mimic fight, and, striking each others' shields, would
threaten with their spears as though engaged in a deadly combat.  At
first these men scarcely attracted Hans' attention, so wholly was he
engaged in watching Katrine; but being accustomed to notice every thing,
however unimportant it might appear, he soon became interested in the
proceedings of these warriors.  Katrine steadily advanced towards the
ravine, and was now distant scarcely half a mile; but behind her, and
within a quarter of a mile, were the armed Matabili, who Hans saw had
steadily followed her and her sister, although they seemed otherwise
engaged.

"Those men," at length said Hans to his companions, "are following
Katrine, and either do so as a means of watching that she does not
escape, or else they know we are near and mean to attack us; there are
but ten of them, and we can surely dispose of that number.  Let us look
to our priming; but we should not fire a shot if we can escape without
doing so, for a gun discharged would alarm the whole country, and our
escape would be very difficult.  See, the men are coming closer to
Katrine, and they are calling to her.  Hear what they say, Victor,
`_Wena musa hamba kona_,' they speak to her in Kaffir, and say, `You
must not go there.'

"Cess! if they lay hand on her I'll try a bullet at them even from
here," said Hans, as he observed two of the Matabili run towards Katrine
and her sister.

The two Dutch girls were not, however, to be ordered like children.
They knew perfectly well what was said to them, but did not intend to
obey it.  Taking advantage of the temporary concealment afforded by some
bushes behind which she walked, Katrine seized her sister's hand and ran
rapidly up the path into the ravine.  Although unaware of this
proceeding, yet the Matabili had intended to prevent the two girls from
entering the ravine; and so the whole party ran forward in order to
bring the two maidens back.

The Matabili, as well as the other tribes of South Africa, used a
certain amount of courtesy towards young and handsome women, although
their wives are treated very much as are slaves.  Thus these men
considered it rather a piece of coquetry that the girls should run away
from them, and were apparently more amused than angry at it.  Thus,
although Katrine and her sister were fully 200 yards in advance of their
pursuers, yet the Matabili knew that the maidens could not escape them;
for even if compelled to spoor them, these experienced hunters would
soon re-capture their prisoners.

The point at which Katrine entered the ravine was distant about 300
yards from where Hans was concealed; and thus, had he remained where he
then was, the Matabili would undoubtedly have captured the girls before
they could have reached him.  Seeing this, he at once decided upon
running down the ravine and intercepting the pursuers.  The suddenness
of a discharge of fire-arms, which he was now convinced must be done,
would so alarm the Matabili, ignorant as they were of the number of
their foes, that their retreat would be immediate, and he would thus be
left in undisturbed possession of Katrine and her sister.

Without any explanation of his reasons to his companions, who were men
that needed not that a plain fact should be made more plain by argument,
Hans said "Follow me," and the three ran down the pathway to meet
Katrine, who, to the delight of Hans, was soon visible, and safely held
for a moment in his arms.

"The Matabili are coming," exclaimed Katrine, "ten of them: can you
fight them?"

"Yes, double the number would be nothing, now you are with me, Katie."

"But, Hans, more are about.  I fear so much for you.  How can we escape
from these brutal murderers?  Oh, it was fearful!  My poor father was
butchered before my eyes, and I lived to see it; but where can these men
be? they were close behind us just now."

Hans was equally surprised at the disappearance of the Matabili, whom he
had expected to see immediately behind Katrine and her sister, but who,
it was evident, were not following her.  Seeing this, Hans turned to his
companions and said, "To the horses, men! not a moment must be lost
now."

Hans, half carrying Katrine, who, however, was well able to move on at
speed, was followed by Victor and Bernhard, between whom was Katrine's
sister.  The party walked and ran up the path towards where the horses
had been left, and soon reached the open grassy glade where they had
been allowed to graze.  Instead, however, of finding their five horses
there ready saddled for mounting, and merely knee-haltered to prevent
their straying, the place was deserted, and no horses visible.

"Bernhard," exclaimed Hans, "where are the horses?"

"I left them here, Hans," replied Bernhard, "they can't be far off.  Let
us each take a path, and we shall soon bring them up: let the girls wait
here for us."

Hans reluctantly quitted the side of Katrine and selected the path to
his left, his two companions taking two other paths.  Hans had proceeded
but a few yards along his selected path, and was looking at the spoor of
the horses, which was fresh on the ground before him, when a slight
noise behind caused him to turn: he had but just time to raise his arm
and partly ward off a blow aimed at his head by a Matabili who was armed
with a horn knobskerrie, when his arms were seized and he was thrown
violently to the ground, his gun dragged from him, and he was held by
the powerful arms of some five or six Matabili.  Almost at the same
instant a shout from Victor and an oath from Bernhard, combined with the
sound of struggling in the bush, indicated to Hans that his companions
also had been captured; and therefore a regular ambush must have been
prepared for the whole party.  That he was not slaughtered at once,
surprised him; for to make prisoners is usually considered by these
warriors to be bad policy.  Still, to be thus suddenly made a prisoner,
and to know that Katrine also must be once more in the hands of his
enemies, was a severe blow to Hans, especially when success had just
seemed about to crown his efforts.

Hans was almost immediately bound with his hands behind him and led,
with shouts of triumph and laughter, to the open glade where he had
expected to find his horses; there he found Victor and Bernhard, bound
like himself, and near them more than fifty armed Matabili warriors;
whilst crouching on the ground, her arm round her sister, and crying
bitterly, sat Katrine, entirely overwhelmed by grief and disappointment.
The horses were held by some boys near the group; whilst a Matabili
chief, who seemed to command the party, stood watching his prisoners.
Suddenly addressing Hans, he said--

"Why have you come armed and without notice into the country of
Moselekatse, when it is war between us?"

To this inquiry Hans gave no other answer than a look of disgust at the
man, who, signalling to his followers, led the way down the ravine
towards the kraals.



CHAPTER NINE.

HANS STERK BECOMES A PRISONER WITH HIS COMPANIONS--FINDS AN UNEXPECTED
ALLY--PLOTS AN ESCAPE.

There are few conditions more unpleasant to any man than that of being a
prisoner.  When, moreover, it happens to a man of active and
enterprising habits, and when the captors are men who are bound by none
of those laws which possess an influence in civilisation, and where,
consequently, the prisoner may be put to death at any moment merely to
gratify the whim of a despot, a captive's condition is one not to be
envied.

As soon as Hans Sterk found that he had been fairly entrapped and made
prisoner by the Matabili, he blamed himself for his want of watchfulness
and caution: had he been one of the unskilled residents of the towns, he
could not have been more easily outwitted.  He saw that his captors
looked at him with contempt and seemed to consider him quite a novice in
the art of bush warfare; and as they talked unreservedly of their
proceedings, he was enabled to find out how artful had been their plans.

The Matabili, he discovered, had crossed the spoor of his horses, and
saw at once that it led to the ravine in which he was concealed; they
believed that he must be with his companions concealed in that ravine,
but if they followed him at once he would, being provided with horses,
either escape by riding, or would fight and probably kill many of his
enemies before he was himself slain.  They decided therefore to
ascertain first whether he was still in the ravine; and a young
keen-eyed boy was despatched to the far side, to see if there were any
spoor leading _out_; for if there were not, then the white men must be
concealed in the ravine.

As soon as this boy's report had been received, the Matabili chiefs
concluded that the men had come either to act as spies, which was
unlikely, or else for the purpose of rescuing the two girls.  This
latter supposition was considered the more probable by the experienced
chiefs; and the ravine having been carefully surrounded by a large party
of the Matabili, who, to avoid suspicion, left the kraals in parties of
three or four only, a careful espionage was kept upon the two female
prisoners, and Hans' plot immediately discovered and guarded against,
and preparations made for his capture and for that of his companions.

The prisoners were conducted to the kraal from which Katrine and her
sister had escaped in the morning.  The three men were placed in the
hut, the door of which was closed, their hands tied behind them, and
some half-dozen boys appointed to watch the hut from the exterior.

There are times when men of the greatest energy and enterprise fail in
the attempts they are making to obtain certain results; these failures
do not invariably occur in consequence of want of skill or care on the
part of the men themselves, but seem to be the effect of some
inscrutable power, which is often termed luck.  When again and again
such failures happen, we are accustomed to be thoroughly cast down, and
to feel that no endeavours of our own can aid us: do what we may, think
what we may, yet an evil luck will attend us, and failure must follow.
These seasons of ill-luck or want of success may be the means used to
teach us that man's efforts alone can be but fruitless, and that it
needs the assistance of higher powers to ensure success.

It was with a feeling of utter despair that Hans Sterk contemplated his
late failure and his present pitiable condition.  Like as a beaten
chess-player reflects on the move which, if executed, might have saved
him his game, so did Hans turn over every act and thought of the past,
in order to find how he might have avoided his late failure; but the
fact remained, that the enemy had been too crafty for him, and he too
sanguine of success.

The hut in which he was a bound prisoner was like all the huts of the
Kaffirs.  It was constructed of strong wicker-work, and thatched with
reeds and long grass; the door was merely a small wattled hurdle, and
did not so entirely block the doorway as to prevent those outside from
looking in; the walls were so thin that voices and conversation, even
though carried on in a moderately low voice, could be heard from hut to
hut.  After the three prisoners had remained silent a short period, Hans
said--

"Friends, I am very sorry that I have brought you into this state.  We
have tried our best, but we have failed: men can do no more than try."

"We have been unlucky," said Bernhard; "and most likely shall not see
another sun rise, for the old chief must be furious at his losses
lately, and may gratify his vengeance by seeing us assagied."

"Don't let us look at the worst," said Victor; "we must think of escape;
it is no use lying here like sheep to be taken, to the slaughter.  I too
believe we shall die to-morrow, but let us at least try to escape."

"Rather difficult to escape, with our hands tied, and surrounded by
enemies," remarked Bernhard.

"Nothing is impossible to men with wits and nerve," replied Hans; "and
now I feel once more a man.  Thank you, Victor, for giving me fresh
strength by your remark, we will try to escape, and here is my plan: as
soon as it is quite dark, we will free each other's arms; this can be
done by biting the withes and hide rope of one of us, then he who is
free can liberate the others.  See, in the roof there is an assagy, with
this we can cut the fastenings as soon as one pair of hands are free.
Next, one of us can go to the door and by some means attract the
attention of the boys on watch, and bring them round to the front of the
door; the other two can then work a way through this thin thatch and
escape to the horses.  The alarm need not be given at once; but if it
should be, a run for life is better than nothing."

"It would never succeed, Hans," replied Victor: "the noise of breaking
through the thatch would be too great; perhaps a better plan may occur
to us if we think for awhile."

The three men sat silently turning over every possible means of escape
for nearly a quarter of an hour; but no idea seemed to be likely to be
practically useful.  As they were thus meditating, they heard a young
Kaffir woman speaking to the boys who were on watch.  She was laughing
with them, and, from what the three prisoners could hear, she seemed to
be rejoicing at their capture.  At length she said, "I should like to
throw some dirt at them, to let them know how little a Matabili maiden
thinks of them."  And suiting the action to the words, she pushed aside
the door, and, with a taunting laugh, threw a handful of earth at the
prisoners.  After a few words with the boys, she then withdrew, and all
were again silent.  A single term of abuse burst from the lips of
Bernhard as a lump of clay struck him; and then, with a look of contempt
at the door near which the Kaffir maiden had stood, he again racked his
brain for some ideas which should aid him to escape.

Hans, who had been working his arms quietly but forcibly backwards and
forwards for some time, suddenly withdrew one of his hands from the
fastenings, exclaiming,--"So much for the tying of a Matabili!  You can
free yourselves in five minutes, if you strain your knots.  Try what you
can do."

The two men thus addressed commenced straining their knots; which
proceeding, however, was not as successful as had been that of Hans.
The latter, however, by one or two cuts of the assagy soon liberated the
arms of his companions, and, to their surprise, addressed them in a
whisper as follows:--

"Soon after sunset we shall be free, so stretch your limbs, and be ready
for a battle for life and freedom."

"What is your plan, Hans?" said Victor; "let us hear."

"It is not my plan; it is Katrine's information.  That ball of clay that
the girl threw contained a roll of paper from Katrine.  This is what she
says:--

"`An hour after sundown, there will not be a man in the kraal, only six
boys to watch you and two old women to watch us.  Free your arms and
make your escape; then your guns are in the chief's hut, the one with
the large ox-horns over the doorway, the horses are in the kraal next
the cow's kraal: we will be ready.  The girl who takes this I have won
by presents.  I leave to you, Hans, the plan: you may depend I tell you
truth; I have learned all this from the girl.'"

"And that was in the clay ball," exclaimed Victor.  "Ah, Bernhard, we
are but stupid hands on the spoor.  Hans, after all, is the born leader.
What made you think there was any thing in the ball, Hans?"

"I did not think the girl looked cruel," replied Hans, "and she seemed
acting a part as I looked at her."

"Let us make our plans now.  What do you propose, Hans?" inquired
Victor.

"We will try my plan first, if that fail we will just rush out and drive
off the boys, and so escape.  I must find out where the men are all
going to, for it depends on that where we ride to.  Our horses may not
be very fit for a journey, however, and as we shall certainly be
followed, and our spoor will be as plain as a waggon-track, we must take
care; for once again captured, we shall never have another chance.  Ah,
here comes the girl again."

The Matabili girl again came to the door, and with a loud laugh threw in
a handful of dirt which she had appeared to pick up from the
cattle-kraal near.  Amidst this heap was another lump of clay, from
which Hans drew a piece of paper, and read, "I can give you no other
weapons than three assagies, these will be pushed through your hut soon
after sunset; look out for them and draw them in rapidly, so as not to
be seen.  We must first ride _north_.  God help us!"

"Katrine is better than gold," exclaimed Victor, "and I for one am glad
to be, running this risk for her, and will readily die without
complaint, if need be.  She will be a fit wife for you, Hans."

A gratified smile passed over Hans' face as he heard Katrine thus spoken
of; but being more disposed to discuss with his companions any other
subject than the merits of his beloved Katrine, he said, "To get our
guns will be the great thing, then we can fight well