Produced by Michael Gray, Diocese of San Jose




[Illustration: "Moses strikes the rock."]
MOSES STRIKES THE ROCK


  ALTEMUS'
  CHILDREN OF THE BIBLE SERIES


  THE ADOPTED SON

  BY

  J. H. WILLARD


  ILLUSTRATED


  PHILADELPHIA
  HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY



  Altemus' Illustrated
  Children of the Bible Series

The Boy who Obeyed
         The Story of Isaac
The Farmer Boy
         The Story of Jacob
The Favorite Son
         The Story of Joseph
The Adopted Son
         The Story of Moses
The Boy General
         The Story of Joshua
The Boy at School
         The Story of Samuel
The Shepherd Boy
         The Story of David
The Boy who would be King
         The Story of Absalom
The Captive Boy
         The Story of Daniel
The Boy Jesus

  Fifty Cents Each
  Copyright, 1905
  By Henry Altemus


[Illustration: Moses brings the Ten Commandments down from Mount
Sinai.]



  THE ADOPTED SON
  THE STORY OF MOSES


ABRAHAM, a descendant of Shem, one of the sons of Noah, was the
father and founder of the great Israelitish, or Hebrew, nation. God
chose him from all the people living on the earth at that time, for
this purpose, promising that He would make his name great and that
his descendants should have for their own the land of Canaan, a
country in Palestine lying west of the river Jordan and the Dead Sea.

Abraham had a son named Isaac, who became the father of Jacob, and
Jacob was the father of twelve sons, among whom was Joseph, who was
sold into slavery by his brothers when but a boy. Joseph was taken to
Egypt and in time rose from a slave to be the governor of that
country under Pharaoh, its king.

Jacob, with his eleven sons and their families, settled in Egypt at
the invitation of Pharaoh, and after the death of their father his
sons continued to live there, and became prosperous. After the death
of Joseph they increased rapidly in numbers, and from shepherds and
herders of flocks became masters of various crafts and occupations.
At this time they began to be called "The Children of Israel."

They lived in towns and villages in the land of Goshen, on the
eastern border of Egypt, industrious and contented. The king who had
been so friendly to Joseph was now dead, and another Pharaoh ruled
the land. He watched with much distrust the growing wealth and
greatness of the children of Israel and determined to prevent any
possible harm they might do him by making them work for him instead
of for themselves.

So Pharaoh began to treat the Israelites like slaves. Under the
direction of his officers he set them at work making bricks and then
had them build two cities to hold his treasures. From a prosperous
people they were now reduced to the condition of common laborers,
working without pay day after day in the burning heat of that
country.

[Illustration: "Working without pay day after day."]
"WORKING WITHOUT PAY DAY AFTER DAY."

But in spite of their hardships the Israelites increased in numbers,
and, to further crush them, Pharaoh ordered that all their boys
should be destroyed as soon as they were born. But the people would
not obey this order, and then Pharaoh commanded that all boys should
be flung into the Nile, the sacred river of Egypt, immediately after
their birth.

At this time a child was born among the Israelites whose life was to
be one of the most remarkable that history has recorded for us. His
father's name was Amram and his mother's Jochebed, and they belonged
to the tribe of Levi, the third son of Jacob. They had two older
children, a son named Aaron and a daughter named Miriam.

The mother of this little boy managed to keep him out of sight for
three months, and then she made a little boat of the water-reeds
called papyrus, fastening them together with clay and pitch. It was
not much more than a basket, but she put the baby into it and placed
it among the rushes at the edge of the river Nile, leaving her
daughter Miriam to see what became of her baby brother.

The Egyptians had many beliefs which appear very strange to us now.
One of them was that anything surrounded by papyrus would be safe
from the crocodiles which infested the river. Possibly Jochebed had
some faith in this superstition, for during the time when the
Israelites were living contentedly in the land of Goshen, many of
them had fallen into the customs of the Egyptians, worshipping Ra,
the sun-god, Apis, the sacred calf, and others of their national
deities.

While Miriam was watching the little boat and its precious burden,
the daughter of Pharaoh, with her attendants, came to the river to
bathe. She saw the little boat floating among the rushes and ordered
it to be brought to her. As she looked down at the baby it cried,
and, while she must have known that it was the child of Israelitish
parents, her heart went out to it in pity, and she declared that she
would bring it up as if it had been her own child.

[Illustration: "It was not much more than a basket."]
"IT WAS NOT MUCH MORE THAN A BASKET."

Miriam then came forward and asked if she might find a nurse for the
child. The princess sent her on this errand and the little girl
hastened to bring her mother. Then the princess gave the baby into
the charge of its own mother, and promised her that she should be
paid for taking good care of the child.

When the baby had grown to be quite a boy the princess took him to
her palace and treated him as if he had been a son of her own. She
named him Moses, which means "drawn out," because she had taken him
from the water.

Then the princess had him trained and taught as though he were really
to be a prince. He was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians
and became learned and powerful. All the pleasures and honors of
Pharaoh's court were open to him, and from them he could have
selected what pleased him most.

But the misery and degradation of his own people appealed to him more
strongly than the splendor and preferments of the Egyptian court. His
spirit was especially stirred one day when he saw an Egyptian
overseer abusing an Israelite in the fields where that oppressed
people were still making bricks.

In his anger at this sight he killed the Egyptian and buried the body
in the sand. The next day he interfered in another quarrel--this time
between two of his own people, but all he received for his efforts as
peacemaker was the knowledge that they knew he had killed the
Egyptian the day before.

For this reason, and also because Pharaoh suspected him of scheming
to deliver the Israelites from their bondage, Moses felt that his
life was not safe in Egypt, so he left the court and went to the land
of Midian. He was then forty years old.

One day when he was resting by the side of a well, the seven
daughters of Jethro, the chief and priest of Midian, came there to
water their father's sheep. Some shepherds, who also wanted to use
the well, drove them away, but Moses took the part of the maidens and
watered their flocks for them.

When Jethro heard of this he invited Moses to be his shepherd and to
live in his house. Moses accepted the home offered him, and in time
married Zipporah, one of Jethro's daughters. They had two sons, one
named Gershom, a word which means "stranger," and Eliezer, or "God is
my help."

For the next forty years Moses led the life of a shepherd in the land
of Midian, in gradual preparation for the great work he was to do
later. He certainly learned patience and must have become familiar
with the country through which he was to lead the children of Israel
when the time of their deliverance from Egypt came. During this time
the afflictions of the Israelites had been increased. Another Pharaoh
ruled the land, but his reign brought no relief to the nation toiling
under cruel taskmasters.

One day Moses was feeding his flocks on a mountain called Horeb, when
he saw a bush of wild thorn, or acacia, apparently on fire. He looked
more closely but could see no smoke, neither were the leaves and
twigs blackened or consumed.

[Illustration: "A bush of acacia apparently on fire."]
"A BUSH OF ACACIA APPARENTLY ON FIRE."

Then a Voice which seemed to come from the bush called, "Moses,
Moses." Understanding that it was the Voice of God, Moses answered,
"Here am I." Then God told him to come no nearer, and to take off his
shoes and stand with bare feet, for His presence made the spot holy
ground.

Moses tremblingly obeyed and stood with covered face while God told
him that He had heard the cries and seen the affliction of the
children of Israel, and that He would set them free from their
bondage in Egypt. He told Moses that He had chosen him to be the
deliverer of His people and their leader to the land of Canaan, which
He had promised to Abraham.

Moses felt unequal to this great undertaking and tried to excuse
himself on various grounds. He said that the Israelites would not
listen to him unless he could, by means of signs and wonders,
convince them that he was the divinely appointed leader, and he also
said that he was not a ready speaker.

But God told him just what he had to do and that his brother Aaron
should be his spokesman. He bestowed upon him the power to do
wonderful things and promised His own protection and help. Moses
could refuse no longer, and accepted the divine commission. Then the
Voice ceased, the vision of the burning bush faded away, and Moses
was alone again with his flocks.

When Moses returned to his home he told Jethro that he wished to go
to Egypt, and in the speech of those days Jethro replied, "Go in
peace." So Moses set out on his journey and on the way met his
brother Aaron, whom God had sent to meet him.

Then Moses related to Aaron all that God had said to him from the
burning bush, told him the part he was to take in God's plan, and
showed him the rod which he was to use in performing the wonderful
things by which the Israelites were to be convinced that he was their
divinely appointed deliverer from the land of Egypt. Then the two
brothers went on their way together.

As soon as Moses and Aaron arrived in Egypt, they called the people
together and told them that God was going to deliver them from their
bondage and give them the land of Canaan. At first the Israelites
were very thankful for the message, but after the first failure of
Moses to get Pharaoh's consent to let them go they began to doubt it,
especially as from that time the King imposed harder tasks than ever
upon them.

Then Moses and Aaron went a second time to Pharaoh. Aaron threw down
his rod and it became a serpent. The magicians of the court did the
same thing, and threw down their rods, which became serpents, but
Aaron's rod swallowed theirs. Then the King once more refused to let
the people go.

[Illustration: "Aaron threw down his rod and it became a serpent."]
"AARON THREW DOWN HIS ROD AND IT BECAME A SERPENT."

Then, one after another, God sent terrible plagues upon the Egyptian
people to show Pharaoh that He was the one Living and True God and
that the children of Israel must be allowed to go to the land He had
promised them.

The first of these plagues was the changing of the waters of the Nile
into blood. The Egyptians were a very cleanly people, paying great
attention to their bodies, and were generally dressed in white. They
were accustomed to bathe in the Nile, and its appearance at this time
must have filled them with loathing. But Pharaoh again refused to let
the people go.

Then one after another eight more plagues were sent upon the land.
They were equally disgusting to such a people and gave them the
greatest discomfort possible, but, while Pharaoh relented from time
to time, he persisted in his refusal to let the children of Israel
depart from his kingdom.

During all this time the land of Goshen, where the Israelites lived,
was exempt from these inflictions. Pharaoh must have known this and
he must have begun to understand that their God punished those who
refused to do as He told them, but he was obstinate and still refused
his consent. It required another and a more severe judgment before
Pharaoh consented to let the children of Israel go.

It was now the month of Nisan or Abib, which means the "month of
green ears," and in consequence of what occurred at that time Abib
has ever since been the first month of the Hebrew sacred year. By
God's command the blood of a lamb was to be sprinkled upon the sides
and top of the doorway to every Israelitish home. The lamb itself was
to be roasted and eaten by the family, who were to be dressed for a
journey and ready to start on it at a moment's notice.

At midnight the tenth and last judgment fell on the Egyptians. A wail
of anguish rose from every home in the land, for the first-born child
in every home lay dead. The angel of death had entered the palace of
the King and the hovel of his poorest subject alike, sparing only the
homes where the blood-sprinkled doorways told of God's protection.

Convinced at last that he could not successfully combat the God of
the Israelites, Pharaoh now begged Moses to hasten their departure,
and the Egyptian people were so anxious to have them out of the land
that they gave them jewels and clothing to induce them to go quickly.

So the whole Israelitish nation--some six hundred thousand men
without counting the women and children--set forth, on foot and in
the night, under the leadership of Moses, for the land of Canaan.
With them they took the coffin containing the embalmed body of
Joseph, which had been carefully kept in Egypt since his death. And
God showed them the way they were to go by having a cloud move before
them in the daytime, and gave it the appearance of fire at night.

[Illustration: "The appearance of fire at night."]
"THE APPEARANCE OF FIRE AT NIGHT."

The shortest way to the Promised Land, which lay along the eastern
coast of the Mediterranean Sea, led through the country of the
Philistines, a warlike people who afterwards became the inveterate
enemies of the Israelites, but with whom they were not now able to
contend. So they traveled in a southeasterly direction until they
came to that part of the Red Sea which is now called the Gulf of
Suez.

Pharaoh in the meanwhile had recovered from his terror and remorse,
and with a mighty army was pursuing the Israelites, intending to take
them back to Egypt. He first came in sight of them encamped upon the
African border of the Gulf. When the Israelites knew that they were
pursued they turned angrily upon Moses and Aaron for taking them away
from Egypt. But Moses told them to trust God for He would not let
Pharaoh overtake them.

Then Moses lifted his rod and stretched it out over the waters, and
God sent a strong east wind which forced them back and left a passage
for the wandering people to cross to the other shore. So on they
marched in the fury of the storm, while Pharaoh and his host were
overwhelmed by the waters, which rushed back again after the children
of Israel had reached the further side.

[Illustration: "Pharaoh and his host were overwhelmed."]
"PHARAOH AND HIS HOST WERE OVERWHELMED."

Then the Israelites broke out into songs of praise and thanksgiving
to God, who had so marvelously preserved them from Pharaoh's anger,
led by Miriam, the sister of Moses, the one who had watched him as a
baby in his little papyrus boat among the rushes on the bank of the
Nile.

During the next three days of their journey no water was found. Then
they came to a well, but the water was not fit to drink. Again they
found fault with Moses, but he threw a tree which God showed him into
the well and the water at once became sweet and good.

Before long they were traveling in a desert country and their stock
of food gave out. As before, the Israelites accused Moses of having
led them from Egypt to die in the wilderness. But God sent them great
flocks of quails, upon which they fed, and covered the ground every
morning with a curious substance, round and white, which was good to
eat. In wonder the Israelites exclaimed "Man-hu?" which meant "What
is it?" and so this mysterious food began to be called manna.

[Illustration: "Covered the ground with a curious substance."]
"COVERED THE GROUND WITH A CURIOUS SUBSTANCE."

Then they got out of the desert and camped at a place called
Rephidim. But here there was no water, and the people became so angry
with Moses that they were ready to kill him. Then God told Moses to
strike one of the rocks with his rod and water poured out in
abundance.

[Illustration: "Water poured out in abundance."]
"WATER POURED OUT IN ABUNDANCE."

Then a new trouble came upon the wandering nation. A people called
the Amalekites attacked them, and for the first time since leaving
Egypt they were obliged to defend themselves by fighting.

Moses chose a young man named Joshua to be the leader of a selected
band and sent him to do battle for the children of Israel, while he
held up his hands in prayer to God to help His people. So long as
Moses' hands were uplifted Joshua was victorious, but when from
weariness he let them fall then the Amalekites prevailed. So Aaron on
one side and Hur on the other supported his weary arms and at sunset
Joshua had won the battle.

Shortly after this Moses was visited by Jethro, his father-in-law,
who brought with him Moses' wife and two sons, who had remained with
him in Midian for safety. Moses welcomed them and told Jethro all the
wonderful things God had done for His people. Then Jethro said, "Now
I know that the Lord is greater than all gods."

From Rephidim the Israelites passed into the desert of Sinai and from
the top of Mount Sinai God gave Moses a message for them. Among
clouds from which lightning gleamed and thunder muttered, Moses was
given the Ten Commandments, which were to be kept by the Israelites
and their children, and laws which they were to observe.

[Illustration: "Among clouds from which lightning gleamed."]
"AMONG CLOUDS FROM WHICH LIGHTNING GLEAMED."

A second time Moses was called to communion with God on Mount Sinai,
and Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the elders of the children of
Israel were permitted to accompany him a part of the way, while he
and Joshua, the young leader of the Israelites in their first battle,
went on further.

After waiting for six days Moses went alone nearer to the top of the
mountain and staid there forty days and forty nights while God
disclosed to him His purposes regarding the children of Israel, and
delivered into his hands two tables or tablets of stone upon which He
had graven the Ten Commandments.

When Moses came down from Mount Sinai a strange sight met his eyes.
In his absence the fickle Israelites had persuaded Aaron to make them
an idol such as they had seen in Egypt and which they could worship.
They had given Aaron their jewels of gold and he had made of them a
golden calf, to which they were now bowing down and offering
sacrifices. In his anger Moses cast the tablets of stone from him and
in their fall they were broken.

Then after reproaching Aaron for what he had done, Moses destroyed
the golden calf by fire and by grinding it to powder, and strewed the
ashes and powder upon water, which he made the Israelites drink.

Then he stood at the gate of the camp and called for all those who
were on the Lord's side to come and stand beside him. The children of
Levi, the third son of Jacob, answered this call, and Moses told them
to go through the camp and slay every man they met. This they did,
and three thousand Israelites fell at that time.

After this God told Moses to make two tablets of stone like those he
had broken, and with them come alone to Him on Mount Sinai, where He
would engrave upon them the words which were on the first tablets.
Moses did this, and when he came down from the mountain his face
shone so that Aaron and the people were afraid to speak to him until
he had put a veil over it.

For more than a year the Israelites remained near Mount Sinai, and
during that time Moses told them, among other things which God had
imparted to him, how the Tabernacle was to be made, who its priests
were to be, and how the services were to be conducted. The people
brought him all the material they had that was suitable for those
purposes, and skilful men built the beautiful and costly Tabernacle,
in which was placed the Ark of the Covenant, which they were also
instructed to make.

Aaron was appointed high priest and his four sons were made priests
to assist him in the services. The Sabbath or seventh day was to be
strictly kept, and various feasts and ceremonies were instituted.
Particularly the feast of the Passover was enjoined upon the
Israelites to commemorate God's mercy in passing over their homes
when the first-born of the Egyptians were slain.

Then the pillar of cloud, which, with the pillar of fire, had never
ceased to show the Israelites the way they were to go in their
journeys, rested over the Tabernacle, and at this sign that they were
to resume their march to the land of Canaan, the children of Israel
marched forth once more and in time came to Kadesh-barnea, near the
borders of the promised land.

Then a man was chosen from each of the twelve tribes to see what the
land of Canaan was like and to find the best way of entering it. They
were gone for forty days, and when they returned their accounts
differed. All agreed as to the exceeding fruitfulness of the land, in
proof of which they brought back a bunch of grapes so large that it
took two men to carry it. But only two advised an immediate advance
into the land. These were Joshua, the young general, and a man named
Caleb.

[Illustration: "A bunch of grapes that took two men to carry it."]
"A BUNCH OF GRAPES THAT TOOK TWO MEN TO CARRY IT."

The ten remaining messengers frightened the people by their account
of the giants and warlike tribes they would have to encounter and the
many dangers that would have to be met, and the people, fickle as
ever, believed these reports and again reproached their faithful
leader.

But their punishment was swift and severe. The ten messengers of evil
died on the spot, and God commanded Moses to tell the people that,
for their doubting and faultfinding, not one of them over twenty
years old except Joshua and Caleb should enter the land of Canaan.
Their children might do so, but they could never set foot in it. They
were to wander in the desert until they died.

After thirty-eight years the wandering nation, which during this time
had been fed with manna and so cared for by God that they were
neither footsore, neither did their clothes wear out, was again
encamped at Kadesh-barnea. In the interval great numbers of the
people had died, and here Miriam, the sister of Moses and of Aaron,
died and was buried. Water was again scarce, and the people, as
formerly, heaped reproaches upon Moses and Aaron, who asked God what
to do.

God told them to speak to one of the rocks and it would produce water
in plenty. Instead of doing exactly what they were told, Moses and
Aaron first rebuked the people and then Moses struck the rock with
his rod. An abundant supply of water followed, but for this act of
disobedience and this display of irritation, both of the brothers
were forbidden to enter the land of Canaan.

Before long Aaron died at the age of one hundred and twenty-three
years and was buried in Mount Hor. After mourning him for thirty
days, the people again broke out into discontent and in punishment
were bitten by venomous serpents, which were sent among them for that
purpose. Many died in this way, and then the people turned to Moses,
who prayed to God in their behalf. God told Moses to make a serpent
of brass and raise it upon a pole high above the heads of the people,
and every one who looked upon this serpent, although he had been
bitten, was healed at once.

At last the Israelites came within sight of their inheritance and
Moses' work was nearly done. He appointed Joshua to succeed him and
lead the children of Israel into the land of Canaan. Then he gathered
the people together and made them an affectionate farewell address.
He wrote down for them all the words of the laws which God had given
him for them and gave them to the priest.

[Illustration: "Moses made them a farewell address."]
"MOSES MADE THEM A FAREWELL ADDRESS."

Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab onto a mountain from which
he could look over the land of Canaan, which he was not to enter, and
there he died. He was one hundred and twenty years old, yet we are
told that his eyesight was undimmed. Where he was buried no one
knows. The Bible says, "The Lord buried him in a valley in the land
of Moab, over against Bethpeor."

[Illustration: "He looked out over the land of Canaan."]
HE LOOKED OUT OVER THE LAND OF CANAAN.

[Illustration: "And there he died."]
"AND THERE HE DIED."







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADOPTED SON: THE STORY OF MOSES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.