Produced by Curtis Weyant, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









BENTON'S ABRIDGMENT OF THE DEBATES OF CONGRESS.




ABRIDGMENT OF THE DEBATES OF CONGRESS,

FROM 1789 TO 1856.

FROM GALES AND SEATON'S ANNALS OF CONGRESS; FROM THEIR REGISTER OF
DEBATES; AND FROM THE OFFICIAL REPORTED DEBATES, BY JOHN C. RIVES.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF THE THIRTY YEARS' VIEW.

VOL. I.

NEW YORK:
D. APPLETON & COMPANY, 346 & 348 BROADWAY.

CHICAGO:
S. C. GRIGGS & CO., 111 LAKE ST.

1857.


ENTERED according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New
York.




PREFACE.


The title-page discloses the sources from which this abridgment is made,
and shows them all to be authentic, and reliable,--well known to the
public, and sanctioned by resolves of Congress. Of the latter of these
authorities--"Gales and Seaton's Register of Debates," "The
Congressional Globe and Appendix, by Blair and Rives," and the same
afterwards by "John C. Rives"--it is not necessary to speak, further
than to remind the reader, that they are original reports, made either
by the publishers or their special reporters, and revised by the
speakers, and accepted as authority by Congress; and therefore needing
no historical elucidation to show their correctness. But of the
first--"The Annals of Congress by Gales and Seaton"--being a
compilation, a special, but brief notice is necessary to show the credit
to which they are entitled. And first, of the qualifications of the
compilers for their work. To education and talent, and a particular turn
for political disquisition and history, they added, at the time, more
than forty years' personal connection with the Debates of Congress, as
reporters and publishers of the speeches and proceedings in that body.
Both of these gentlemen reported, on extraordinary occasions; and both
with great aptitude and capacity for the business, and Mr. Gales
especially, (under whose particular care the compilation of the Annals
was made,)--of whom Mr. Randolph, a most competent judge, was accustomed
to say, that he was the most perfect reporter he had ever known--a
perfection which resulted not merely from manual facility in noting
down what was said, but from quickness and clearness of apprehension,
and a full knowledge of the subject spoken upon.[1] To this capacity for
the work, these gentlemen added peculiar advantages for knowing and
reaching the sources of information. The father of one of them, and the
father-in-law of the other,--(Mr. Joseph Gales, Senior,)--had been an
early reporter of the Debates of Congress;--in the time of Washington
and the first Mr. Adams,--and, of course, a collector and preserver of
all contemporary reports. These came into their hands, with ample
knowledge of all the sources from which further collections could be
made. To these capabilities and advantages, were added the pride of
character which exults in producing a perfect work;--and they spared
neither pains nor cost to produce such a work--and succeeded. The
following extracts from a letter of the late Mr. Justice Story, of the
Supreme Court of the United States, dated January 14th, 1837--and from
one from Mr. Justice McLean, still of that high court, dated 24th of
February, 1843--sufficiently attest the value of the Compilation, and
the excellence of its execution. Mr. Justice Story says:

"I have examined these volumes with great attention, and I am entirely
satisfied with the plan and execution of them. I have, for many years,
deemed the publication of the Debates in Congress, interwoven as they
should be, and as they are in your plan, with the proceedings
explanatory of them, one of the most important and valuable enterprises
for public patronage. In an historical view, it will reflect the
strongest and best lights upon the nature and operations of the
Government itself, its powers, its duties, and its policy. As a means of
expounding and interpreting the Constitution itself, it can scarcely be
over-estimated. When I was employed in the task of preparing my
Commentaries on the Constitution I constantly had recourse to this
source of information in all cases within my reach. I had occasion then
deeply to regret, however, that many of my researches terminated in
disappointment from there not being any complete collection of the
debates in print, or at least none in any one repository, or without
large chasms, which it was difficult if not impossible to supply. If
any such collection had existed, I am satisfied that it would have
enabled me to make my own work far more accurate, full, and satisfactory
than it now is. The Parliamentary Debates of England have been long
since published, and constitute, in a political and historical view,
some of the most authentic and useful documents for statesmen and
jurists which have ever issued from the press. They are an indispensable
part of the library of every real British statesman. A similar
publication of all the Debates in Congress would be, if possible, of
more permanent and extensive value to us, since questions of
constitutional law and general public policy are more frequent topics of
public debate here than in England. Indeed, I do not well see how
American statesmen, seeking a profound knowledge of the nature and
operations of our Government, can well do without them. At all events,
if published, they would and ought to be found in the library of every
American statesman, lawyer, and judge, who should aspire to an exact or
thorough knowledge of our Constitution, laws, or national policy."

Mr. Justice McLean says:

"I have read with much interest your proposal to publish the Debates in
Congress from the adoption of the Constitution. This is an undertaking
of great magnitude, and will require large expenditures: but the work
will embody a mass of information in regard to the history and policy of
the Government, which can be found nowhere else. There is no subject
within the action of the Government, which will not be found discussed
in these volumes. They will contain materials rich in facts and talent
for the writer of history, and will reward the researches of all who may
wish to acquire a thorough knowledge of our system of government. This
work when completed will become, I think, more interesting and valuable
to this country, than are the Parliamentary Debates in England. The
questions considered, (from the nature of our Government, and especially
in regard to our domestic relations,) are more diversified than the
Debates in Parliament; and I have no doubt, that the general ability
displayed in the American Congress, will not suffer in comparison with
that of the British Parliament. Our statesmen and jurists will find in
these Debates much to guide them in the performance of their public
duties; for it is from the history of that time that knowledge is
acquired for an enlightened public action. If our Government is to be
handed down to those who come after us, these volumes will increase in
value with the progress of time, and will be one of the richest
memorials of our early enterprise and patriotism, and the best evidence
of our national advancement."

And to these opinions of these two eminent jurists of the value of these
Annals, and the qualifications of the publishers for their task, and the
merits of their work, is to be added the encouraging opinion of Mr.
Madison, given at the commencement of the enterprise, in the year
1818,--near forty years ago,--when, in a letter to _Messrs._ Gales and
Seaton, he said:

"The work to which you have turned your thoughts, is one which justly
claims for it _my_ favorable wishes. A legislative history of our
country is of too much interest not to be at some day undertaken; and
the longer it is postponed, the more difficult and deficient the
execution becomes. In the event of your engaging in it, I shall
cheerfully contribute any suggestions in my power as to the sources from
which materials may be drawn; but I am not aware, at present, of any not
likely to occur to yourselves."

Such is the value which these eminent men place upon these annals of our
earlier Congresses, and these annals embrace the whole period during
which our Government was presided over by those who helped to make
it--the whole period from Washington to Monroe inclusive--a period of
thirty-five years, and covering more than half the time that our
Government has existed. The two Justices of the Supreme Court who gave
their opinion of the work, and who were then (as one of them still is)
in the actual discharge of great public duties, have declared the
personal benefit which they derived from the compilation--one of them
(Mr. Justice Story) going so far as to say that his own work--the
Commentaries upon the Constitution--(deemed faultless by others)--would
have been "more accurate, full and satisfactory," if the Annals had been
published before them. With such opinions in favor of the Annals, no
more need be said to show their value to the rising generations; and in
abridging them, the author feels that he is only making accessible to
the community what is now inaccessible to it, on account of quantity and
price; and useless (nearly), if accessible, on account of the obsolete
or irrelevant matter which overlays and buries the useful. As late as
the year 1840, the publishers of the Annals say, in a Memorial to
Congress, that they had sold to individuals but twenty sets of their
work; and the present enterprising and faithful publisher of the
Congress Debates, (Mr. John C. Rives,) says he sells but some three or
four sets a year of his valuable and voluminous work;--and these, not to
individuals, but to institutions. It is the Congress subscription alone,
that has enabled the publishers of all these works to bring them out;
and no public money was ever more worthily applied: but still Congress
cannot supply the community.

Mr. Madison, in his letter of characteristic modesty to _Messrs._ Gales
and Seaton, speaks of their (then) intended work, as one which justly
claimed _his_ favorable wishes. And well it might! for nowhere, in all
the just and impressive eulogiums which have been pronounced upon him,
does he appear to such advantage as in his own modest, temperate,
luminous, and patriotic speeches during his service in Congress--putting
that new Government into operation, of which he was one of the founders,
and giving to all its machinery, a smooth, clean, and harmonious
working. And so of innumerable others--illustrious men, and his
compatriots--national reputations in their day, but contracting into
local names under the progress of time, for want of a record of their
patriotic labors, of national circulation, and popular accessibility. Of
that character, it is the desire of the author to make this Abridgment.
It is to him a labor of love and of pride--resuscitating the patriotic
dead, putting them in scene again, passing them in long procession over
an extended domain--no one skipped, and each in his place, with the best
of his works in his hand. It is a work of justice to them, and may be of
advantage to the present age, and to posterity, by reproducing for study
and imitation, the words and conduct of the wise, just, modest,
patriotic, intelligent, and disinterested men, who carried their country
through a momentous revolution--moulded that country into one brotherly
Union--and then put the Government they had formed into operation, in
the same fraternal spirit of "_amity, mutual deference and concession_,"
in which they had made it.




INTRODUCTION.


The debates of Congress have been accruing for near seventy years, and
fill more than an hundred volumes, and cannot be purchased for less than
$500, nor advantageously used, on account of the quantity of superfluous
matter which they contain. They are printed in full by Congress, and
ought to be so, and a small distribution is made among the members; but
this distribution cannot reach the community, and would be nearly
useless if it did, from the quantity of obsolete, local and transient
matter which overloads them. In the mean time, these debates contain the
history of the working of our Government from its foundation--preserve
and hand down to posterity the wisdom of ages--show what has been done,
and how it was done--and shed light upon the study of all impending
questions; for there is not a question of the day, and will not be while
the Government continues, which will not be illustrated by something
previously said in these debates.

All works consisting of periodical accumulations require periodical
abridgment, in which, being relieved of what is superfluous, the
residuum becomes more valuable from the disencumbrance--of easier use to
the reader--and more accessible to the community, from the diminution of
price and quantity. Even the reports of the Supreme Court of the United
States, though comparatively free from redundant or obsolete matter,
have undergone abridgment--three volumes reduced to one--and become more
valuable from the reduction. The same may be done with these debates,
and with a far greater license of reduction, from the very nature of
popular debating. Some fifteen or sixteen octavo volumes, double
columns, are expected to contain all that retains a surviving interest
in the (more than) one hundred volumes, now surcharged with the full
debates.

The abridgment will not be restricted to the speeches of the celebrated
orators, but extend to those of the business men, and to the plainest
speakers--who are often the members who give the most useful
information. Full speeches are not expected to be given, there being
none, after a short time, which do not contain much matter that has lost
its interest. Many entire heads of reported proceedings and discussions
would be omitted: as--The morning presentation of petitions, often the
same for ten or twenty years, and presented in both Houses at the same
time: discussion on private bills, which have no general interest: mere
personalities: the endless repetition of yeas and nays, sometimes
recorded an hundred times in contests about the same bill, when three or
four sets would be sufficient to show the opinion of every member upon
every material point: repetitions of speeches, for it is impossible that
a member speaking for ten or twenty sessions on the same subject,
(tariff, internal improvement, national bank, &c.) should not repeat the
same thing over and over again.

The work is intended to be national, such as would commend itself to the
study, and come within the reach, of all who aspire to a share in the
public affairs, either State or Federal; or who wish to understand the
history and working of their own Government. It is the only way in which
the wisdom of the earlier generation of our statesmen who put the
Government into operation--the Madisons, Gallatins, John Marshalls,
William B. Giles, the Fisher Ames, Roger Shermans, &c.--can be made
known to the present or future ages; and it is the best way in which the
speeches of those who have lived in our own day, even the most eminent,
can be diffused. For the speeches of no one, published in mass and
alone, can have more than a local circulation; while judicious
selections from a whole debate, enlivened by the vivacity of contention,
going into a general work of this kind, must have a general circulation,
and carry the name of the speaker, and the best of his speaking, into
every part of the Union.

Some notes, or commentaries, will be added by the author, discriminated
from the text, to mark great starting, or turning points, in our
legislative history, with a view to assist the reader in making the
practical applications which give utility to knowledge. For example: At
the beginning of the first tariff debate in the first session of the
first Congress, he will show that Mr. Madison compressed into twenty-two
short lines, of eight or nine words each, all the principles of impost
and tonnage duties which have governed all wise legislation upon the two
subjects from that time to the present--namely: Specific duties the
rule--_ad valorems_ the exception: revenue the object--incidental
encouragement to home industry the incident: specifics on all the
leading and staple articles--_ad valorems_ on the inferior remainder:
discrimination between articles of luxury and necessity, so as to put
the burthen on the former--and between articles made, or not made, at
home, so as to give encouragement to the home article: and all these
duties moderate, so as not to shackle trade or agriculture. These were
his principles on impost duties. Those on tonnage consisted of
discriminations in favor of our own ships, and in favor of nations
having treaties of commerce with us, so as to encourage our own
ship-building and navigation, and also to stimulate all nations to make
commercial treaties with us. And thus, every object of impost
legislation was provided for:--revenue for the Government, encouragement
to home industry, exemption from burthen to trade and agriculture.

Then, at the end of that debate, (which began in April, and ended in
May,) it will be shown that a rate of duties was established,
corresponding with these principles--all moderate, and adapted each to
its object: five per centum on the lowest class of _ad valorems_, seven
and a half on the next, and fifteen for the highest, and it of luxuries.
The specific duties, applicable to the mass of the importations, at the
same low rate; and this low rate, on the small importation of that time,
and with the economy of that time, producing seven times the amount of
revenue necessary for the "_support_" of the Government! leaving six
sevenths to go to the public debt and Indian wars. The same rates of
duty, with the same economy, ought to be equally sufficient now upon a
sevenfold importation of dutiable goods.

The Emperor Justinian, in compiling his Institutes, commended their
study to the liberal-minded youth of the empire who aspired to
employment in the government; for that emperor, although a great and
victorious general, yet placed the arts of peace and government above
the exploits of war, and wished to see law and order, more than arms,
studied and cultivated in his dominion. The great Emperor Napoleon had
the same appreciation of legal and civil studies; and hence the Four
Codes, at the digest of which he personally assisted, and the
conception and execution of which do so much honor to his memory. In our
own government the career of public employment is open to all, and
should be prepared for by all who aspire to enter it. Of elementary
political works we have many, and excellent; but most of them only teach
principles, and that abstractly, without practice. Practical works are
wanted to complete the study, and of these the most ample and least
ungrateful may be a well-considered and impartial abridgment of the
Debates of Congress.

And here the Author discharges an obligation of gratitude and justice to
the earlier generation of our statesmen. He owes what he is to them. His
political principles were learnt in their school--his knowledge obtained
from their works--his patriotism confirmed by their example--his love of
the Union exalted by their teaching.

                                  THE AUTHOR.

                                  WASHINGTON CITY, May, 1856.




FIRST CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

HELD AT THE CITY OF NEW YORK, MARCH 4 TO SEPTEMBER 29, 1789.

PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,--GEORGE WASHINGTON.

PROCEEDINGS[2] IN THE SENATE.


WEDNESDAY, March 4, 1789.

This being the day for the meeting of the new Congress, the following
members of the Senate appeared and took their seats:[3]

From New Hampshire, JOHN LANGDON and PAINE WINGATE.

From Massachusetts, CALEB STRONG.

From Connecticut, WILLIAM S. JOHNSON and OLIVER ELLSWORTH.

From Pennsylvania, WILLIAM MACLAY and ROBERT MORRIS.

From Georgia, WILLIAM FEW.

The members present not being a quorum, they adjourned from day to day,
until


WEDNESDAY, March 11.

When the same members being present as on the 4th instant, it was agreed
that a circular should be written to the absent members, requesting
their immediate attendance.


THURSDAY, March 12.

No additional members appearing, the members present adjourned from day
to day, until


WEDNESDAY, March 18.

When no additional members appearing, it was agreed that another
circular should be written to eight of the nearest absent members,
particularly desiring their attendance, in order to form a quorum.


THURSDAY, March 19.

WILLIAM PATERSON, from New Jersey, appeared and took his seat.


FRIDAY, March 20.

No additional member appeared.


SATURDAY, March 21.

RICHARD BASSETT, from Delaware, appeared and took his seat.

A sufficient number of members to form a quorum not appearing, the
members present adjourned from day to day, until


SATURDAY, March 28.

JONATHAN ELMER, from New Jersey, appeared and took his seat.

No other member appearing, an adjournment took place from day to day,
until


MONDAY, April 6.

RICHARD HENRY LEE, from Virginia, then appearing, took his seat and
formed a quorum of the whole Senators of the United States.

The credentials of the members present being read and ordered to be
filed, the Senate proceeded, by ballot, to the choice of a President for
the sole purpose of opening and counting the votes for President of the
United States.

JOHN LANGDON was elected.

_Ordered_, That Mr. ELLSWORTH inform the House of Representatives that a
quorum of the Senate is formed; that a President is elected for the sole
purpose of opening the certificates, and counting the votes of the
electors of the several States, in the choice of a President and Vice
President of the United States; and that the Senate is now ready, in the
Senate Chamber, to proceed in the presence of the House, to discharge
that duty; and that the Senate have appointed one of their members to
sit at the clerk's table, to make a list of the votes as they shall be
declared; submitting it to the wisdom of the House to appoint one or
more of their members for the like purpose.

Mr. ELLSWORTH reported that he had delivered the message; and Mr.
BOUDINOT, from the House of Representatives, informed the Senate that
the House is ready forthwith to meet them, to attend the opening and
counting of the votes of the electors of the President and Vice
President of the United States.

The Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives attended in
the Senate Chamber; and the President elected for the purpose of
counting the votes, declared that the Senate and House of
Representatives had met, and that he, in their presence, had opened and
counted the votes of the electors for President and Vice President of
the United States, which were as follows:

[Transcriber's Note: Legend Created to make table fit.]

A = George Washington, Esq.
B = John Adams, Esq.
C = Samuel Huntingdon, Esq.
D = John Jay, Esq.
E = John Hancock, Esq.
F = Robert H. Harrison, Esq.
G = George Clinton, Esq.
H = John Rutledge, Esq.
I = John Milton, Esq.
J = James Armstrong, Esq.
K = Edward Telfair, Esq.
L = Benjamin Lincoln, Esq.

STATES.

                     A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H    I    J    K    L
New Hampshire,       5    5
Massachusetts,      10   10
Connecticut,         7    5    2
New Jersey,          6    1   ..    5
Pennsylvania,       10    8   ..   ..    2
Delaware,            3   ..   ..    3
Maryland,            6   ..   ..   ..   ..    6
Virginia,           10    5   ..    1    1   ..    3
South Carolina,      7   ..   ..   ..    1   ..   ..    6
Georgia,             5   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..   ..    2    1    1    1

    Total,          69   34    2    9    4    6    3    6    2    1    1    1

Whereby it appeared that GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esq. was elected President,
and JOHN ADAMS, Esq. Vice President of the United States of America.

Mr. MADISON, from the House of Representatives, thus addressed the
Senate:

      MR. PRESIDENT: I am directed by the House of
      Representatives to inform the Senate, that the House have
      agreed that the notifications of the election of the
      President and of the Vice President of the United States,
      should be made by such persons, and in such manner, as the
      Senate shall be pleased to direct.

And he withdrew.

Whereupon, the Senate appointed CHARLES THOMSON, Esq. to notify GEORGE
WASHINGTON, Esq. of his election to the office of President of the
United States of America, and Mr. SYLVANUS BOURN, to notify JOHN ADAMS,
Esq. of his election to the office of Vice President of the said United
States.

A letter was received from James Duane, Esq. enclosing resolutions of
the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty, of the city of New York, tendering
to Congress the use of the City Hall.

James Mathews was elected doorkeeper.


TUESDAY, April 7.

Messrs. ELLSWORTH, PATERSON, MACLAY, STRONG, LEE, BASSETT, FEW, and
WINGATE, were appointed a committee to bring in a bill for organizing
the Judiciary of the United States.

Messrs. ELLSWORTH, LEE, STRONG, MACLAY, and BASSETT, were appointed a
committee to prepare rules for the government of the two Houses in cases
of conference, and to take under consideration the manner of electing
chaplains, and to confer thereupon with a committee of the House of
Representatives.

The same committee were also to prepare rules for conducting the
business of the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, April 8.

The Senate proceeded to ballot for a Secretary, and SAMUEL ALYNE OTIS,
Esq. was elected.

Cornelius Maxwell was appointed messenger.


THURSDAY, April 9.

Messrs. LANGDON, JOHNSON, and FEW, were appointed a committee to make
arrangements for receiving the President, and were empowered to confer
with any committee of the House of Representatives that may be appointed
for that purpose.


MONDAY, April 13.

RALPH IZARD, from South Carolina, CHARLES CARROLL, from Maryland, and
GEORGE REED, from Delaware, appeared and took their seats.

The report of the committee to prepare rules for conducting the business
of the Senate was read, and ordered to lie for consideration.

Messrs. JOHNSON, IZARD, and MACLAY, were appointed a committee to confer
with any committee appointed on the part of the House of
Representatives, upon the future disposition of the papers in the office
of the late Secretary of Congress, and report thereon.

The committee appointed to make arrangements for receiving the
President, were directed to settle the manner of receiving the Vice
President also.

Mr. CARROLL and Mr. IZARD were added to the Judiciary Committee.


TUESDAY, April 14.

TRISTRAM DALTON, from Massachusetts, appeared and took his seat.

A letter was written to the mayor of the city of New York, by the
President of the Senate, acknowledging the respect shown to the
Government, and accepting of the offer made by him of the City Hall for
the use of Congress.


MONDAY, April 20.

JOHN HENRY, from Maryland, and JAMES GUNN, from Georgia, appeared and
took their seats.

Messrs. STRONG and IZARD were appointed a committee to wait on the Vice
President, and conduct him to the Senate Chamber.


TUESDAY, April 21.

The committee appointed to conduct the Vice President to the Senate
Chamber, executed their commission, and Mr. LANGDON, the Vice President
_pro tempore_, meeting the Vice President on the floor of the Senate
Chamber, addressed him as follows.

      SIR: I have it in charge from the Senate, to introduce you
      to the chair of this House; and, also, to congratulate you
      on your appointment to the office of Vice President of the
      United States of America.

[After which Mr. Langdon conducted the Vice President to the chair, when
the Vice President addressed the Senate in a speech of congratulation on
the successful formation of the Federal Union, the adoption of the
Federal Constitution, and the auspicious circumstances under which the
new government came into operation, under the presidency of him who had
led the American armies to victory, and conducted by those who had
contributed to achieve Independence.]


FRIDAY, April 24.

On motion, to reconsider the commission of the committee appointed the
23d instant, to report what titles shall be annexed to the offices of
President and Vice President. Passed in the affirmative.

On motion, that the following words, "What titles it will be proper to
annex to the offices of President and of Vice President of the United
States; if any other than those given in the Constitution," be struck
out. Passed in the negative.

On motion, that the words "style or" before the word "title," be added.
Passed in the affirmative.


SATURDAY, April 25.

The Right Reverend SAMUEL PROVOST was elected Chaplain.

A letter from CHARLES THOMSON, Esq., dated the 24th of April, 1789,
directed to the President of the Senate, purporting his having delivered
to General WASHINGTON the certificate of his being elected President of
the United States, was read, and ordered to be filed.

The committee appointed to consider of the time, place, and manner, in
which, and of the person by whom, the oath prescribed by the
Constitution shall be administered to the President of the United
States, and to confer with a committee of the House appointed for that
purpose, report:

      That the President hath been pleased to signify to them,
      that at any time or place which both Houses may think
      proper to appoint, and any manner which shall appear most
      eligible to them, will be convenient and acceptable to
      him; that requisite preparations cannot probably be made
      before Thursday next; that the President be on that day
      formally received by both Houses in the Senate Chamber;
      that the Representatives' Chamber being capable of
      receiving the greater number of persons, that, therefore,
      the President do take the oath in that place, and in the
      presence of both Houses.

      That, after the formal reception of the President in the
      Senate Chamber, he be attended by both Houses to the
      Representatives' Chamber, and that the oath be administered
      by the Chancellor of the State of New York.

      The committee farther report it as their opinion, that it
      will be proper that a committee of both Houses be appointed
      to take order for conducting the business. Read and
      accepted.

Whereupon, Mr. LEE, Mr. IZARD, and Mr. DALTON, on the part of the
Senate, together with a committee that may be appointed on the part of
the House of Representatives, were empowered to take order for
conducting the business.

An order of the House of Representatives, concurring in the appointment
of a committee on their part to confer with a committee appointed on the
24th instant, on the part of the Senate, to consider and report, "what
style, &c., it will be proper to annex to the offices of President and
Vice President," was read, by which it appeared, that Mr. BENSON, Mr.
AMES, Mr. MADISON, Mr. CARROLL, and Mr. SHERMAN, were appointed on the
part of the House.


MONDAY, April 27.

The committee appointed to take order for conducting the ceremonial of
the formal reception, &c., of the President, reported:

      That it appears to them more eligible that the oath should
      be administered to the President in the outer gallery
      adjoining the Senate Chamber, than in the Representatives'
      Chamber, and therefore, submit to the respective Houses the
      propriety of authorizing their committee to take order as
      to the place where the oath shall be administered to the
      President, the resolution of Saturday assigning the
      Representatives' Chamber as the place, notwithstanding.
      Read and accepted.

      _Resolved_, That after the oath shall have been
      administered to the President, he, attended by the Vice
      President, and members of the Senate, and House of
      Representatives, proceed to St. Paul's Chapel, to hear
      divine service, to be performed by the Chaplain of Congress
      already appointed. Sent to the House of Representatives for
      concurrence.


TUESDAY, April 28.

Received from the House of Representatives, the report of a joint
committee on the ceremonial to be observed in administering the oath,
&c., to the President; and a bill to regulate the time and manner of
administering certain oaths. The report was read and ordered to lie on
the table; and the bill received its first reading.


THURSDAY, April 30.

Mr. LEE, in behalf of the committee appointed to take order for
conducting the ceremonial of the formal reception, &c., of the President
of the United States, having informed the Senate that the same was
adjusted, the House of Representatives were notified that the Senate
were ready to receive them in the Senate Chamber, to attend the
President of the United States, while taking the oath required by the
Constitution. Whereupon, the House of Representatives, preceded by their
Speaker, came into the Senate Chamber, and took the seats assigned them,
and the joint committee, preceded by their chairman, agreeably to order,
introduced the President of the United States to the Senate Chamber,
where he was received by the Vice President, who conducted him to the
chair, when the Vice President informed him, that "the Senate, and House
of Representatives of the United States, were ready to attend him to
take the oath required by the Constitution, and that it would be
administered by the Chancellor of the State of New York." To which the
President replied, he was ready to proceed; and being attended to the
gallery in front of the Senate Chamber, by the Vice President and
Senators, the Speaker and Representatives, and the other public
characters present, the oath was administered. After which, the
Chancellor proclaimed, "_Long live George Washington, President of the
United States_."

The PRESIDENT, having returned to his seat, after a short pause arose,
and addressed the Senate and House of Representatives as follows:[4]

      _Fellow-Citizens of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      Among the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could
      have filled me with greater anxieties than that of which
      the notification was transmitted by your order, and
      received on the 14th day of the present month. On the one
      hand, I was summoned by my country, whose voice I can never
      hear but with veneration and love, from a retreat which I
      had chosen with the fondest predilection, and, in my
      flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum
      of my declining years: a retreat which was rendered every
      day more necessary, as well as more dear to me, by the
      addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent
      interruptions in my health, to the gradual waste committed
      on it by time. On the other hand, the magnitude and
      difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my country
      called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and
      most experienced of her citizens a distrustful scrutiny
      into his qualifications, could not but overwhelm with
      despondence one, who, inheriting inferior endowments from
      nature, and unpractised in the duties of civil
      administration, ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own
      deficiencies. In this conflict of emotions, all I dare aver
      is, that it has been my faithful study to collect my duty
      from a just appreciation of every circumstance by which it
      might be effected. All I dare hope is that if, in executing
      this task, I have been too much swayed by a grateful
      remembrance of former instances, or by an affectionate
      sensibility to this transcendent proof of the confidence of
      my fellow-citizens, and have thence too little consulted my
      incapacity as well as disinclination for the weighty and
      untried cares before me, my error will be palliated by the
      motives which misled me, and its consequences be judged by
      my country, with some share of the partiality in which they
      originated.

             *       *       *       *       *

      To the preceding observations I have one to add, which will
      be most properly addressed to the House of Representatives.
      It concerns myself, and will, therefore, be as brief as
      possible. When I was first honored with a call into the
      service of my country, then on the eve of an arduous
      struggle for its liberties, the light in which I
      contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every
      pecuniary compensation. From this resolution I have in no
      instance departed. And being still under the impressions
      which, produced it, I must decline, as inapplicable to
      myself, any share in the personal emoluments which may be
      indispensably included in a permanent provision for the
      executive department; and must accordingly pray that the
      pecuniary estimates for the station in which I am placed
      may, during my continuance in it, be limited to such actual
      expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.

      Having thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have
      been awakened by the occasion which brings us together, I
      shall take my present leave; but not without resorting once
      more to the benign Parent of the human race, in humble
      supplication, that since He has been pleased to favor the
      American people with opportunities for deliberating in
      perfect tranquillity, and dispositions for deciding with
      unparalleled unanimity on a form of Government for the
      security of their union, and the advancement of their
      happiness, so his divine blessing may be equally
      conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate
      consultations, and the wise measures, on which the success
      of this Government must depend.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

      _April 30, 1789._

The President, the Vice President, the Senate, and House of
Representatives, &c., then proceeded to St. Paul's Chapel, where divine
service was performed by the chaplain of Congress, after which the
President was reconducted to his house by the committee appointed for
that purpose.

The Vice President and Senate returned to the Senate Chamber; and,

Upon motion, unanimously agreed, That a committee of three should be
appointed to prepare an answer to the President's speech. Mr. JOHNSON,
Mr. PATERSON, and Mr. CARROLL, were elected.


THURSDAY, May 7.

The committee appointed to confer with such committee as might be
appointed on the part of the House of Representatives, to report what
style or titles it will be proper to annex to the offices of President
and of Vice President of the United States, if any other than those
given in the Constitution, reported.

Which report was ordered to lie for consideration.

The committee appointed to prepare an answer to the President's speech,
delivered to the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States, reported as follows:

      SIR: We, the Senate of the United States, return you our
      sincere thanks for your excellent speech delivered to both
      Houses of Congress; congratulate you on the complete
      organization of the Federal Government; and felicitate
      ourselves and our fellow-citizens on your elevation to the
      office of President; an office highly important by the
      powers constitutionally annexed to it, and extremely
      honorable from the manner in which the appointment is made.
      The unanimous suffrage of the elective body in your favor,
      is peculiarly expressive of the gratitude, confidence, and
      affection of the citizens of America, and is the highest
      testimonial at once of your merit and their esteem. We are
      sensible, sir, that nothing but the voice of your
      fellow-citizens could have called you from a retreat,
      chosen with the fondest predilection, endeared by habit,
      and consecrated to the repose of declining years. We
      rejoice, and with us all America, that, in obedience to the
      call of our common country, you have returned once more to
      public life. In you all parties confide; in you all
      interests unite; and we have no doubt that your past
      services, great as they have been, will be equalled by your
      future exertions; and that your prudence and sagacity as a
      statesman will tend to avert the dangers to which we are
      exposed, to give stability to the present Government, and
      dignity and splendor to that country, which your skill and
      valor, as a soldier, so eminently contributed to raise to
      independence and empire.

      When we contemplate the coincidence of circumstances, and
      wonderful combination of causes, which gradually prepared
      the people of this country for independence; when we
      contemplate the rise, progress, and termination of the late
      war, which gave them a name among the nations of the earth;
      we are, with you, unavoidably led to acknowledge and adore
      the great Arbiter of the universe, by whom empires rise and
      fall. A review of the many signal instances of divine
      interposition in favor of this country claims our most
      pious gratitude; and permit us, sir, to observe, that,
      among the great events which have led to the formation and
      establishment of a Federal Government, we esteem your
      acceptance of the office of President as one of the most
      propitious and important.

      In the execution of the trust reposed in us, we shall
      endeavor to pursue that enlarged and liberal policy to
      which your speech so happily directs. We are conscious that
      the prosperity of each State is inseparably connected with
      the welfare of all, and that, in promoting the latter, we
      shall effectually advance the former. In full persuasion of
      this truth, it shall be our invariable aim to divest
      ourselves of local prejudices and attachments, and to view
      the great assemblage of communities and interests committed
      to our charge with an equal eye. We feel, sir, the force,
      and acknowledge the justness of the observation, that the
      foundation of our national policy should be laid in private
      morality. If individuals be not influenced by moral
      principles, it is in vain to look for public virtue; it is,
      therefore, the duty of legislators to enforce, both by
      precept and example, the utility, as well as the necessity,
      of a strict adherence to the rules of distributive justice.
      We beg you to be assured that the Senate will, at all
      times, cheerfully co-operate in every measure which may
      strengthen the Union, conduce to the happiness, or secure
      and perpetuate the liberties of this great confederated
      republic.

      We commend you, sir, to the protection of Almighty God,
      earnestly beseeching him long to preserve a life so
      valuable and dear to the people of the United States; and
      that your administration may be prosperous to the nation,
      and glorious to yourself.

      Read and accepted; and

      _Ordered_, That the Vice President should affix his
      signature to the address, in behalf of the Senate.


FRIDAY, May 8.

The report of the committee appointed to determine "What style or title
it will be proper to annex to the offices of President and Vice
President of the United States, if any other than those given in the
Constitution;" and to confer with a committee of the House of
Representatives appointed for the same purpose, was considered, and
disagreed to.

The question was taken, "Whether the President of the United States
shall be addressed by the title of _His Excellency_?" and it passed in
the negative.

On motion that a committee of three be appointed to consider and report
under what title it will be proper for the Senate to address the
President of the United States, Mr. LEE, Mr. ELLSWORTH, and Mr. JOHNSON,
were elected.


SATURDAY, May 9.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they had accepted the report of the committee appointed to consider what
style or title it will be proper to annex to the offices of President
and Vice President of the United States, if any other than those given
in the Constitution.

      _Ordered_, That Mr. FEW, Mr. MACLAY, and Mr. STRONG, be a
      committee to view the apartments in the City Hall, and to
      confer with any committee that may be appointed by the
      House of Representatives for that purpose, and report how
      the same shall be appropriated.

The committee appointed to consider under what title it will be proper
for the Senate to address the President of the United States, reported;
the consideration of which was postponed until Monday next.

The Secretary was charged with a message to the House of
Representatives, with the order of Senate passed the 7th instant, on the
mode adopted by the Senate in receiving communications from that House.

      _Ordered_, That Mr. LEE, Mr. ELLSWORTH, and Mr. JOHNSON, be
      a committee to confer with any committee to be appointed by
      the House of Representatives, on the difference of opinion
      now subsisting between the two Houses, respecting the title
      of the President of the United States; and, on motion for
      reconsideration, the instruction to the committee was
      agreed to, as follows:

      "That they consider and report under what title it will be
      proper for the President of the United States in future to
      be addressed, and confer thereon with such committee as the
      House of Representatives may appoint for that purpose."


The Secretary carried to the House of Representatives the appointment of
a committee, on the part of the Senate, to view the rooms in the City
Hall, and to confer upon their appropriation;

The rejection of the report of the committee appointed to consider what
style, &c., it will be proper to annex to the offices of President and
of Vice President;

And the appointment of a committee on the part of the Senate to confer
on a title under which it will be proper to address the President of the
United States.


MONDAY, May 11.

      _Ordered_, That the consideration of the report of the
      committee upon "the title by which it will be proper for
      the Senate to address the President," be postponed until
      Tuesday next.


TUESDAY, May 12.

      _Ordered_, That the committee appointed the 9th of May, to
      consider "by what title it will be proper for the Senate to
      address the President of the United States", be instructed
      to confer with the committee of the House of
      Representatives, agreeably to the proposition in their
      message of this day.

      A motion for the committee, appointed to address the
      President, to proceed, was postponed to Thursday next.


THURSDAY, May 14.

The committee, appointed the 9th instant, to determine "under what title
it will be proper for the Senate to address the President," and to
confer with a committee of the House of Representatives "upon the
disagreeing votes of the Senate and House," informed the Senate that
they had conferred with a committee of the House of Representatives, but
could not agree upon a report.

The committee appointed the 9th instant, "to consider and report under
what title it will be proper for the Senate to address the President of
the United States of America," reported:

      That, in the opinion of the committee, it will be proper
      thus to address the President: "_His Highness, the
      President of the United States of America, and Protector of
      their Liberties_."

Which report was postponed; and the following resolve was agreed to, to
wit:

      From a decent respect for the opinion and practice of
      civilized nations, whether under monarchical or republican
      forms of Government, whose custom is to annex titles of
      respectability to the office of their Chief Magistrate; and
      that, on intercourse with foreign nations, a due respect
      for the majesty of the people of the United States may not
      be hazarded by an appearance of singularity, the Senate
      have been induced to be of opinion, that it would be proper
      to annex a respectable title to the office of President of
      the United States; but, the Senate, desirous of preserving
      harmony with the House of Representatives, where the
      practice lately observed in presenting an address to the
      President was without the addition of titles, think it
      proper, for the present, to act in conformity with the
      practice of that House: therefore,

      _Resolved_, That the present address be "_To the President
      of the United States_," without addition of title.

A motion was made to strike out the preamble as far as the words "but
the Senate;" which passed in the negative:

And on motion for the main question, it passed in the affirmative.

The committee appointed to consider and report a mode of carrying into
effect the provision in the second clause of the third section of the
first article of the Constitution, reported;

Whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That the Senators be divided into three
      classes;

      The first to consist of Mr. Langdon, Mr. Johnson, Mr.
      Morris, Mr. Henry, Mr. Izard, and Mr. Gunn;

      The second of Mr. Wingate, Mr. Strong, Mr. Paterson, Mr.
      Bassett, Mr. Lee, Mr. Butler, and Mr. Few;

      And the third of Mr. Dalton, Mr. Ellsworth, Mr. Elmer, Mr.
      Maclay, Mr. Read, Mr. Carroll, and Mr. Grayson.

      That three papers of an equal size, numbered 1, 2, and 3,
      be, by the Secretary, rolled up and put into a box, and
      drawn by Mr. Langdon, Mr. Wingate, and Mr. Dalton, in
      behalf of the respective classes, in which each of them are
      placed; and that the classes shall vacate their seats in
      the Senate, according to the order of numbers drawn for
      them, beginning with No. 1.

      And that, when Senators shall take their seats from States
      that have not yet appointed Senators, they shall be placed
      by lot in the foregoing classes, but in such manner as
      shall keep the classes as nearly equal as may be in
      numbers.

The committee appointed to confer with a committee of the House of
Representatives, in preparing proper rules to be established for the
enrolment, &c. of the acts of Congress, reported; which report was
ordered to lie for consideration.

      _Ordered_, That the committee appointed to draft an answer
      to the President's speech, wait on him, and request him to
      appoint the time when it will be agreeable to receive the
      address of the Senate, at his own house.


FRIDAY, May 15.

The committee appointed to draft an answer to the President's speech
further reported; whereupon it was

      _Agreed_, That the Senate should wait on the President at
      his own house on Monday next, at a quarter after 11
      o'clock, and that the Vice President then present the
      address of the Senate, as agreed to on the 7th instant.

The Senate proceeded to determine the classes, agreeably to the resolve
of yesterday, on the mode of carrying into effect the provision of the
second clause of the third section of the first article of the
Constitution; and the numbers being drawn, the classes were determined
as follows:

Lot No. 1, drawn by Mr. Dalton, contained Mr. Dalton, Mr. Ellsworth, Mr.
Elmer, Mr. Maclay, Mr. Read, Mr. Carroll, and Mr. Grayson; whose seats
shall, accordingly, be vacated in the Senate at the expiration of the
second year.

Lot No. 2. drawn by Mr. Wingate, contained Mr. Wingate, Mr. Strong, Mr.
Paterson, Mr. Bassett, Mr. Lee, Mr. Butler, and Mr. Few; whose seats
shall, accordingly, be vacated in the Senate at the expiration of the
fourth year.

Lot No. 3, drawn by Mr. Langdon, contained Mr. Langdon, Mr. Johnson, Mr.
Morris, Mr. Henry, Mr. Izard, and Mr. Gunn; whose seats shall,
accordingly, be vacated in the Senate at the expiration of the sixth
year.


MONDAY, May 18.

Agreeably to the order of the 15th instant, the Senate waited on the
President of the United States at his own house, when the Vice
President, in their name, delivered to the President the address agreed
to on the 7th instant. To which the President of the United States was
pleased to make the following reply:

      GENTLEMEN: I thank you for your address, in which the most
      affectionate sentiments are expressed in the most obliging
      terms. The coincidence of circumstances which led to this
      auspicious crisis, the confidence reposed in me by my
      fellow-citizens, and the assistance I may expect from
      counsels which will be dictated by an enlarged and liberal
      policy, seem to presage a more prosperous issue to my
      administration than a diffidence of my abilities had taught
      me to anticipate. I now feel myself inexpressibly happy in
      a belief that Heaven, which has done so much for our infant
      nation, will not withdraw its providential influence before
      our political felicity shall have been completed, and in a
      conviction that the Senate will at all times co-operate in
      every measure which may tend to promote the welfare of this
      confederated republic. Thus supported by a firm trust in
      the great Arbiter of the universe, aided by the collective
      wisdom of the Union, and imploring the divine benediction
      on our joint exertions in the service of our country, I
      readily engage with you in the arduous but pleasing task of
      attempting to make a nation happy.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.


THURSDAY, May 21.

WILLIAM GRAYSON, from Virginia, appeared and took his seat.

      _Resolved_, That all bills on a second reading shall be
      considered by the Senate in the same manner as if the
      Senate were in a committee of the whole, before they shall
      be taken up and proceeded on by the Senate, agreeably to
      the standing rules, unless otherwise ordered.


MONDAY, May 25.

The Senate to-day, for the first time, entered upon executive business,
having received from the President of the United States a communication
covering a report from the Secretary of War, on the negotiations of the
Governor of the Western Territory with certain northern and
north-western Indians, and the treaties made in consequence thereof at
Fort Harmar, on the 9th of January, 1789, which was read, and ordered to
lie on the table.


THURSDAY, May 28.

The Senate proceeded in the consideration of the bill for laying a duty
on goods, wares and merchandises imported into the United States; and,
after debate, adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, June 3.

_Ordered_, That Mr. LANGDON administer the oath to the Vice President;
which was done accordingly.

And the Vice President administered the oath according to law, to the
following members: to Messrs. LANGDON, WINGATE, STRONG, DALTON, JOHNSON,
ELLSWORTH, PATERSON, MACLAY, MORRIS, READ, BASSETT, CARROLL, HENRY, LEE,
GRAYSON, IZARD, FEW, GUNN.

The same oath was, by the Vice President, administered to the Secretary,
together with the oath of office.


MONDAY, June 8.

PIERCE BUTLER, from South Carolina, appeared and took his seat.

The Vice President administered the oath to Mr. Butler.


TUESDAY, June 16.

The Senate entered on executive business. A communication from the
President informed them that Mr. JEFFERSON wished to return home, and he
proposed WILLIAM SHORT, Esq. to take his place as minister to France.
Laid on the table.


WEDNESDAY, June 17.

The Senate went into executive business. They examined into the fitness
of Mr. SHORT to supply the place of Mr. JEFFERSON, but came to no
conclusion.


THURSDAY, June 18.

The Senate went into executive business, and confirmed the appointment
of Mr. SHORT to take charge of our affairs at the court of France,
during the absence of the minister.


THURSDAY, June 25.

The Senate proceeded to the consideration of the bill for establishing
an Executive Department, to be denominated the Department of Foreign
Affairs; which was read the first time, and ordered to lie for
consideration.


FRIDAY, July 17.

On motion, that, on the final question upon a bill or resolve, any
member shall have a right to enter his protest or dissent on the
journal, with reasons in support of such dissent, provided the same be
offered within two days after the determination on such final question:

Passed in the negative.


TUESDAY, July 21.

The Senate entered on executive business, and

_Ordered_, That the Secretary of Foreign Affairs attend the Senate
to-morrow, and bring with him such papers as are requisite to give full
information relative to the consular convention between France and the
United States.


WEDNESDAY, July 22.

The Senate were to-day mostly engaged in executive business. The
Secretary of Foreign Affairs attended, agreeably to order, and made the
necessary explanations; and the following resolution was entered
into.[5]


SATURDAY, July 25.

RUFUS KING, from New York, appeared, and took his seat.


MONDAY, July 27.

PHILIP SCHUYLER, from New York, appeared, and took his seat.


TUESDAY, July 28.

On motion, the Senators from the State of New York proceeded to draw
lots for their classes, in conformity to the resolve of the 14th of May;
and two lots, No. 3, and a blank, being, by the Secretary, rolled up and
put into the box, Mr. SCHUYLER drew blank; and Mr. KING having drawn No.
3, his seat shall accordingly be vacated in the Senate at the expiration
of the sixth year.

The Secretary proceeded to put two other lots into the box, marked Nos.
1 and 2; and Mr. SCHUYLER having drawn lot No. 1, his seat shall
accordingly be vacated in the Senate at the expiration of the second
year.


MONDAY, August 3.

The Senate entered on executive business. The President communicated to
them a list of about one hundred appointments as collectors, naval
officers, and surveyors. The Senate advised and consented to about
one-half the list; the rest lay till to-morrow.


TUESDAY, August 4.

A message from the House of Representatives brought up a bill for making
compensation to the President and Vice President of the United States,
and desired the concurrence of the Senate therein;

Together with the appointment of Messrs. WADSWORTH, CARROLL, and
HARTLEY, a committee, to join with a committee of the Senate to be
appointed for the purpose, "to consider of and report when it will be
convenient and proper that an adjournment of the present session of
Congress should take place; and to consider and report such business,
now before Congress, necessary to be finished before the adjournment,
and such as may be conveniently postponed to the next session; and,
also, to consider and report such matters, not now before Congress, but
which it will be necessary should be considered and determined by
Congress before an adjournment."

The Senate again entered on executive business, and advised and
confirmed all the remainder of the list of appointments presented
yesterday, one excepted.


FRIDAY, August 7.

The Senate, in the absence of the Vice President, proceeded to elect a
President _pro tempore_; and the votes being collected and counted, the
Honorable JOHN LANGDON was unanimously appointed.

A message from the President of the United States, by General Knox:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      The business which has hitherto been under the
      consideration of Congress has been of so much importance,
      that I was unwilling to draw their attention from it to any
      other subject. But the disputes which exist between some of
      the United States and several powerful tribes of Indians,
      within the limits of the Union, and the hostilities which
      have, in several instances, been committed on the
      frontiers, seem to require the immediate interposition of
      the General Government.

      I have, therefore, directed the several statements and
      papers which have been submitted to me on this subject, by
      General Knox, to be laid before you for your information.

      While the measures of Government ought to be calculated to
      protect its citizens from all injury and violence, a due
      regard should be extended to those Indian tribes whose
      happiness, in the course of events, so materially depends
      on the national justice and humanity of the United States.

      If it should be the judgment of Congress that it would be
      most expedient to terminate all differences in the southern
      district, and to lay the foundation for future confidence,
      by an amicable treaty with the Indian tribes in that
      quarter, I think proper to suggest the consideration of the
      expediency of instituting a temporary commission for that
      purpose, to consist of three persons, whose authority
      should expire with the occasion. How far such a measure,
      unassisted by posts, would be competent to the
      establishment and preservation of peace and tranquillity on
      the frontiers, is also a matter which merits your serious
      consideration.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      NEW YORK, _August 7, 1789_.

The above message was ordered to lie for consideration.[6]

Mr. MORRIS, in behalf of the committee on the bill for allowing a
compensation to the President and Vice President of the United States,
reported an amendment, to wit:

      To expunge, in the provision for the Vice President, "five
      thousand dollars," and insert "six thousand dollars."

On motion to reduce the provision for the President of the United
States, from "twenty-five thousand" to "twenty thousand dollars:"

Passed in the negative.

On motion to make the provision for the Vice President eight thousand
dollars, instead of five thousand dollars:

Passed in the negative.

The Senate entered on executive business.

The following message from the President was laid before them:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      My nomination of Benjamin Fishbourn for the place of naval
      officer of the port of Savannah not having met with your
      concurrence, I now nominate Lachlan McIntosh for that
      office.[7]

      Whatever may have been the reasons which induced your
      dissent, I am persuaded they were such as you deemed
      sufficient. Permit me to submit to your consideration
      whether, on occasions where the propriety of nominations
      appears questionable to you, it would not be expedient to
      communicate that circumstance to me, and thereby avail
      yourselves of the information which led me to make them,
      and which I would with pleasure lay before you. Probably my
      reasons for nominating Mr. Fishbourn may tend to show that
      such a mode of proceeding, in such cases, might be useful.
      I will, therefore, detail them.

      First. While Colonel Fishbourn was an officer, in actual
      service, and chiefly under my own eye, his conduct appeared
      to me irreproachable; nor did I ever hear any thing
      injurious to his reputation as an officer or a gentleman.
      At the storming of Stony Point, his behavior was
      represented to have been active and brave, and he was
      charged by his General to bring the account of that
      success to the head quarters of the army.

      Secondly. Since his residence in Georgia, he has been
      repeatedly elected to the Assembly as a representative of
      the county of Chatham, in which the port of Savannah is
      situated, and sometimes of the counties of Glynn and
      Camden; he has been chosen a member of the executive
      council of the State, and has lately been president of the
      same; he has been elected by the officers of the militia,
      in the county of Chatham, lieutenant-colonel of the militia
      in that district; and, on a very recent occasion, to wit,
      in the month of May last, he has been appointed by the
      council (on the suspension of the late collector) to an
      office in the port of Savannah, nearly similar to that for
      which I nominated him; which office he actually holds at
      this time. To these reasons for nominating Mr. Fishbourn, I
      might add that I received private letters of
      recommendation, and oral testimonials in his favor, from
      some of the most respectable characters in that State; but
      as they were secondary considerations with me, I do not
      think it necessary to communicate them to you.

      It appeared, therefore, to me, that Mr. Fishbourn must have
      enjoyed the _confidence_ of the militia officers, in order
      to have been elected to a military rank; the _confidence_
      of the freemen, to have been elected to the Assembly; the
      _confidence_ of the Assembly, to have been selected for the
      council; and the _confidence_ of the council, to have been
      appointed collector of the port of Savannah.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      NEW YORK, _August 6, 1789_.


FRIDAY, August 21.

The Senate entered on executive business. They proceeded to consider the
report made by Mr. IZARD, yesterday, as follows:

The committee appointed to wait on the President of the United States,
and confer with him on the mode of communication proper to be pursued
between him and the Senate, in the formation of treaties, and making
appointments to offices, reported:

Which report was agreed to. Whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That when nominations shall be made in writing
      by the President of the United States to the Senate, a
      future day shall be assigned, unless the Senate unanimously
      direct otherwise, for taking them into consideration; that
      when the President of the United States shall meet the
      Senate in the Senate Chamber, the President of the Senate
      shall have a chair on the floor, be considered as at the
      head of the Senate, and his chair shall be assigned to the
      President of the United States; that when the Senate shall
      be convened by the President of the United States to any
      other place, the President of the Senate and Senators shall
      attend at the place appointed. The Secretary of the Senate
      shall also attend to take the minutes of the Senate.

      That all questions shall be put by the President of the
      Senate, either in the presence or absence of the President
      of the United States; and the Senators shall signify their
      assent or dissent by answering _viva voce_, aye or no.[8]


Another message was received from the President, viz:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      The President of the United States will meet the Senate, in
      the Senate Chamber, at half-past eleven o'clock to-morrow,
      to advise with them on the terms of the treaty to be
      negotiated with the Southern Indians.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      NEW YORK, _August 21, 1789_.


SATURDAY, August 22.

The Senate again entered on executive business.

The President of the United States came into the Senate Chamber,
attended by General Knox, and laid before the Senate the following
statement of facts, with the questions thereto annexed, for their advice
and consent:

      [Here follows the statement of facts, and the questions
      thereto annexed, and the answer of the Senate to each
      question.]


MONDAY, August 24.

The Senate was to-day wholly engaged in executive business.

The President of the United States being present in the Senate Chamber,
attended by General Knox,

The Senate resumed the consideration of the state of facts and questions
thereto annexed, laid before them by the President of the United States,
on Saturday last. And the first question, viz: "In the present state of
affairs between North Carolina and the United States, will it be proper
to take any other measures for redressing the injuries of the Cherokees
than the one herein suggested?" being put, was answered in the
negative.[9]

The third question, viz: "If the commissioners shall adjudge that the
Creek nation was fully represented at the three treaties with Georgia,
and that the cessions of land were obtained with the full understanding
and free consent of the acknowledged proprietors, and that the said
treaties ought to be considered as just and equitable: in this case,
shall the commissioners be instructed to insist on a formal renewal and
confirmation thereof? and, in case of a refusal, shall they be
instructed to inform the Creeks that the arms of the Union shall be
employed to compel them to acknowledge the justice of the said
cessions?" was wholly answered in the affirmative.

The fourth question, and its four subdivisions, viz: "But if the
commissioners shall adjudge that the said treaties were formed with an
inadequate or unauthorized representation of the Creek nation, or that
the treaties were held under circumstances of constraint or unfairness
of any sort, so that the United States could not, with justice and
dignity, request or urge a confirmation thereof: in this case, shall the
commissioners, considering the importance of the Oconee lands to
Georgia, be instructed to use their highest exertions to obtain a
cession of said lands? If so, shall the commissioners be instructed, if
they cannot obtain the said cessions on better terms, to offer for the
same, and for the further great object of attaching the Creeks to the
Government of the United States, the following conditions:

"1st. A compensation in money or goods, to the amount of ---- dollars;
the said amount to be stipulated to be paid by Georgia at the period
which shall be fixed, or in failure thereof, by the United States.

"2d. A secure port on the Altamaha or on St. Mary's river, or at any
other place between the same, as may be mutually agreed to by the
commissioners and the Creeks.

"3d. Certain pecuniary considerations to some, and honorary military
distinctions to other influential chiefs, on their taking oaths of
allegiance to the United States.

"4th. A solemn guarantee by the United States to the Creeks of their
remaining territory, and to maintain the same, if necessary, by a line
of military posts," was wholly answered in the affirmative. The blank to
be filled at the discretion of the President of the United States.

The fifth question, viz: "But if all offers should fail to induce the
Creeks to make the desired cessions to Georgia, shall the commissioners
make it an ultimatum?" was answered in the negative.

The sixth question being divided, the first part, containing as follows,
viz: "If the said cessions shall not be made an ultimatum, shall the
commissioners proceed and make a treaty, and include the disputed lands
within the limits which shall be assigned to the Creeks?" was answered
in the negative.

The remainder, viz: "If not, shall a temporary boundary be marked,
making the Oconee the line, and the other parts of the treaty be
concluded?"

"In this case, shall a secure port be stipulated, and the pecuniary and
honorary considerations granted?"

"In other general objects shall the treaties formed at Hopewell, with
the Cherokees, Chickasaws, and Choctaws, be the basis of a treaty with
the Creeks?" were all answered in the affirmative.

On the seventh question, viz: "Shall the sum of twenty thousand dollars,
appropriated to Indian expenses and treaties, be wholly applied, if
necessary, to a treaty with the Creeks? if not, what proportion?" It was
agreed to advise and consent to appropriate the whole sum, if necessary,
at the discretion of the President of the United States.

The President of the United States withdrew from the Senate Chamber, and
the Vice President put the question of adjournment; to which the Senate
agreed.


WEDNESDAY, September 16.

The following message from the President of the United States was
received by the Secretary of War.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      The Governor of the Western Territory has made a statement
      to me of the reciprocal hostilities of the Wabash Indians,
      and the people inhabiting the frontiers bordering on the
      river Ohio, which I herewith lay before Congress.

      The United States, in Congress assembled, by their acts of
      the 21st day of July, 1787, and of the 12th August, 1788,
      made a provisional arrangement for calling forth the
      militia of Virginia and Pennsylvania in the proportions
      therein specified.

      As the circumstances which occasioned the said arrangement
      continue nearly the same, I think proper to suggest to your
      consideration the expediency of making some temporary
      provision for calling forth the militia of the United
      States for the purposes stated in the constitution, which
      would embrace the cases apprehended by the Governor of the
      Western Territory.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      _September_ 16, 1789.


THURSDAY, September 17.

The Senate entered on executive business.

The following message was received from the President of the United
States:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      It doubtless is important that all treaties and compacts
      formed by the United States with other nations, whether
      civilized or not, should be made with caution and executed
      with fidelity.

      It is said to be the general understanding and practice of
      nations, as a check on the mistakes and indiscretions of
      ministers or commissioners, not to consider any treaty
      negotiated and signed by such officers as final and
      conclusive, until ratified by the sovereign or government
      from whom they derive their powers. This practice has been
      adopted by the United States respecting their treaties with
      European nations, and I am inclined to think it would be
      advisable to observe it in the conduct of our treaties with
      the Indians; for though such treaties being, on their part,
      made by their chiefs or rulers, need not be ratified by
      them, yet, being formed on our part by the agency of
      subordinate officers, it seems to be both prudent and
      reasonable that their acts should not be binding on the
      nation until approved and ratified by the Government. It
      strikes me that this point should be well considered and
      settled, so that our national proceedings, in this respect,
      may become uniform, and be directed by fixed and stable
      principles.

      The treaties with certain Indian nations, which were laid
      before you with my message of the 25th May last, suggested
      two questions to my mind, viz: 1st, Whether those treaties
      were to be considered as perfected, and, consequently, as
      obligatory, without being ratified? If not, then, 2dly,
      Whether both, or either, and which of them, ought to be
      ratified? On these questions I request your opinion and
      advice.

      You have, indeed, advised me "_to execute and enjoin an
      observance of_" the treaty with the Wyandots, &c. You,
      gentlemen, doubtless intended to be clear and explicit; and
      yet, without further explanation, I fear I may
      misunderstand your meaning: for if by my _executing_ that
      treaty you mean that I should make it (in a more particular
      and immediate manner than it now is) the act of Government,
      then it follows that I am to ratify it. If you mean by my
      _executing it_ that I am to see that it be carried into
      effect and operation, then I am led to conclude, either
      that you consider it as being perfect and obligatory in its
      present state, and therefore to be executed and observed;
      or that you consider it to derive its completion and
      obligation from the silent approbation and ratification
      which my proclamation may be construed to imply. Although I
      am inclined to think that the latter is your intention, yet
      it certainly is best that all doubts respecting it be
      removed.

      Permit me to observe, that it will be proper for me to be
      informed of your sentiments relative to the treaty with the
      Six Nations, previous to the departure of the Governor of
      the Western Territory; and therefore I recommend it to
      your early consideration.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      _September_ 17, 1789.

      _Ordered_, That the President's message be committed to
      Messrs. CARROLL, KING, and READ.


FRIDAY, September 18.

The Senate entered on executive business.

Mr. CARROLL, on behalf of the committee appointed yesterday, reported as
follows:

The committee, to whom was referred a message from the President of the
United States of the 17th September, 1789, report:

      That the signature of treaties with the Indian nations has
      ever been considered as a full completion thereof, and that
      such treaties have never been solemnly ratified by either
      of the contracting parties, as hath been commonly practised
      among the civilized nations of Europe: wherefore the
      committee are of opinion that the formal ratification of
      the treaty concluded at Fort Harmar on the 9th day of
      January, 1789, between Arthur St. Clair, Governor of the
      Western Territory, on the part of the United States, and
      the sachems and warriors of the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa,
      Chippewa, Pattiwattima, and Sac Nations, is not expedient
      or necessary; and that the resolve of the Senate of the 8th
      September, 1789, respecting the said treaty, authorizes the
      President of the United States to enjoin a due observance
      thereof.


TUESDAY, September 29.

The following communications from the President were received by Mr.
Jay:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      His Most Christian Majesty, by a letter dated the 7th of
      June last, addressed to the President and members of the
      General Congress of the United States of North America,
      announces the much lamented death of his son, the Dauphin.
      The generous conduct of the French monarch and nation
      towards this country renders every event that may affect
      his or their prosperity interesting to us; and I shall take
      care to assure him of the sensibility with which the United
      States participate in the affliction which a loss so much
      to be regretted must have occasioned, both to him and to
      them.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      _September_ 29.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      Having been yesterday informed by a joint committee of both
      Houses of Congress, that they had agreed to a recess, to
      commence this day, and to continue until the first Monday
      of January next, I take the earliest opportunity of
      acquainting you that, considering how long and laborious
      this session has been, and the reasons which, I presume,
      have produced this resolution, it does not appear to me
      expedient to recommend any measures to their consideration
      at present, or now to call your attention, gentlemen, to
      any of those matters in my department which require your
      advice and consent, and yet remain to be despatched.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      _September_ 29, 1789.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House of Representatives had finished the business of the session, and
were ready to adjourn, agreeably to the order of the two Houses of
Congress.

The business of the session being brought to a close, the Vice
President, agreeably to the resolve of the two Houses on the 26th
instant, adjourned the Senate to the first Monday in January next, then
to meet at the City Hall in New York.


FIRST CONGRESS


LIST OF SENATORS.

_New Hampshire._--John Langdon, Paine Wingate.

_Massachusetts._--Caleb Strong, Tristram Dalton.

_Connecticut._--William S. Johnson, Oliver Ellsworth.

_New York._--Rufus King, Philip Schuyler.

_New Jersey._--William Paterson, Jonathan Elmer.

_Pennsylvania._--William Maclay, Robert Morris.

_Delaware._--Richard Bassett, George Reed.

_Maryland._--Charles Carroll, John Henry.

_Virginia._--Richard Henry Lee, William Grayson.

_South Carolina._--Ralph Izard, Pierce Butler.

_Georgia._--William Few, James Gunn.

_North Carolina._[10]--Benjamin Hawkins, Samuel Johnston.

_Rhode Island._[11]--Joseph Stanton, jr., Theodore Foster.


LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES.

_New Hampshire._--Nicholas Gilman, Samuel Livermore, Abiel Foster.

_Massachusetts._--George Thatcher, Fisher Ames, George Leonard, Elbridge
Gerry, Jonathan Grout, Benjamin Goodhue, Theodore Sedgwick, George
Partridge.

_Connecticut._--Benjamin Huntington, Jonathan Trumbull, Jeremiah
Wadsworth, Roger Sherman, Jonathan Sturges.

_New York._--John Lawrence, Egbert Benson, William Floyd, Peter
Sylvester, John Hathorn, Jeremiah Van Rensselaer.

_New Jersey._--Elias Boudinot, James Schureman, Lambert Cadwalader,
Thomas Sinnickson.

_Pennsylvania._--Henry Wynkoop, Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg, Daniel
Heister, Thomas Scott, George Clymer, Thomas Fitzsimons, Thomas Hartley,
Peter Muhlenberg.

_Delaware._--John Vining.

_Maryland._--William Smith, George Gale, Daniel Carroll, Joshua Seney,
Michael Jenifer Stone, Benjamin Contee.

_Virginia._--Alexander White, James Madison, jr., John Page, Richard
Bland Lee, Samuel Griffin, Andrew Moore, Josiah Parker, Theodorick
Bland,[12] Isaac Coles, John Brown.

_South Carolina._--Thomas Tudor Tucker, Edanus Burke, Daniel Huger,
William Smith, Thomas Sumter.

_Georgia._--Abraham Baldwin, James Jackson, George Mathews.

_North Carolina._[13]--John Steele, Timothy Bloodworth, Hugh Williamson,
John Baptist Ashe, John Sevier.

_Rhode Island._[14]--Benjamin Bourn.




FIRST CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


WEDNESDAY, March 4, 1789.

This being the day fixed for the meeting of the new Congress, the
following members of the House of Representatives appeared and took
their seats, viz:[15]

_From Massachusetts_, GEORGE THATCHER, FISHER AMES, GEORGE LEONARD, and
ELBRIDGE GERRY.

_From Connecticut_, BENJAMIN HUNTINGTON, JONATHAN TRUMBULL, and JEREMIAH
WADSWORTH.

_From Pennsylvania_, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG, THOMAS HARTLEY,
PETER MUHLENBERG, and DANIEL HEISTER.

_From Virginia_, ALEXANDER WHITE.

_From South Carolina_, THOMAS TUDOR TUCKER.

A quorum of the members not being present, the House adjourned until
to-morrow at eleven o'clock.


THURSDAY, March 5.

Several other members attended, viz: from New Hampshire, NICHOLAS
GILMAN; from Massachusetts, BENJAMIN GOODHUE; from Connecticut, ROGER
SHERMAN and JONATHAN STURGES; and from Pennsylvania, HENRY WYNKOOP; and
no other members arriving, a quorum not being present, the House
adjourned, from day to day, until the 14th instant.


SATURDAY, March 14.

The following members took their seats, to wit: JAMES MADISON, junior,
JOHN PAGE, and RICHARD BLAND LEE, from Virginia.

A quorum not being yet present, the House adjourned, from day to day,
until the 17th instant.


TUESDAY, March 17.

SAMUEL GRIFFIN, from Virginia, took his seat.


WEDNESDAY, March 18.

ANDREW MOORE, from Virginia, took his seat.

No other member appearing, the House adjourned, from day to day, until
the 23d instant.


MONDAY, March 23.

The following members appeared, to wit:--

From New Jersey, ELIAS BOUDINOT; and from Maryland, WILLIAM SMITH.

No additional member appeared on the 24th.


WEDNESDAY, March 25.

JONATHAN PARKER, from Virginia, appeared and took his seat.

No additional member arrived until the 30th instant.


MONDAY, March 30.

GEORGE GALE, from Maryland, and THEODORICK BLAND, from Virginia,
appeared and took their seats.

No additional member on the 31st instant.


WEDNESDAY, April 1.

Two other members appeared, to wit: JAMES SCHUREMAN, from New Jersey,
and THOMAS SCOTT, from Pennsylvania, who, forming a quorum of the whole
body, it was, on motion,

      _Resolved_, That this House will proceed to the choice of a
      Speaker by ballot.

The House accordingly proceeded to ballot for a Speaker, when it was
found that a majority of the votes were in favor of FREDERICK AUGUSTUS
MUHLENBERG, one of the Representatives from Pennsylvania. Whereupon Mr.
MUHLENBERG was conducted to the chair, from whence he made his
acknowledgments to the House for so distinguished an honor.

The House then proceeded in the same manner to the appointment of a
Clerk, when it was found that Mr. JOHN BECKLEY was elected.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That the members do severally deliver in their credentials at
the Clerk's table.


THURSDAY, April 2.

LAMBERT CADWALADER, from New Jersey, appeared and took his seat.


FRIDAY, April 3.

GEORGE CLYMER, from Pennsylvania, appeared and took his seat.


SATURDAY, April 4.

GEORGE PARTRIDGE, from Massachusetts, appeared and took his seat.

The House proceeded to the election of a doorkeeper, and assistant
doorkeeper; when Gifford Dudley was chosen to the former, and Thomas
Claxton to the latter office.


MONDAY, April 6.

DANIEL CARROLL, from Maryland, appeared and took his seat.

_Ordered_, That leave be given to bring in a bill to regulate the taking
the oath or affirmation prescribed by the sixth article of the
Constitution; and that Messrs. WHITE, MADISON, TRUMBULL, GILMAN, and
CADWALADER, do prepare and bring in the same.

On motion,

      _Resolved_, That the form of the oath to be taken by the
      members of this House, as required by the third clause of
      the sixth article of the Constitution of Government of the
      United States, be as followeth, to wit: "I, A B, a
      Representative of the United States in the Congress
      thereof, do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be)
      in the presence of Almighty GOD, that I will support the
      Constitution of the United States. So help me God."

A message from the Senate, by Mr. ELLSWORTH.

      Mr. SPEAKER: I am charged by the Senate to inform this
      House, that a quorum of the Senate is now formed; that a
      President is elected for the sole purpose of opening the
      certificates and counting the votes of the electors of the
      several States, in the choice of a President and Vice
      President of the United States; and that the Senate is now
      ready in the Senate Chamber, to proceed, in presence of
      this House, to discharge that duty. I have it also in
      further charge to inform this House that the Senate has
      appointed one of its members to sit at the Clerk's table to
      make a list of the votes as they shall be declared,
      submitting it to the wisdom of this House to appoint one or
      more of its members for the like purpose.

On motion,

      _Resolved_, That Mr. Speaker, attended by the House, do now
      withdraw to the Senate Chamber, for the purpose expressed
      in the message from the Senate; and that Mr. PARKER and Mr.
      HEISTER be appointed on the part of this House, to sit at
      the Clerk's table with the member of the Senate, and make a
      list; of the votes, as the same shall be declared.

Mr. Speaker accordingly left the chair, and attended by the House,
withdrew to the Senate Chamber, and after some time returned to the
House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the chair.

Mr. PARKER and Mr. HEISTER then delivered in at the Clerk's table a list
of the votes of the electors of the several States in the choice of a
President and Vice President of the United States, as the same were
declared by the President of the Senate, in the presence of the Senate
and of this House, which was ordered to be entered on the Journal.[16]


WEDNESDAY, April 8.

Two other members, to wit: JNO. LAWRENCE, from New York, and THOMAS
FITZSIMONS, from Pennsylvania, appeared and took their seats.


_Duties on Imports._

On motion, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair.

Mr. MADISON.--I take the liberty, Mr. Chairman, at this early stage of
the business, to introduce to the committee a subject, which appears to
me to be of the greatest magnitude; a subject, sir, that requires our
first attention, and our united exertions.

No gentleman here can be unacquainted with the numerous claims upon our
justice; nor with the impotency which prevented the late Congress of the
United States from carrying into effect the dictates of gratitude and
policy.

The union, by the establishment of a more effective government, having
recovered from the state of imbecility that heretofore prevented a
performance of its duty, ought, in its first act, to revive those
principles of honor and honesty that have too long lain dormant.

The deficiency in our Treasury has been too notorious to make it
necessary for me to animadvert upon that subject. Let us content
ourselves with endeavoring to remedy the evil. To do this a national
revenue must be obtained; but the system must be such a one, that, while
it secures the object of revenue, it shall not be oppressive to our
constituents. Happy it is for us that such a system is within our power;
for I apprehend that both these objects may be obtained from an impost
on articles imported into the United States.

In pursuing this measure, I know that two points occur for our
consideration. The first respects the general regulation of commerce;
which, in my opinion, ought to be as free as the policy of nations will
admit. The second relates to revenue alone; and this is the point I mean
more particularly to bring into the view of the committee.

Not being at present possessed of sufficient materials for fully
elucidating these points, and our situation admitting of no delay, I
shall propose such articles of regulations only as are likely to
occasion the least difficulty.

The propositions made on this subject by Congress in 1783, having
received, generally, the approbation of the several States of the Union,
in some form or other, seem well calculated to become the basis of the
temporary system, which I wish the committee to adopt.[17] I am well
aware that the changes which have taken place in many of the States, and
in our public circumstances, since that period, will require, in some
degree, a deviation from the scale of duties then affixed: nevertheless,
for the sake of that expedition which is necessary, in order to embrace
the spring importations, I should recommend a _general_ adherence to the
plan.

This, sir, with the addition of a clause or two on the subject of
tonnage, I will now read, and, with leave, submit it to the committee,
hoping it may meet their approbation, as an expedient rendered eligible
by the urgent occasion there is for the speedy supplies of the federal
treasury, and a speedy rescue of our trade from its present anarchy.

      _Resolved_, As the opinion of this committee, that the
      following duties ought to be levied on goods, wares, and
      merchandise, imported into the United States, viz:

On rum, per gallon, ---- of a dollar; on all other spirituous liquors
----; on molasses ----; on Madeira wine ----; on all other wines ----;
on common bohea teas per lb. ----; on all other teas ----; on pepper
----; on brown sugar ----; on loaf sugar ----; on all other sugars ----;
on cocoa and coffee ----; on all other articles ---- per cent. on their
value at the time and place of importation.

That there ought, moreover, to be levied on all vessels in which goods,
wares, or merchandises shall be imported, the duties following, viz: On
all vessels built within the United States, and belonging wholly to
citizens thereof, at the rate of ---- per ton.

On all vessels belonging wholly to the subjects of Powers with whom the
United States have formed treaties, or partly to the subjects of such
Powers, and partly to citizens of the said States, at the rate of ----.

On all vessels belonging wholly or in part to the subjects of other
Powers, at the rate of ----.[18]

Mr. BOUDINOT.--The necessity of adopting some measure, like the one
proposed by the honorable gentleman from Virginia, is too apparent to
need any argument in its support. The plan which he has submitted to the
committee appears to be simple and sufficiently complete for the present
purpose; I shall, therefore, for my own part, be content with it, and
shall move you, sir, that the blanks be filled up in the manner they
were recommended to be charged by Congress in 1783. My reason for this
is, that those sums have been approved by the Legislatures of every
State represented on this floor, and of consequence must have been
agreeable to the sense of our constituents at that time; and, I believe,
nothing since has intervened to give us reason to believe they have made
an alteration in their sentiments.

Mr. WHITE.--I wish filling up the blanks may be deferred until the
business is more matured; nor will this be attended with a loss of time,
because the forms necessary to complete a bill will require so much as
to give gentlemen leisure to consider the proper quantum of impost to be
laid, as well on the enumerated articles as on the common mass of
merchandise rated _ad valorem_; for, as was hinted by my colleague,
something may have occurred to render an alteration in the sums
recommended in 1783 in some degree necessary; and if so, time will be
given to consider the subject with more attention in the progress of the
bill, and no unnecessary delay can arise; wherefore, I move you, sir,
that the committee now rise, report progress, and ask leave to sit
again.

Mr. MADISON.--I do not consider it at this moment necessary to fill up
the blanks, nor had I it in contemplation at the time I offered the
propositions. I supposed that most of the gentlemen would wish time to
think upon the principles generally, and upon the articles particularly;
while others, who, from their situation and advantages in life, are more
conversant on this subject, may be induced to turn their particular
attention to a subject they are well able to do justice to, and to
assist the committee with their knowledge and information; unless such
gentlemen are now prepared and disposed to proceed in filling up the
blanks, I shall second the motion for the committee's rising.


THURSDAY, April 9.

EGBERT BENSON, from New York, and ISAAC COLES, from Virginia, appeared
and took their seats.


_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The subject of the proposition laid before the committee
by the honorable gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. MADISON,) will now, I
presume, Mr. Chairman, recur for our deliberation. I imagine it to be of
considerable importance, not only to the United States, but to every
individual of the Union. The object of the revenue alone would place it
in this situation, and in this light I mean now to consider it. If I am
not mistaken, the honorable mover of the plan viewed it as a temporary
system, particularly calculated to embrace the spring importations;
therefore, in order to discover whether the mode laid before you is well
calculated to answer this end, it will be proper to consider its
operation. The plan consists of certain distinct propositions; one part
is intended to lay a specific sum on enumerated articles, the other a
certain per cent. _ad valorem_: perhaps simplifying the system may be
productive of happy consequences, and it strikes me that confusion and
perplexity will be best avoided by such a measure; hence, it may be
proper to lay a duty at a certain rate per cent. on the value of all
articles, without attempting an enumeration of any; because, if we
attempt to specify every article, it will expose us to a question which
must require more time than can be spared, to obtain the object that
appears to be in the view of the committee. A question, I say, sir, will
arise, whether the enumeration embraces every article that will bear a
duty, and whether the duty to be affixed is the proper sum the article
is able to bear. On this head, sir, I believe that the committee have
not materials sufficient to form even the basis of the system, beside
being wholly incompetent to determine the rate most advantageous to the
article of revenue, and most agreeable to the interest and convenience
of our constituents. Knowledge on these points can only be obtained by
experience; but hitherto we have had none, at least of a general nature.
The partial regulations made by the States, throw but little light on
the subject, and its magnitude ought to induce us to use the greatest
degree of caution.

A system of the nature which I hinted at, will, in my opinion, be not
only less complex and difficult in its formation, but likewise easier
and more certain in its operation; because the more simple a plan of
revenue is, the easier it becomes understood and executed: and it is,
sir, an earnest wish of mine, that all our acts should partake of this
nature. Moreover, by adopting the plan I have mentioned, you will
embrace the spring importation and give time for digesting and maturing
one upon more perfect principles; and, as the proposed system is
intended to be but a temporary one, _that_ I esteem to be best which
requires the least time to form it.

With great deference I have submitted these sentiments to the committee,
as what occurred to me to be the better plan of the two; though, I must
own, it is a subject on which I am not so fully informed as I wish to
be, and therefore hope the indulgence of the committee in considering
it.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--I observe, Mr. Chairman, by what the gentlemen have
said, who have spoken on the subject before you, that the proposed plan
of revenue is viewed by them as a temporary system, to be continued only
until proper materials are brought forward and arranged in more perfect
form. I confess, sir, that I carry my views on this subject much
further; that I earnestly wish such a one which, in its operation, will
be some way adequate to our present situation, as it respects our
agriculture, our manufactures, and our commerce.

An honorable gentleman (Mr. LAWRENCE) has expressed an opinion that an
enumeration of articles will operate to confuse the business. So far am
I from seeing it in this point of view, that, on the contrary, I
conceive it will tend to facilitate it. Does not every gentleman
discover that, when a particular article is offered to the consideration
of the committee, he will be better able to give his opinion upon it
than on an aggregate question? because the partial and convenient impost
laid on such article by individual States is more or less known to every
member in the committee. It is also well known that the amount of such
revenue is more accurately calculated and better to be relied on,
because of the certainty of collection, less being left to the officers
employed in bringing it forward to the public treasury. It being my
opinion that an enumeration of articles will tend to clear away
difficulties, I wish as many to be selected as possible; for this reason
I have prepared myself with an additional number, which I wish subjoined
to those already mentioned in the motion on your table; among these are
some calculated to encourage the productions of our country, and protect
our infant manufactures; besides others tending to operate as sumptuary
restrictions upon articles which are often termed those of luxury. The
amendment I mean to offer is in these words: I shall read it in my
place, and, if I am seconded, hand it to you for the consideration of
the committee.

      _Resolved_, As the opinion of this committee, that the
      following duties ought to be laid on goods, wares, and
      merchandise imported into the United States, to wit:

[The articles enumerated for duty were beer, ale, and porter; beef,
pork, butter, candles, cheese, soap, cider, boots, steel, cables,
cordage, twine or pack thread, malt, nails, spikes, tacks, or brads;
salt, tobacco, snuff, blank books, writing, printing, and wrapping
paper; pasteboard, cabinet ware; buttons, saddles, gloves, hats,
millinery, castings of iron, slit, or rolled iron; leather, shoes,
slippers, and golo shoes; coach, chariot, and other four wheel
carriages; chaise, solo, or other two wheel carriages; nutmegs,
cinnamon, cloves, raisins, figs, currants, almonds.]

This motion was seconded by Mr. SCHUREMAN.

Mr. WHITE.--I shall not pretend to say that there ought not to be
specific duties laid upon every one of the articles enumerated in the
amendment just offered; but I am inclined to think, that entering so
minutely into the detail, will consume too much of our time, and thereby
lose us a greater sum than the additional impost on the last-mentioned
articles will bring in; because there may be doubts whether many of them
are capable of bearing an increased duty; but this, sir, is not the case
with those mentioned in the motion of my colleague: for I believe it
will be readily admitted on all sides, that such articles as rum, wines,
and sugar, have the capacity of bearing an additional duty besides a per
cent. _ad valorem_. His system appears to be simple, and its principles
I conceive, are such as gentlemen are agreed upon, consequently a bill
founded thereupon would pass this House in a few days; the operation of
the law would commence early, and the treasury be furnished with money
to answer the demands upon it. This law would continue until mature
deliberation, ample discussion, and full information, enabled us to
complete a perfect system of revenue: for, in order to charge specified
articles of manufacture, so as to encourage our domestic ones, it will
be necessary to examine the present state of each throughout the Union.
This will certainly be a work of labor and time, and will perhaps
require more of each than the committee have now in their power. Let us,
therefore, act upon the principles which are admitted, and take in the
most material and productive articles, leaving to a period of more
leisure and information a plan to embrace the whole.

Mr. TUCKER.--In common with the other gentlemen on this floor, I
consider the subject which engages our present deliberations as of very
great importance as it relates to our agriculture, manufactures, and
commerce; I also consider it of consequence that we should give full
satisfaction to our constituents by our decision, be that whatever it
may; and I think this most likely to be effected by establishing a
permanent regulation, although in the interim, a temporary system may be
expedient.

I have no objection, sir, to go so far into the matter as to pass a law
to collect an impost _ad valorem_, whilst it is understood to be but a
temporary system; and likewise to lay a duty on such enumerated articles
of importation as have been heretofore considered as proper ones by the
Congress of 1783. So far, sir, the matter may be plain to us, and we run
no hazard of doing any thing which may give dissatisfaction to any State
in the Union. The duties proposed by the Congress of 1783 were, I
believe, five per cent. on the value of all goods imported, and an
additional duty on a few enumerated articles.[19] This recommendation of
Congress has been so universally received by the several States, that I
think we run no risk of giving umbrage to any by adopting the plan; but
the other articles which have just been offered, are, I apprehend, to
many of us so novel, and, at the same time, so important, as to make it
hard to determine the propriety of taxing them in a few hours, or even
in a few days.

In order to preserve the peace and tranquillity of the Union, it will
become necessary that mutual deference and accommodation should take
place on subjects so important as the one I have first touched upon.
And, in order that this may take place, it is proper that gentlemen
deliver their sentiments with freedom and candor. I have done this in a
manner which I conceived it my duty to do, and shall just repeat that I
wish to confine the question to that part of the motion made by the
honorable gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. MADISON,) which respects laying
a general impost on the value of all goods imported, and the small
enumeration which precedes it: if it is in contemplation to do
otherwise, I shall be under the necessity of moving for a division of
the question. If I should lose this, and a high tonnage duty be insisted
on, I shall be obliged to vote against the measure altogether; when, if
the business is conducted on principles of moderation, I shall give my
vote for it to a certain degree.

Mr. HARTLEY.--If we consult the history of the ancient world, we shall
see that they have thought proper, for a long time past, to give great
encouragement to the establishment of manufactures, by laying such
partial duties on the importation of foreign goods, as to give the home
manufactures a considerable advantage in the price when brought to
market. It is also well known to this committee, that there are many
articles that will bear a higher duty than others, which are to remain
in the common mass, and be taxed with a certain impost _ad valorem_.
From this view of the subject I think it both politic and just that the
fostering hand of the General Government should extend to all those
manufactures which will tend to national utility. I am therefore sorry
that gentlemen seem to fix their mind to so early a period as 1783; for
we very well know our circumstances are much changed since that time: we
had then but few manufactures among us, and the vast quantities of goods
that flowed in upon us from Europe, at the conclusion of the war,
rendered those few almost useless; since then we have been forced by
necessity, and various other causes, to increase our domestic
manufactures to such a degree as to be able to furnish some in
sufficient quantity to answer the consumption of the whole Union, while
others are daily growing into importance. Our stock of materials is, in
many instances, equal to the greatest demand, and our artisans
sufficient to work them up even for exportation. In these cases, I take
it to be the policy of every enlightened nation to give their
manufactures that degree of encouragement necessary to perfect them,
without oppressing the other parts of the community; and under this
encouragement, the industry of the manufacturer will be employed to add
to the wealth of the nation.

Mr. MADISON.--From what has been suggested by the gentlemen that have
spoken on the subject before us, I am led to apprehend we shall be under
the necessity of travelling further into an investigation of principles
than what I supposed would be necessary, or had in contemplation when I
offered the propositions before you.

I am sensible that there is great weight in the observation that fell
from the honorable gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. TUCKER,) that it
will be necessary, on the one hand, to weigh and regard the sentiments
of the gentlemen from the different parts of the United States; but, on
the other hand, we must limit our consideration on this head, and,
notwithstanding all the deference and respect we pay to those
sentiments, we must consider the general interest of the Union; for this
is as much every gentleman's duty to consider as is the local or State
interest--and any system of impost that this committee may adopt must be
founded on the principles of mutual concession.

Gentlemen will be pleased to recollect, that those parts of the Union
which contribute more under one system than the other, are also those
parts more thinly planted, and consequently stand most in need of
national protection; therefore they will have less reason to complain of
unequal burthens.

There is another consideration; the States that are most advanced in
population, and ripe for manufactures, ought to have their particular
interests attended to in some degree. While these States retained the
power of making regulations of trade, they had the power to protect and
cherish such institutions; by adopting the present constitution, they
have thrown the exercise of this power into other hands: they must have
done this with an expectation that those interests would not be
neglected here.

In my opinion, it would be proper also for gentlemen to consider the
means of encouraging the great staple of America, I mean agriculture;
which I think may justly be styled the staple of the United States, from
the spontaneous productions which nature furnishes, and the manifest
advantage it has over every other object of emolument in this country.
If we compare the cheapness of our land with that of other nations, we
see so decided an advantage in that cheapness, as to have full
confidence of being unrivalled. With respect to the object of
manufactures, other countries may and do rival us; but we may be said to
have a monopoly in agriculture; the possession of the soil, and the
lowness of its price, give us as much a monopoly in this case, as any
nation or other parts of the world have in the monopoly of any article
whatever; but, with this advantage to us, that it cannot be shared nor
injured by rivalship.

If my general principle is a good one, that commerce ought to be free,
and labor and industry left at large to find its proper object, the only
thing which remains will be to discover the exceptions that do not come
within the rule I have laid down. I agree with the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, that there are exceptions, important in themselves, and
which claim the particular attention of the committee. Although the
freedom of commerce would be advantageous to the world, yet, in some
particulars, one nation might suffer to benefit others, and this ought
to be for the general good of society.

The next exception that occurs, is one on which great stress is laid by
some well informed men, and this with great plausibility. That each
nation should have within itself the means of defence, independent of
foreign supplies: that in whatever relates to the operations of war, no
State ought to depend upon a precarious supply from any part of the
world. There may be some truth in this remark, and therefore it is
proper for legislative attention. I am, though, well persuaded that the
reasoning on this subject has been carried too far. The difficulties we
experienced a few years ago, of obtaining military supplies, ought not
to furnish too much in favor of an establishment which would be
difficult and expensive; because our national character is now
established and recognized throughout the world, and the laws of war
favor national exertion more than intestine commotion, so that there is
good reason to believe that when it becomes necessary, we may obtain
supplies from abroad as readily as any other nation whatsoever. I have
mentioned this, because I think I see something among the enumerated
articles that seems to favor such a policy.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I believe that it will not be disputed, that the best and
easiest way of supplying the public wants, is by raising a revenue on
the importation of goods by way of impost, though the manner in which it
should be done, I confess, is a subject on which I stand greatly in need
of information. I should, therefore, most cordially comply with the
request of the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. TUCKER,) in order to
obtain time for consideration, and to wait the arrival of the absent
gentlemen, in order that we may have that assistance which is to be
derived from them. Did I consider the question on the present motion
final, I should be at a loss how to act; but this, I take it, is not the
case. I presume it is intended by the mover only to lay his motion on
the table, with the original propositions open for debate and
consideration, till the committee are possessed of sufficient
information to proceed. I also confess, that, in general, I am in favor
of specific duties on enumerated articles. I shall therefore vote for
the amendment; but, in doing this, I shall not consider myself as bound
to support the whole, nor, indeed, any particular article which, upon
due consideration, I may deem either impolitic or unjust; for I cannot
conceive, that, by adopting the amendment, we tie up our hands, or
prevent future discussion. No, sir, that is not the case; and as I trust
we all have the same object in view, namely, the public good of the
United States, so I hope that a willing ear will be lent to every
proposition likely to promote this end; nor do I doubt but gentlemen are
mutually inclined to sacrifice local advantages for the accomplishment
of this great purpose.

On motion of Mr. LEE, the committee rose and reported progress, and the
House adjourned.


SATURDAY, April 11.

Mr. CLYMER submitted it to the consideration of the committee, how far
it was best to bring propositions forward in this way. Not that he
objected to this mode of encouraging manufactures and obtaining revenue,
by combining the two objects in one bill. He was satisfied that a
political necessity existed for both the one and the other, and it would
not be amiss to do it in this way, but perhaps the business would be
more speedily accomplished by entering upon it systematically.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--It appears to me that this business of raising revenue
points out two questions, of great importance, demanding much
information. The first is, what articles are proper objects of taxation,
and the probable amount of revenue from each. The second is, the proper
mode of collecting the money arising from this fund, when the object and
its amount are ascertained. There are three sources from which we may
gain information on the first question, namely, from the revenue laws of
the different States, for I believe a partial revenue has been raised
almost in every State by an impost. The second source of information,
and a very natural one, is the great body of merchants spread throughout
the United States; this is a very respectable and well-informed body of
our fellow-citizens, and great deference ought to be paid to their
communications--they are in a peculiar situation under the present
constitution, to which they are generally esteemed sincere friends--they
are also more immediately interested in the event of the proposed
measure, than any other class of men. To this Government they look for
protection and support, and for such regulations as are beneficial to
commerce; for these reasons, I think they deserve our confidence, and we
ought to obtain from them such information as will enable the Congress
to proceed to a general permanent system on more solid principles.

There are gentlemen on this floor well calculated to represent the
mercantile interests of this country, and in whose integrity and
abilities I have the highest confidence; but it is the duty of the
members of this body to see that the principles upon which we act, are
those calculated to promote the general good, and not confined to the
local interests of a few individuals, or even individual States, so that
they will decline trusting alone to this species of information, when
another is attainable.

Mr. FITZSIMONS thought it best to make the system as perfect as possible
before the committee determined its duration.

Mr. MADISON, that the subject which was under consideration divided
itself, as had been observed by the honorable gentlemen from Jersey,
into two parts; and hence he concluded that they might very properly be
provided for by two separate bills; and while the Committee of the Whole
are selecting articles and taxing them, another committee can be
employed in devising the mode of collection. This method he thought more
likely to reconcile the opinions of the committee than any he had heard
suggested.

Mr. SHERMAN gave it as his opinion, that in fixing the duties on
particular articles, if they could not ascertain the exact quantum, it
would be better to run the risk of erring in setting low duties than
high ones, because it was less injurious to commerce to raise them than
to lower them; but nevertheless, he was for laying on duties which some
gentlemen might think high, as he thought it better to derive revenue
from impost than from direct taxation, or any other method in their
power. He moved that the article of rum should be charged with fifteen
cents per gallon--he used the term cents because it was a denomination
of national coin, fixed by the late Congress, ten of which make a _dime_
and ten _dimes_ one dollar.

Mr. SMITH was apprehensive fifteen cents would be too high, and
therefore moved ten cents, which he thought would raise more revenue
than the other.

Mr. MADISON advised and moved for the rising of the committee, in order
to give gentlemen time to make up their minds respecting the quantum of
impost to be laid on each article.


MONDAY, April 13.

WILLIAM FLOYD, from New York; THOMAS SINNICKSON, from New Jersey; JOSHUA
SENEY, from Maryland; EDANUS BURKE, DANIEL HUGER, and WILLIAM SMITH,
from South Carolina, appeared and took their seats.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That Mr. BENSON, Mr. PETER MUHLENBERG, and Mr. GRIFFIN, be a
committee to consider of and report to the House respecting the
ceremonial of receiving the President, and that they be authorized to
confer with a committee of the Senate for the purpose.


TUESDAY, April 14.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union; Mr. PAGE in the chair.

Mr. BLAND, from Virginia, thought the committee not prepared to enter on
the business of impost in the accurate manner which the form of the
propositions seemed to imply. No gentleman on the floor could be more
desirous than he was to go into the measure of a permanent system; but
he could not agree to proceed at this time, for want of information.
When he looked at the list of articles, he saw some calculated to give
encouragement to home manufactures. This might be in some degree proper;
but it was a well-known fact, that the manufacturing arts in America
were only in their infancy, and far from being able to answer the
demands of the country; then certainly you lay a tax upon the whole
community, in order to put the money in the pockets of a few, whenever
you burthen the importation with a heavy impost.

Mr. SCOTT.--The subject before us naturally divides itself into two
heads. First, what article shall be the subject of a particular tax, and
what shall remain in the common mass liable to an impost _ad valorem_?
The second, what the sum is that is proper for the article we select?
For both these points will be necessary, because it can hardly be
supposed that all articles can be enumerated, while some certainly
ought. This being the case, it leads us to inquire what rule or
principle shall be laid down in order to make a proper discrimination;
for surely some reason should be assigned for this distinction. I
presume the particular article which is to be subjected to an
extraordinary duty must either come at so cheap a rate, according to its
intrinsic value, as to bear a greater impost without being unreasonably
expensive, or it must be one which we do not stand in need of at all,
and only used for the purposes of luxury. If an article does not come
within one of these descriptions, I see no reason why it should be taxed
in an extraordinary manner.

On motion of Mr. GALE, the word _rum_ was changed into distilled spirits
of Jamaica proof.

Mr. LAWRENCE proposed to lay twelve cents on this article, saying, I
believe, Mr. Chairman, it will be necessary to consider, when we are
about to lay a duty on any article, how far it is likely to be
collected, especially if our main object is to obtain revenue by our
impost. I trust it does not require much illustration to prove to the
satisfaction of the committee, that if you lay your duties too high, it
will be a temptation to smuggling; for, in the proportion which that sum
bears to the value of the article, will be the risk run in every attempt
to introduce it in a clandestine manner, and, if this temptation is made
too strong, the article will furnish no revenue. I believe, if the
committee shall impose a duty of fifteen cents, as proposed by the
gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. SHERMAN,) it will be so strong a
temptation for smuggling, that we shall lose our revenue altogether, or
be compelled to use a mode of collection probably different from what we
have been accustomed to--a mode so expensive as to absorb the whole
produce of the tax.

I wish to lay as large a sum on this article as good policy may deem
expedient; it is an article of great consumption, and though it cannot
be reckoned a necessary of life, yet it is in such general use, that it
may be expected to pay a very considerable sum into your treasury, when
others may not with so much certainty be relied upon. But, when we
consider the relative proportion of the first cost of it, and the
fifteen cents duty, we shall find it about one third. This, I cannot
help thinking, is too high, as the risk of a total loss may be ventured
in order to save so great a sum; it is surely a great temptation, and I
dread its consequences on more accounts than one.

Mr. MADISON.--I would tax this article with as high a duty as can be
collected, and I am sure, if we judge from what we have heard and seen
in the several parts of the Union, that it is the sense of the people of
America that this article should have a duty imposed upon it weighty
indeed. The duty proposed by the gentleman from New York (Mr. LAWRENCE)
very little exceeds what is laid in this State, and very little what is
laid in some other States, while some have thought it expedient to
impose an excise superior. The question then is, whether the highest sum
can be collected? I am of opinion that higher duties may generally be
collected under the government of the Union than could be under that of
the particular States, because it has been the policy of some, not only
to decline going hand in hand together, but actually to oppose
regulations made in a neighboring State. Being persuaded, likewise, that
the highest sum will not exceed the power of the law to enforce the
collection of, I shall vote for it.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I am in favor of taxing this article as high as there is
a probability of collecting the duty. I think our doing so will answer
two or three good purposes. The present object of the committee is to
raise a revenue, and no article on the list before you is more likely to
be productive than this one; but a high duty may also discourage the use
of ardent spirits; if not, it may discourage the West Indies from
turning their molasses into rum. This being the case, they have no other
market for molasses than this country, and our own distilleries, with
the advantages arising therefrom, will be able to rival them in the
manufacture of that article; so far it may tend to the benefit of the
country. I conceive it might be proper, on these accounts, to lay a much
higher duty than has been proposed, were it not for the considerations
mentioned by the gentleman from New York, that we run a risk of losing
all by grasping at too much.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The sum proposed is higher than the duty collected in
this State, which is about eight cents; I fear, therefore, that it
cannot be collected. If we are to reason and act as moralists on this
point, I am certain it is the wish of every member to prevent the use of
ardent spirits altogether, for their influence on the morals of the
people is of the most pernicious kind. Nor does the mischief terminate
here, as I apprehend it is equally destructive to the health; but we are
not to deliberate and determine on this subject as moralists, but as
politicians, and endeavor to draw (if I may use the expression) from the
vices of mankind, that revenue which our citizens must, in one form or
other, contribute. The question is, what shall be the duty on any
particular article? To accomplish this purpose, we must determine by the
circumstances of that article. Now, if we lay a high duty on Jamaica
rum, it is supposed it will prevent the consumption; but then the
purpose we have in view is frustrated, either because we cannot collect
the tax, or the object of it is no longer imported. The consequence in
this latter case would be, that the morals of our citizens are not
impaired; yet it does not appear to me that this consequence would
certainly flow from a system of high duties. I rather fear it would lead
no further than to set men on schemes to evade the duty; and none of us
are ignorant of the ingenuity and invention which can be exercised, when
interest prompts mankind to an evasion of the law. We know the situation
of the different States; the coast disposed by its prodigious extent to
favor every means of illicit trade. A cargo of rum could be landed in
Jersey, and the whole, reshipped in small vessels, might soon be brought
into this city. If this should be the effect of our law, we have no
other way to correct the operation, but by adopting a mode of collection
odious to all, on account of the numerous train of officers it would
require in its execution. But there would also be a danger of vessels
running into creeks and small inlets, for the purpose of landing their
cargoes, as well as on the sea-shore. Hence a necessity would arise of
employing a number of vessels to check and correct such abuses, and the
probable event would be, that all the impost collected would go to
defray the expense of getting it into the treasury.

The committee now agreed to tax ardent spirits, of Jamaica proof,
fifteen cents; and all other spirituous liquors twelve cents.

On filling up the blank on molasses:

Mr. MADISON.--It is agreed, I presume, that spirits of every kind are
proper objects of taxation, but whether we shall tax spirits in the case
before us, or whether we shall tax the article from which it comes, is a
question worthy of the consideration of the committee for several
reasons. I believe it will be best to lay our hands on the duty, by
charging this article on its importation, to avoid a more disagreeable
measure. I would, therefore, lay such a duty on molasses, as is
proportioned to what we have affixed upon rum, making an allowance in
favor of our own manufacture. I think eight cents per gallon will allow
a sufficient advantage to them, but of this I am not positive, and,
therefore, shall not pertinaciously adhere to that sum, if it be
thought too high; but I presume I am right in the principle upon which I
contend, that we ought to collect the duty on the importation of
molasses, in preference to any other way.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--I think the duty on this article depends, in a great
measure, upon what has been already agreed to. If the tax of West India
and country rum is not well proportioned, it may be destructive of the
end we have in contemplation. If, agreeably to the idea of the gentleman
from New York, we affix a low duty, a great deal more rum will, in all
probability, be distilled and used, than heretofore; of course, it will
effectually rival the Jamaica rum, and the Union will lose the revenue
which we calculate upon. Eight cents, I apprehend, is as well
proportioned to the other taxes as can be devised.

Mr. GOODHUE considered molasses as a raw material, essentially requisite
for the well-being of a very extensive and valuable manufacture. It
ought likewise to be considered (as was truly stated) a necessary of
life. In the Eastern States it entered into the diet of the poorer
classes of people, who were, from the decay of trade and other
adventitious circumstances, totally unable to sustain such a weight as a
tax of eight cents would be upon them. Moreover, the tax was upon
particular States as well as individuals, for it was a fact of public
notoriety, that Massachusetts imported more molasses than all the other
States together. She imports from 30,000 to 40,000 hogsheads annually.
He would make one observation more. It had been the policy of Great
Britain, as he well remembered, to encumber and depress the distillation
of molasses. To do this, at one time they laid a duty of three pence
sterling per gallon. It was conceived to be an oppressive measure, but
it had little other effect than to cause heart-burnings and enmity. It
produced no revenue, and the Parliament were forced to reduce the duty
to a penny. From experience, therefore, as well as from the arguments
before urged, he was inclined to believe that the committee would be
satisfied with fixing a lower sum. He could not consent to allow more
than two cents.

Mr. THATCHER.--It appears to me, that for the want of a certain and
fixed principle to act upon, there is a great danger of making some
improper establishments. It is for this reason that I wish not to hurry
on the business with so much precipitation. Did gentlemen consider, when
they agreed to a high duty on ardent spirits, that it would be a pretext
for increasing the duties on a necessary of life. I presume a principal
reason why a high tax on spirits was admitted, was in order to
discourage the use of it among ourselves. If this was the intention of
the committee, I have no objection to the burthen; but, even here, I
fear difficulties will arise. Did we judiciously examine whether the
spirit of the law accords with the habits and manners of the people? and
did we assure ourselves of the full execution of the law? If we did
not, the act becomes impolitic, because a law which cannot be executed
tends to make the Government less respectable.

Mr. AMES.--I have not had the advantage of hearing all the arguments in
support of the eight cents proposed; but those I have heard I am not
satisfied with. The principles on which this tax is founded, I
understand to be this: that it is an article of luxury, and of pretty
general consumption, so that the duty is expected to fall equally upon
all; but that it will not operate in this manner, I think is easily
demonstrable. Can a duty of fifty per cent. _ad valorem_, paid, as it
were, in an exclusive manner, by the State of Massachusetts, be equal?
No, sir. But taking it as a part of the general system, can it be equal
unless a proportionable duty, equal to fifty per cent., is laid upon
articles consumed in other parts of the Union? No, sir; and is it in the
contemplation of gentlemen to lay duties so high as to produce this
equality? I trust it is not; because such duties could never be
collected. Is not, therefore, eight cents disproportioned to the rates
fixed, or intended to be imposed on other articles? I think it is; and,
if to these considerations we add what has been said before, relative to
its being a raw material important to a considerable manufacture, we
cannot hesitate to reject it.

However gentlemen may think the use of this article dangerous to the
health and morals of our fellow-citizens--I would also beg them to
consider, that it is no more so than every other kind of spirituous
liquors; that it will grow into an article for exportation; and although
I admit we could export it even encumbered with the duty proposed, yet
by it we run the risk of having the manufacture totally ruined, for it
can hardly now stand a competition at home with the West India rum, much
less can it do so abroad. If the manufacturers of country rum are to be
devoted to certain ruin, to mend the morals of others, let them be
admonished that they prepare themselves for the event: but in the way we
are about to take, destruction comes on so sudden, they have not time to
seek refuge in any other employment whatsoever. If their situation will
not operate to restrain the hand of iron policy, consider how
immediately they are connected with the most essential interests of the
Union, and then let me ask if it is wise, if it is reconcilable to
national prudence, to take measures subversive of your very existence?
For I do contend, that the very existence of the Eastern States depends
upon the encouragement of their navigation and fishery, which receive a
deadly wound by an excessive impost on the article before us.

I would concur in any measure calculated to exterminate the poison
covered under the form of ardent spirits, from our country; but it
should be without violence. I approve as much as any gentleman the
introduction of malt liquors, believing them not so pernicious as the
one in common use; but before we restrain ourselves to the use of them,
we ought to be certain that we have malt and hops, as well as
brew-houses for the manufacture. Now, I deny that we have these in
sufficient abundance to the eastward; but if we had, they are not taxed.
Then why should the poor of Massachusetts be taxed for the beverage they
use of spruce, molasses and water? It surely is unreasonable. I hope
gentlemen will not adopt the motion for eight cents until they are
furnished with some better evidence of its propriety and policy than any
that has yet been given, or as I suspect that can be given.

Mr. FITZSIMONS was pleased that gentlemen went so fully into a
discussion of a subject which they conceived of great importance, but he
begged them not to lose sight of an observation that had already been
made, that whenever a particular duty was supposed to bear hard on any
one member of the Union, it ought to be regarded as a part only of a
system bearing equally upon all. He was a friend to commerce, it was his
particular profession, and what he had principally devoted his attention
to; and therefore it might justly be imagined he was unwilling to fetter
it with restraints; but as a member of this body, he considered it
proper to forego a pertinacious adhesion to that system, when its
interest came in competition with the general welfare.

The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. Ames) has represented the proposed
regulation as tending eventually to the ruin of the commerce, fisheries,
and manufactures of that State. I do not believe (added he) such a
consequence would result from a duty of eight cents on a gallon of
molasses; if I did, I would be one of the last to advocate the measure;
but to understand this circumstance more fully, let us proceed to an
inquiry of the ground on which we stand. The State of Massachusetts
imports a greater proportion of this article than any other in the
Union; she will have therefore (say the opponents of the measure) to pay
exclusively all the impost upon it. Let us examine this. Some part of
the molasses is consumed in the substance, but all the remainder is
distilled: this must either be consumed in the State, or exported from
it; in the latter case, I would propose that all the rum shipped to
foreign nations should draw back the duties it had paid as molasses.
This would obviate all that was said relative to the competition between
this State and other nations at a foreign market. As to what is
exported, but consumed in some other parts of the United States, it is
but proper that a duty should be paid, and although it may be advanced
in the first instance by the people of Massachusetts, yet it will be
ultimately paid by the consumers in other parts.

What is consumed within the State itself, gentlemen surely do not mean
to have excluded from a duty. If they consume more country rum than West
India, they pay a less duty than those States which consume a greater
proportion of the latter. As to what is used in its raw, unmanufactured
state, it will be sufficient to observe, that as it is generally a
substitute for sugar, the consumers will therefore avoid the tax on that
article, and pay it on the other. In Pennsylvania they mostly use sugar;
now, if the people there pay a tax on that article, it is but
distributive justice that the people of Massachusetts pay one on the
article they use for the same purpose.

Mr. GOODHUE.--Fifteen cents, the sum laid on Jamaica spirits, is about
one-third part of its value; now eight cents on molasses is considerably
more: the former is an article of luxury, as was observed when it was
under consideration, therefore that duty might not be improper; but the
latter cannot be said to partake of that quality in the substance, and
when manufactured into rum, it is no more a luxury than Jamaica spirits.
I cannot see, therefore, why molasses ought to be taxed forty or fifty
per cent. when the other pays but thirty-three. Surely the substance
ought not to pay at this rate--then what good reason can be offered for
the measure?

Mr. BOUDINOT had attended to the arguments of the gentlemen on both
sides of the question, and was led to believe the proportion was not
properly observed. By the resolution of Congress in 1783, the molasses
was fixed upon due consideration at one penny, and West India rum at
fourpence. The proposed proportion was two-thirds of what is charged on
West India rum. He thought this too high, as it would be an encumbrance
on a considerable manufacture; six cents were therefore a more equitable
rate than eight cents were; he believed also, that it was as much as the
article would bear, especially if it was considered that the whole of
the article was not manufactured into rum, but a large proportion
consumed in substance. This might also be near what is intended to be
charged on sugar; by fixing it at this rate, the necessity of lowering
the duty at some future day would be avoided, which he thought an object
worthy of the committee's consideration.

Mr. BOUDINOT wished the gentleman to consider the difference in the
price; if he did that, he would allow it to be reduced to six cents; if
this principle could now be fixed, it would carry them through the
whole.

Mr. PARTRIDGE allowed, if all the molasses was distilled into rum, that
a small duty might be proper; but when it was considered as an article
of sustenance to the poor, and as a requisite to the support of the
fisheries and navigation, he hoped the committee would allow but a very
small one indeed. He wished it was possible to discriminate between what
was manufactured into rum, and what was consumed in the raw state,
because a higher duty might be collected in the former case than in the
latter.

Mr. FITZSIMONS stated, that there were 327,000 gallons of rum imported
into Pennsylvania in 1785, which would tend to show how great a part
was consumed by the citizens of the Union; a demand in one State so
great as this, proved how likely it was for New England rum to rival the
West India. He thought the prices of the two articles gave the country
rum a very considerable advantage, and therefore a duty of seven cents
could not be very injurious to the manufacture.

The question was put on seven cents and lost.

And it was agreed to fill the blank with six cents.

On filling up the blank on Madeira wine,

Mr. SHERMAN moved fifteen cents.

Mr. GILMAN moved twenty cents, and

Mr. HARTLEY moved thirty cents, in order (as he observed) to make it
correspond with the rate per cent. on the value; as the principle of
proportion seemed to be admitted by the committee.

Mr. SHERMAN said, it appeared to him to be pretty well proportioned;
because those who accustomed themselves to drink wine, consumed two or
three times as much as those who used spirits, and consequently paid a
due proportion.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--I shall move you, sir, that the blank be filled with
fifty cents. I observed some gentlemen, in their arguments on the last
article, laid great stress upon the impropriety of taxing the
necessaries of life that were principally consumed by the poorer class
of citizens. I do not think any of the members of this committee
consider the article of Madeira wine a necessary of life, at least to
those whose incomes are only sufficient for a temperate subsistence;
therefore no objection of this kind can be made on the present occasion.
The propriety of a high tax on wines, I apprehend, is self-evident,
whether we consider the price of the article, or the ability of the
people to pay who consume it. The value of a pipe of Madeira wine, I
believe, is about two hundred dollars, a hogshead of rum is worth about
forty dollars. The ability of those who consume the one and the other
are, I suppose, in nearly the same ratio. I do not pretend to know what
are the intentions of gentlemen on this subject, but my wish is, to
raise so considerable a revenue from imposts as to render it unnecessary
to apply to any other mode. If this be the wish of the committee also,
they will be inclined to raise a great part of it from the consumption
of those people who are best able to pay, among whom we may, with great
propriety, reckon the consumers of Madeira wine.

Mr. P. MUHLENBERG thought his colleague's observations were very
judicious, and said they met exactly his ideas; he therefore seconded
the motion for fifty cents.

Mr. BLAND.--I am not against laying any sum on this article which there
is a probability of collecting; but I am afraid we are running wild in
the business, and although we appear to be in search of revenue, we are
pursuing a track that will lead us wide of our mark. I am really
suspicious, if we lay a duty of fifty cents upon Madeira wine, we shall
not have a single gallon entered in any port of the United States, and
we shall fully verify to the world the truth of an old maxim, that two
and two, in finance, do not make four. I would therefore suggest to the
committee, the propriety of considering well, whether they can, or
cannot, collect the high duty proposed. If they are well convinced that
it can be done, and will satisfy me only that there is a probability of
its being the case, I shall cheerfully concur in the motion; but at
present, I am of opinion we shall not be able to obtain any revenue
whatsoever if the tax is laid so high.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I agree entirely with the principle of laying duties
according to their relative value, and hope the committee will keep up
the line of proportion as near as possible. It is only in the
application of this principle on the present occasion, that I differ
with the honorable gentleman from Pennsylvania, for whose opinions I
have the highest respect. I confess, too, that he is much better able to
ascertain the price of foreign articles than I am; but I believe, with
regard to this one of Madeira wine, I have it in my power to ascertain
it pretty well. I take it, that a pipe of wine usually costs at Madeira
from twenty-five to thirty pounds sterling; but then I would wish the
committee to take into consideration that this wine is paid for there in
our own produce at a very advantageous rate, which reduces the nominal
sterling sum down in value to a like sum of our currency. I therefore
look upon it, that we may calculate the cost of a gallon of Madeira wine
at one dollar; for I cannot conceive that any gentleman entertains an
idea of taxing the risk the merchant runs in importing the wine, or the
increased value it obtains during the time it takes to ripen for sale.
In laying our duties we ought to apportion it to the value of the
article at the time and place of importation, without taking advantage
of such adventitious circumstances. Beside, there is a considerable loss
attends keeping Madeira. The storage is no inconsiderable expense, and
the evaporation is an actual loss in quantity, which the merchant is
obliged to replace by filling up the cask. Under these considerations, I
think it may be admitted, that twenty or twenty-five cents per gallon is
a sufficient tax. Moreover, it may be easily demonstrated, that such a
duty would be more productive than fifty cents; because it would be with
greater certainty collected. There is another reason that induces me to
think twenty cents more proper; fifty cents for a gallon of wine is a
large sum for a merchant to lay down in duties; it must abridge his
mercantile operations, and consequently tend to discourage the Madeira
trade, which, in my humble opinion, is one of the most advantageous
America has left to her, from the selfish policy that actuates some
foreign Powers; therefore we ought not to burthen it to so great a
degree as the proposed duty seems to have in contemplation.

Mr. FITZSIMONS withdrew his motion for fifty cents, and moved
thirty-three and one-third cents.

The question was put upon thirty-three and one-third cents as the
highest sum, and agreed to, being twenty-one votes for it, and nineteen
against it.

The next article "on all other wines," presented itself in order for the
consideration of the committee.

Mr. HEISTER observed, there were a great variety of wines included in
that general expression, the prices of which were very different; some
worth even more than Madeira, and others less; he submitted, therefore,
to the committee the propriety of discriminating and taxing them
according to their value.

Mr. BOUDINOT acquiesced in the remark.

Mr. FITZSIMONS did not think it worth while, at this time, to engage the
committee in making such a discrimination. The rich wines were imported
in no very considerable quantities, and if the duty was laid pretty
high, it would tend to exclude the most inferior and low wines from
being introduced.

It was thereupon agreed to lay twenty cents on all other wines.

The next article on the list was "bohea tea," on which

Mr. FITZSIMONS observed, that he meant this article not only as a
revenue, but as a regulation of a commerce highly advantageous to the
United States. The merchants of this country have, from a variety of
circumstances, and finding their trade restrained and embarrassed, been
under the necessity of exploring channels to which they were heretofore
unaccustomed. At length they have succeeded in discovering one that bids
fair to increase our national importance and prosperity, while at the
same time it is lucrative to the persons engaged in its prosecution. I
mean, sir, the trade to China and the East Indies. I have no doubt but
what it will receive the encouragement of the Federal Government for
some time to come. There is scarcely any direct intercourse of this
nature, but what requires some assistance in the beginning; it is
peculiarly necessary in our case, from the jealousy subsisting in Europe
of this infant branch of commerce. It has been thought proper, under
some of the State governments, to foster and protect a direct
communication with India. I hope the Government of the United States has
an equal disposition to give this trade their encouragement.

I wish, therefore, the committee would pass over the article for the
present, and permit it to come in at another place in the list, where I
mean to move a discrimination in the duty on teas, according as they are
imported, directly from China in our own ships, or in any ships from
Europe.

The articles of teas and pepper were passed over for the present.

Mr. BOUDINOT proposed one cent per pound on sugar.

Two cents were afterwards proposed, when

Mr. FITZSIMONS remarked, that one gallon of molasses weighed eight
pounds; that at six cents it did not pay a cent per pound; could it,
therefore, be called anywise equal to such a tax on sugar? Moreover,
sugar is an article of as general consumption as molasses, and when it
is of this inferior quality, it enters as much or more into the
consumption of the poor as the other, while, at the same time, molasses
will sweeten more, according to its weight, than even the best sugar;
from which considerations, I think gentlemen will be satisfied by
putting it on an equality with molasses; therefore I do not oppose the
one cent.

On the question, the committee agreed to tax it but one cent per pound,
and loaf sugar three cents per pound. All other sugars one and a half
cent per pound. On coffee two and a half cents per pound.

On motion of Mr. BLAND, the committee rose and reported progress.
Adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, April 15.

A petition of David Ramsay, of the State of South Carolina, was
presented to the House and read, setting forth that Mr. William Smith, a
member returned to serve in this House as one of the representatives for
the State of South Carolina, was, at the time of his election,
ineligible thereto, and came within the disqualification of the third
paragraph of the constitution, which declares, "that no person shall be
a representative who shall not have been seven years a citizen of the
United States," and praying that these allegations may be inquired by
the House.

Referred to the Committee on Elections.

Mr. BENSON, from the committee to whom it was referred to consider of
and report to the House respecting the ceremonial of receiving the
President, and to whom was also referred a letter from the Chairman of a
Committee of the Senate to the SPEAKER, communicating an instruction
from that House to a committee thereof, to report if any, and what,
arrangements are necessary for the reception of the President, made the
following report:

      "That Mr. Osgood, the proprietor of the house lately
      occupied by the President of Congress, be requested to put
      the same, and the furniture therein, in proper condition
      for the residence and use of the President of the United
      States, to provide for his temporary accommodation.

      "That it will be most eligible, in the first instance, that
      a committee of three members from the Senate, and five from
      the House of Representatives, to be appointed by the Houses
      respectively, to attend to receive the President at such
      place as he shall embark from New Jersey for this city, and
      conduct him without form to the house lately occupied by
      the President of Congress, and that at such time
      thereafter, as the President shall signify it will be
      convenient for him, he be formally received by both Houses.

      "That a committee of two members from the Senate, and three
      members from the House of Representatives, to be appointed
      by the Houses respectively, wait on the Vice President of
      the United States, as soon as he shall come to this city,
      and, in the name of the Congress of the United States,
      congratulate him on his arrival."

And a committee of five was balloted for and chosen accordingly, for the
purpose of waiting on the President.

Another committee of three was appointed to wait on the Vice President.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair; the question being on
inserting, in the list of dutiable articles, beer, ale, and porter--

Mr. FITZSIMONS meant to make an alteration in this article, by
distinguishing beer, ale, and porter, imported in casks, from what was
imported in bottles. He thought this manufacture one highly deserving of
encouragement. If the morals of the people were to be improved by what
entered into their diet, it would be prudent in the national Legislature
to encourage the manufacture of malt liquors. The small protecting
duties laid in Pennsylvania had a great effect towards the establishment
of breweries; they no longer imported this article, but, on the
contrary, exported considerable quantities, and, in two or three years,
with the fostering aid of Government, would be able to furnish enough
for the whole consumption of the United States. He moved nine cents per
gallon.

Mr. LAWRENCE seconded the motion. He would have this duty so high as to
give a decided preference to American beer; it would tend also to
encourage agriculture, because the malt and hops consumed in the
manufacture were the produce of our own grounds.

Mr. SMITH (of Maryland) was opposed to such high duties as seemed to be
in the contemplation of some members of the committee. He thought enough
might be raised if the tax was lowered. He formed this opinion from some
calculations he had made with respect to the imports at Baltimore. He
stated them to amount for the last year, at the rate now proposed, to
£258,163; to this, if he added five other districts in Maryland, the
probable amount of which, on the same principle, would be £185,537;
then, these two sums multiplied by twelve, the supposed proportion that
Maryland ought to bear of the national debt, would produce £5,324,400, a
sum exceeding very considerably what the wants of the Union required.

Mr. GALE thought a duty of nine cents would operate as a prohibition
upon the importation of beer and porter. He remarked the advantages
which America possessed in growing malt and hops for the manufacture of
these articles. In addition to this, the risk and expense of bringing it
from Europe was to be considered. Upon the whole, he concluded so high a
duty as nine cents would give the brewers here a monopoly, defeat the
purpose of obtaining revenue, enhance the price to the consumer, and
thereby establish the use of spirituous liquors. For these
considerations he was against that sum.

Mr. SINNICKSON declared himself a friend to this manufacture, and
thought if the duty was laid high enough to effect a prohibition, the
manufacture would increase, and, of consequence, the price be lessened.
He considered it of importance, inasmuch as the materials were produced
in the country, and tended to advance the agricultural interest.

Mr. MADISON moved to lay an impost of eight cents on all beer imported.
He did not think this sum would give a monopoly, but hoped it would be
such an encouragement as to induce the manufacture to take deep root in
every State in the Union; in this case, it would produce the collateral
good hinted at by the gentleman from New Jersey, which, in his opinion,
was an object well worthy of being attended to. He observed, that, in
the State of New York, the article paid a duty equal to six cents on
importation, and if brought in foreign vessels, it amounted to eight
cents; and yet quantities of it were still imported, which proved that
eight cents would not amount to a prohibition.

The committee agreed hereupon to charge it at eight cents.

On all beer, ale, or porter, imported in bottles, per dozen, twenty-five
cents. Agreed to without debate.

On every barrel of beef it was moved to lay a duty of a dollar per
barrel.

Mr. BLAND thought that very little revenue was likely to be collected on
this article, let the duty be more or less; and as it was to be had in
sufficient quantities within the United States, perhaps a tax amounting
to a prohibition would be proper.

Mr. THATCHER admitted that there was beef enough to be got in every part
of the country, but it was fresh beef. Some States, from local
circumstances, were unable to salt and preserve it, therefore a tax on
this article would operate as a partial tax upon those States. If there
is a sufficient quantity in the other States to answer their own
consumption, they will feel no part of the burthen; but it appeared
unnecessary to him to lay this restriction, because he found some States
capable of exporting beef on terms as reasonably low as any other
country could, and it could not, therefore, be contended for as a
requisite encouragement to this branch of the agricultural interest.

Mr. GOODHUE did not contend that it was necessary to lay a particular
duty on beef, although it was among the enumerated articles admitted by
the committee. He was satisfied of the fact, that meat could be put up
here cheaper than in Europe, and afforded at a less price, so there was
little to apprehend from rivalship.

Mr. MADISON thought that almost every State in the Union had more of
this article than was necessary for its own consumption, and
consequently there was no danger of its being imported, unless the
quality of the foreign beef was superior. He would not object to
gentlemen gratifying themselves with this meat, especially as the
consumption was neither so great nor general as to affect the revenue,
and therefore he judged it might be struck out.

Mr. TUCKER thought with the gentleman from Virginia, that the regulation
was unnecessary, and that it would be better to throw it into the common
mass, taxable at a certain rate per cent. He therefore moved to have it
struck out.

Upon these considerations the articles of beef, pork, and butter, were
all struck out.

Mr. FITZSIMONS moved to lay a duty of two cents on all candles of tallow
per pound.

Mr. TUCKER observed, that some States were under the necessity of
importing considerable quantities of this article also, while others had
enough, and more than enough, for their own consumption, therefore the
burthen would be partially borne by such States. As the committee had
just rejected some articles upon this principle, he would move that this
be struck out likewise.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--I am not for striking out, sir. Every article imported
into the State that gentleman represents, from which revenue is to be
raised, he moves to have struck out; but I wish the committee to
consider a moment before they join in sentiments with him. The
manufacture of candles is an important manufacture, and far advanced
towards perfection. I have no doubt but, in a few years, we shall be
able to furnish sufficient to supply the consumption of every part of
the continent. In Pennsylvania we have a duty of two pence per pound,
and under the operation of this small encouragement the manufacture has
gained considerable strength. We no longer import candles from Ireland
or England, of whom a few years ago we took considerable quantities; the
necessity of continuing those encouragements which the State
Legislatures have deemed proper, exists in a considerable degree;
therefore it will be politic in the Government of the United States to
continue such duties till their object is accomplished.

Mr. TUCKER would be glad to know what article it was that South Carolina
would not contribute her full proportion of tax upon--he saw none; on
the contrary, so far as the enumeration went, the impost would bear
unequally upon her, and he feared many others in the list would increase
the imposition. He thought it the duty of the committee to guard against
an unequal distribution of the public burthen in every case, and
therefore wished the duty on this article to be a moderate one; not
because it affected the State he represented, for it did not do this to
any degree, as wax candies were there principally consumed, the material
for which was the production of the Southern States, but because other
States, not having this advantage, might be oppressed.

Mr. BOUDINOT apprehended most States imported considerable quantities of
this article from Russia and Ireland; he expected they would be made
cheaper than they could be imported, if a small encouragement was held
out by the Government, as the materials were to be had in abundance in
our country.

Mr. LAWRENCE thought that if candles were an object of considerable
importation, they ought to be taxed for the sake of obtaining revenue,
and if they were not imported in considerable quantities, the burthen
upon the consumer would be small, while it tended to cherish a valuable
manufacture. He seconded Mr. FITZSIMON's motion for two cents: which was
carried in the affirmative upon the question being put.

      On all candles of wax or spermaceti, per lb. six cents;
      cheese, four cents; soap, two cents; boots, per pair, fifty
      cents; on all shoes, slippers, or goloshes made of leather,
      ten cents; on all shoes or slippers, made of silk or stuff,
      ten cents; on all steel unwrought, per 112 lbs.,----

Mr. LEE moved to strike out this last article, observing that the
consumption of steel was very great, and essentially necessary to
agricultural improvements. He did not believe any gentleman would
contend, that enough of this article to answer consumption could be
fabricated in any part of the Union: hence it would operate as an
oppressive, though indirect tax upon agriculture, and any tax, whether
direct or indirect, upon this interest, at this juncture, would be
unwise and impolitic.

Mr. TUCKER joined the gentleman in his opinion, observing that it was
impossible for some States to get it but by importation from foreign
countries. He conceived it more deserving a bounty to increase the
quantity, than an impost which would lessen the consumption and make it
dearer also.

Mr. CLYMER replied, that the manufacture of steel in America was rather
in its infancy; but as all the materials necessary to make it were the
produce of almost every State in the Union, and as the manufacture was
already established, and attended with considerable success, he deemed
it prudent to emancipate our country from the manacles in which she was
held by foreign manufactures. A furnace in Philadelphia, with a very
small aid from the Legislature of Pennsylvania, made three hundred tons
in two years, and now makes at the rate of two hundred and thirty tons
annually, and with a little further encouragement would supply enough
for the consumption of the Union. He hoped, therefore, gentlemen would
be disposed, under these considerations, to extend a degree of patronage
to a manufacture, which a moment's reflection would convince them was
highly deserving protection.

Mr. MADISON thought the object of selecting this article to be solely
the encouragement of the manufacture, and not revenue, for on any other
consideration it would be more proper, as observed by the gentleman from
Carolina, (Mr. TUCKER) to give a bounty on the importation. It was so
materially connected with the improvement of agriculture and other
manufactures, that he questioned its propriety even on that score. A
duty would tend to depress many mechanic arts in the proportion that it
protected this; he thought it best to reserve this article to the
non-enumerated ones, where it would be subject to a five per cent. _ad.
valorem_.

Mr. TUCKER considered the smallest tax on this article to be a burthen
on agriculture, which ought to be considered an interest most deserving
protection and encouragement; on this is our principal reliance, on it
also our safety and happiness depend. When he considered the state of it
in that part of the country which he represented on this floor, and in
some other parts of the Union, he was really at a loss to imagine with
what propriety any gentleman could propose a measure big with
oppression, and tending to burthen particular States. The situation of
South Carolina was melancholy; while the inhabitants were deeply in
debt, the produce of the State was daily falling in price. Rice and
indigo were become so low, as to be considered by many not objects
worthy of cultivation; and gentlemen will consider, that it is not an
easy thing for a planter to change his whole system of husbandry in a
moment; but accumulated burthens will drive to this, and add to their
embarrassments. He thought an impost of five per cent. as great an
encouragement as ought to be granted, and would not oppose that being
laid. He called upon gentlemen to exercise liberality and moderation in
what they proposed, if they wished to give satisfaction and do justice
to their constituents.

Mr. FITZSIMONS thought, if gentlemen did not get rid of local
considerations, the committee would make little progress. Every State
will feel itself oppressed by a duty on particular articles, but when
the whole system is perfected, the burthen will be equal on all. He did
not desire, for his part, to obtain exclusive advantages for
Pennsylvania; he would contend, and undertake to prove, that by the
duties already agreed to, that State sacrificed as much as any other.
Indeed, if he had said more, he believed himself capable of proving the
position. Being of this opinion he hoped the committee would agree to
grant her an advantage which would revert back upon the other parts of
the Union, without operating even for the present, to the material
disadvantage of any. Some States were, from local circumstances, better
situated to carry on the manufacture than others, and would derive some
little advantage on this account in the commencement of the business.
The Eastern States were so situated, perhaps some of the Middle ones
also; but will it therefore be insisted upon, that the Southern States
pay more of the impost on foreign goods than these? For his part, he
never could conceive, that the consumption of those articles by the
negroes of South Carolina would contribute to the revenue as much as
that of the white inhabitants of the Eastern States. But laying aside
local distinctions, what operates to the benefit of one part in
establishing useful institutions, will eventually operate to the
advantage of the whole. With these considerations, he cheerfully
submitted the article to the discretion of the committee, moving to fill
the blank with sixty-six cents.

Mr. BLAND considered a tax of sixty-six cents a very heavy duty on
agriculture and the mechanic arts, and was averse to granting it.

Mr. BOUDINOT moved fifty-six cents, which motion was agreed to.

      On nails and spikes, it was agreed to lay one cent per
      pound; on tarred cordage, fifty cents per 112 pounds; on
      untarred cordage, sixty cents per 112 pounds; on twine or
      pack-thread, one hundred cents per 112 pounds.

Mr. MADISON said, that he was not clear as to the policy of taxing
cordage. He thought ship-building an object worthy of legislative
attention, and questioned the propriety of raising the price of any
article that entered so materially into the structure of vessels. But if
it was politic to lay an impost on cordage, would it not be the same
with regard to hemp? He thought it would, and therefore moved it.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--Hemp is a raw material, necessary for an important
manufacture, and therefore ought not to be subject to a heavy duty. If
it was the product of the country in general, a duty might be proper,
but this he believed was not the case.

Mr. MADISON.--I said before, I very much doubted the propriety of laying
a duty on such articles as entered into ship-building; but if it is
necessary to lay a duty on cordage for the purpose of encouraging the
manufacture, and making us independent of the world as to that article,
it is also politic to endeavor to make us alike independent for the raw
material; a great proportion of the land in the Western country is
peculiarly adapted to the growth of hemp, and it might be there
cultivated to advantage, if the labors of the husbandman were protected
by the Government.

Mr. BOUDINOT thought the soil of this country ill adapted to the
cultivation of hemp; even the strong low lands which are fit for it,
soon became exhausted; it impoverished the lands wherever it grew, and
destroyed the agricultural stamina. If he was not mistaken in this
opinion, he thought the committee would, with him, disagree to the
motion.

Mr. PARTRIDGE thought a duty on hemp would tend to discourage the
American navigation, her trade, and fisheries, without any good
resulting to warrant such an injury. It was not ascertained whether hemp
could be furnished in any tolerable quantities to answer the demand, and
if upon experience, it should be found that the quantity was
insufficient, what a stab this would prove to all concerned in
ship-building.

Mr. AMES expressed a doubt of the policy of taxing either cordage or
hemp, because while it tended to encourage the agriculture or
manufacture, it discouraged the maritime interest, and therefore the
discouragement, in the event, would reflect back upon those interests it
was intended to cherish.

Mr. MOORE declared the Southern States well calculated for the
cultivation of hemp, and, from certain circumstances, well inclined
thereto. He conceived it the duty of the committee to pay as much
respect to the encouragement and protection of husbandry (the most
important of all interests in the United States) as they did to
manufactures.

Mr. FITZSIMONS thought there was a clear distinction between taxing
manufactures and raw materials, well known to every enlightened country.
He had no doubt but hemp enough could be raised for the home
consumption, nay for exportation also, and why it was not done he could
not say. He recollected that before the revolution, very little was
imported; now, considerable quantities are brought from England. When
such a bulky article is capable of paying double freight, first from
Russia and then from England, besides its first cost, he conceived that
what was produced in America had a very considerable advantage. It could
not be urged that the people are unacquainted with the cultivation,
because it had been carried to very great perfection in former years. If
eight dollars a hundred is not a sufficient inducement to farmers to
raise hemp, it is a proof that they direct their labors to more
profitable productions, and why should legislative authority be
exercised to divide their attention? Or for this purpose, why should
navigation and ship-building be necessarily burthened. He concluded with
declaring, that no duty which the Congress would agree to lay, could
give encouragement to the cultivation of hemp, if the present price of
that article was insufficient.

Mr. SCOTT stated a fact or two, being perhaps as well acquainted with
the Western country as any member of the committee. The lands along the
frontiers, he could assure the committee, were well calculated for the
cultivation of this plant; it is a production that will bear carriage by
land better than any other, tobacco not excepted. He believed an
encouragement of the kind now moved for would bring, in a year or two,
vast quantities from that country, at little expense, to Philadelphia,
even from the waters of the Ohio; the inhabitants expect some
encourgement, and will be grateful for it. Although a gentleman has
called it a bulky article, yet as much can be packed upon a horse as a
horse can carry, or in a wagon as four horses can draw; so that its bulk
will not prevent our countrymen from seeking a market on the waters of
the Atlantic.

The committee rose and reported, and

The House adjourned.


THURSDAY, April 16.

The House proceeded, by ballot, to the appointment of a committee of
five, to attend, with a committee from the Senate, to receive the
President of the United States at such place as he shall embark at from
New Jersey for this city.

The members elected were Messrs. BOUDINOT, BLAND, TUCKER, BENSON, and
LAWRENCE.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That Messrs. GILMAN, AMES, and GALE, be a committee, in
conjunction with a committee from the Senate, to wait upon the Vice
President of the United States upon his arrival in this city, and to
congratulate him thereupon in the name of the Congress of the United
States.


_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
State of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair.

Mr. MOORE thought it good policy to encourage the manufacture of
cordage, but was not convinced that it was bad policy to encourage
likewise the growth of the raw material in America, so that we might
become as independent of all the world for this article, as we are
already for every other used in the structure of vessels. He believed it
would be difficult to persuade the farmer that his interest ought to be
neglected to encourage particular artisans: he therefore begged the
committee to do as much for them as was in their power, believing that
the event of such policy would mutually benefit the manufacturer and
agriculturist.

Mr. HEISTER remarked, that a heavy duty on hemp would not encourage the
raising of it this year, because the time was elapsed for commencing the
cultivation; but a duty to take place at some future time, would no
doubt be beneficial. He assured the committee of the ability of the land
in America to grow hemp equal to any part of the world; and, therefore,
joined heartily in giving it legislative encouragement, in order to
induce the people to turn their attention more particularly to the
subject, but would recommend the duty to be laid so as to commence its
operation at a distant day.

Mr. WHITE remarked, what was good policy in England might be the
contrary in America. England was a maritime nation, and therefore she
gave a bounty on such articles as were requisite to support her maritime
importance--America was an agricultural country, and therefore ought to
attend to the encouragement of that interest. If the Legislature take no
notice of this article, the people will be led to believe it is not an
object worthy of encouragement, and the spirit of cultivation will be
damped; whereas, if a small duty only was laid, it might point out to
them that it was desirable, and would induce an increase of the
quantity. Our lands are capable of bearing this plant many years without
being exhausted. He could not say exactly what sum would be proper to
fill the blank with, but mentioned seventy-five cents for the
consideration of the committee.

Mr. PARTRIDGE admitted the propriety of encouraging agriculture, but it
ought not to be done at the expense of the ship-builders, especially as
the good would not balance the evil. He told the committee that hemp had
risen, within three or four years, forty per cent. in Russia, owing,
perhaps, to the increased demand which the present northern war
occasioned. This naturally operated to encourage the cultivation in
America, and perhaps was sufficient, without the aid now intended to be
given. If gentlemen were desirous of having it stand among the selected
articles, he should not object, but hoped the duty would not exceed five
per cent. Forty cents were about equal to that rate, and he moved to
fill the blank with that sum.

Mr. WHITE thought with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that the United
States would furnish this article in sufficient abundance, not only for
home consumption, but for exportation. The maritime powers of Europe do
not raise the article, but obtain it principally from Russia--these
powers are as well disposed to take it from us as from Russia. Our back
lands are extremely well adapted to its cultivation; a road to bring it
to market is opening; the Potomac extends her now navigable waters into
the interior country, and a communication will be established with the
river Ohio and the western waters. The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
HARTLEY) had hinted at the propriety of settling the western territory;
it was his opinion that every encouragement ought to be given them to
engage their affection; that the administration of the Government ought
to be such as to give satisfaction to all parts of the Union, but it is
peculiarly our interest to render that country advantageous; her fertile
lands, and streams easy of descent, would pour into the Atlantic States,
through the channels he had mentioned, a profusion of wealth, and hemp
in abundance. The Shenandoah river disembogues into the Potomac, the
South Branch communicates with it also, and a number of other rivers
whose lands will produce immense quantities. He considered that this, in
a short time, would do more towards encouraging ship-building than a
bounty, as had been mentioned by some gentlemen.

Mr. BURKE thought it proper to suggest to the committee what might be
the probable effect of the proposed measure in the State he represented,
(South Carolina,) and the adjoining one (Georgia.) The staple products
of that part of the Union were hardly worth cultivation, on account of
their fall in price; the planters are, therefore, disposed to pursue
some other. The lands are certainly well adapted to the growth of hemp,
and he had no doubt but its culture would be practised with attention.
Cotton is likewise in contemplation among them, and if good seed could
be procured, he hoped it might succeed. But the low, strong, rice lands,
would produce hemp in abundance--many thousand tons even this year, if
it was not so late in the season. He liked the idea of laying a low
duty now, and encouraging it against the time when a supply might be had
from our own cultivation.

Mr. MADISON feared seventy-five cents was too high; he was doubtful
whether it would not have been as well to have left out cordage; for if
a duty on hemp was impolitic because it burthened navigation, so also
was that on cordage. He by no means approved of measures injurious to
ship-building, which he considered in a threefold view: first, as it
related to vessels employed in the coasting trade; second, as it
respected those employed in those channels of trade, the stream of which
depends upon the policy of foreign nations; and third, as it was
connected with vessels built for sale. With respect to the first, no
doubt but we can prevent any discouragement from the operation of the
duty, because we can make such discrimination as will prevent a
rivalship; but, in relation to the two other points, and particularly
the last, he was sensible that every penny laid upon cordage would enter
into the price of the vessel, and, by raising the price, drive the
purchasers to seek a better bargain at other hands. Fearful therefore of
injuring this interest, he should vote for a small duty at present, in
hopes of being able to see, in a little time, sufficient quantities of
hemp brought to market, as predicted, at even a less price than is given
now for the imported.

Mr. SMITH agreed to forty cents, provided the committee would make it
one dollar at the end of two years.

Mr. MADISON could not judge of the alteration in the circumstances of
this country two years hence, and therefore did not like the kind of
provision mentioned. He preferred making it a positive sum, and moved
fifty cents; which was agreed to.

On malt.

Mr. SHERMAN thought this might be struck out, on the same principle that
beef and pork had been, there was none imported.

Mr. FITZSIMONS replied, that there had been considerable and recent
importations of this article into the United States--30,000 bushels in
one year; certainly this interferes with the products of the country. He
moved ten cents per bushel, and it was agreed to.

On motion of Mr. AMES, barley was taxed six cents, and lime one hundred
cents. He just stated that these articles were imported in considerable
quantities from a neighboring State that had not yet adopted the
constitution; and, perhaps, said he, our political situation is such as
to make some regulation on this head necessary.

On nails, spikes, tacks, and brads.

Mr. LEE did not think we were ripe for such extensive manufactures as
some gentlemen seemed desirous of encouraging; but this was particularly
objectionable, because it was a tax upon the improvement of estates,
unless the articles could be furnished as cheap and abundantly at home
as they were by foreign nations. He moved to strike it out.

Mr. MADISON conceived this, like a tax on hemp, would increase the price
on ship-building; spikes and nails were necessary for the construction
of vessels.

Mr. BLAND thought a duty on nails an unequal tax, burthening the
Southern States, but not felt by the Northern, who made only enough for
their own consumption; he opposed it also on account of its being an
article of indispensable necessity.

Mr. GOODHUE informed the gentlemen who were opposed to a duty on nails,
that great quantities of them were manufactured for exportation in
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, and he believed some other States; and,
in a little time, enough might be made to supply all North America.

Mr. TUCKER judged, from what was said of the little expense and great
facility of manufacturing nails, that it stood in no need of legislative
assistance. Why lay a duty on foreign nails, when they cannot rival you
if you make them as good and as cheap? Will not the five per cent. duty,
with freight and shipping charges, be sufficient encouragement? He
thought it would, and therefore was averse to any other duty. He
observed also, that it would burthen ship-building, and was,
consequently against those employed in that business.

Mr. FITZSIMONS was not very solicitous about the duty. He thought the
manufacturer would have but little to apprehend if the Legislature
should decide against them; for, the fact was, that nails were at this
moment made cheaper and, in the opinion of some judges, better than
those coming from England. Before the revolution, the people in America
were not permitted to erect slitting mills. They now have several, and
are independent of all the world for the materials necessary for
carrying on the business in the most extensive manner. So far as the
duty respected the manufacture in Pennsylvania, it was his opinion that
refusing it would do no material injury, and he believed it would draw
but little money into the treasury; yet, nevertheless, he was willing to
allow a small one, because it conformed to the policy of the States, who
thought it proper, in this manner, to protect their manufactures. He
believed neither spikes nor nails for ship-building were imported; they
were generally large and heavy, and were made in the country, according
to the builder's orders.

On the motion, nails and spikes were taxed one cent per pound, but tacks
and brads were struck out.

On salt, per bushel.

Mr. BURKE.--I need not observe to the committee that this article is a
necessary of life, nor that black cattle, sheep, and horses do not
thrive without it; on these considerations alone I should oppose it; but
I know likewise that it is a tax particularly odious to the inhabitants
of South Carolina and Georgia, to whom the price is already
oppressively great. The back parts of that State are obliged to haul all
they consume, two, three, or four hundred miles in wagons, for which
they pay about seven shillings sterling. Add this to the first cost,
which is about one shilling, though sometimes more, and you will find
the burthen sustained by those who live remote from the sea-shore
sufficiently unequal. I hope, therefore, the committee will not agree to
it.

Mr. LAWRENCE hoped a duty would be laid on the article; it was in
general use, and the consumption so regular, that it was much to be
depended upon as a source of revenue; but the duty ought not to be so
high as to make it oppressive. He moved to impose a duty of six cents
per bushel.

Mr. TUCKER felt an aversion to laying a duty on salt for several
motives. It would bear harder upon the poor than upon the rich. The true
principle of taxation is, that every man contribute to the public
burthens in proportion to the value of his property. But a poor man
consumes as much salt as a rich man. In this point of view, it operates
as a poll-tax, the most odious of all taxes; it does not operate simply
as a poll-tax, but is heavier on the poor than on the rich, because the
poor consume greater quantities of salted provisions than the rich. Nor
does it bear equally upon every part of the country; for it is consumed
in a greater proportion by cattle at a distance, than by those near the
sea shores. Moreover, the duty collected on the importation will enter
into the price of the article, and the countryman will pay the retailer
a profit on the tax, perhaps of four times its amount. For which
reasons, he was more averse to this article being taxed than any other
whatsoever.

Mr. SCOTT declared himself decisively against the duty, although he
admitted a most certain revenue could be drawn from it, on account of
its universal demand and utility. But he did not think these
considerations alone amounted to a sufficient reason why this necessary
article should be taxed; if they did, the argument would prove too much,
it would extend to the use of water and common air. He presumed the old
arguments often urged by gentlemen in favor of manufactures did not
apply, because no encouragement would be sufficient to establish it.

From the nearest part of the Atlantic coast, where salt can be obtained,
to the next nearest in the Western territory, is a distance of eight
hundred or one thousand miles; all the intermediate space must be
supplied from one or the other; over the mountains it must be carried on
pack-horses. This of itself is a sufficient tax upon the consumer; how
oppressive then must it be to increase the burthen.

Mr. MOORE observed upon the inequality, as it respected the consumption
of the article by cattle: some States raised more than others,
consequently they consumed more; some parts of the same State were in a
like situation. The people on the sea-coast pursued merchandise; those
in the back parts raised cattle, which he was bold to say consumed five
times as much salt as the lower country, and would pay the tax in the
same proportion. It has been said, that if they pay more on salt, they
pay less on other articles--agreed to. But there are a number more which
may perhaps unequally affect them; yet it is an argument of small weight
to say, because we in large commercial cities are regulated in a
sumptuary manner for indulging in luxuries, you who are obliged to
retrench them shall pay a tax upon the necessaries of life. In short,
the tax appeared to him not only unpopular, but unjust likewise, and he
would not agree to it.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina.)--If any further arguments were necessary
to convince the committee of the impropriety of the present measure,
more might be urged, though what has been said is certainly sufficient
to demonstrate that it will be attended with a great deal of
dissatisfaction, and in proportion to that dissatisfaction will be the
danger of having your laws contemned, opposed, or neglected in the
execution. It is well known, that however small the duty, it will
furnish a pretext to the seller to extort a much greater sum from the
consumer. Another observation. It is believed that the inhabitants of
the interior part of South Carolina are opposed to the new Government;
it will be a melancholy circumstance to entangle ourselves, at this
time, among the shoals of discontent; yet no stronger impulse could be
given for opposition than the proposed tax; conceiving it in this light,
he was against the measure.

Mr. SCOTT added, that the price of salt where he lived was four dollars
a bushel, the country was settled three or four hundred miles beyond
him, and he supposed the price there to be greater.

Mr. LAWRENCE thought it would be better for the committee to take time
to examine what had been urged against the tax, and as it was the usual
time for adjourning, the committee might rise and defer their decision
till to-morrow.

Whereupon the committee rose, and the House adjourned.


FRIDAY, April 17.

BENJAMIN CONTEE, from Maryland, appeared and took his seat.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair; the question of laying a duty
on salt recurred.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--I had the honor yesterday of delivering my sentiments in
favor of this duty; but observations were made by gentlemen from
different parts of the House against the measure. The principal
objection was, that the tax was an odious one. It was admitted by a
worthy gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SCOTT) that all taxes are
odious; this is certainly true, for the people are not pleased with
paying them; nothing but necessity will induce a Government to have
recourse to them. It is also true, that some are more odious than
others. From what has been said, it may be seen that a tax on salt is
not so in general, but only in particular parts of the Union; the remote
inhabitants, it is said, will be dissatisfied, because it increases the
price of the commodity, and they use more of it than others. It is
mentioned as partaking of the nature of a capitation tax, but this kind
of tax is odious, more from its manner of operation than its nature. We
find in some States where it is in use, the people live easy under it;
for example, it is not complained of in some of the Eastern States. We
have not much to apprehend from a tax on salt in this State; the people
are satisfied with it; at least the complaints are neither so loud nor
so general, as to make us apprehensive for the existence of the
Government we live under. Its operations, though the contrary was
predicted, go on with as much ease since an impost has been laid, as
they did before. I believe, likewise, we have only to try the
experiment, to be convinced it would have a similar effect throughout
the continent; for I cannot persuade myself that it is generally looked
upon in so odious a light as some gentlemen imagine. It was also said,
that the tax would be unequal, and the objects of inequality were two.
The poor man would pay as much as the rich; but this is not the case;
the rich are generally more profuse in their consumption than the poor;
they have more servants and dependents also to consume it; consequently
the whole amount of their consumption must be in a proportionable ratio.
The other inequality was its different operation in different States,
and even different parts of the same State. On examination, this
objection also may be obviated. Gentlemen tell you the high price of
this article at three or four hundred miles distance; is it not hence
presumable that there they consume as little as possible, while along
the sea-coasts they use it with a liberal hand? But whether it be
consumed on the sea-coast, or on the western waters, the tax is the
same, or but inconsiderably augmented; for I take it the great addition
which is made is in consequence of the charge of carriage. I cannot,
therefore, see by what magic gentlemen will prove to you that it is
increased four or five fold. We must also take into contemplation the
number of persons who consume it; here it will appear, that the weight
of population is much greater on the sea-coast than in the western parts
of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Carolina, consequently the consumption
must be greater. It was said, the argument I urged was not a good one,
because it proved too much, that an article of general consumption was
not the best article for taxation; now, I believe the maxim is just, and
when examined it will be found so. Taxes, to be just, should affect all,
and equally affect them, and not be left to fall partially upon a few.
This is more the case with salt than any other article which has yet
been taxed, and I believe is the only tax which will get at the pockets
of those to whom it is said to be obnoxious. But how comes it, if the
other articles are equally consumed in the back countries, that
gentlemen did not urge the argument of expense on transportation, and
the pretext that a tax would furnish the seller to extort from the
consumer.

Mr. MADISON.--From the nature of the arguments made use of on this
occasion, it is necessary to proceed with some circumspection, though
not to depart from that policy which can be justified by reason and
experience. I am willing to trust a great deal to the good sense,
justice, and penetration of our fellow-citizens for support; and though
I think it might be just to lay a considerable duty generally on
imported articles, yet it would not be prudent or politic, at this time,
to do so. Let us now proceed to consider the subject before us, on the
principles of justice and principles of policy. In the first point of
view, we may consider the effect it will have on the different
descriptions of people throughout the United States, I mean different
descriptions, as they relate to property. I readily agree that, in
itself, a tax would be unjust and oppressive that did not fall on the
citizens according to their degree of property and ability to pay it;
were it, therefore, this single article which we are about to tax, I
should think it indispensable that it should operate equally, agreeably
to the principle I have just mentioned. But in order to determine
whether a tax on salt is just or unjust, we must consider it as part of
a system, and judge of the operation of this system as if it was but a
single article; if this is found to be unequal, it is also unjust. Now,
examine the preceding articles, and consider how they affect the rich,
and it will be found that they bear more than a just proportion
according to their ability to pay; by adding this article, we shall
rather equalize the disproportion than increase it, if it is true, as
has been often mentioned, that the poor will contribute more of this tax
than the rich. When we consider the tax as it operates on the different
parts of the United States, dividing the whole into the northern,
middle, and southern districts, it will be found that they contribute
also in proportion to their numbers and ability to pay. If there be any
distinction in this respect, it will be perceived to be in favor of the
southern division, because the species of property there consists of
mouths that consume salt in the same proportion as the whites; but they
have not this property in the middle and northern districts to pay taxes
for. The most important objection is, that the western part of our
country uses more salt than any other; this makes it unequal; but,
considered as a part of a system, the equilibrium is restored, when you
find this almost the only tax they will have to pay. Will they
contribute any thing by consuming imported spirits? Very little. Yet,
this is a principal source of revenue; they will subsist upon what they
procure at home; and will they submit to a direct tax, if they murmur at
so light a one on salt? Will they submit to an excise? If they would, I
trust it is not in the contemplation of gentlemen to propose it.

Mr. WHITE, after some doubts, had made up his mind against the article
being taxed. We ought to pass no law that is unjust or oppressive in its
nature, or which the people may consider as unjust or oppressive; a duty
on salt would be considered in that light by a great number. Our
constituents expect some ease and relief, particularly the poorer sort
of people. It seems to be granted, from all that has been said, that it
will affect them in a manner which no other tax can, though, it is said,
they will not be affected beyond their proportion, as they pay nothing
for the consumption of wine, spirits, &c. because they use none. One
reason which influenced the committee to tax those articles, was to
abolish the use of them altogether, or prevent the excesses they
occasioned. Now will you urge in argument for taxing the poor, that they
already practise that temperance which you desire to bring universally
about? All taxes, it is admitted, are odious, and some merely from
opinion; but if they are odious from opinion, they ought to be carefully
guarded against, especially if the Government depends upon opinion for
support.

Mr. SMITH, of Maryland, said, they collected eight cents in his State,
and it caused no complaint that he knew of.

The question on imposing six cents on salt was put and carried, as was a
motion for a drawback on salted provisions and fish.

On manufactured tobacco.

Mr. SHERMAN moved six cents, as he thought the duty ought to amount to a
prohibition. This was agreed to.

On snuff, ten cents per pound.

Mr. CARROLL moved to insert window and other glass. A manufacture of
this article was begun in Maryland, and attended with considerable
success; if the Legislature were to grant a small encouragement, it
would be permanently established; the materials were to be found in the
country in sufficient quantities to answer the most extensive demand.

A desultory conversation arose in the committee respecting the propriety
of receiving the motion at this time, when it was agreed to add on all
window and other glass, except black quart bottles, ten per cent. _ad
valorem_.

Mr. CLYMER informed the House of the state of the paper mills in
Pennsylvania; they were so numerous as to be able to supply a very
extensive demand in that and the neighboring States; they annually
produce about 70,000 reams of various kinds, which is sold as cheap as
it can be imported. This manufacture certainly is an important one; and
having grown up under legislative encouragement, it will be wise to
continue it. Thereupon it was agreed to lay an impost of seven and a
half per cent. _ad valorem_ on blank books, writing, printing, and
wrapping paper, and pasteboard; the same, without debate, was laid upon
canes, walking-sticks, whips, clothing ready made, on gold, silver, and
plated ware, and on jewelry and paste work; upon cabinet ware, buttons
of metal, saddles, gloves of leather, all hats of beaver, fur, wool, or
mixture of either, all millinery, castings of iron, or slit or rolled
iron, all leather tanned or tawed, or manufactures thereof, except such
as are otherwise rated.

On every coach, chariot, or other four wheel carriage, and on every
chaise, solo, or other two wheel carriage, or parts thereof, fifteen per
cent. _ad valorem_.


SATURDAY, April 18.

Mr. WHITE, from the Committee of Elections, reported that the committee
had examined the certificates and other credentials of the members
returned to serve in this House, and found them entitled to take their
seats; which report was concurred with.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair.

On motion of Mr. GOODHUE, anchors at seven and a half per cent. _ad
valorem_, was added.

On motion of Mr. SHERMAN, nutmegs, cinnamon, raisins, figs, currants,
and almonds, were struck out.

Mr. AMES introduced wool cards, with observing that they were
manufactured to the eastward as good and as cheap as the imported ones.

Mr. CLYMER mentioned, that in the State of Pennsylvania, the manufacture
was carried to great perfection, and enough could be furnished to supply
the demand. A duty of fifty cents per dozen was imposed on wool cards.

On wrought tin ware, seven and a half per centum _ad valorem_; on every
quintal of fish, fifty cents; and on every barrel of pickled fish,
seventy-five cents.

Mr. FITZSIMONS moved the following: On all teas imported from China or
India, in ships built in the United States, and belonging wholly to a
citizen or citizens thereof, as follows: on bohea tea, per pound, six
cents; on all souchong and other black teas, ten cents; on superior
green teas, twenty cents; on all other teas, ten cents.

On all teas imported from any other country, or from China or India, in
ships which are not the property of the United States, as follows: on
bohea tea, per pound, ten cents; souchong, and other black teas, fifteen
cents; on superior green teas, thirty cents; on all other green teas,
eighteen cents per pound.

Mr. FITZSIMONS supported the motion, by observing that one effect of the
late glorious revolution was, to deprive the merchants of America of
most of the channels of commerce which they had before pursued. This
circumstance obliged them to search for other sources to employ their
vessels in. It had been discovered that a pretty lucrative trade could
be carried on with the countries in the east; the merchants have gone
largely into it, and it at present gives employment to some thousand
tons of American shipping and seamen; our success has been so great, as
to excite the jealousy of Europe, and nothing is left undone to cramp or
prevent our commercial operations in that quarter. The Legislature of
Pennsylvania, impressed with the importance of the subject, had granted
it aid by discriminating in the manner he proposed to the committee; and
with the like aid from the Government of the United States, the
merchants may no longer fear the machinations of the opulent companies
in Europe, who are unwilling to let us partake of a trade they so long
have had a monopoly of. Already the trade to India has had a very happy
effect in favor of our inhabitants, by reducing commodities brought from
thence to one half of their former price, and yet a sufficient profit is
left to enable those concerned to carry it on with advantage.

Mr. MADISON felt a reluctance in being obliged to state his reasons why
he doubted the policy of the proposed measure. What, said he, is its
object? It is not to add to the revenue, for it will in fact tend to
diminish it, in that proportion which the importation from China lessens
that from other parts; it is not to increase our commerce, for long
voyages are unfriendly to it; it is not to increase the importation of
necessary articles, for India goods are mostly articles of luxury; it is
not to carry off our superfluities, for these articles are paid for
principally, if not altogether, in solid coin. If the trade is
beneficial at all to the United States, it must be in this single point
of view, that the articles can be imported cheaper through that channel
than any other; and, if so, that it is the interest of the people to be
supplied as cheap as possible. There are no collateral good purposes to
claim our attention in this case. It is not in the nature of things that
we should derive any other advantage than the one I have mentioned,
without it is that of raising our India commerce from its weak and
infant state to strength and vigor; to enable it to continue supplies at
a cheaper rate than they could otherwise be obtained.

Mr. GOODHUE replied to Mr. MADISON's observations, respecting the mode
of paying for India goods, by informing the committee that very
considerable quantities of ginseng, naval stores, lumber, and
provisions, were shipped; other articles were sent also, and disposed of
at ports on this side of China, in order to procure the most suitable
cargo; so that we do not pay principally for their commodities in solid
coin, but send off superfluities to a considerable amount, much more
than if we were to procure our teas and nankeens from any part of
Europe.

Mr. MADISON had not made the objection merely because the specie was
exported, but to show that it did not bring in an equivalent, as the
goods were mostly of that kind which are termed luxuries.

Mr. BOUDINOT declared himself a friend to the Indian commerce. He
thought it encouraged the employment of shipping, and increased our
seamen; he knew its advantages to agriculture. The gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. MADISON) supposed but little of our productions were sent
in exchange for India goods; but our beef, pork, flour, and wheat, were
shipped for this purpose, not to China, yet to ports where proper
cargoes were taken in to answer the trade. Encouragement and protection
were necessary to prevent the large companies in Europe from
underselling our merchants, which they would readily do, at considerable
loss, if they could, in consequence, put a stop to our trade. He hoped,
therefore, the committee would not hesitate in adopting the motion.

The motion was adopted accordingly.

On coal per bushel ---- cents.

Mr. BLAND informed the committee, that there were mines opened in
Virginia capable of supplying the whole of the United States, and, if
some restraint was laid on the importation of foreign coal, those mines
might be worked to advantage. He thought it needless to insist upon the
advantages resulting from a colliery, as a supply for culinary and
mechanical purposes, and as a nursery to train up seamen for a navy. He
moved three cents a bushel.

Mr. HARTLEY was willing to admit a moderate duty, but thought three
cents would be a great discouragement to those manufactures which
necessarily consume large quantities of fuel. He moved one cent.

Mr. PARKER said, that a less sum than three cents would not answer the
purpose intended. Coal came from England as ballast, and was sold so
low, as almost to prevent the working of their mines in Virginia. He
hoped, if the committee were disposed to encourage them, they would
proportion the means to the end; a duty of one cent would be void;
nothing under what was moved by his colleague (Mr. BLAND) could answer
the purpose. He hoped, therefore, the committee would agree to three
cents.

On the question, there appeared a majority in favor of three cents.
After which the committee rose, and the House adjourned.


MONDAY, April 20.

ABRAHAM BALDWIN and JAMES JACKSON, from Georgia, appeared and took their
seats.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. PAGE in the chair.

The following clause of the bill was agreed to, viz: "On all other
articles, five per cent. on their value at the time and place of
importation, except tin in pigs, tin plates, lead, old pewter, brass,
iron or brass wire, copper in plates, wool, dying woods and dying drugs,
(other than indigo,) raw hides, beaver, and all other furs, and deer
skins."

Mr. FITZSIMONS proposed a drawback of six cents per gallon on all rum
distilled in the United States, exported without the limits of the same.

Mr. MADISON asked if the quantity of rum so exported was very
considerable? He believed it was not; and he would not, for the sake of
encouraging that branch of trade, open a door by which frauds on the
revenue could be committed equal to the whole duty collected.

Mr. FITZSIMONS could not say what quantity of rum was exported in that
way; but he feared, unless a drawback was allowed, it would be a great
injury to the manufacture. At the time the duty of six cents on molasses
was laid, he thought it was understood, the committee would allow a
drawback on the rum exported. There seems to be an apprehension that the
system of drawbacks will operate to the disadvantage of the revenue; but
he believed a mode could be devised to prevent frauds, in this case,
fully as effectually as on the importation. If this was not done, it
would be time enough for gentlemen to oppose it; they would have this
opportunity, because a bill, regulating the manner of collection, he
presumed, would pass at the same time with the one for levying the
duties. If drawbacks were not allowed, it would be a very considerable
restraint on commerce, particularly on the India trade, which he
believed was likely to be considerably extended. He was sorry the
gentlemen from Massachusetts were not there in their places,[20] to give
information to the committee respecting the quantity exported from that
State; from Pennsylvania the quantity was but small.

Mr. FITZSIMONS contended for drawbacks generally, but on this article it
was particular injustice to omit it. The manufacture of rum was of
considerable importance in the Eastern States, but it would not be able
to stand a successful competition with West India rum in foreign
countries, while loaded with a duty of six cents per gallon. The tax on
molasses was that sum, and he looked upon it to be the same thing as if
it had been paid on the rum at distillation; one gallon of the former
yielding but one of the latter.

Mr. MADISON thought there were very few cases in which drawbacks ought
to be allowed, perhaps none but what related to the East India trade.
The small proportion of distilled rum exported did not justify so great
a risk; but of the small proportion which went abroad, the greatest part
went to the coast of Africa. He feared this trade was inconsistent with
the good of mankind, and ought to be reprobated instead of encouraged.

Mr. BLAND said the committee had spent several days in encouraging
manufactures, by selecting articles for revenue, and were now extending
their views to the encouragement of commerce. He thought there was some
impropriety in combining the clause proposed in this part of the bill,
and even doubted if it was in order; therefore would vote against it.

The question was put on the motion for a drawback on country rum, and
lost.

Mr. FITZSIMONS had another clause upon the same subject, only on more
general principles; he hoped gentlemen would consider well before they
doomed it to share the fate of the former. It was to this purpose: that
all the duties paid, or secured to be paid, upon goods imported, shall
be returned or discharged upon such of the said goods, as shall within
---- months be exported to any country without the limits of the United
States, except so much as shall be necessary to defray the expense that
may have accrued by the entry and the safe keeping thereof. The subjects
of duties and drawbacks are so connected by their nature, that he did
not see how they were to be separated. Gentlemen did not imagine that
what had been done tended to favor commerce; it certainly did not. Every
impost which is paid is a disadvantage to the person concerned in trade,
and nothing but necessity could induce a submission to it. The interest
of the landholder is undoubtedly blended with the commercial interest;
if the latter receive an injury, the former will have to sustain his
proportion of it; if drawbacks are not allowed, the operations of trade
will be considerably shackled; merchants will be obliged, in the first
instance, to send their cargoes to the place of consumption, and lose
the advantage of a circuitous freight, which alone is a profit of no
small magnitude.

Mr. HARTLEY expressed his sorrow for the last decision of the committee;
he wished the question had not been put in the absence of the gentlemen
from Massachusetts, who were on a business in some degree of a public
nature. The present motion was only just brought in; he submitted,
therefore, to the committee, if it were not best to pass it over for the
present, in order to give time for consideration.


TUESDAY, April 21.

Mr. HARTLEY asked and obtained leave of absence.


WEDNESDAY, April 22.

PETER SYLVESTER, from New York, appeared and took his seat.


THURSDAY, April 23.

JOHN HATHORN, from New York, appeared and took his seat.


FRIDAY, April 24.

Mr. BOUDINOT reported, from the committee appointed to attend with a
committee from the Senate, to receive the President of the United
States, at the place of his embarkation from New Jersey, that the
committee did, according to order, together with a committee from the
Senate, attend at Elizabethtown, in New Jersey, on the 23d instant, at
which place the two committees met the President, and thence embarked
for this city, where they arrived about three o'clock in the afternoon
of the same day, and conducted him to the house appointed for his
residence.

The Speaker laid before the House a letter from the Vice President of
the United States, enclosing a resolution of the Senate, appointing a
committee to consider and report what style or titles it will be proper
to annex to the office of President and Vice President of the United
States, if any other than those given in the constitution; also to
consider of the time, place, and manner in which, and the person by
whom, the oath prescribed by the constitution, shall be administered to
the President, and to confer thereon with such committee as this House
should appoint for that purpose; whereupon,

_Ordered_, That a committee, to consist of five members, be appointed
for the purpose expressed in the resolution of the Senate.

The members elected were Messrs. BENSON, AMES, MADISON, CARROLL, and
SHERMAN.

_Duties on Imports._

The House then proceeded to consider the resolutions reported by the
Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union.

Mr. BOUDINOT complained that the articles were generally taxed too high,
not too high for the article to bear, but too high for the due
collection of the revenue. Every thing we tax should be considered as it
relates to the interest of the importer, as well as other circumstances;
now, if it is discovered that the duties are so great as to make it a
beneficial trade to the merchant to run his goods, he will do so, and
injure the revenue.

Mr. MADISON was sensible that high duties had a tendency to promote
smuggling, and in case those kinds of frauds were successfully practised
the revenue must be diminished; yet he believed the sum proposed on
spirits was not so high as to produce those effects to any considerable
degree. If any article is capable of paying a heavy duty, it is this; if
the duty on any article is capable of being collected with certainty, it
is this; if a duty on any article is consonant with the sentiment of the
people of America, it is this; why then should not the article be made
as tributary as possible to the wants of Government? But, besides these
favorable circumstances, I think the combination of the merchants will
come in aid of the law; the people will also lend their aid. These
circumstances would do much toward insuring the due collection of the
revenue.

Mr. JACKSON seconded Mr. BOUDINOT's motion for reducing the duties,
because he was well convinced they were too high even to be well
collected, unless we establish custom-houses every ten or twelve miles,
like watch-towers, along the sea-coast. When trade is so unproductive,
the Legislature ought to be careful how they make it more worth a man's
while to live by committing frauds upon the revenue than by practising
honest commerce.

There is another consideration which particularly regarded the Georgia
trade. That country, abounding with lumber of the most luxurious growth,
could only exchange it for rum; and a very considerable commerce grew
out of this intercourse favorable to Georgia. This would be affected by
the imposition of heavy duties; but commercial considerations, we shall
be told, form only a secondary object in this business. There is another
proposition in which he acquiesced; it would be more convenient, and
more to the honor of the House, to make their first essay with low
duties; because, if they persisted in laying them high, they would be
compelled to an inglorious retreat, and the Government would be
insulted. In the State he represented, it was next to impossible to
collect the revenue, the country was so intersected with navigable
creeks and rivers, if the people were disposed to evade the payment of
it; and there was no more certain way to produce this disposition than
by making it their interest to defraud you.

Mr. BOUDINOT was not ashamed to confess that he wanted the advantages of
commercial knowledge on a question where the principles of trade were
interwoven; but he opposed high duties on a conviction in his own mind
that they could not be collected. He repeated some few of his former
arguments to show why he held this opinion; but it was not the
particular article of rum that he was opposed to, it was the high scale
on which the duties were laid generally, and that only from an idea that
greater revenue might be obtained from less duties.

Mr. TUCKER wished the duties to be lowered, and proposed to the
committee to strike off seven cents from the fifteen; by varying his
motion in this manner, he expected the sense of the House could be taken
on his proposition first, notwithstanding the rule that "the question
shall be put on the highest sum first." He joined in the opinion that
high duties were productive of smuggling; that notwithstanding the
powers and vigilance of custom-house officers, and the whole Executive,
contraband trade is carried on in every nation where the duties are so
high; the facility with which it could be done in America ought to show
a prudent Legislature the degree of probability; unless this can be
guarded against, what will the law avail? It can avail nothing. Besides,
the higher the duty is laid, the more you expose the officer to the
temptation of being corrupted; when that is done, the revenue will be
very unproductive.

Mr. BLAND would second the gentleman last up, but thought it was not in
order to have the question taken first on the lowest sum.

Mr. FITZSIMONS observed to the House, that the decision of the present
question, in his mind, involved some very important alterations in the
present measure; the consequences resulting from which ought to be well
considered. In order, therefore, to gain time for this purpose, he would
move an adjournment; whereupon the House adjourned.


SATURDAY, April 25.

Mr. BENSON, from the committee appointed to consider of the time, place,
and manner in which, and of the person by whom the oath prescribed by
the constitution shall be administered to the President of the United
States, and to confer with a committee of the Senate for the purpose,
reported as followeth:

      That the President hath been pleased to signify to them
      that any time or place which both Houses may think proper
      to appoint, and any manner which shall appear most eligible
      to them, will be acceptable to him: that requisite
      preparations cannot probably be made before Thursday next:
      that the President be on that day formally received by both
      Houses in the Senate Chamber: that the Representatives'
      Chamber being capable of receiving the greater number of
      persons, that therefore the President do take the oath in
      that place, and in the presence of both Houses: that after
      the formal reception of the President in the Senate
      Chamber, he be attended by both Houses to the
      Representatives' Chamber, and that the oath be administered
      by the Chancellor of this State.

      The committee further report it as their opinion, that it
      will be proper that a committee of both Houses be appointed
      to take order for further conducting the ceremonial.

The said report was twice read; and, on the question put thereupon,
agreed to by the House.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. BENSON, AMES, and CARROLL be a committee on the
part of this House, pursuant to the said report.


MONDAY, April 27.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Vice President of
the United States, enclosing certain proceedings of the Senate, touching
the ceremonial of the formal reception of the President of the United
States, by both Houses, which were read, and ordered to lie on the
table.

Mr. BENSON, from the committee of both Houses, appointed to take order
for conducting the ceremonial of the formal reception of the President
of the United States, reported as followeth:

      "That it appears to the committee more eligible that the
      oath should be administered to the President in the outer
      gallery adjoining the Senate Chamber, than in the
      Representatives' Chamber, and therefore submit to the
      respective Houses the propriety of authorizing their
      committees to take order as to the place where the oath
      shall be administered to the President, the resolutions of
      Saturday, assigning the Representatives' Chamber as the
      place, notwithstanding."

The said report being twice read,

      _Resolved_, That this House doth concur in the said report,
      and authorize the committee to take order for the change of
      place thereby proposed.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Vice President of
the United States, enclosing two orders of the Senate, one of the 13th
instant, appointing a committee to confer with any committee to be
appointed on the part of this House, respecting the future disposition
of the papers, &c. in the office of the late Secretary of the United
States: the other of the 27th instant, for the attendance of both
Houses, with the President of the United States, after the oath shall be
administered to him, to hear divine service at St. Paul's Chapel: which
was read, and ordered to lie on the table.


TUESDAY, April 28.

Mr. RICHARD BLAND LEE, from the committee to whom was recommitted the
report respecting the mode of communicating papers, bills, and messages,
between the two Houses, reported as followth:

      "When a message shall be sent from the Senate to the House
      of Representatives, it shall be announced at the door of
      the House by the doorkeeper, and shall be respectfully
      communicated to the Chair, by the person by whom it may be
      sent.

      "The same ceremony shall be observed when a message shall
      be sent from the House of Representatives to the Senate.

      "Messages shall be sent by such persons as a sense of
      propriety in each House may determine to be proper."

The said report was twice read, and, on the question put thereupon,
agreed to by the House.

A letter from Matthias Ogden, of New Jersey, referring to sundry
petitions from citizens of that State, complaining of illegality in the
late election of Representatives for that State to this House was read
and ordered to lie on the table.

The order of the Senate of the 13th instant was read, appointing a
committee to confer with any committee to be appointed on the part of
this House, respecting the future disposition of the papers in the
office of the late Secretary of the United States; whereupon

_Ordered_, That Messrs. TRUMBULL, CADWALADER, and JACKSON, be a
committee for that purpose.


WEDNESDAY, April 29.

The House proceeded to consider the report from the Committee of
Elections (which lay on the table) on the petition of David Ramsay, of
the State of South Carolina, suggesting that William Smith, returned a
member of this House, as elected within that State, was, at the time of
his election, ineligible; and the said report being amended to read as
followeth:

      That in this case it will be sufficient in the first
      instance, that a committee take such proofs as can be
      obtained in this city respecting the facts stated in the
      petition, and report the same to the House--That Mr. Smith
      be permitted to be present from time to time when such
      proofs are taken, to examine the witnesses, and to offer
      counter-proofs, which shall also be received by the
      committee, and reported to the House--That if the proofs so
      to be reported shall be declared by the House insufficient
      to verify the material facts stated in the petition, or
      such other facts as the House shall deem proper to be
      inquired into, it will then be necessary for the House to
      direct a further inquiry, and especially the procuring
      whatever additional testimony may be supposed to be in
      South Carolina, as the case may require--That all questions
      arising on the proofs be decided by the House, without any
      previous opinion thereon reported by a committee.

      _Resolved_, That this House doth agree to the said report,
      and that it be an instruction to the Committee of Elections
      to proceed accordingly.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That a committee be appointed to prepare and report an
estimate of the supplies requisite for the present year, and of the net
produce of the impost as agreed to by the House, and that Messrs. GERRY,
SMITH, (of Maryland,) and PARKER, be of the said committee.

The House proceeded to consider the following resolution of the Senate,
to wit:

      "In Senate, April 27.

      "_Resolved_, That after the oath shall have been
      administered to the President, he, attended by the Vice
      President, and the members of the Senate and House of
      Representatives, proceed to St. Paul's Chapel to hear
      divine service, to be performed by the Chaplains to
      Congress already appointed:" Whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That this House doth concur with the Senate in
      the said resolution: amended to read as followeth, to wit:

      "That after the oath shall have been administered to the
      President, the Vice President and members of the Senate,
      the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives,
      will accompany him to St. Paul's Chapel, to hear divine
      service performed by the Chaplains of Congress."

_Ordered_, That the Clerk of this House do carry the said resolution to
the Senate, and desire their concurrence.--Adjourned.


THURSDAY, April 30.

JONATHAN GROUT, from Massachusetts, appeared and took his seat.

This being the day on which the President of the United States was
inaugurated, no other business, of course, was attended to. The
President's address to both Houses appears in the proceedings of the
Senate.[21]


FRIDAY, May 1.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a copy of the speech of the President
of the United States, to both Houses of Congress, delivered yesterday in
the Senate Chamber, immediately after his inauguration, which being
read,

On motion,

      _Resolved_, That the said speech be committed to a
      Committee of the whole House.

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr.
PAGE in the chair. And after adopting the following resolution, the
committee rose, and reported it to the House, which agreed to it.

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      an address to the President ought to be prepared,
      expressing the congratulations of the House of
      Representatives, on the distinguished proof given him of
      the affection and confidence of his fellow-citizens, by the
      unanimous suffrage which has appointed him to the high
      station which he fills; the approbation felt by the House
      of the patriotic sentiments and enlightened policy
      recommended by his speech; and assuring him of their
      disposition to concur in giving effect to every measure
      which may tend to secure the liberties, promote the
      harmony, and advance the happiness and prosperity of their
      country.

_Ordered_, That a committee to consist of five members be appointed to
prepare an address pursuant to the said resolution. The members elected
Messrs. MADISON, CLYMER, SHERMAN, GALE, and BENSON.

A motion was made that the House do come to the following resolution:

      _Resolved_, That ---- per annum be the compensation to be
      allowed to the President of the United States, during the
      term for which he is to be elected.

The said resolution being read, was committed to a Committee of the
whole House.

The House then proceeded by ballot to the appointment of a Chaplain to
Congress on the part of this House. Upon examining the ballots, it
appeared that the Rev. WILLIAM LINN was elected.

SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire, appeared and took his seat.


TUESDAY, May 5.

Mr. BENSON, from the committee appointed to consider of, and report what
style or titles it will be proper to annex to the office of President
and Vice President of the United States, if any other than those given
in the Constitution, and to confer with a committee of the Senate
appointed for the same purpose, reported as followeth:

"That it is not proper to annex any style or title to the respective
styles or titles of office expressed in the Constitution."

And the said report being twice read at the Clerk's table, was, on the
question put thereupon, agreed to by the House.

_Ordered_, that the Clerk of this House do acquaint the Senate
therewith.

Mr. MADISON, from the committee appointed to prepare an address on the
part of this House to the President of the United States, in answer to
his speech to both Houses of Congress, reported as followeth:

      _The Address of the House of Representatives to George
      Washington, President of the United States._

      SIR: The Representatives of the People of the United States
      present their congratulations on the event by which your
      fellow-citizens have attested the pre-eminence of your
      merit. You have long held the first place in their esteem.
      You have often received tokens of their affection. You now
      possess the only proof that remained of their gratitude for
      your services, of their reverence for your wisdom, and of
      their confidence in your virtues. You enjoy the highest,
      because the truest honor, of being the First Magistrate, by
      the unanimous choice of the freest people on the face of
      the earth.

      We well know the anxieties with which you must have obeyed
      a summons from the repose reserved for your declining
      years, into public scenes, of which you had taken your
      leave for ever. But the obedience was due to the occasion.
      It is already applauded by the universal joy which welcomes
      you to your station. And we cannot doubt that it will be
      rewarded with all the satisfaction with which an ardent
      love for your fellow-citizens must review successful
      efforts to promote their happiness.

      This anticipation is not justified merely by the past
      experience of your signal services. It is particularly
      suggested by the pious impressions under which you mean to
      commence your administration, and the enlightened maxims by
      which you mean to conduct it. We feel with you the
      strongest obligations to adore the invisible hand which has
      led the American people through so many difficulties, to
      cherish a conscious responsibility for the destiny of
      republican liberty; and to seek the only sure means of
      preserving and recommending the precious deposit in a
      system of legislation founded on the principles of an
      honest policy, and directed by the spirit of a diffusive
      patriotism.

      The question arising out of the fifth article of the
      Constitution will receive all the attention demanded by its
      importance; and will, we trust, be decided, under the
      influence of all the considerations to which you allude.

      In forming the pecuniary provisions for the Executive
      Department, we shall not lose sight of a wish resulting
      from motives which give it a peculiar claim to our regard.
      Your resolution, in a moment critical to the liberties of
      your country, to renounce all personal emolument, was among
      the many presages of your patriotic services, which have
      been amply fulfilled; and your scrupulous adherence now to
      the law then imposed on yourself, cannot fail to
      demonstrate the purity, whilst it increases the lustre of a
      character which has so many titles to admiration.

      Such are the sentiments which we have thought fit to
      address to you. They flow from our own hearts, and we
      verily believe that, among the millions we represent,
      there is not a virtuous citizen whose heart will disown
      them.

      All that remains is, that we join in your fervent
      supplications for the blessings of heaven on our country;
      and that we add our own for the choicest of these blessings
      on the most beloved of our citizens.

Said address was committed to a Committee of the Whole; and the House
immediately resolved itself into a committee, Mr. PAGE in the chair. The
committee proposing no amendment thereto, rose and reported the address,
and the House agreed to it, and resolved that the Speaker, attended by
the members of this House, do present the said address to the President.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. SINNICKSON, COLES, and SMITH (of South
Carolina), be a committee to wait on the President to know when it will
be convenient for him to receive the same.

Mr. CLYMER, from the committee appointed for the purpose, reported a
bill for laying a duty on goods, wares, and merchandise, imported into
the United States, which passed its first reading.

_Amendment of the Constitution._

      [Mr. BLAND presented the application of the Legislature of
      Virginia, to have a convention called of deputies from all
      the States, to consider the defects of the Constitution and
      report amendments; and moved to refer the application to
      the Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union.]

Mr. BOUDINOT.--According to the terms of the Constitution, the business
cannot be taken up until a certain number of States have concurred in
similar applications; certainly the House is disposed to pay a proper
attention to the application of so respectable a State as Virginia, but
if it is a business which we cannot interfere with in a constitutional
manner, we had better let it remain on the files of the House until the
proper number of applications come forward.

Mr. BLAND thought there could be no impropriety in referring any subject
to a committee; but surely this deserved the serious and solemn
consideration of Congress. He hoped no gentleman would oppose the
compliment of referring it to a Committee of the Whole; beside, it would
be a guide to the deliberations of the committee on the subject of
amendments, which would shortly come before the House.

Mr. MADISON said, he had no doubt but the House was inclined to treat
the present application with respect, but he doubted the propriety of
committing it, because it would seem to imply that the House had a right
to deliberate upon the subject. This, he believed, was not the case
until two-thirds of the State Legislatures concurred in such
application, and then it is out of the power of Congress to decline
complying, the words of the Constitution being express and positive
relative to the agency Congress may have in case of applications of this
nature. "The Congress, wherever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution; or, on the
application of the Legislatures of two-thirds of the several States,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments." From hence it must
appear that Congress have no deliberative power on this occasion. The
most respectful and constitutional mode of performing our duty will be,
to let it be entered on the minutes, and remain upon the files of the
House until similar applications come to hand from two-thirds of the
States.

Mr. BOUDINOT hoped the gentleman who desired the commitment of the
application would not suppose him wanting in respect to the State of
Virginia. He entertained the most profound respect for her--but it was
on a principle of respect to order and propriety that he opposed the
commitment; enough had been said to convince gentlemen that it was
improper to commit--for what purpose can it be done? what can the
committee report? The application is to call a new convention. Now, in
this case, there is nothing left for us to do, but to call one when
two-thirds of the State Legislatures apply for that purpose. He hoped
the gentleman would withdraw his motion for commitment.

Mr. BLAND.--The application now before the committee contains a number
of reasons why it is necessary to call a convention. By the fifth
article of the Constitution, Congress are obliged to order this
convention when two-thirds of the Legislatures apply for it; but how can
these reasons be properly weighed, unless it be done in committee?
Therefore, I hope the House will agree to refer it.

Mr. HUNTINGTON thought it proper to let the application remain on the
table, it can be called up with others when enough are presented to make
two-thirds of the whole States. There would be an evident impropriety in
committing, because it would argue a right in the House to deliberate,
and, consequently, a power to procrastinate the measure applied for.

Mr. TUCKER thought it not right to disregard the application of any
State, and inferred, that the House had a right to consider every
application that was made; if two-thirds had not applied, the subject
might be taken into consideration, but if two-thirds had applied, it
precluded deliberation on the part of the House. He hoped the present
application would be properly noticed.

Mr. GERRY.--The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) told us yesterday,
that he meant to move the consideration of amendments on the fourth
Monday of this month; he did not make such motion then, and may be
prevented by accident, or some other cause, from carrying his intention
into execution when the time he mentioned shall arrive. I think the
subject however is introduced to the House, and, perhaps, it may consist
with order to let the present application lie on the table until the
business is taken up generally.

Mr. PAGE thought it the best way to enter the application at large upon
the Journals, and do the same by all that came in, until sufficient were
made to obtain their object, and let the original be deposited in the
archives of Congress. He deemed this the proper mode of disposing of it,
and what is in itself proper can never be construed into disrespect.

Mr. BLAND acquiesced in this disposal of the application. Whereupon it
was ordered to be entered at length on the Journals, and the original to
be placed on the files of Congress.


_Duties on Tonnage._

The House then resumed the consideration of the Report of the Committee
of the Whole on the state of the Union, in relation to the duty on
tonnage.

Mr. JACKSON (from Georgia) moved to lower the tonnage duty from thirty
cents, as it stood in the report of the Committee on ships of nations in
alliance, and to insert twenty cents, with a view of reducing the
tonnage on the vessels of Powers not in alliance. In laying a higher
duty on foreign tonnage than on our own, I presume, said he, the
Legislature have three things in contemplation: 1st, The encouragement
of American shipping; 2ndly, Raising a revenue; and 3rdly, The support
of light-houses and beacons for the purposes of navigation. Now, for the
first object, namely, the encouragement of American shipping, I judge
twenty cents will be sufficient, the duty on our own being only six
cents; but if twenty cents are laid in this case, I conclude that a
higher rate will be imposed upon the vessels of nations not in alliance.
As these form the principal part of the foreign navigation, the duty
will be adequate to the end proposed. I take it, the idea of revenue
from this source is not much relied upon by the House; and surely twenty
cents is enough to answer all the purposes of erecting and supporting
the necessary light-houses. On a calculation of what will be paid in
Georgia, I find a sufficiency for these purposes; and I make no doubt
but enough will be collected in every State from this duty. The tonnage
employed in Georgia is about twenty thousand tons, fourteen thousand
tons are foreign; the duty on this quantity will amount to £466 13s. 4d.
Georgia currency. I do not take in the six cents upon American vessels,
yet this sum appears to be as much as can possibly be wanted for the
purpose of improving our navigation.

I shall just mention to the House one observation more, to show that the
produce of the Southern States cannot bear a high tonnage duty. The
value of rice, tobacco, and indigo has fallen so much in foreign
markets, that they are no longer worth the exportation. The merchants
complain that they lose by those remittances; and they have now got into
the practice of sending off specie; forty thousand dollars have been
sent in one vessel. This is a daily practice, and we shall shortly have
no specie left to pay our debts. The difficulty will be increased, as
no money will remain to pay for the duties imposed on the articles
imported. I hope the government will not insist upon our walking before
we are able to creep, or compel us to make bricks without straw. These
are my sentiments on the present question; if they have weight, the
House will agree with me in reducing the duty; but if the House persist
in continuing the high rates agreed to in committee, I shall content
myself with having done my duty by warning them of the danger.

Mr. AMES.--I hope the reduction moved for by the gentleman who has just
sat down will not be agreed to; for I trust the House is not satisfied
with the reasons offered in its support. A great deal has been now said
respecting the jealousy entertained of the advantages given by this
preference to some States; a great deal was also said before the
committee adopted the measure. I do not think this doctrine of jealousy
is natural to us. I know it has been cultivated by the British, and
disseminated through the United States; they had their particular views
in exciting such ideas; but I do not believe, that because we have
various we have opposite interests. Upon examination there will be found
but few of our interests that clash with each other so much as to admit
a well grounded jealousy. Nature has so arranged our circumstances, that
the people of the several States pursue various employments which
support each other. If one end of the continent is employed in
manufactures and commerce, the other is attentive to agriculture; so far
are they, therefore, from being rivals, that, both in a natural and
political sense, they mutually are necessary and beneficial to each
other's interests. I wish gentlemen, before they insist upon this
jealousy, would point out the causes of its existence. So far from this
being the case, I believe the individual interest of each part is
compatible with the general interest; and that the public opinion is the
same, is clearly demonstrated by the attachment professed by every part
to remain in union--it is acknowledged, that on this principle our
existence as a nation depends.

This being the case, I do not listen with any great degree of concern to
arguments founded on that cause. So far from surveying the affluence or
ease of my Southern brethren with the jaundiced eye of jealousy, I
contemplate their prosperity with ineffable satisfaction. I look with an
equal eye upon the success of every State through the whole extent of
United America. I wish their interests to be equally consulted; and if I
may judge of the feelings of the people, by those of their
representatives on this floor, I may venture to say there was never less
reason to apprehend discord or envy than at this time. I believe the
fact is so, because I feel it. I appeal with confidence to the gentlemen
round me, whether they have not found the disposition of those who were
suspected most to favor navigation, ready to concede what was asked for
the encouragement of every other interest? Whether a like conciliatory
conduct has not been observed by the advocates of manufactures? I ask
gentlemen, whether the language they have heard from the several parts
of this House has not been much more congenial to their sentiments than
they expected, and the measures pursued more coincident to their
feelings than what they looked for? I believe, at the moment I am making
this observation, the breasts of gentlemen beat in concert with it; I am
sure my feelings accord most cordially in the sentiment.

I believe the encouragement of our navigation is looked upon to be
indispensably necessary; its importance has never been denied. Now, I
ask if gentlemen are inclined to support and extend our navigation,
whether they are not willing to proportion the mean to the end, and
adopt measures tending to increase the quantity of American shipping? It
has been often justly remarked, that the Constitution, under which we
deliberate, originated in commercial necessity. The mercantile part of
our fellow-citizens, who are the firm friends to an equal and energetic
government, hope the improvement of our navigation may obtain the
attention of Congress; it is but justice that it be early attended to,
and it will give general satisfaction to find it considered as an
important object by the General Government. The most liberal of the
friends of American commerce only wish for such regulations as may put
our navigation on a footing with foreigners. If other nations have
restricted our navigation by regulations or charges, we must restrict
them by a tonnage, or some other duty, so as to restore an equality; but
this will not be found to be the case in the present instance. The
moderate and inconsiderable duty of thirty cents on foreigners in
treaty, and fifty cents on others not in treaty, will not enable our
vessels to go abroad with as much advantage as foreigners can come here;
so that the proposed encouragement may perhaps fall short of procuring
us a maritime strength equal to our national security.

The observations of gentlemen tending to show that one end of the
continent will suffer more by the regulation contemplated by the House
than the other, are, I conceive, not well founded. The price of freight
will equalize itself. If the people of Carolina or Georgia pay a high
freight in consequence of the tonnage duty, the State of Massachusetts
must pay the same, or her vessels will go to the southward in search of
freight, so that the Eastern States have no peculiar interest in the
measure. It has been suggested, that because Massachusetts has foreign
vessels in her employ, she cannot transport produce for
others--Massachusetts, by reason of that influence which Britain has, is
obliged to receive some of her supplies in foreign bottoms, but this is
only a proof that the evil requires a remedy. I might here easily draw a
picture of the distress to which the Eastern country is subjected for
want of a protecting hand: her shipwrights are glad to work for two
shillings and sixpence a day, or less, and less will not maintain them
and their families. Their lumber is of no value, it lies rotting in the
forests, for want of encouragement to frame it into ships; the other
artisans are clamorous for employment, and without a speedy relief they
will have to desert the country. I believe if this relief is extended to
them, it will give a spring to their industry, and a little time will
render them serviceable to their fellow-citizens in the South. They will
find markets for their tobacco, which is now rotting, and their valuable
productions will be transported to all parts of the globe. From these
circumstances, I am led to beg gentlemen to consider, that the
improvement and extension of our navigation is one of the most important
objects that can come before the Legislature; that there are abundant
proofs that a regulation in favor of American shipping is absolutely
necessary to restore them to an equality with foreigners; and if they
are convinced with me of its importance and necessity, they will not
think the sums agreed to in committee too high for the purpose of
protecting the navigation of the United States.

Mr. BURKE.--Something has been said relative to a jealousy subsisting in
the Southern States respecting the navigation interest; I shall,
therefore, make an observation or two on that subject. So far as my own
knowledge of that country goes, I believe the citizens look with
indignation at the power which foreigners have over their commerce. So
far from being jealous of the Eastern States, they look forward to some
future day when their navigation will be secured to that part of the
Union. They know that it possesses superior maritime advantages, and
expect they will hereafter afford security to them. They know, that from
the spirit and industry of the people of New England, they may derive
commercial and agricultural benefits. This is also my own judgment on
the point. I know they cannot now supply us with vessels to transport
our produce, but I hope the time will shortly come when they will have
the ability; in the mean time, when I consider how much the Southern
staples are fallen in price, and the great debts due in that country, I
must say, that I fear a heavy tonnage will be attended with very
dangerous consequences. There are very few foreigners but British come
among us, and a high duty laid upon their ships will fall severely upon
the planters. The Southern people are willing to render any assistance
to increase the maritime importance of the Eastern States, as soon as
they are able; if, therefore, a distant period is fixed for the
commencement of the high duties, I shall be in favor of them; but if
they are to take place immediately, I fear they will do a great deal of
injury in the present deranged and calamitous situation of our country.

Mr. GOODHUE was glad to hear from the several parts of the House, that
there was a disposition to give a preference to American shipping. This
principle being fixed, it only remained for the House to ascertain the
proper degree of encouragement to be given; the rate agreed to in the
committee was not more than good policy required. The gentleman from
Georgia fears that the people of his State will suffer for want of
vessels, or pay a higher freight than their neighbors; but a high duty
is not contended for in the first instance, it is only such a degree of
encouragement as will enable us to enter into a competition with
foreigners in our own carrying trade. The same gentleman has said,
Massachusetts has not vessels enough for her own commerce, and,
therefore, cannot furnish any for others; although Massachusetts employs
7 or 8,000 tons of foreign shipping; yet it is supposed she supplies the
other States with 30,000 tons. The circumstance of 5,000 hogsheads of
tobacco lying to rot for want of vessels, when some thousand tons of
ours are idle for want of employment, does not prove the want of
shipping, so much as that the price of the article is too high for a
foreign market. If the produce is held so high as not to bear the
expense of transportation, the merchants who import will be obliged to
send off money in payment. In order to remedy these inconveniences in
future, it will be necessary to hold out sufficient encouragement for
the construction of vessels. Perhaps it may be good policy to allow a
moderate tonnage duty at this time, to be increased hereafter.

Mr. MADISON.--I believe every gentleman who hears the observations from
the different quarters of this House, discovers great reason for every
friend of the United States to congratulate himself upon the evident
disposition which has been displayed to conduct our business with
harmony and concert.

We have evinced a disposition different from what was expected to arise
from the different interests of the several parts of the Union. I am
persuaded, that less contrariety of sentiment has taken place than was
supposed by gentlemen, who did not choose to magnify the causes of
variance; every thing we have hitherto done, tends to make this evident.
The importance of the Union is justly estimated by all its parts; this
being founded upon a perfect accordance of interest, it may become
perpetual. I know that the point before us has often been selected as a
proof that there was an incompatibility of interest in the United
States. On this opinion I beg leave to remark, that the difference in
point of capacity in the several States to build ships, and furnish
seamen, is much less than has generally been supposed. From the
extremity of the Northern States until we reach South Carolina,
materials of all sorts for ship-building can be obtained in abundance
from the bounty of nature; even Georgia abounds with materials of
superior quality; although their population disqualifies them for
ship-building at present, yet their advantages are such as to enable
them in a short time to rival the most prosperous State. In the next
place, I may remark, that so far as the encouragement of our own
shipping will be given at the expense of the people of the United
States, it will diffuse and equalize its operations in every part. The
ships belonging to one place will, like the people, seek employment in
another where better wages are obtained, and this, in its operations,
will level any inequalities supposed to arise from legislative
interference.


WEDNESDAY, May 6.

JOHN VINING, from Delaware, appeared and took his seat.

The bill for laying a duty on goods, wares, and merchandises imported
into the United States, was read a second time, and ordered to be
committed to a Committee of the whole House to-morrow.

On motion of Mr. SHERMAN, the House entered upon the consideration of
the amendments of the Senate to the bill for regulating the time and
manner of administering certain oaths.

The following amendments being before them, to wit:

      "That the members of the several State Legislatures, and
      all executive and judicial officers of the several States,
      who have been heretofore chosen or appointed, or who shall
      be chosen or appointed before the first day of August next,
      and who shall then be in office, shall, within one month
      thereafter, take the same oath or affirmation, except where
      they shall have taken it before; which may be administered
      by any person authorized by the law of the State in which
      such office shall be holden to administer oaths. And the
      members of the several State Legislatures, and all
      executive and judicial officers of the several States, who
      shall be chosen or appointed after the said first day of
      August, shall, before they proceed to execute the duties of
      their respective offices, take the foregoing oath or
      affirmation, which shall be administered by the person or
      persons who by the law of the State shall be authorized to
      administer the oath of office; and the person or persons so
      administering the oath hereby required to be taken shall
      cause a record or certificate thereof to be made, in the
      same manner as, by the law of the State, he or they shall
      be directed to record or certify the oath of office."

Mr. GERRY said, he did not discover what part of the constitution gave
to Congress the power of making this provision, except so much of it as
respects the form of the oath; it is not expressly given by any clause
of the constitution; and if it does exist, must arise from the sweeping
clause, as it is frequently termed, in the eighth section of the first
article of the constitution, which authorizes Congress "to make all laws
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in
the Government of the United States, or in any department or office
thereof." To this clause there seems to be no limitation, so far as it
applies to the extension of the powers vested by the constitution; but
even this clause gives no legislative authority to Congress to carry
into effect any power not expressly vested by the constitution. In the
constitution, which is the supreme law of the land, provision is made,
that the members of the Legislatures of the several States, and all
executive and judicial officers thereof, shall be bound by oath to
support the constitution. But there is no provision for empowering the
Government of the United States, or any officer or department thereof,
to pass a law obligatory on the members of the Legislatures of the
several States, and other officers thereof, to take this oath. This is
made their duty already by the constitution, and no such law of Congress
can add force to the obligation; but, on the other hand, if it is
admitted that such a law is necessary, it tends to weaken the
constitution which requires such aid; neither is any law, other than to
prescribe the form of the oath, necessary or proper to carry this part
of the constitution into effect; for the oath required by the
constitution being a necessary qualification for the State officers
mentioned, cannot be dispensed with by any authority whatever other than
the people, and the judicial power of the United States, extending to
all cases arising in law or equity under this constitution. The Judges
of the United States, who are bound to support the constitution, may, in
all cases within their jurisdiction, annul the official acts of State
officers, and even the acts of the members of the State Legislatures, if
such members and officers were disqualified to do or pass such acts, by
neglecting or refusing to take this oath. He concluded his observations,
by submitting to the House the propriety of appointing a Committee of
Conference, to state to the Senate the doubts of the House upon this
subject.

Mr. BLAND had no doubt respecting the powers of Congress on this
subject. The evident meaning of the words of the constitution implied,
that Congress should have the power to pass a law, directing the time
and manner of taking the oath prescribed for supporting the
constitution. There can be no hesitation respecting the power to direct
their own officers, and the constituent parts of Congress; besides, if
the State Legislatures were to be left to arrange and direct this
business, they would pass different laws, and the officers might be
bound in different degrees to support the constitution. He not only
thought Congress had the power to do what was proposed by the Senate,
but he judged it expedient also, and therefore should agree to the
amendment.

Mr. JACKSON.--I believe this House, and the other branch of the
Legislature, have the power, by the constitution, to pass a law,
obliging the officers of the State Governments to take the oath required
by the constitution that their States have adopted, and which has become
the supreme law of the land. I believe the general opinion of the House
inclines to favor this sentiment. It then only remains to examine the
measure on the principle of policy. Here I must give my opinion. I
believe, sir, that it is not time to bring it forward, that it is not
expedient at present, because some jealousies exist respecting the
jurisdiction of the Federal and State Governments. The States had better
be left to regulate this matter among themselves, for an oath that is
not voluntary is seldom held sacred. Compelling people to swear to
support the constitution, will be like the attempts of Britain, during
the late revolution, to secure the fidelity of those who fell within the
influence of her arms, and, like those attempts, they will be
frustrated; the moment the party could get from under her wings, the
oath of allegiance was disregarded. If the State officers will not
willingly pay this testimony of their attachment to the constitution,
what is extorted from them against their inclination is not much to be
relied on. Besides, it argues a jealousy in the National Government,
which can have no foundation. Can any thing show more friendly to the
Union than adopting the constitution, and sending us here to administer
it? If we judge from these circumstances, there is good reason to
believe that the State Governments will pay a proper attention to the
duty enjoined upon them by the constitution. I shall readily agree, if
they do not pay this attention, that the National Legislature ought to
exercise its powers to compel them; but they know the necessity there is
for conforming to what the constitution orders; if they neglect it, it
becomes in some degree a relinquishment of their power in government. No
State Legislature can pass an act that will have the efficacy of a law.
Suppose a judge on the bench were to condemn a criminal to die for an
offence; the sentence could not be carried into execution, if the judge
had omitted to qualify himself for the discharge of the duties of his
office. In short, there would be a total stagnation of the Government,
its vital powers would be suspended, until they were revived by the
action of the constitution. Besides, the constitution partakes of the
nature of a compact; it guaranties to the State Governments the
principles of a republican government, conditionally, that the States
conform themselves to what is declared in the constitution; they must
therefore take the oath directed by the constitution, or infringe the
compact; in which case I apprehend, the guaranty is virtually withdrawn;
this is another inducement for the States to perform their duty.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--I believe, Mr. Speaker, if there is any thing improper in
making provision that the officers shall take an oath to support the
Government, the fault cannot properly be charged upon us, because the
provision is already made, and adopted by our constituents; and we are
to suppose that some beneficial effects were intended by it; while we
are reprobating the measure, let us take care we do not fall under the
censure, which the observation of the gentleman last up brought to our
view, of taking an oath, and neglecting to fulfil the duties enjoined by
it. I believe, sir, that the persons who are to take this oath in
conformity to the constitution, will conceive themselves, after having
taken such oath, under an obligation to support the constitution. It has
been said by one gentleman, that Congress have not the power to carry
this regulation into effect. Only a few words will be necessary to
convince gentlemen that Congress have this power. It is declared by the
constitution, that its ordinances shall be the supreme law of the land.
If the constitution is the supreme law of the land, every part of it
must partake of this supremacy; consequently, every general declaration
it contains is the supreme law. But then these general declarations
cannot be carried into effect, without particular regulations adapted to
the circumstances. These particular regulations are to be made by
Congress, who, by the constitution, have power to make all laws
necessary or proper to carry the declarations of the constitution into
effect. The constitution likewise declares, that the members of the
State Legislatures, and all officers, executive and judicial, shall take
an oath to support the constitution. This declaration is general, and it
lies with the supreme Legislature to detail and regulate it. The law is
to supply the necessary means of executing the principle laid down; for
how can it be carried into effect in any other manner? This explanation,
I trust, convinces gentlemen that the power of enacting such a law
exists in Congress. But whether it is good policy or not to do it,
depends upon a variety of circumstances; for my own part, I think it
prudent to make the necessary regulations for carrying into effect this
part of the constitution.

Mr. SYLVESTER.--I am an advocate for supporting the dignity of the
House, and to me it appears somewhat inconsistent that we should change
our sentiments in order to conform to the amendment of the Senate,
without knowing the reason upon which they have founded the proposed
measure. No doubt but sufficient reasons have occurred to them, but none
have appeared to this House. If we are to follow the Senate in all the
alterations they propose, without hearing reasons to induce a change,
our time in deliberation is taken up unnecessarily. With respect to any
member of this House who has not taken the oath, I concur that they are
to pay obedience to what the authority of the Legislature may order on
this head. Nay, I am equally clear that the power to regulate the
members of the State Governments in taking the oath, is either lodged
with the Congress of the United States, or nowhere. But, it appears to
me, that the State Legislatures have a concurrent power with Congress in
this regulation, for the officers of the General Government and State
Governments are called upon in the same manner: "The Senators and
Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several State
Legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the
United States and of the several States, shall be bound by oath, or
affirmation, to support the constitution." These are the words of that
instrument. The question, then, is reduced to its expediency, whether
it is good policy to exercise the power or not? I am afraid, Mr.
Speaker, if we exercise this power, it may be considered an interference
with the State Governments. I would rather leave them to their
discretion, trusting they would come forward and take the oath; it is
unnecessary for us to intermeddle, if they will conform to what is
directed by the constitution. It appears to me most prudent, that, till
we see a disposition in the State Governments to neglect this duty, we
do not, by law, oblige them to perform it. I wish the Government to go
on gradually in administering the constitution, and not give umbrage
even to its enemies, by a compulsory act, when there appears no
necessity for it.

I could not concur in the amendment proposed by the Senate, even if I
considered it not inconsistent in the House to adopt a measure they had
previously rejected, unless some good reasons were offered to show its
propriety; not but if I have been mistaken, I am always ready to retract
my error, upon better information.

Mr. SHERMAN was not afraid of being charged with inconsistency. He had
voted against a similar clause when the bill was before the House, but
he was convinced now of its propriety; he thought it more eligible to
have a general provision for taking the oath, than particular ones. It
also appeared necessary to point out the oath itself, as well as the
time and manner of taking it. No other Legislature is competent to all
these purposes; but, if they were, there is a propriety in the supreme
Legislature's doing it. At the same time, if the State Legislatures take
it up, it cannot operate disagreeably upon them, to find all their
neighboring States obliged to join them in supporting a measure they
approve. What a State Legislature may do, will be good as far as it
goes; on the same principle, the constitution will apply to each
individual of the State officers--they may go, without the direction of
the State Legislature, to a justice, and take the oath voluntarily.
This, I suppose, would be binding upon them. But this is not
satisfactory; the Government ought to know that the oath has been
properly taken, and this can only be done by a general regulation. If it
is in the discretion of the State Legislatures to make laws to carry the
declaration of the constitution into execution, they have the power of
refusing, and may avoid the positive injunctions of the constitution. As
our power in this particular extends over the whole Union, it is most
proper for us to take the subject up, and make the proper provision for
carrying it into execution, according to the intention of the
constitution.

Mr. BOUDINOT wished to remove the gentleman's objections arising from
inconsistency. The clause that was rejected by the Committee of the
Whole on this bill, contained a penalty for the neglect of taking the
oath as prescribed; but the amendment of the Senate was not
objectionable on that account, because it contained no such provision.

As to the policy or expediency of the messure, he entertained not the
least doubt respecting it. The constitution said only that the officers
of Government should be bound by oath, leaving to Congress to say what
oath. In short it was the duty of the House, as had been well said by
the gentleman from New York, (Mr. LAWRENCE,) to detail the general
principles laid down in the constitution, and reduce them to practice.

He would enforce the expediency of the measure with one further remark.
Several of the State Legislatures were sitting at this time, and had
expressed a wish or expectation that such a regulation would be made by
the General Government; if from principles of false policy the measure
did not take place, the State Legislatures might neglect it also, and it
was well known that their officers cannot act without it; hence the
legality of their acts may be called in question, and give cause to a
great deal of uneasiness and confusion.

The question on concurring with the Senate in their amendments to the
bill was carried, with an amendment, that the members of the State
Legislatures be directed to take the oath at their next session
respectively.

The bill was, by order of the House, returned to the Senate as amended.


THURSDAY, May 7.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, from the committee appointed to wait on
the President of the United States, to know when it will be convenient
for him to receive the address of this House, reported:

That the committee had, according to order, waited on the President, and
that he signified to them that it would be convenient to him to receive
the said address at 12 o'clock on Friday, at such place as the House
shall be pleased to appoint: Whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That as the Chamber designed for the
      President's receiving the respective Houses is not yet
      prepared, this House will wait on the President to present
      their address, in the room adjacent to the Representatives'
      Chamber.

_Duties on Tonnage._

The House resumed the consideration of the report of the Committee of
the Whole on the duty on tonnage. The proposition was to lay a duty of
fifty cents per ton, on all vessels belonging wholly or in part to the
subjects of all other Powers.

Mr. MADISON moved to reduce it to forty cents, and at the end of the
year 1790, to increase it to seventy-five cents. He was satisfied to go
as far as seventy-five, because he expected, under such encouragement, a
sufficient number of vessels for the whole commerce of America might be
constructed. If he was not too sanguine in this expectation, the measure
would be both safe and expedient.

Mr. SMITH, (of Maryland.)--Both in Virginia and Maryland, British ships
pay a higher duty than what is proposed; yet they continue to carry on
an extensive trade in those States, which, in my opinion, proves those
sums to be too low. American shipping derives considerable advantages
from the regulations made in this respect by those two States. If that
protection is withdrawn from them by the General Government, it will
subject our commerce to very great inconveniences and absolute distress.
I shall therefore be opposed to the reduction.

Mr. AMES.--The gentlemen from the southward, who suppose their States
most likely to be affected by a discrimination in the tonnage duty, have
concluded their arguments with a candor, which I conceive does honor to
their patriotism. They declare themselves willing to encourage American
shipping and commerce, though they do not join with us in the sum we
think necessary to be laid on foreign tonnage to accomplish so important
an object. If sufficient encouragement is given, and by our regulation
American vessels are put on a footing with foreigners, I think we may
flatter ourselves with the prospect of seeing our navigation immediately
flourish. We have reason to expect a very considerable addition to our
shipping in the course of one year. Experience has convinced us, that
25,000 tons can be built within double that period, by the town of
Boston alone. The other ports in Massachusetts can furnish 37,000 tons,
New Hampshire a considerable quantity, and if the other States furnish
their proportion, we shall soon find ourselves independent of European
nations for the transportation of our products. If forty cents at
present, and the seventy-five cents in expectation, are thought a
sufficient encouragement for the purpose, I shall not object to the
motion.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--If it is intended to increase the duty at the
expiration of two years, it is certainly proper to reduce it in the
interim; but I very much question such policy. The business of
ship-building, I conceive, stands at this moment in want of the greatest
encouragement in our power to give. If sufficient encouragement is
given, at this time, to produce a quantity of shipping adequate to the
demand, when we once are in possession of them, the business will stand
in need of no further encouragement. If the citizens of the United
States were now in possession of a sufficient quantity of shipping, and
had the ability to employ them, I conceive they would not stand in need
of any encouragement whatever. But this is not the case, and therefore
an encouragement is requisite. At the conclusion of the last war we were
left without shipping, and from our inability to carry on commerce, by
reason of the oppression we were subjected to by foreign powers, the
building of vessels has made but slow progress in the several States.
Hence it becomes necessary to give encouragement sufficient to induce
merchants to vest a greater proportion of their capital in this way. The
proposed encouragement is not very high, and even under it, I should not
expect a quantity of shipping would be furnished equal to the demand, in
less than four or five years. It would be brought forward by slow and
gradual degrees; they will continue, year by year, to increase them,
until the number is competent to the demand. The business of
ship-building being so relaxed, persons of that occupation have turned
to other avocations, and some sensible advantage must appear, to induce
them to return to their original profession. A proof of this is
evidenced by the situation of Philadelphia. Before the Revolution, 5,000
tons of shipping were annually built in that city; last year, the whole
tonnage was but 1,300, so much has it declined there. If it revives from
its present languishing condition, it must be by great fostering care
and protection, and by slow and gradual degrees. It does not appear to
me, that fifty cents are more than necessary for its immediate
encouragement. Gentlemen will be pleased to recollect that it is always
in the power of Congress to increase it.

Gentlemen will recollect, on the article of hemp, immediate
encouragement was contended for. It was not opposed by the commercial
gentlemen in this House. But without encouragement is given to building
and fitting out ships, the demand for hemp will be small; for very
little advantage will arise from exporting it: the great market must be
furnished by ourselves. Upon the whole, I conclude against the motion,
believing our ship-building to need encouragement more at this time than
it will at any subsequent period.

Mr. JACKSON.--The gentlemen from Massachusetts have, I must own, behaved
with liberality. One is willing to reduce the duty to forty cents,
another gentleman is more liberal still--he is willing to go lower; but
not so the gentlemen from Pennsylvania and Maryland; they are actuated
by other principles. They call to my mind a passage of scripture, where
a king, by the advice of inexperienced counsellors, declared to his
people, "my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, but I will add to
your burthens." A steady pursuit of this counsel brought about the
separation of his kingdom. These gentlemen want us even to go further.
They bring forward calculations upon the moment, and pass them for
information,--the mere calculations of yesterday,--and demonstrate
thereby the propriety of their measures. They may consider some States
of less importance than others, because they do not contribute the same
quantity of revenue; but let them remember, the widow's mite is as good
as the rich man's coffers; so the mite of Georgia is equal to the
revenue of Pennsylvania.

Mr. BURKE.--It has been observed, in the former part of the debate, that
the people of the Southern States might buy ships, if they did not
build them. There are none owned in Carolina: we are destitute both of
ships and seamen, and unable to procure them; it would be folly in us,
therefore, to burthen them with duties. Though it is true, that there
are men there who live in affluence, are rich in lands and servants, yet
I believe they are universally in debt. This may be fairly inferred from
the laws they have made to favor debtors. It would take twelve years to
enable people there to pay their State and private debts; they are
therefore very unable to sustain any new burthens, especially when their
produce is so fallen in price as not to pay the expense of cultivation.
I do not say this is to be attributed to the want of vessels to carry it
off, though there may probably be a great want in this respect; and if
there is, gentlemen tell you they are unable to make up the deficiency.
If this be the case, they ought to be contented with a moderate duty for
the present; and as my mind is strongly impressed with the importance of
encouraging the American navigation, I shall join them in doing
something that may be productive of that effect.

Mr. MADISON.--As there is a great diversity of sentiment respecting the
policy of the duty, I am very happy to find it is not prescribed by the
geographical situation of our country. This evinces that it is merely
difference of opinion, and not difference of interest. Gentlemen of the
same State differ as much as gentlemen from the extremes of the
continent. As no objection is made to giving some encouragement, we
ought to endeavor to harmonize upon the quantum. I doubt very much if
any proposition that can now be brought forward will coincide with the
sentiments of this body more than the one that is before us. I am not
anxious to reduce the encouragement too low, nor to throw to a very
distant day the advanced rate intended by my modification of the
measure; so gentlemen need not apprehend any evil to arise from its
adoption.

Gentlemen who are opposed to giving sufficient encouragement to
ship-building, ought to recollect an argument that was considered of
weight in the case of encouraging manufactures. It is certain that
manufactures have been reared up by the fostering care of the State
Legislatures, displayed in the shape of protecting duties; but the
people, by the adoption of this constitution, have put it out of their
power to continue them. The provision for the support of navigation,
made by the several States, ought to induce us to suppose even a higher
tonnage duty pleasing to them, at least in those States where a higher
tonnage duty has been laid. Those States not being able to continue
their encouragement, expect that we will attend to their policy, and
protect their citizens in the property they were led to acquire under
the State regulations. If we disappoint them, they will suffer more than
is consistent with good policy. I am not apprehensive that forty cents
will be so low as to occasion any discontent.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--Gentlemen have endeavored to persuade
us, that a high tonnage duty will be beneficial to the Union; but I
would as soon be persuaded to throw myself out of a two-story window, as
to believe a high tonnage duty was favorable to South Carolina.
Gentlemen tell us we are in great want of shipping and a navy--that
sufficient encouragement for ship-building must be given before we can
expect it; but I think, let the encouragement be what it may, many years
will elapse before we have sufficient for the export of our commodities.
I know Massachusetts cannot furnish us, because there are adventitious
causes to prevent it. The course of the stream in which our navigation
has so long flowed, cannot be altered in a day. The debts due from the
merchants of that country to the British, will be an insuperable bar.
Suppose they should send ships to transport our produce to a foreign
market, they have no connections abroad to transact their business, no
house in a commercial line to employ in the sales. What are they to
bring back in return? They must come in ballast: and will the mere
transportation of our crop be a sufficient inducement to engage them to
come here? If they had more shipping than they wanted, we should still
labor under the same difficulty, and employ foreigners; because the
business is unchangeably in their hands, and the very moment the tonnage
duty is increased, it will be an inducement to them to raise the price
of freight.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--There have been circumstances mentioned in the course of
this debate, which I think may be useful in ascertaining whether the
proposed duty of fifty cents on tonnage be too high or not. It appears
that there is a duty in Georgia equal to 1s. 8d. sterling; in South
Carolina, 1s. 3d. besides something on goods imported in foreign
bottoms; in Virginia and Maryland it is much greater. How, then, can
gentlemen from those States contend that the proposed duty is so much
too high as to occasion the fatal consequences they foretell? When we
consider the valuable produce of the Southern States, we are led to
believe that the difference of ten cents per ton can make no material
difference in the price. Will it materially affect the price of rice or
tobacco? Neither of these articles would pay more than five cents per
cask, if the duty should be reduced.

The duty, therefore, cannot be fairly said to be too high for the
Southern States; it is not contended to be too high for the middle ones;
it is not too high for us.

If we consider the subject as it relates to revenue, it will form a
material object for our attention; if the duty be considered as a bounty
to the maritime States, it will be admitted that it is our interest to
increase our navigation.

The regulation proposed by the gentleman from Virginia, to increase the
duty to seventy-five cents at the end of two years, may never take
effect; before that period arrives, a treaty may be formed with the
nation that is our great commercial rival. I am, therefore, in favor of
a permanent regulation, rather than one holding out an encouragement
that will never take place.

Mr. JACKSON.--The gentleman last up thinks the reduction of ten cents
will not materially affect the Southern States, yet he supposes it will
injure ship-building: how it can hurt one interest by being reduced, and
not wound the other by its increase, I do not clearly understand; for my
part, I do not see the weight of such arguments.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--I consider the difference of ten cents to be too small
for contention; the arguments of the gentlemen in opposition go as much
against a duty of forty cents as against fifty.

Mr. PAGE.--I have heard all the arguments now brought against this
measure, urged over and over again, when a tonnage duty was contended
against in the same manner in Virginia. It was then merely a trial, but
now we have the arguments resulting from experience in our favor. We
find the British shipping still crowding our ports, although the tonnage
duty is twice as great as is now proposed; and although the price of
produce has fallen within that time, yet I am persuaded it must be
attributed to other causes than this. Let the experiment be made with
firmness, and I venture to say, it will turn out the same in other
States as in ours. I acknowledge the gentlemen's arguments have weight,
but they go against any tax whatsoever being laid on tonnage. But
experience has demonstrated to us, that such a duty is attended with
advantages; it will encourage ship-building, and render us independent
for the transportation of our produce. Let, therefore, no suggestions of
the kind that have been offered deter us from pursuing, with firmness
and decision, the plan adopted by the committee.

Mr. WADSWORTH.--If the gentleman who has brought forward this
proposition had proposed thirty cents instead of forty, I should have
agreed to the motion, because it would have destroyed the discrimination
between the vessels of nations in treaty, and those not in treaty with
us; but in every other point of view, I should be against a reduction.
Foreign vessels will be better circumstanced under a duty of fifty
cents, than American free of duty. The charges on foreign bottoms in our
ports are very small; there is not, I believe, a vessel of ours that
goes to Europe, that does not pay, in light money and other charges,
more than fifty cents per ton.

Mr. MADISON.--The subject of discrimination is not now within our view;
it has been decided by a great majority; I think there were not more
than nine members against it. I do not mean, by the arguments that I
have urged, to prove that the increase of tonnage has a tendency to
raise the price of freight: all my object has been to quiet the
apprehensions of gentlemen who hold that opinion. I do not think it will
keep away foreign vessels from visiting us, nor increase the burthen on
our Southern commerce, so much as has been calculated; and even if it
did, the extension of our navigation would be an adequate compensation.
The price of freight before the late revolution was higher than it is at
present; perhaps it may be lower when ships are furnished in larger
quantities.

Mr. TUCKER.--I fear the gentlemen who look for a sufficient quantity of
shipping to answer the demands of our commerce in so short a space as
two years, will find themselves deceived. I think, therefore, it would
be improper to lay a high tonnage duty, commencing at that period; if it
appears expedient, a future Legislature may give such encouragement, but
they are not bound to perform our engagement. After they have seen the
effect of the present regulation, they will be better able to judge of
what is right in this particular than we can do. I am doubtful whether
the measure would place the United States in a better or worse situation
than a duty of fifty cents; a commutation of this kind, in order to save
ten cents for two years, and admit an addition of twenty-five cents for
ever afterwards, appears a doubtful policy. At any rate, the Congress
might feel themselves, in some degree, bound to raise the duty to
seventy-five cents, when their judgments might tell them it was
inexpedient--they will then have cause to complain of our anticipation.
I should, I think, rather be in favor of fixing a certain tonnage duty
at present, and leave it to the consideration of a future Legislature,
whether to increase it or not, according to the circumstances of the
case. I think thirty cents as much as can be given, with propriety, at
this time; considering the interest of the State I have the honor to
represent, I believe it will bear harder on some States than on others,
acting partially and not generally. When I speak of the State I
represent, I would not be thought actuated by improper motives; I think
every gentleman is bound to support, in a proper manner, the interest he
is well acquainted with, and believes to be conducive to the general
welfare. A great deal has been said respecting the duties that have been
laid on tonnage in the Southern States. I begged the attention of the
House, on a former occasion, to a striking difference there is in duties
imposed by the State, for its own particular advantage, and what are
about to be laid for the benefit of the United States. Every duty
imposed, I consider as a tax on the inhabitants of South Carolina. If
that tax is to bear harder on them than on other States, I pronounce it
unequal and unjust. I consider the tax on tonnage in this light; but as
I am willing to give encouragement to our navigation, so I shall not
oppose a moderate duty on foreign vessels; as I also conceive a
discrimination proper between those nations in alliance with us and
those with whom we have no treaties subsisting, I am disposed to admit a
larger sum than thirty cents: I would propose thirty-five, upon the
express condition of reducing the duty already agreed to, to twenty or
twenty-five, when a bill shall come forward founded upon the principles
now agreed to.

The question was here put on Mr. MADISON's motion and lost.

The House then decided upon the original proposition, which being agreed
to, it was

      _Resolved_, That there ought to be levied on all vessels
      entered or cleared in the United States, the duties
      following, to wit:

      On all vessels built within the United States, and
      belonging wholly to citizens thereof, at the rate of nine
      cents per ton.

      On all vessels not built within the United States, but now
      belonging wholly to citizens thereof, at the rate of six
      cents per ton.

      On all vessels belonging wholly to the subjects of Powers
      with whom the United States have formed treaties, or partly
      to the subjects of such Powers, and partly to citizens of
      the said States, at the rate of thirty cents per ton.

      On all vessels belonging wholly or in part to subjects of
      other Powers, at the rate of fifty cents per ton.

      _Provided_, That no vessel built within the United States,
      and belonging to a citizen or citizens thereof, whilst
      employed in the coasting trade, or in the fisheries, shall
      pay tonnage more than once in any one year; nor shall any
      ship or vessel built within the United States pay tonnage
      on her first voyage.

      _Provided also_, That no vessel be employed in the
      transportation of the produce or manufactures of the United
      States or any of them, coastwise, except such vessels shall
      be built within the United States, and the property of a
      citizen or citizens thereof.

The same was, on a question put thereupon, agreed to by the House.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in pursuant to the said
resolution, and that Mr. WADSWORTH, Mr. HEISTER, and Mr. SENEY, do
prepare and bring in the same.[22]


FRIDAY, May 8.

The Speaker, attended by the members of the House, withdrew to the room
adjoining the Representatives' Chamber, and there presented to the
President of the United States the address agreed to on Tuesday last, to
which he returned the following answer:

      GENTLEMEN:

      Your very affectionate address produces emotions which I
      know not how to express. I feel that my past endeavors in
      the service of my country are far overpaid by its goodness;
      and I fear much that my future ones may not fulfil your
      kind anticipation. All that I can promise is, that they
      will be invariably directed by an honest and an ardent
      zeal; of this resource my heart assures me. For all
      beyond, I rely on the wisdom and patriotism of those with
      whom I am to co-operate, and a continuance of the blessings
      of Heaven on our beloved country.

The Speaker and members being returned into the House:

Mr. GERRY, from the committee appointed, presented, according to order,
a bill for collecting duties on goods, wares, and merchandises imported
into the United States; and the same was received and read the first
time.

_Ordered_, That the Clerk of this House do procure one hundred copies of
the said bill to be printed for the use of the members of this House.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That the committee appointed on the 29th ultimo, to report an
estimate of the supplies requisite for the present year, and of the net
produce of the impost, as agreed to by the House, be authorized and
instructed to collect early and authentic statements of the particular
articles of foreign produce and manufactures annually imported into, and
of all the articles exported from, the several States, and the value of
such imports and exports; also, the number of vessels, both foreign and
domestic, entered and cleared during that time, specifying their
tonnage, and the nations to which they respectively belong; specifying,
also, the exact numbers of each particular description of vessels of
each nation, and the amount of tonnage of each particular vessel.

_Duties on Imports._

The House, according to the order of the day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the whole House on the bill for laying a duty on goods,
wares, and merchandises imported into the United States.

Mr. PAGE in the chair.

Mr. TUCKER.--As I am desirous of beginning with moderate duties, I deem
it proper, at this stage of the business, to offer my reasons in support
of this opinion, that if it be the opinion of the committee, we may go
uniformly through the list, and make the necessary reduction. I am
opposed to high duties, particularly for two reasons: First, because
they will tend to introduce and establish a system of smuggling; and,
Secondly, because they tend to the oppression of certain citizens and
States, in order to promote the benefit of other States and other
classes of citizens. I cannot say I have a peculiar aversion to a high
duty on distilled spirits; I may, therefore, be suspected of
inconsistency in moving to reduce it; but I do it on the principle of a
general reduction. If I do not succeed on the first article, I shall
despair of succeeding on the others.

It appears to me that if we lay high duties on the importation of goods,
a system of smuggling will be adopted before we can possibly make the
necessary provision to prevent it. I take it, sir, that proper
regulations respecting the collection is all our security against
illicit trade. From a variety of circumstances, it appears to me, we
shall not only be a long time in completing such a system, but, for want
of experience, many of the regulations will be of a dubious propriety.
Gentlemen will recollect we have an extensive sea-coast, accessible at a
thousand points, and upon all this coast there are but few custom-houses
where officers can be stationed to guard the collection of the duties;
therefore, we labor under considerably greater disadvantages than a
thicker settled country is liable to. I apprehend, if we consider the
present state of our population, we shall conclude it impracticable to
establish a sufficient number of custom-houses on those parts of the
coast most assailable, to render us perfectly secure in the collection
of our duties. If it were practicable, the expense would be a formidable
objection; it would require more revenue to support such a system than
all we shall derive from the impost. But we know in Great Britain where
the duties are high, no expense is spared in the collection, yet
smuggling is carried on to a very considerable amount; the risk run by
this class of people is very great, the penalties are very severe, and
the vigilance of the officers renders detection not very improbable. As
this is the case, under the administration of a very powerful
Government, I apprehend ours, which is only in its infancy, will be
unable to prevent it taking place, otherwise than by a system of
moderate duties. If we begin with laying them high, there will be an
immediate temptation to engage in a system of smuggling, a system of
which may soon be formed, so as to render our future efforts
ineffectual; it is better to avoid the temptation, than to punish the
evil. A man that is disposed to trade fairly, will be brought under the
necessity of falling into the same practice, or giving up his business;
for the higher the duty, the greater the advantage the smuggler has over
the fair trader, being compelled by necessity to engage in a contraband
trade, or to forego the means of a livelihood. Smuggling will be no
longer dishonorable, no longer difficult, and none will be found
opposing the practice; repeated efforts to corrupt will be successful
among even the officers of your customs; they at first may resist the
temptation, but when they find the practice general, their vigilance
will wink at a contraband trade, and smuggling will be considered as a
matter of course. They will consider the reward given them for being out
of the way as a benefit to which they are entitled. For these reasons, I
shall be against a system of high duties, and because I fear there is
danger of a system of smuggling being introduced before proper
arrangements are made to prevent it; or if we had time to make such
arrangements, they must inevitably be ineffectual.

I would observe further, that a high duty not only tends to the
encouragement of smuggling, but it likewise raises, in my mind, a
scruple respecting the allowance of a drawback, as I conceive every
drawback becomes an additional encouragement to smuggling. In many
instances, I fear it may be found, that the drawback will amount to more
than all the duties paid in the States which are entitled to it.
Considering the situation of the States of North Carolina and Rhode
Island, which are not in the Union, their contiguity to the other States
will increase the facility with which smuggling can be carried on; it
will be easy to import articles from Europe and the West Indies into
their ports, and send them by land, or even water to the adjacent
States. When these are smuggled into the United States, they may be
re-exported and entitled to receive a drawback, although the revenue was
not collected upon the importation. If we agree to moderate duties it
will be much easier to regulate our system on this head; if our revenue
is found not to be quite so productive as gentlemen calculate upon a
system of higher duties, which, by the by, appears to me to be very
unlikely, we shall be better able to judge what we can do after a trial,
than we can possibly at present; at any rate, it will be but a small
loss; whereas, by a large scale, we may throw the whole Union into
confusion, and there will be no remedy by which we can recover what we
have now in our power; for a reduction of duties, when they are once
laid, is productive of the most serious consequences. Having, therefore,
a strong impression upon my mind, that we hazard a great deal in
imposing high duties in the first instance, I should not have been
satisfied with having done my duty, if I had not stated my doubts and
difficulties to the committee; but having done this, I shall content
myself with their decision, be it what it may.

On motion, the further reading of the bill was postponed--adjourned.


SATURDAY, May 9.

JEREMIAH VAN RENSSELAER, from New York, appeared and took his seat.

The following communications were received from the Senate by Mr. Otis,
their Secretary:

Mr. SPEAKER: The Senate have disagreed to the report of a committee
appointed to determine what style or titles it will be proper to annex
to the office of President and Vice President of the United States, if
any other than those given in the constitution; and have appointed a
committee to consider and report under what title it will be proper for
the President of the United States in future to be addressed, and confer
thereon with such committee as this House may appoint for that purpose.
The Senate have also appointed a committee to view and report how the
rooms in the City Hall shall be appropriated, and to confer with any
committee this House may appoint for that purpose.


_Duties on Imports._

The House, according to the order of the day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the whole House on the bill for laying a duty on goods,
wares, and merchandises imported into the United States. Mr. PAGE in the
chair.

Mr. TUCKER.--The observations I made yesterday were intended to apply
generally against a system of high duties. As to the particular article
of spirits, I have no objection to a high duty being laid upon it,
provided it can be strictly collected; for I do not wish to give
encouragement to the consumption of that article, though, I fear, no
duty we can lay will tend much to discourage it. I thought that if it
was the general opinion of the House to lessen the duties, it would be a
saving of time to discuss it on a motion to reduce the first article. I
repeat the observation, that high duties are improper, because they are
impolitic, and likely to defeat the object of revenue: less will be
collected on them than on moderate ones. If it be considered as an
encouragement to manufactures to lay heavy duties on enumerated
articles, it is a tax on one part for the emolument of another. Five per
cent. upon all articles imported would raise a considerable revenue, and
be a sufficient encouragement to manufactures, especially if we add to
this five per cent. the expense of freight and other charges of
importation on foreign goods. The five per cent. in the bill is to be
collected on the value of the goods at the time and place of
importation; the value of goods within the United States is twenty-five
per cent. more than they cost in Europe; adding this therefore to the
other advantages, and it will be a considerable encouragement; but,
besides all this, there are many articles made here as cheap, and
cheaper than they can be imported. Gentlemen, who have given us this
information, know the fact to be so in their respective States; in them,
therefore, the operation of the measure would be just and politic, but
it does not apply with the same force as it respects South Carolina and
some other States. Although in Boston and Philadelphia they can
manufacture certain wares cheaper than they can import them, yet they
are not brought at the same price to Charleston: hence the operation is
unequal and a partial tax upon us. Another thing to be considered is,
even if these articles could be furnished us at home as cheap as we get
them from abroad, whether we should have equal advantages? If a cargo of
nails were to be sent to Carolina, I would be glad to know how we are to
purchase it? Would the makers of shoes be content to go there and retail
them? If they would, they might be brought there; but I apprehend, if
they have not established connections in that country, they could never
be disposed of. Can they expect the planters to come in a body, and take
off their goods upon their arrival? It is not even expected that they
could; it must be left to them to judge, whether they do not purchase
them in a better way, by taking them upon credit, and paying for them in
their crop. Gentlemen will not pretend to say that we do not know our
own interest, and therefore they will teach us. These reasons will not
go down with the people; they will take to themselves the right of
judging what is most conducive to their interests. Gentlemen cannot
argue from the fact, that we do not consume the articles made within
their States, as readily and willingly, as those imported from abroad,
merely because we do not wish to encourage them. Facts prove the direct
contrary: we have shown a disposition to encourage articles from their
States which can be made in our State in great abundance. I will mention
a few of them, although it may appear disgraceful for South Carolina to
take from any country what she can furnish herself. We have imported to
the city of Charleston vegetables for table use, which we can raise as
well as any part of the world; yet no complaint was made by the
agricultural interest of that State, that we imported foreign
productions to their prejudice; no duty was imposed to discourage the
use of them; all we considered was, whether they came cheaper when
brought from abroad than when raised at home, concluding the cheapest to
be the best.

On the same principles that are now urged, our citizens might have
contended that we should impose a duty on all articles which could be
produced at home. No imposition on the importation was laid in order to
encourage the productions of our country; the same principle ought to
have induced us to lay a duty on the importation of flour. We make but
little of that; our constituents consume rice in place of it. It might
have been said that a heavy duty should have been laid in order to
prevent the interference with our staple commodity. The planters should
have said, we will compel you to eat rice, and after being some time in
the habit you will find you will like it as well as we; indeed, this
argument might be extended to a measure calculated to oblige the other
States to use rice in their daily food. It might be said, that it was
necessary in order to give encouragement to the productions of the
Southern States, but I believe such arguments would have had no weight
if they had been used; yet they are similar to what have been brought
forward by gentlemen for the encouragement of domestic manufactures.

Mr. Speaker, if gentlemen are content with moderate duties, we are
willing to agree to them and give every reasonable encouragement in our
power, but we cannot consent to very great oppression. I once more wish
that gentlemen will consider great duties as imposing a heavier burthen
upon the Southern States, as they import more, the other less; and the
sum we pay towards the revenue must be in proportion to our importation.
I therefore move, in order to begin with the first article, that
distilled spirits be reduced six cents per gallon.

Mr. JACKSON seconded this motion, and would assign his reasons for it,
but they had been so fully stated by the honorable mover.

Mr. AMES.--I wish the committee may consider, with the attention the
subject demands, whether the duties are too high or not? It is hardly
possible, I own, to contemplate this subject as a practical question.
We shall find it necessary to consider attentively, before we proceed
any further, what the objects of our Government are; and, having
discovered them, we are to consider whether the proposed measure will
answer the purposes intended. I believe in every point of view that we
can possibly consider it, the subject of revenue will be thought to be
one of the primary objects to which the power of Government extends. It
has long been apprehended, that an ill administration of the new
constitution was more to be feared, as inimical to the liberties of the
people, than any hostility from the principles of the constitution. Of
all the operations of Government, those which concern taxation are the
most delicate as well as the most important. This observation applies to
all governments. Revenue is the soul of Government, and if such a soul
had not been breathed into our body politic it would have been a
lifeless carcass, fit only to be buried. I would wish this soul might be
actuated by rational principles, that, in establishing a revenue system,
we might go on a superior principle to that which has heretofore been
the governing principle in the United States; that we might consider
what was most adequate to the object. The nature of the revenue system
in this Government is to the last degree important; for want of the
soul, the late Government was found utterly incapable of invigorating
and protecting industry, or securing the Union; therefore these seem to
be the great objects which we are to accomplish. I consider the present
question as a direct application to the principles of the constitution;
it will either support or destroy them. If the revenue system should
fall with oppressive weight on the people, if it shall injure some in
their dearest interests, it will shake the foundation of the Government.
However the newspapers may stand your friends, and trumpet forth
panegyrics on the new constitution, if your administration does not give
satisfaction, you will find all ineffectual that they can do, whilst the
people are against you. This being admitted, the Government will not
push their regulations too far; they will consider the weaknesses and
prejudices of the individual members of the Union. When they lay a tax,
they will consider how far it is agreeable to them, and how far the
measure is wise in itself. If it is said the article to be taxed is a
luxury, and the Government is zealous to correct the vice, they will be
careful they do not do it in too severe a manner; the principle would be
capable of great expansion: all the enjoyments of social life are
luxuries, and, as objects of revenue, we ought to set a price on the
enjoyment, without suppressing their use altogether. Neither ought we to
consider what the article in this point of view is able to pay, so much
as what we may reasonably expect to collect from it.

Mr. MADISON.--The right understanding of this subject is of great
importance. The discussion has been drawn out to a very considerable
length on former occasions. The chain of ideas on which the subject is
suspended, is not very long, nor consists of many links. The present
constitution was framed to supply the defects of the one that has
preceded it. The great and material defects of it are well known to have
arisen from its inability to provide for the demands of justice and
security of the Union. To supply those defects, we are bound to fulfil
the public engagements; expectation is anxiously waiting the result of
our deliberations; it cannot be satisfied without a sufficient revenue
to accomplish its purposes. We cannot obtain the money any other way but
by taxation. Among the various objects of this nature, an impost on
merchandise imported is preferable to all others, and among the long
list of articles included in the bill, there is not one more proper for
the purpose than the article under consideration. The public sentiment
has strongly pointed it out as an object of revenue. I conceive,
therefore, that it will be our duty to draw from this source all the
money that it is capable of yielding. I am sure that it will not exceed
our wants, nor extend to the injury of our commerce. How far the powers
of Government are capable of going on this occasion, is matter of
opinion; we have had no direct experiment of what can be done under the
energy and popularity of the new system; we must recur to other sources
for information, and then, unless the circumstances are alike, the
comparison may not be true. We have been referred to the experience of
other nations; if that is to guide us on this subject, I am sure we
shall find precedents for going much farther than is now proposed. If I
do not mistake the calculations that I have seen of duties on
importation, they amount to more on an average than fifteen per cent.;
the duty on ardent spirits in all nations exceeds what is in
contemplation to be laid in the United States. I am sensible that the
means which are used by those nations to insure the collection, would be
odious and improper in this country; but I believe the means which this
country is capable of using, without exciting complaint or incurring too
much expense, would be as adequate to secure a duty of fifteen per cent.
as the powers of any other nation could be to obtain ninety or one
hundred per cent. I pay great respect to the opinions of mercantile
gentlemen, and am willing to concede much to them, so far as their
opinions are regulated by experience; but if I am to be guided by this
information, it will not lead me to agree to the reduction of the duties
in the manner contended for. It is said, that if we reduce at all, we
must go through the whole. Now I doubt whether the duty on the article
of rum exceeds that proportion which pervades the long list before us.
It does not amount to more than thirty per cent., while some other
articles stand at forty; some articles again that are not enumerated,
but which fall within the general mass at five per cent., are more
likely to be introduced clandestinely than this article, if it stood at
fifty per cent. I am sure, if we reduce the whole system in the manner
now proposed, all the duty we shall be able to collect will be very
incompetent to what the public necessities demand. We must turn our
eyes, then, to some other source that will fill up the deficiency. There
are but two objects to which in this dilemma we can have
recourse--direct taxation and excises. Direct taxation is not
contemplated by any gentleman on this floor, nor are our constituents
prepared for such a system of revenue; they expect it will not be
applied to, until it is found that sufficient funds cannot be obtained
in any other way. Excises would give particular disgust in some States,
therefore gentlemen will not make up the deficiency from that quarter. I
think, upon the whole, it is better to try what will be produced by a
plan which is favored by the public sentiment. This will give a support
to our laws equal to the greatest energy of a strong execution. The
citizens of America know that their individual interest is connected
with the public. We shall then have the strong motive of interest acting
in favor of the Government in a peculiar manner. But I am not inclined
to trust too much to this security. I would take in the aid of the best
regulations in our power to provide; these acting in concert, would give
a moral certainty to the faithful collection of the revenue. But if
gentlemen, notwithstanding, will persist in contending against such a
system, and cannot offer us a substitute, we must fail of the primary
object for which the Government was created. If upon experience we find
that the duties cannot be safely collected, it may be proper to reduce
them; but if we set them too low in the first instance, and they do not
yield a sufficiency to answer the just demands of the public creditors
and the expenses of Government, the public reputation must suffer.

Mr. BLAND.--I join with the gentlemen who are disposed to lower the
duties. Although I feel the necessity we are under of raising revenue as
much as any other gentleman possibly can, yet I think we ought to
deliberate fully upon the means before we adopt them. It is
demonstrable, nay it is self-evident, that laying high duties, in the
first instance, will beget smuggling, and I fear our regulations,
respecting the collection, will prove the impracticability of defeating
the practice. But when we come to consider the subject in another point
of view, I trust such a system will be found unnecessary. The enumerated
articles in this bill are very numerous; they are taxed from fifty per
cent. downwards; the general mass pays five per cent. The calculations
made by the late Congress, who no doubt maturely considered the subject,
found a list of eight articles only, and those at one-fourth or
one-fifth of the rate now proposed, would produce a revenue of nine
hundred and fifteen thousand six hundred and fifty-six dollars annually.

When we add to this calculation a circumstance of notoriety, the
increase of our importation, we shall find that we levy, or mean to
levy, greater sums than the public necessities require. There will not
be found specie enough within the United States to pay the duties: four
times the rate of what the former Congress recommended, will produce
three millions six hundred thousand dollars. The enumeration is four
times as great also; hence we may infer, that the amount will reach
thirteen or fourteen millions. At least we shall be convinced that we
are upon too high a scale. But where is the necessity of raising the
impost to this degree? There are other means of revenue, and such as
will not give disgust. We have already proposed a duty on tonnage; there
is the post-office, and some other things which the ingenuity of
Government can devise and is entitled to, for the purpose of revenue; if
it is therefore unnecessary to levy such oppressive taxes, what other
pretext can be set up for adopting the system? Independent of every
other consideration, this ought to induce us to lower them. But there
are other and weighty considerations; but as they have been well urged
by the gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. AMES,) I shall not touch upon
them. It is said, that it is merely matter of opinion whether they are
too high or not; if so, let us be careful not to venture too far on such
ground. It will be much better to reduce it in the manner proposed by
the gentleman from South Carolina, and increase it hereafter, than
strain the measure too high at present.

Mr. SHERMAN.--After this subject had been debated in a Committee of the
Whole, and then in the House upon the report, and every argument that
could be thought of had been urged, both on the general and particular
amount of the duties proposed, and the probable effects of a deduction,
I did not expect to have heard the same debate take place again.
Gentlemen have a large field to display their abilities in, but I do not
think it contains any new matter that will induce a single gentleman to
alter his opinion on the subject. The great object is to raise a sum of
money adequate to supply our wants; and let us dispute as we will about
the mode, the fact is it must be raised. The people have sent their
representatives here for this purpose; it is for their benefit that we
raise the money, and not for any peculiar advantage to ourselves; the
objects are to pay the debts, and to provide for the general welfare of
the community. The first of these objects I take to be, that we pay our
debts. There are very many meritorious characters who furnished us with
essentials in the hour of imminent danger, who, from the imbecility of
our former Government, have not been able to get even the interest of
what they loaned us. I believe it is the first wish of the people
throughout the United States to do justice to the public creditors, and
to do it in such a manner, that each may contribute an equal part
according to his abilities. We have very considerable arrearages due on
this account, upon not only the domestic but foreign debt; there are
several instalments not yet discharged, and considerable of the interest
not yet paid. No statement can be made of the expenses of Government, so
as to ascertain what quantity of revenue will be demanded on that head,
but saying that they will be much the same under this Government as the
former, and we shall have occasion for a very considerable sum to defray
the expenses. I believe we are not able to make a very accurate
calculation of what the system, proposed in the bill, will yield. The
late Congress contemplated a million of dollars from this source, which,
in aid of the requisition, they supposed sufficient for the purpose of
paying the instalments of the national debt and interest; but that sum
alone will now be found very short of what is wanted without the aid of
direct taxes. It is very material that we lay the burthen as equal as
possible, in whatever mode we pursue to obtain revenue: a great deal of
care has been taken in distributing the proportion with equity; I
apprehend, therefore, that we shall not be able to make it much more
equitable by any alteration than it is at present. I think, also, that
the people will pay more freely a duty of this nature than they will in
direct taxes. If gentlemen prevail in getting the duties lowered to what
the late Congress proposed, they will find themselves obliged to have
recourse to direct taxation for a million and a half, or two millions of
dollars. It then only remains for us to consider, whether it will be
more agreeable to the people to reduce the impost in this manner, and
raise the deficiency by direct taxes. If these duties are to be
considered as a tax on the trading part of the community alone, they are
improper; but this I believe is not the case; the consumer pays them
eventually, and they pay no more than they choose, because they have it
in their power to determine the quantity of taxable articles they will
use. A tax left to be paid at discretion must be more agreeable than any
other. The merchant considers that part of his capital applied to the
payment of the duties the same as if employed in trade, and gets the
same profit upon it as on the original cost of the commodity.

Mr. WHITE.--When this system first came before the committee, I was
opposed to enter into an enumeration, because I supposed much time would
be taken up in the discussion, which would be an absolute loss of
revenue, perhaps to a greater amount than the difference between the
duties of such a system and the one proposed by the late Congress; but
as it was thought proper by the committee to proceed in the way that we
have done, it would be presumption in me to say, that the duty on every
article has been perfectly digested and properly laid, but I believe
every article stands as well as can be upon the information we are in
possession of. I believe very few, if any, of the articles can be
disapproved of.

Mr. AMES.--The gentleman from Pennsylvania set out with informing us
that nothing new had or could be offered on the subject, yet you found,
Mr. Chairman, the gentleman had a good deal to say, which I thought new
and much to the purpose. As to applying the observation to myself, in
common with the advocates for low duties, I shall decline it, only
noting that the long discussion which the subject has had, would
restrain me from rising on this occasion, more than any remarks of the
nature made by the gentlemen from Pennsylvania and Connecticut; but I am
actuated by higher motives than a regard to my own feelings, otherwise I
should come reluctantly forward to press arguments which the committee
may be fatigued with listening to. But I feel such strong impressions on
my mind, with regard to the effects our impost law is likely to produce,
that I cannot pass it over with a silent vote. I must admonish
gentlemen, that the events which may result from our present measures
are of the most alarming nature. When I was up before, I endeavored to
show the degree of power the Government could exercise without being
charged with an ill administration. I shall now proceed briefly to
consider the arguments used in reply to what has been advanced by the
advocates for moderate duties. I believe it is a good rule to judge of
the strength of a cause by the arguments used to defend it; and here I
must take the liberty of saying, that the gentlemen on the other side of
the question have adduced not one to support their opinion that has
carried conviction to my mind. I consider that, by a decision of this
question, the good which the new Government is expected to produce may
be rendered problematical. Though I am fully impressed with the
necessity there is for revenue to supply the public expenses, yet I
cannot believe we are likely to obtain more by heavy duties than by
temperate ones, and it is to this point that my arguments tend. I do not
believe that in either case we shall procure fully sufficient to supply
the public demands. If we have to procure 8,000,000 dollars, I venture
to say, not near the half could be raised by an impost system; but
admitting that it could by a high scale of duties for the first year, it
could not be done in the subsequent ones. Now I regard this as a
permanent system of revenue, rather than a productive one; if it is laid
high, you will find your collection annually diminish. Now, will any
Government take such measures in gathering in its harvest, as to ruin
the soil? Will they rack-rent their tenants in such a manner as to
deprive them of the means of improving the estate? Such can never be the
policy of this enlightened country. We know, from the fundamental
principles of republics, that public opinion gives the tone to every
action of the Government--the laws ought to correspond with the habits
and manners, nay, I may almost add, wishes of the people. Well, Mr.
Chairman, we are told a tax upon rum is popular; I will agree with the
gentlemen; but still a high duty will induce people to run it, and
though the consumer may pay the tax without complaining, yet it will go
into the pockets of individuals who defraud your revenue. Gentlemen have
complained that we do not offer a substitute for what we find fault
with. I will endeavor to explain a system I would place in the room of
this. I would reduce the duties generally so low as to hold out no
encouragement to smuggling; in this case, it is more than probable, the
amount of the impost, at the end of one year, would exceed the
collection under the present rate. By giving this proof of moderation
and wisdom, we should obtain the public favor and confidence; the
Government would be acquiring strength, its movements would be more
certain, and we could in every subsequent year extend the system, and
make the whole productive; then it would be in the power of Government,
by aids, to improve our agriculture, manufactures, and commerce. Our
imports are now very great; by the increase of our commerce, we shall
probably find our revenue produce twice as much seven years hence as it
can be expected to do at present.

Mr. MADISON.--Let us compare the probable amount of the revenue proposed
to be raised by this system, with what is raised in Great Britain, and
we shall be apt to infer that they are not so oppressive as gentlemen
seem to insinuate. Taking the highest estimate that I have heard
mentioned, and it will not produce three millions of dollars. The
population of the United States exceeds three millions of souls, hence
the tax does not amount to one dollar per head. Great Britain, on the
highest estimation, does not contain eight millions of inhabitants, and
has an annual revenue to provide of thirteen millions sterling. It is
true, she has recourse to other means besides an impost for the purpose
of obtaining such a revenue; but those other means are certainly more
objectionable in that country, and would be much more so here. Each
individual of that kingdom pays eight times as much as is required by
the United States; now, where is the propriety of making a comparison
between them?

Mr. BALDWIN asked if the Government of the United States of America was
four or five times worse to be administered than the Governments in
Europe? Whether the public opinion was four or five times more
unfavorable to such an administration? If these questions are answered
in the affirmative, then the inferences which gentlemen have drawn, of
the impracticability of collecting the duties laid in the bill, are
just. But this is not allowing the General Government the common chance
of executing its laws. If it were the worst Government on earth, it
might be allowed a chance of doing one quarter of what others perform.
If we find by experience, that we are too weak to execute a system which
is so much easier than other nations have adopted, it may be proper to
alter it. We shall be better able to judge how far we are likely to
succeed, when the bill for the collection of the revenue is brought
forward. Such a bill is now in the hands of a committee, and it is to
be hoped, when they report it, it will be found sufficient to insure the
collection; till then, it will be best to continue the rate as it
stands.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--When we consider the arguments of gentlemen on both sides
of this question, we shall find they do not differ so much as, on a
superficial view, gentlemen may be led to imagine. It is agreed, that a
revenue must be obtained adequate to our wants; but some gentlemen think
we shall not receive a greater sum, because we lay a high duty; in this
opinion I am with them. I think the present is a favorable time to lay
an impost duty, and expect very considerable aid from the public spirit;
but I am in favor of a low duty, because I would do nothing to check
that spirit. If we lay high duties, and a man finds smuggling the most
profitable business he can follow, we shall have to contend with private
interest. If we lay a light duty of thirty or forty per cent., the
temptation will be too strong for resistance, and the sum collected may
not amount to ten per cent. on the whole importation; whereas, if we lay
twenty or fifteen per cent. the whole may probably be collected, and the
treasury be better filled, because it does not hold out so strong an
inducement to evade the payment of the duties.

Another objection has been stated, which is of great weight: a system of
high duties will necessarily engage us in a system of drawbacks. If we
are forced into this measure, it will be a great injury to the revenue.

We ought also to consider the inconvenience to which high duties will
subject our merchants. It is a common case in America, that our
mercantile capitals are limited. Gentlemen engaged in commerce can ill
spare so large a proportion in the payment of duties.

It has been mentioned by gentlemen, that Great Britain collects four
shillings sterling per gallon on rum; yet she is exposed to great
difficulties in obtaining it. But I ask gentlemen, whether Great Britain
ever laid such a high duty in the first instance, as we are about to
impose? I believe they did not: they began, I apprehend, with moderate
duties, and increased them as circumstances authorized, when the people
became habituated to the imposition. This is the very principle I wish
to adopt, and show the world that our conduct is founded in wisdom,
propriety, and experience. If we shall discover our mistake in laying
high duties, and are driven by necessity to reduce them, such measures
will operate to the injury of the fair trader; whereas, if we increase
them by degrees, it will be rather favorable to their interest than
otherwise; at all events, it will injure none.

If a sense of the committee could be obtained on a general reduction of
ten or fifteen per cent. on the rate the articles now stand at, I should
be glad to vote in favor of such a motion; but I could not approve of
reducing the article of rum alone, because I do not think it charged out
of proportion with the others.

Mr. JACKSON differed from his colleague, (Mr. BALDWIN.) He thought,
although the British laid four shillings on rum, they did not collect
it; and that their custom-house establishments were so expensive, as to
leave a mere trifle for the net produce of the impost duty. If America
employed such a host of revenue officers as to secure the payment of
high duties, there would be very little left, after compensating their
services, to supply the federal treasury.

Mr. WADSWORTH desired gentlemen to consider, that the citizens of the
United States owned vessels as well calculated for smuggling, as any
that were employed between the Netherlands and England; therefore, they
had little more security against smuggling than Great Britain.

Mr. JACKSON.--It was well observed by the honorable gentleman from
Connecticut, (Mr. WADSWORTH,) that America has vessels well adapted for
smuggling: I can declare it, from my own knowledge, to be the fact. It
is not, Mr. Chairman, the large vessels coming off long voyages that we
are to apprehend danger from; it is our coasters, small vessels
constantly coming in and going out; these can run goods from foreign
ports adjacent to the United States; they are best acquainted with the
unfrequented parts, where they can deposit their cargoes with safety,
and will make use of these advantages to defraud your revenue.

With regard to the equity of the impost system, I conceive direct
taxation will be more equitable. We, in the Southern States, shall then
pay in proportion to our numbers; but under this law we shall contribute
much more.

Gentlemen talk of improving the morals of the people by taxation. For my
part, I conceive revenue has nothing to do with the morals of the
people; therefore, such considerations have no weight on my mind. All
that I contemplate is, drawing as much money as we can with equity; and
here I believe more can be obtained by a less impost than by a greater;
therefore, I am in favor of reducing the duties. It will likewise be
more honorable to the Government to begin gradually and win the
affections of the people, rather than disgust them by oppressive
measures; for if we lose their confidence, we lose our power and
authority.

Mr. GERRY.--It appears to me, that gentlemen place their arguments on
the name of high duties, rather than on principle; for if they were
certain that the energy of Government would effect all they aspire at,
then it would follow, that we have nothing more to do than to name the
sum we want. But if these ideas are not well supported, the
superstructure they have raised upon them must fall to the ground. The
energy of your Government depends upon the approbation of the people. No
doubt the citizens of the United States will support the Government
they have adopted, so long as they approve the measures it pursues, but
no longer. Gentlemen trust much, on this occasion, to the co-operation
which they expect from their constituents; but I would wish them to
examine this argument. These duties are to be collected from the several
States into which certain goods are imported. If the people of
Massachusetts shall conceive any particular duty peculiarly oppressive
on them, they will seek to evade it. This opens a door for smuggling all
the other articles.

I conceive gentlemen to be mistaken with respect to the effects which
high duties will produce on the mercantile interest. I think there
cannot be a doubt but they will be obliged to smuggle; if they mean to
continue their business, their capital will be insufficient for the
purposes of commerce and the payment of high duties. Gentlemen will not
draw knowledge from the experience of Great Britain; therefore, it is
unnecessary to adduce her example. But let us see what we are taught by
the practice of our own States. Massachusetts drew a very considerable
revenue from an impost; she lately tried to increase it by doubling the
duties; but, instead of doing so, they found the revenue lessened, and
they were obliged to alter what they had so injudiciously attempted. I
am willing to suppose with gentlemen, that the Government is invested by
the constitution with sufficient energy to carry any regulation of this
kind into effect; but is this the time to try the energy of your
Government, when your commerce is struggling with every kind of
difficulty and embarrassment? Formerly our merchants were able to extend
their operations by the means of an established credit in Britain; but
unfortunately this is no longer the case. How, then, is it possible they
can continue their trade, when you lop off another part of their
capital? Besides, as was said by the worthy gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
BLAND), there is not money enough in the United States to pay the
duties. I believe it is well known, that our commerce is greatly
distressed by the universal want of specie; there has not been less in
circulation for many years than there is at this time. Gentlemen who
have property cannot convert it into money; then how will the merchant
be able to raise cash for the payment of duties equal to thirty or forty
per cent. on his capital? These are serious and alarming circumstances,
and such as prove to my mind that the commerce was never less able to
bear a high impost than at present, nor ever stood in greater need of
the fostering hand of Government for its support. If gentlemen are
convinced of the truth of these observations, and they are so notorious
that they cannot have escaped the knowledge of any one, they will see
the necessity of turning their attention to the encouragement of
navigation and trade, rather than think of drawing an oppressive revenue
from them.

Mr. MADISON submitted, whether the burthen would not operate more on the
Southern States than the Northern. The duties could be collected in the
Middle States--this was proved by the experience of some years; for they
had collected in those States, in many instances, duties nearly equal to
what were proposed. In the Eastern States, it was the interest of the
manufacturers to see the duties were well collected; they had been
imposed to favor their interests. The distillers would exert themselves
in aiding the Government to collect the duty on foreign rum, because it
particularly interfered with country rum; from hence he concluded that
the impost could be collected with tolerable certainty even in that
country most convenient for carrying on a clandestine trade.

Mr. AMES contended that it would be the particular interest of one set
of men to evade the payment of the duties. As mankind was governed by
interest, it required all the attention of the Government to prevent a
breach of the law; because, when the banks and bulwarks of defence were
once broken down, the full tide of clandestine commerce would overflow
the country. Gentlemen recollected the circumstances which attended the
depreciation of the late continental money. Some persons, from motives
of interest or necessity, first made a distinction between it and
specie, and although every exertion was made by the patriotic among our
citizens to prevent the alarming evil, yet every thing was insufficient;
they were at length obliged to acquiesce in measures they could not
prevent. This was the case on that occasion, and will be the case
whenever our laws or regulations run counter to private interest.

Mr. SHERMAN.--The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. AMES) has said, that
because we cannot raise the whole sum necessary to supply our wants, we
should be content to stop half way. I know we shall not be able to
obtain money enough by the impost to pay off our whole debt, but then I
wish to raise as much as possible in this way. I believe the people are
able to pay as much as the necessities of the Government require; if
they are not, we shall never restore the public credit, which is one of
the chief ends of our appointment. I believe they are not only able but
willing to contribute sufficient for this purpose. The resources of this
country are very great, if they are properly called into action; and
although they may not be so great as those of Britain, yet it should be
remembered, that nation has occasion for twelve times as much revenue as
the United States.

Gentlemen have had recourse to popular opinion in support of their
arguments. Popular opinion is founded in justice, and the only way to
know if the popular opinion is in favor of a measure, is to examine
whether the measure is just and right in itself. I think whatever is
proper and right, the people will judge of and comply with. The people
wish that the Government may derive respect from the justice of its
measures; they have given it their support on this account. I believe
the popular opinion is in favor of raising a revenue to pay our debts,
and if we do right, they will not neglect their duty; therefore, the
arguments that are urged in favor of a low duty will prove that the
people are contented with what the bill proposes. The people at this
time pay a higher duty on imported rum than what is proposed in this
system, even in Massachusetts; it is true, it is partly laid by way of
excise, but I can see no reason against doing it in this way as well as
the other.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--It has been intimated by gentlemen in favor of high
duties, that it will limit the consumption of foreign articles; if this
be the case, the quantity imported will be lessened; if it is our object
to raise revenue, it is certainly unwise to destroy the object from
which the revenue is to be collected. It is supposed the amount of the
duties will be insufficient to answer the public wants; and yet the
public creditors have great expectations from this resource. Let us
therefore be careful how we destroy it; if revenue is our primary
object, and the other considerations but secondary, we should do nothing
to operate against that principle.

Mr. MADISON.--It does not follow, because it will in some degree limit
the consumption, that we ought not to lay a high duty on rum; if it has
that effect, it will be an ample compensation for the loss of revenue;
but probably, as we extinguish our debt, we shall have the less occasion
for the revenue itself.

Mr. GOODHUE.--The object of the committee is to raise revenue, I take
it. This would, perhaps, be best done by reducing the duty, but I am not
inclined to reduce it so low as some gentlemen seem to desire; it may be
reduced a few cents, and therefore I move to insert ten instead of
twelve.

The question was taken for striking out the twelve cents, as it stood in
the bill, on all spirits of Jamaica proof, imported from the dominions
of nations in alliance with the United States, in order to leave it
blank, to be filled up hereafter.

The House divided on the question; 19 in favor of the motion, and 26
against it.

So it passed in the negative.

Adjourned.


MONDAY, May 11.

_On Titles._

The House took into consideration the message from the Senate,
communicated on Saturday last, respecting the disagreement of the Senate
to the report of a joint committee, on the subject of annexing titles to
the offices of President and Vice President.

Mr. PARKER moved a resolution to the following effect:

      _Resolved_, That this House having, on Tuesday last,
      adopted the report of their committee appointed to confer
      with a committee of the Senate, stating, "That it is not
      proper to annex any style or title to the respective
      styles or titles of office expressed in the constitution;"
      and having, in their address to the President of the United
      States on Friday last, proceeded to act pursuant thereto,
      deem it improper to accede to the proposition made by the
      Senate, as communicated by their order of the 9th instant,
      for appointing a committee to confer with a committee of
      this House, in considering and reporting under what title
      it will be proper for the President of the United States in
      future to be addressed.

Mr. PAGE seconded the motion, observing, that in his opinion, the House
had no right to interfere in the business: the constitution expressly
prescribed the power of Congress as to bestowing titles. He did not
conceive the real honor or dignity of either of those situations to
consist in high sounding titles. The House had, on a former occasion,
expressed their disapprobation of any title being annexed to their own
members, and very justly too. After having so fully and explicitly
declared their sentiments against such measures, he thought it behooved
them to be explicit with the Senate. Indeed, he felt himself a good deal
hurt, that gentlemen on this floor, after having refused their
permission to the Clerk to enter any more than their plain names on the
journal, should be standing up and addressing one another by the title
of "the honorable gentlemen." He wished the practice could be got over,
because it added neither to the honor nor dignity of the House.

Mr. LEE approved of the appointment of a committee to confer with a
committee of the Senate, as to the mode due to the occasion; but he was
against adding any title.

Mr. TUCKER.--When this business was first brought before the House, I
objected to the appointment of a committee to confer with a committee of
the Senate, because I thought it a subject which this House had no right
to take into consideration. I then stood single and unsupported in my
opinion, but have had the pleasure to find since, that some gentlemen on
this floor agree that I was right. If I was then right, I shall, from
stronger reasoning, be right now in opposing the appointment of another
committee on the same subject. The joint committee reported that no
titles ought to be given; we agreed to the report, and I was in hopes we
should have heard no more of the matter. The Senate rejected the report,
and have now sent us a resolution, expressive of a determination to give
a title, to which they desire our concurrence. I am still of the opinion
that we were wrong in appointing the first committee, and think that we
shall be guilty of greater impropriety if we now appoint another. What,
sir, is the intention of this business? Will it not alarm our
fellow-citizens? Will it not give them just cause of alarm? Will they
not say, that they have been deceived by the convention that framed the
constitution? That it has been contrived with a view to lead them on by
degrees to that kind of government which they have thrown off with
abhorrence? Shall we not justify the fears of those who were opposed to
the constitution, because they considered it as insidious and hostile to
the liberties of the people? One of its warmest advocates, one of the
framers of it, (Mr. Wilson, of Pennsylvania,) has recommended it by
calling it a pure democracy. Does this look like a democracy, when one
of the first acts of the two branches of the Legislature is to confer
titles? Surely not. To give dignity to our government, we must give a
lofty title to our chief magistrate. Does the dignity of a nation
consist in the distance between the first magistrate and his citizens?
Does it consist in the exaltation of one man, and the humiliation of the
rest? If so, the most despotic government is the most dignified; and to
make our dignity complete, we must give a high title, an embroidered
robe, a princely equipage, and, finally, a crown and hereditary
succession. Let us, sir, establish tranquillity and good order at home,
and wealth, strength, and national dignity will be the infallible
result. The aggregate of dignity will be the same whether it be divided
among all, or centred in one. And whom, sir, do we mean to gratify? Is
it our present President? Certainly, if we expect to please him, we
shall be greatly disappointed. He has a real dignity of character, and
is above such little vanities. We shall give him infinite pain; we shall
do him an essential injury. We shall place him in a most delicate and
disagreeable situation; we shall reduce him to the necessity of evincing
to the world his disapprobation of our measures, or of risking some
diminution of that high reputation for disinterested patriotism which he
has so justly acquired. It is not for his gratification; for whose,
then, are we to do this? Where is the man among us who has the
presumption and vanity to expect it? Who is it that shall say--for my
aggrandizement three millions of people have entered into a calamitous
war; they have persevered in it for eight long years; they have
sacrificed their property, they have spilt their blood, they have
rendered thousands of families wretched by the loss of their only
protectors and means of support? This spirit of imitation, sir, this
spirit of mimicry and apery will be the ruin of our country. Instead of
giving us dignity in the eye of foreigners, it will expose us to be
laughed at as apes. They gave us credit for our exertions in effecting
the revolution, but they will say that we want independence of spirit to
render it a blessing to us.

Mr. TRUMBULL moved for the appointment of a Committee of Conference, to
consider on the difference which appeared in the votes of the two Houses
upon the report of the joint committee.

Mr. BURKE hoped the House would express their decided disapprobation of
bestowing titles in any shape whatever; it would be an indignity in the
House to countenance any measures of this nature. Perhaps some gentlemen
might think the subject was a matter of indifference; but it did not
appear to him in that light. The introduction of two words which he
could mention into the titles of these officers, would alter the
constitution itself; but he would forbear to say any thing further, as
he had a well-grounded expectation that the House would take no further
notice of the business.

Mr. GOODHUE thought the conference unnecessary, because the House had
not only adopted the report of their committee, but proceeded to act in
pursuance thereof.

Mr. SENEY joined the last gentleman in sentiment, and thought it an
unnecessary waste of time to give the subject any longer discussion.

Mr. MADISON.--I may be well disposed to concur in opinion with gentlemen
that we ought not to recede from our former vote on this subject, yet at
the same time I may wish to proceed with due respect to the Senate, and
give dignity and weight to our own opinion, so far as it contradicts
theirs, by the deliberate and decent manner in which we decide. For my
part, Mr. Speaker, I do not conceive titles to be so pregnant with
danger as some gentlemen apprehend. I believe a President of the United
States, clothed with all the powers given in the constitution, would not
be a dangerous person to the liberties of America, if you were to load
him with all the titles of Europe or Asia. We have seen superb and
august titles given, without conferring power and influence, or without
even obtaining respect. One of the most impotent sovereigns in Europe
has assumed a title as high as human invention can devise; for example,
what words can imply a greater magnitude of power and strength than that
of High Mightiness? This title seems to border almost upon impiety; it
is assuming the pre-eminence and omnipotence of the Deity; yet this
title, and many others cast in the same mould, have obtained a long time
in Europe, but have they conferred power? Does experience sanction such
an opinion? Look at the republic I have alluded to, and say if their
present state warrants the idea.

I am not afraid of titles, because I fear the danger of any power they
could confer, but I am against them because they are not very
reconcilable with the nature of our Government or the genius of the
people. Even if they were proper in themselves, they are not so at this
juncture of time. But my strongest objection is founded in principle;
instead of increasing, they diminish the true dignity and importance of
a republic, and would in particular, on this occasion, diminish the true
dignity of the first magistrate himself. If we give titles, we must
either borrow or invent them. If we have recourse to the fertile fields
of luxuriant fancy, and deck out an airy being of our own creation, it
is a great chance but its fantastic properties would render the empty
phantom ridiculous and absurd. If we borrow, the servile imitation will
be odious, not to say ridiculous also; we must copy from the pompous
sovereigns of the East, or follow the inferior potentates of Europe; in
either case, the splendid tinsel or gorgeous robe would disgrace the
manly shoulders of our chief. The more truly honorable shall we be, by
showing a total neglect and disregard to things of this nature; the more
simple, the more republican we are in our manners, the more rational
dignity we shall acquire; therefore, I am better pleased with the report
adopted by the House, than I should have been with any other whatsoever.

The Senate, no doubt, entertain different sentiments on this subject. I
would wish, therefore, to treat their opinion with respect and
attention. I would desire to justify the reasonable and republican
decision of this House to the other branch of Congress in order to
prevent a misunderstanding. But that the motion of my worthy colleague
(Mr. PARKER) has possession of the House, I would move a more temperate
proposition, and I think it deserves some pains to bring about that good
will and urbanity, which for the despatch of public business ought to be
kept up between the two Houses. I do not think it would be a sacrifice
of dignity to appoint a Committee of Conference, but imagine it would
tend to cement that harmony which has hitherto been preserved between
the Senate and this House; therefore, while I concur with the gentlemen
who express, in such decided terms, their disapprobation of bestowing
titles, I concur also with those who are for the appointment of a
Committee of Conference, not apprehending they will depart from the
principles adopted and acted upon by the House.

Mr. WHITE did not approve of a Committee of Conference, because the
House had already determined the question by unanimously adopting the
report of the joint committee. He did not think that it was worth while
having the subject longer contested; he was satisfied both the spirit of
the constitution and the spirit of the people disapproved of titles.

Mr. BLAND would be careful of giving umbrage to the Senate, because he
wished that the unanimity and moderation which subsisted between the two
Houses might continue. He considered the present as a very proper
opportunity for the appointment of a Committee of Conference. The two
Houses had disagreed on the report of their committees; it was proper,
therefore, that they should mutually assign their reasons, in order to
bring about an agreement to the same resolution. He hoped, therefore,
that such a committee would be appointed, though he had no expectation
that the House would give up an opinion they so justly and decidedly
entertained respecting titles.

Mr. PARKER wanted to know what was the object of gentlemen in the
appointment of a Committee of Conference? The committee could only say
that the House had refused their consent to annexing any titles whatever
to the President and Vice President; for certainly the committee would
not descend into the merits of a question already established by the
House. For his part, he could not see what purpose was to be answered
by the appointment of such a committee. He wished to have done with the
subject, because while it remained a question in the House, the people's
minds would be much agitated; it was impossible that a true republican
spirit could remain unconcerned when a principle was under
consideration, so repugnant to the principles of equal liberty.

Mr. SHERMAN thought it was pretty plain that the House could not comply
with the proposition of the Senate. The appointment of a committee, on
the part of the House, to consider and determine what style or title
will be proper to annex to the President and Vice President, would imply
that the House meant that some style or title should be given. Now this
they never could intend, because they have decided that no style or
title ought to be given; it will be sufficient to adduce this reason for
not complying with the request of the Senate.

Mr. JACKSON wondered what title the Senate had in contemplation to add
dignity or lustre to the person that filled the presidential chair. For
his part, he could conceive none. Would it add to his fame to be called
after the petty and insignificant princes of Europe? Would styling him
His Serene Highness, His Grace, or Mightiness, add one tittle to the
solid properties he possessed? He thought it would not; and therefore
conceived the proposition to be trifling with the dignity of the
Government. As a difference had taken place between the two Houses, he
had no objection to a conference taking place. He hoped it might be
productive of good consequences, and that the Senate might be induced to
follow the laudable example of the House.

Mr. MADISON was of opinion, that the House might appoint a Committee of
Conference without being supposed to countenance the measure. The
standing rule of the House declared, that, in case of disagreeing votes,
a Committee of Conference should be appointed. Now, as the case provided
for in the rule had actually happened, he inferred that it was proper to
proceed in the manner directed by the rules of the House. The subject
was still open to discussion, but there was little probability that the
House would rescind their adoption of the report. I presume gentlemen do
not intend to compel the Senate into their measures; they should
recollect that the Senate stand upon independent ground, and will do
nothing but what they are convinced of the propriety of; it would be
better, therefore, to treat them with delicacy, and offer some reasons
to induce them to come into our measure. He expected this would be the
result of a conference, and therefore was in favor of such a motion.

Mr. SENEY intended nothing disrespectful to the Senate, but he
conceived, after having adopted the report of the committee, it would
derogate from their own dignity to rescind a unanimous resolution; and
for what other purpose could a conference be appointed by the House?
They must certainly suppose that there might be ground for changing
their opinion. Nothing of this kind appeared to him, and therefore he
was of opinion, it would be a useless consumption to waste any more time
about it.

Mr. CLYMER thought that there was little occasion to add any title to
either the President or Vice President. He was very well convinced, by
experience, that titles did not confer power; on the contrary, they
frequently made their possessors ridiculous. The most impotent
potentates, the most insignificant powers, generally assumed the highest
and most lofty titles. That they do not indicate power and prerogative,
is very observable in the English history; for when the chief magistrate
of that nation bore the simple style of His Grace or Highness, his
prerogatives were much more extensive than since he has become His Most
Sacred Majesty.

Titular distinctions are said to be unpopular in the United States; yet
a person would be led to think otherwise, from the vast number of
honorable gentlemen we have in America. As soon as a man is selected for
the public service, his fellow-citizens, with liberal hand, shower down
titles on him--either excellency or honorable. He would venture to
affirm, there were more honorable esquires in the United States than in
all the world besides. He wished to check a propensity so notoriously
evidenced in favor of distinctions, and hoped the example of the House
might prevail to extinguish that predilection which appeared in favor of
titles.

Mr. PAGE.--If I thought the motion made by my colleague in the least
degree disrespectful, I should not have seconded it. I would be the last
man on this floor to treat that worthy body with disrespect; but I
believe it cannot be construed to have such a meaning. If we were to let
the resolution lie on the table, it would not be disrespectful. But what
is the object of the motion? Simply to inform the Senate that we cannot
rescind a resolution adopted in consequence of the report of a joint
committee. If the conduct of either House is in the least degree
disrespectful, (though I do not conceive it is,) the body who declined
adopting the report, after knowing the sense of the other to be in its
favor, is the most so.

But on what are a committee to confer? Not upon what title shall be
bestowed, because we have no right to enter on the subject; and here I
must tell gentlemen I differ from them, when they think titles can do no
harm. Titles, sir, I say, may do harm, and have done harm. If we contend
now for a right to confer titles, I apprehend the time will come when we
shall form a reservoir for honor, and make our President the fountain of
it. In such case, may not titles do an injury to the Union? They have
been the occasion of an eternal faction in the kingdom we were formerly
connected with, and may beget like inquietude in America; for I contend,
if you give the title, you must follow it with the robe and the diadem,
and then the principles of your government are subverted.

Mr. LEE moved the previous question, as the best mode of getting rid of
the motion before the House: he was supported by a sufficient number.
And on the question, Shall the main question be now put? it passed in
the negative; and so the motion was lost.

On motion, it was

      _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed, to join with
      such committee as the Senate may appoint, to confer on the
      disagreeing votes of the two Houses, upon the report of
      their joint committee, appointed to consider what titles
      shall be given to the President and Vice President of the
      United States, if any other than those given in the
      constitution.

Messrs. MADISON, PAGE, BENSON, TRUMBULL, and SHERMAN were the committee
elected.


_Impost Bill._

The House then went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for laying
a duty on goods, wares, and merchandises imported into the United
States. Mr. PAGE in the chair.

The question on laying a duty on molasses being under consideration:

Mr. TUCKER.--Notwithstanding I am anxious for a reduction of the duties
on all the articles in the bill, yet my vote on molasses will be
regulated by what the committee shall determine in other cases, as I do
not conceive it to be out of proportion. If a general reduction takes
place on the other articles, I shall be disposed to make a reduction on
this article; but as mine is but a single vote, gentlemen may not be
inclined to favor my proposition for a general reduction in order to
gain my assent to a reduction on this particular article.

Mr. GOODHUE was of opinion that the duties were too high for collection;
but he did not agree with the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. TUCKER)
that the duty on molasses was rated in proportion to the other articles,
and therefore the question, whether molasses shall be reduced or not,
did not depend on a general reduction, but on its own bottom; if it was
rated too high for collection and proportion, the committee would agree
to reduce it.

Mr. FITZSIMONS expected the gentleman from South Carolina would vote in
the manner he had pledged himself; he had promised to vote for reducing
the duty on molasses if the committee reduced the duty on other
articles; now, as they had decided against a reduction, he hoped the
gentleman would be in favor of the duty on molasses, as it stood in the
bill, and not vote in the manner he had promised.

Mr. TUCKER.--The gentleman last up has certainly misunderstood me. I
made no promise. I said my vote would depend upon the reduction of the
other articles, but I was indifferent as to rum; I did not consider the
State I represented as being either particularly benefited or injured by
a duty on rum; and therefore did not urge any arguments in favor of
reducing that article, more than I thought it might be proper to
preserve the ratio, as fixed by the House, between the several articles.
If gentlemen think rum can bear a high duty, and be safely collected, I
have no objection to letting it remain. But there are some articles that
bear heavily and unequally upon South Carolina; now, I think it my duty
to vote in such a manner as to prevent her from bearing an undue
proportion of the tax to be collected; I am, consequently, obliged to
vote for a high tax on articles used in other States, (if my State is
highly taxed,) however unequally it may fall. I shall therefore vote so
as to endeavor to oblige other States to bear their true proportion of
the aggregate sum. I wish to defer any determination on the article of
molasses until we have gone through the other articles, that I may know
how to vote on this. If gentlemen think my single vote of no
consequence, they may proceed; but I may think the duty too high on
molasses, and may be disposed to make it five cents, or less, if a
reduction is made in the other articles; but I would not be understood
to pledge myself for any particular sum.

Mr. AMES thought the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. FITZSIMONS) had
misunderstood the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. TUCKER) respecting
his pledging himself to vote in favor of molasses. He believed the
gentleman from South Carolina incapable of making any improper
accommodation either on this or any other occasion; the subject had
never been mentioned to him, nor he believed to any body else, much less
could the gentleman's intention be the result of bargain or compromise.
For his own part, he would never consent to such a degradation of his
rights as a member of the House, as to stipulate for the exercise of his
opinion.

Mr. TUCKER.--If the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. FITZSIMONS)
supposes that I have bargained to vote for or against any measure, he
does me wrong; and if he charges me with such actions, I desire he may
state his reasons and explain himself. I did not hear perfectly what he
said when he was up before, and therefore did not refute any improper
construction he might have put on my arguments.

Mr. FITZSIMONS had no difficulty in declaring his meaning. He understood
when the article of rum was under consideration, that the gentleman held
out a promise to vote for the reduction of the duty on molasses, if the
committee would agree with him in reducing generally. This promise was
not made in a private manner; it was made by the gentleman in his place.
He could not recite the particular expression of the gentleman, but he
understood from it that the gentleman pledged himself to reduce the duty
on molasses, if the gentlemen from the Eastern States would join him in
a general reduction.

Mr. TUCKER.--I expressed a wish for a general reduction to take place
throughout the whole system; but I never made a promise with regard to a
reduction of any particular article.

Mr. SENEY observed, that the discussion of molasses had been deferred
when the subject was last before the House, in order to give time for a
full investigation; but he conceived that no such reason now existed, in
favor of its lying over, and therefore hoped the House would proceed to
decide upon it.

Mr. AMES was willing to proceed to the consideration of that subject; he
did not wish it deferred to the end of the list, that it might be held
over them _in terrorem_. There were several articles in the list, which
he did not conceive to be taxed too high for collection, or out of
proportion with others, therefore it was likely they would not be
reduced. If this was the case, the reduction would not be general, and
the gentleman from South Carolina might not think it his duty to favor
the reduction of molasses. He wished every article to stand upon its own
bottom. If molasses was too high, the committee would lower it; if not,
they will continue it at the rate it is, and the business would be done
with. If the committee were disposed to proceed, he was ready to take up
the subject.

Mr. CARROLL saw no reason for postponing the business at this time. When
the subject was suspended on a former occasion, several gentlemen from
Massachusetts were absent on business, but it was surely unnecessary now
to have any delay. After the repeated discussions it had undergone, he
was satisfied gentlemen were prepared for a decision, and he hoped the
question might be taken, and the committee proceed to get through the
business. Gentlemen should consider the daily loss which the revenue
sustained by the delay of this bill; he cautioned them against
considering overmuch, and letting slip the opportunity they now had to
supply the public wants.

Mr. WADSWORTH would not go over the old ground, and enumerate all the
reasons why a reduction of the duty on this article should take place.
He satisfied himself with saying it was out of proportion, and too high
ever to be collected with certainty; he wished the committee to lower it
to three or four cents, and apply to an excise for the deficiency, not
conceiving an excise on distilled spirits to be inconvenient or
unpopular.

Mr. AMES was sensible that any further discussion of the present subject
was unpleasant, nay, it was painful to the committee; but he had such
impressions on his mind with regard to its importance, that he must
trespass on them again. On all subjects demonstration is desirable, but
there is only one science capable of complete demonstration. Many other
sciences admit of different degrees of demonstration; but of all the
sciences on earth, the science of politics is the least capable of
affording satisfactory conclusions, while it is the one that, from its
importance, requires the greatest degree of certainty; because when we
are to consider those things which relate to the welfare of nations, it
is of consequence, and nothing can be more desirable than that we adopt
just principles in order to come at proper conclusions. In this science
it is dangerous to adopt the visionary projects of speculators instead
of principle. We ought to be cautious, therefore, in selecting the
information upon which we form our system.

He trusted to make it appear in the course of his arguments, that the
propriety of the particular measure under discussion depended upon local
knowledge, and yet it would be found of national concern. He believed it
could be clearly proved to be as much the interest of one part as of
another to have the duty reduced.

It was laid down as a principle that all duties ought to be equal. He
believed, if gentlemen gave themselves time for consideration, they
would not contend this duty was equal. He said he had made some
calculations, which demonstrated the inequality to a very surprising
degree. The tax operated in two ways: first, as a tax on a raw material,
which increased the price of stock and narrowed the sale; and second, as
a tax on an article of consumption. It required the distillation and the
consumption to be equal in every part of the Union to render the duty
equal in its operation; but no gentleman contended that the consumption
or distillation was equal. The gentleman from Virginia said, on a former
occasion, that Massachusetts would not contribute her proportion of the
national revenue, because her exports were not equal to the Southern
States, and of consequence her imports are less; but if this fact is
examined, it will be found that she does export in full proportion with
the Southern States. Examine her custom-house books, and you will find
it; but Massachusetts is greatly concerned in navigation, and the wages
of her seamen ought to be added to the amount of the profits of her
industry. Then if we consider her consumption, we shall find it in
proportion also. Admitting the people of New England to live more
moderate than the opulent citizens of Virginia or Carolina, yet they
have not such a number of blacks among them, whose living is wretched;
consequently, the average consumption per head will be nearly the same.
The fact is, that all taxes of this nature will fall generally in
proportion to the ability to pay.

Laying a heavy duty on molasses incurs the necessity of allowing a
drawback on country rum. By this system, we may lose more revenue than
we gain; anyhow, it will render it very uncertain. It is a question of
some importance, whether it would not be beneficial to the United States
to establish a manufacture which would be very lucrative. But waiving
that consideration, he would ask gentlemen, if there was any propriety
in taxing molasses in its raw state, with a duty intended to be laid on
rum? Certainly this had better be by way of excise. In this mode the
revenue would escape fraud by smuggling, which would otherwise be
unavoidable. The tax was such a temptation, being thirty per cent. upon
its value, that no checks could prevent a clandestine trade being
carried on.

Without the molasses trade is continued, the fishery cannot be carried
on. They are so intimately connected, that the weapon which wounds the
one will stab the other. If by such measures as these we ruin one of the
most valuable interests of the United States, will not the people have a
right to complain that, instead of protecting, you injure and destroy
their pursuits? He did not mean to say that the people would form
unwarrantable combinations; but their exertions to support the
Government will be damped; they will look with chagrin on the
disappointment of their hopes; and it will add to their vexation that
they have been deceived under the most flattering appearances; for who
could conceive that a Government, constructed and adopted in the manner
this has been, could ever be administered to the destruction of that
welfare which it was formed to support?

He recommended experience as the best guide, and said, that it was
decidedly against high duties, particularly on molasses; and concluded
with appealing to the justice and wisdom of the committee for a
determination on this subject.

Mr. CARROLL would not take up the time of the committee with saying a
word on the main subject, but begged them to consider of how much
importance it was to the Union to get this bill into operation. If every
article was to be again debated in the manner it had already been, he
could see no end to the business. Unless gentlemen could advance some
new and weighty arguments, he thought the time misspent in
recapitulating those that had been unsuccessfully urged twice or three
times before.

Mr. MADISON thought the arguments against the duty were inconsistent. He
believed the gentlemen in opposition had not replied to an observation
he had made, and which was of great force on his mind. The gentlemen all
say that a heavy duty will ruin the distilleries and fisheries, and the
people concerned in them; yet they profess themselves willing to lay the
same duty, but in two forms instead of one. Now he would be glad to know
if the distilleries and fisheries would not be precisely in the same
situation, let which would take place?

On motion, the committee rose, and the House adjourned.


TUESDAY, May 12.

_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. PAGE
in the chair, on the Impost Bill.

The article of molasses being still under consideration:

Mr. AMES wished to reply to the observation made yesterday by the
gentleman from Virginia. Does that gentleman, said he, recollect, if we
lay an excise, we prevent the burthen from being imposed upon the poor
for their subsistence, as molasses, in the raw state, will be lightly
taxed? In the next place, it is more favorable to the importers of that
article than the impost; it does not require so large a proportion of
their capital to be advanced in payment of duties, nor do they run the
risk of bad debts, because it may be so regulated that the retailer
shall secure the duty. Another reason is, it will save the expense of a
numerous host of custom-house officers, tide-waiters, &c. These
considerations proved, that if the excise was no better than an impost,
it was no worse; and as the duty would be better collected, and give
less reason for smuggling, which, above all things, was dangerous to the
revenue, it was sufficient to warrant the committee in giving the excise
duty a preference.

Mr. GOODHUE would not trouble the House long on the subject; but begged
leave to repeat the manner in which the molasses trade was connected
with the fisheries, and the fisheries with the navigation; that, if the
first is injured, the other two are wounded through its side. About
three-fifths of all the fish that are put up for that market, are of an
inferior quality, and would not sell elsewhere. The French would not
permit us to carry them there, but because we take their molasses in
exchange; they will not let their colonies send the molasses to France,
lest it interfere with their brandy. Now, any impediment to the
exportation of molasses, will prevent the exportation of fish; if we
cannot export the fish, for what purpose shall we continue our
fisheries? And if they are given up, how are we to form seamen to man
our future navy?

Mr. MADISON said his mind was incapable of discovering any plan that
would answer the purpose the committee have in view, and not produce
greater evils than the one under consideration. He thought an excise
very objectionable, but as no actual proposition for entering into such
a system was before the committee, he forbore to say any thing further
about it. He admitted an excise would obviate in part some of the
difficulties; but he did not think the answer given to his argument
altogether satisfactory; yet there was another argument he urged on a
former occasion remaining unanswered--it was, that, at this moment, the
fisheries, distilleries, and all their connections, were laboring under
heavier duties than what is now proposed; true, the duty is collected in
a different mode, but it affects the consumer in the same manner. The
gentlemen have said, to be sure, that the duty is evaded; but if half is
collected, it amounts to more than six cents per gallon.

It is said that a tax on molasses will be unpopular, but not more so
than a tax on salt. Can gentlemen state more serious apprehensions in
the former than the latter case? yet the committee did not forego a
productive fund, because the article was a necessary of life, and in
general consumption. If there is the disposition that is represented for
people to complain of the oppression of Government, have not the
citizens of the Southern States more just ground for complaint than
others? The system can only be acceptable to them, because it is
essentially necessary to be adopted for the public good.

Gentlemen argue, that a tax on molasses is unpopular, and prove it by
experience under the British Government. If this is to be adduced as a
proof of the popularity of a measure, what are we to say with respect to
a tax on tea? Gentlemen remembered, no doubt, how odious this kind of
tax was thought to be throughout America; yet the House had, without
hesitation, laid a considerable duty upon it. He did not imagine that a
duty on either of those articles was in itself objectionable; it was the
principle upon which the tax was laid that made them unpopular under the
British Government.

It is said that this tax is unjust; now, he had not a single idea of
justice, that did not contradict the position. If it be considered as it
relates to rum, he was certain the consumers of foreign rum paid a
larger proportion of revenue into the Treasury than the consumers of
country rum; they paid more than equal distributive justice required; if
it was considered as it respected molasses, there would appear no
injustice. Molasses was consumed in other States; but if it was not,
sugar was used in its stead, and subjected to a duty full as high as
that on molasses. But dismissing both these considerations, and even
admitting the whole weight to fall upon the Northern States, it would
not be disproportioned, because, in the long list of enumerated articles
subject to a high duty, they imported few or none; indeed, the articles
were pretty generally taxed for the benefit of the manufacturing part of
the northern community; see loaf sugar, candles, cheese, soap, &c. He
hoped gentlemen would not infer from this observation, that he thought
the encouragement held out by the bill to manufactures improper; far
from it; he was glad to see their growing consequences, and was disposed
to give them every aid in his power. From this view of the subject, he
was inclined to adhere to the bill, and not make any reduction.

Mr. GERRY hoped the committee would not consider the subject as finally
decided; he thought it deserving of further investigation, and expected
the committee would be satisfied of the propriety of making some
reduction. He felt a concern at being obliged to extend the discussion,
but his duty impelled him to oppose a measure he conceived injurious to
his country.

Gentlemen had contended, that a duty of six cents per gallon on molasses
was just and equal; for his part, he could not discover, with all the
exertions his mind was capable of making, how gentlemen prove this to be
the case; it appeared to him partial and oppressive.

The principle laid down in the constitution for an equal distribution of
taxes was, that they shall be apportioned among the several States,
according to their respective number of inhabitants. This principle is
made positive as it respects direct taxes; but he thought the equality
ought to extend itself to every possible case. The power possessed by
the House, with regard to revenue and the power of making all necessary
laws, enabled the General Government to exist independent of subordinate
associations; but if they were inclined to annihilate the State
Governments, yet it would be their interest to attend to the advantages
of the community, and administer their power so as not to make it
burthensome and oppressive. Now, he wished to know, what principle of
justice authorized the committee to lay a duty of six cents on molasses?
Unfortunately for Massachusetts, she imports a greater quantity than the
whole Union besides. This makes her interest stand alone, and her
representatives are left to labor the point, knowing the ill effect it
will have upon their constituents. Under these circumstances, it is
necessary to pay particular attention to the justice of the measure;
gentlemen should consider that, in such cases, there is danger of
interest prevailing over equity and policy. Certainly, if the measure is
pursued, we shall discover this effect in the end.

Gentlemen have considered the arguments brought against this duty as
standing upon local ground, advocating the local interest of
Massachusetts. He would examine this position. It is the interest of a
majority of the people of that State, that as much revenue should be
drawn from molasses as possible. I say it is the interest of the State,
for their interest is divided between the landed and commercial; the
landed interest predominates, and it was always supposed that the
commercial bore a greater share of the public burthen than it ought. The
conduct of the State of Massachusetts ought to be esteemed by us as the
best guide to discover how far our commercial regulations, as they
respect that State, are consistent with policy, if she furnishes the
best example. Can we find that she ever imposed a duty of six cents per
gallon on molasses? Not a single instance can be produced where she
raised revenue from this article. If they then never laid a duty upon
it, and they were disposed to get every thing in their power from
commerce, we must conclude that if it could have been laid they would
have done it. It is not the landed citizens, if he might use the term,
who consume molasses; it is the inhabitants of the sea-coast; the former
had the power, and they were interested to lay such a tax, it might
therefore be expected they would have done it, if they had not been
convinced it would have destroyed the fisheries and navigation of the
State.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) cannot see how an impost on
molasses can affect the distilleries and fisheries. After having been
repeated over and over again, it would be unnecessary that he should
dwell on this point. But every one could see the connection; if we do
not import molasses, we cannot carry on our distilleries nor vend our
fish; and it will be impossible to import molasses under such heavy
duties; at least the future importation will be limited to two-thirds of
the present, because the demand will be in proportion to the increase of
price, and the merchant will not have capital to import more than
two-thirds of his usual quantity.

He would not reiterate the arguments respecting the fisheries; it was
well known to be the best nursery for seamen, the United States had no
other, and it never could be the intention of gentlemen to leave the
navigation of the Union to the mercy of foreign powers. It is of
necessity, then, that we lay the foundation of our maritime importance
as soon as may be, and this can be done only by encouraging our
fisheries. It is also well known that we have a number of rivals in this
business desirous of excluding us from the fishing banks altogether.
This consideration of itself is sufficient to induce a wise legislature
to extend every encouragement to so important a concern. In any
regulation they make, by which it can be effected, they ought to be sure
of the ground on which they go.

It appeared to him that six cents would have the most ruinous
consequences to the general interest; he therefore hoped gentlemen would
agree to reduce it, if not so as to place it among the _ad valorem_
articles, at least down to two cents. However, as the committee are not
prepared to say the particular sum proper to be laid, he hoped they
would agree to leave it a blank, to be filled up at some future stage of
the business.

The question was now taken on striking out six cents, and passed in the
affirmative: ayes 24, noes 22.

Propositions were severally made for filling up the blank with two,
three, four, and five cents; five being the highest was first put and
agreed to--ayes 25, noes 23.

The committee proceeded to consider the subsequent articles; but not
having time to go through the whole, they rose, and reported progress,
and the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, May 13.

The petition of John Fitch, of Pennsylvania, was presented, stating that
he is the original discoverer of the principle of applying steam-power
to the purposes of navigation, and has obtained an exclusive right
therein for a term of years, in the States of Virginia, Delaware,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York, and praying that his rights may
be secured to him by law, so as to preclude subsequent improvers upon
his principle from participation therein, until the expiration of his
granted right. Referred to a committee, consisting of Messrs.
HUNTINGTON, CADWALADER, and CONTEE, to report thereon.


_Duties on Imports._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
Impost Bill, Mr. PAGE in the chair.


AFRICAN SLAVES.

Mr. PARKER moved to insert a clause in the bill, imposing a duty on the
importation of slaves, of ten dollars each person. He was sorry that the
constitution prevented Congress from prohibiting the importation
altogether; he thought it a defect in that instrument that it allowed of
such a practice; it was contrary to the Revolution principles, and ought
not to be permitted; but as he could not do all the good he desired, he
was willing to do what lay in his power. He hoped such a duty as he
moved for would prevent, in some degree, this irrational and inhuman
traffic; if so, he should feel happy from the success of his motion.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, hoped that such an important and serious
proposition as this would not be hastily adopted. It was a very late
moment for the introduction of new subjects. He expected the committee
had got through the business, and would rise without discussing any
thing further. At least, if gentlemen were determined on considering the
present motion, he hoped they would delay it for a few days, in order to
give time for an examination of the subject. It was certainly a matter
big with the most serious consequences to the State he represented; he
did not think any one thing that had been discussed was so important to
them, and the welfare of the Union, as the question now brought forward;
but he was not prepared to enter on any argument, and therefore
requested the motion might either be withdrawn or laid on the table.

Mr. SHERMAN approved of the object of the motion, but he did not think
this bill was proper to embrace the subject. He could not reconcile
himself to the insertion of human beings as an article of duty, among
goods, wares, and merchandise. He hoped it would be withdrawn for the
present, and taken up hereafter as an independent subject.

Mr. JACKSON, observing the quarter from which this motion came, said it
did not surprise him, though it might have that effect upon others. He
recollected that Virginia was an old settled State, and had her
complement of slaves; so she was careless of recruiting her numbers by
this means; the natural increase of her imported blacks was sufficient
for their purpose; but he thought gentlemen ought to let their neighbors
get supplied, before they imposed such a burthen upon the importation.
He knew this business was viewed in an odious light to the eastward,
because the people were capable of doing their own work, and had no
occasion for slaves; but gentlemen will have some feeling for others;
they will not try to throw all the weight upon those who have assisted
in lightening their burthens; they do not wish to charge us for every
comfort and enjoyment of life, and at the same time take away the means
of procuring them; they do not wish to break us down at once.

He was convinced, from the inaptitude of the motion, and the want of
time to consider it, that the candor of the gentleman would induce him
to withdraw it for the present; and if ever it came forward again, he
hoped it would comprehend the white slaves as well as black, who were
imported from all the jails of Europe; wretches, convicted of the most
flagrant crimes, were brought in and sold without any duty whatever. He
thought that they ought to be taxed equally with the Africans, and had
no doubt but the constitutionality and propriety of such a measure was
equally apparent with the one proposed.

Mr. TUCKER thought it unfair to bring in such an important subject at a
time when debate was almost precluded. The committee had gone through
the impost bill, and the whole Union was impatiently expecting the
result of their deliberations; the public must be disappointed, and much
revenue lost, or this question cannot undergo that full discussion which
it deserves.

We have no right, said he, to consider whether the importation of slaves
is proper or not; the constitution gives us no power on that point; it
is left to the States to judge of that matter as they see fit. But if it
is a business the gentleman is determined to discourage, he ought to
have brought his motion forward sooner, and even then not have
introduced it without previous notice. He hoped the committee would
reject the motion, if it was not withdrawn. He was not speaking so much
for the State he represented as for Georgia; because the State of South
Carolina had a prohibitory law, which could be renewed when its
limitation expired.

Mr. PARKER had ventured to introduce the subject after full
deliberation, and did not like to withdraw it. Although the gentleman
from Connecticut (Mr. SHERMAN) had said, that they ought not to be
enumerated with goods, wares, and merchandise, he believed they were
looked upon by the African traders in this light. He knew it was
degrading the human species to annex that character to them; but he
would rather do this than continue the actual evil of importing slaves a
moment longer. He hoped Congress would do all that lay in their power to
restore to human nature its inherent privileges, and, if possible, wipe
off the stigma under which America labored. The inconsistency in our
principles, with which we are justly charged, should be done away, that
we may show, by our actions, the pure beneficence of the doctrine we
hold out to the world in our Declaration of Independence.

Mr. SHERMAN thought the principles of the motion, and the principles of
the bill, were inconsistent; the principle of the bill was to raise
revenue, the principle of the motion to correct a moral evil. Now,
considering it as an object of revenue, it would be unjust, because two
or three States would bear the whole burthen, while he believed they
bore their full proportion of all the rest. He was against receiving the
motion into this bill, though he had no objection to taking it up by
itself, on the principles of humanity and policy; and therefore would
vote against it if it was not withdrawn.

Mr. AMES joined the gentleman last up; no one could suppose him
favorable to slavery; he detested it from his soul; but he had some
doubts whether imposing a duty on the importation would not have the
appearance of countenancing the practice; it was certainly a subject of
some delicacy, and no one appeared to be prepared for the discussion. He
therefore hoped the motion would be withdrawn.

Mr. LIVERMORE was not against the principle of the motion; but in the
present case he conceived it improper. If negroes were goods, wares, or
merchandise, they came within the title of the bill; if they were not,
the bill would be inconsistent. But if they are goods, wares, or
merchandise, the five per cent. _ad valorem_ will embrace the
importation, and the duty of five per cent. is nearly equal to ten
dollars per head; so there is no occasion to add it even on the score of
revenue.

Mr. JACKSON said, it was the fashion of the day to favor the liberty of
slaves. He would not go into a discussion of the subject; but he
believed it was capable of demonstration that they were better off in
their present situation than they would be if they were manumitted. What
are they to do if they are discharged? Work for a living? Experience has
shown us they will not. Examine what has become of those in Maryland;
many of them have been set free in that State. Did they turn themselves
to industry and useful pursuits? No, they turn out common pickpockets,
petty larceny villains. And is this mercy, forsooth, to turn them into a
way in which they must lose their lives; for when they are thrown upon
the world, void of property and connections, they cannot get their
living but by pilfering. What is to be done for compensation? Will
Virginia set all her negroes free? Will they give up the money they cost
them, and to whom? When this practice comes to be tried there, the sound
of liberty will lose those charms which make it grateful to the ravished
ear. But our slaves are not in a worse situation than they were on the
coast of Africa. It is not uncommon there for the parents to sell their
children in peace; and in war, the whole are taken and made slaves
together. In these cases, it is only a change of one slavery for
another; and are they not better here, where they have a master, bound
by the ties of interest and law, to provide for their support and
comfort in old age or infirmity, in which, if they were free, they would
sink under the pressure of woe for want of assistance?

He would say nothing of the partiality of such a tax; it was admitted by
the avowed friends of the measure; Georgia, in particular, would be
oppressed. On this account, it would be the most odious tax Congress
could impose.

Mr. SCHUREMAN hoped the gentleman would withdraw his motion, because the
present was not the time or place for introducing the business. He
thought it had better be brought forward in the House as a distinct
proposition. If the gentleman persisted in having the question
determined, he would move the previous question, if he was supported.

Mr. MADISON.--I cannot concur with gentlemen who think the present an
improper time or place to enter into a discussion of the proposed
motion. If it is taken up in a separate view, we shall do the same thing
at a greater expense of time. But gentlemen say that it is improper to
connect the two objects, because they do not come within the title of
the bill; but this objection may be obviated by accommodating the title
to the contents. There may be some inconsistency in combining the ideas
which gentlemen have expressed, that is, considering the human race as a
species of property; but the evil does not arise from adopting the
clause now proposed; it is from the importation to which it relates. Our
object in enumerating persons on paper with merchandise, is to prevent
the practice of actually treating them as such, by having them in future
forming part of the cargoes of goods, wares, and merchandise to be
imported into the United States. The motion is calculated to avoid the
very evil intimated by the gentleman.

It has been said that this tax will be partial and oppressive; but if a
fair view is taken of this subject, I think we may form a different
conclusion. But if it be partial or oppressive, are there not many
instances in which we have laid taxes of this nature? Yet are they not
thought to be justified by national policy? If any article is warranted
on this account, how much more are we authorized to proceed on this
occasion? The dictates of humanity, the principles of the people, the
national safety and happiness, and prudent policy require it of us. The
constitution has particularly called our attention to it; and of all the
articles contained in the bill before us, this is one of the last I
should be willing to make a concession upon, so far as I am at liberty
to go, according to the terms of the constitution or principles of
justice. I would not have it understood that my zeal would carry me to
disobey the inviolable commands of either.

I understood it had been intimated, that the motion was inconsistent or
unconstitutional. I believe, sir, my worthy colleague has formed the
words with a particular reference to the constitution; any how, so far
as the duty is expressed, it perfectly accords with that instrument. If
there are any inconsistencies in it, they may be rectified. I believe
the intention is well understood, but I am far from supposing the
diction improper. If the description of the persons does not accord with
the ideas of the gentleman from Georgia, (Mr. JACKSON,) and his idea is
a proper one for the committee to adopt, I see no difficulty in changing
the phraseology.

I conceive the constitution, in this particular, was formed in order
that the Government, whilst it was restrained from laying a total
prohibition, might be able to give some testimony of the sense of
America with respect to the African trade. We have liberty to impose a
tax or duty upon the importation of such persons, as any of the States
now existing shall think proper to admit; and this liberty was granted,
I presume, upon two considerations. The first was, that until the time
arrived when they might abolish the importation of slaves, they might
have an opportunity of evidencing their sentiments on the policy and
humanity of such a trade. The other was, that they might be taxed in due
proportion with other articles imported; for if the possessor will
consider them as property, of course they are of value, and ought to be
paid for. If gentlemen are apprehensive of oppression from the weight of
the tax, let them make an estimate of its proportion, and they will find
that it very little exceeds five per cent. _ad valorem_; so that they
will gain very little by having them thrown into that mass of articles;
whilst, by selecting them in the manner proposed, we shall fulfil the
prevailing expectations of our fellow-citizens, and perform our duty in
executing the purposes of the constitution. It is to be hoped, that by
expressing a national disapprobation of this trade, we may destroy it,
and save ourselves from reproaches, and our posterity the imbecility
ever attendant on a country filled with slaves.

I do not wish to say any thing harsh to the hearing of gentlemen who
entertain different sentiments from me, or different sentiments from
those I represent; but if there is any one point in which it is clearly
the policy of this nation, so far as we constitutionally can, to vary
the practice obtaining under some of the State Governments, it is this.
But it is certain a majority of the States are opposed to this practice;
therefore, upon principle, we ought to discountenance it as far as is in
our power.

If I were not afraid of being told that the Representatives of the
several States are the best able to judge of what is proper and
conducive to their particular prosperity, I should venture to say that
it is as much the interest of Georgia and South Carolina as of any in
the Union. Every addition they receive to their number of slaves, tends
to weaken and render them less capable of self-defence. In case of
hostilities with foreign nations, they will be the means of inviting
attack, instead of repelling invasion. It is a necessary duty of the
General Government to protect every part of the empire against danger,
as well internal as external. Every thing, therefore, which tends to
increase this danger, though it may be a local affair, yet, if it
involves national expense or safety, becomes of concern to every part of
the Union, and is a proper subject for the consideration of those
charged with the general administration of the Government. I hope, in
making these observations, I shall not be understood to mean that a
proper attention ought not to be paid to the local opinions and
circumstances of any part of the United States, or that the particular
representatives are not best able to judge of the sense of their
immediate constituents.

If we examine the proposed measure by the agreement there is between it
and the existing State laws, it will show us that it is patronized by a
very respectable part of the Union. I am informed that South Carolina
has prohibited the importation of slaves for several years yet to come.
We have the satisfaction, then, of reflecting that we do nothing more
than their own laws do at this moment. This is not the case with one
State. I am sorry that her situation is such as to seem to require a
population of this nature; but it is impossible, in the nature of
things, to consult the national good, without doing what we do not wish
to do to some particular part.

Perhaps gentlemen contend against the introduction of the clause on too
slight grounds. If it does not comport with the title of the bill, alter
the latter. If it does not conform to the precise terms of the
constitution, amend it. But if it will tend to delay the whole bill,
that, perhaps, will be the best reason for making it the object of a
separate one. If this be the sense of the committee, I shall submit.

Mr. GERRY thought all duties ought to be laid as equal as possible. He
had endeavored to enforce this principle yesterday, but without the
success he wished for; he was bound by the principle of justice,
therefore, to vote for the proposition. But if the committee were
desirous of considering the subject fully by itself, he had no
objection; but he thought when gentlemen laid down a principle, they
ought to support it generally.

Mr. BURKE said, gentlemen were contending for nothing; that the value of
a slave averaged about eighty pounds, and the duty on that sum at five
per cent. would be ten dollars. As Congress could go no further than
that sum, he conceived it made no difference whether they were
enumerated or left in the common mass.

Mr. MADISON.--If we contend for nothing, the gentlemen who are opposed
to us do not contend for a great deal. But the question is, whether the
five per cent. _ad valorem_, on all articles imported, will have any
operation at all upon the introduction of slaves, unless we make a
particular enumeration on this account. The collector may mistake; for
he would not presume to apply the term goods, wares, and merchandise to
any person whatsoever. But if that general definition of goods, wares,
and merchandise, is supposed to include African slaves, why may we not
particularly enumerate them, and lay the duty pointed out by the
constitution, which, as gentlemen tell us, is no more than five per
cent. upon their value. This will not increase the burthen upon any; but
it will be that manifestation of our sense expected by our constituents,
and demanded by justice and humanity.

Mr. BLAND had no doubt of the propriety or good policy of this measure.
He had made up his mind upon it; he wished slaves had never been
introduced into America. But if it was impossible at this time to cure
the evil, he was very willing to join in any measures that would prevent
its extending further. He had some doubts whether the prohibitory laws
of the States were not in part repealed. Those who had endeavored to
discountenance this trade by laying a duty on the importation, were
prevented by the constitution from continuing such regulation, which
declares that no State shall lay any impost or duties on imports. If
this were the case, and he suspected pretty strongly that it was, the
necessity of adopting the proposition of his colleague was more
apparent.

Mr. SHERMAN said the constitution does not consider these persons as
species of property; it speaks of them as persons, and says, that a tax
or duty may be imposed on the importation of them into any State which
shall permit the same, but they have no power to prohibit such
importation for twenty years. But Congress have power to declare upon
what terms persons coming into the United States shall be entitled to
citizenship; the rule of naturalization must, however, be uniform. He
was convinced there were others who ought to be regulated in this
particular, the importation of whom was of an evil tendency; he meant
convicts particularly. He thought that some regulation respecting them
was also proper; but it being a different subject, it ought to be taken
up in a different manner.

Mr. MADISON was led to believe, from the observation that had fallen
from the gentlemen, that it would be best to make this the subject of a
distinct bill: he, therefore, wished his colleague would withdraw his
motion, and move in the House for leave to bring in a bill on the same
principles.

Mr. PARKER consented to withdraw his motion, under a conviction that the
House was fully satisfied of its propriety. He knew very well that these
persons were neither goods nor wares, but they were treated as articles
of merchandise. Although he wished to get rid of this part of his
property, yet he should not consent to deprive other people of theirs by
any act of his, without their consent.

The committee rose, reported progress, and the House adjourned.


FRIDAY, May 15.

Mr. WHITE, one of the Representatives from Virginia, presented to the
House a resolve of the Legislature of that State, of the 27th of
December, 1788, offering to the acceptance of the Federal Government,
ten miles square of territory, or any lesser quantity, in any part of
that State, which Congress may choose, to be occupied and possessed by
the United States, as the seat of the Federal Government; which was
read, and ordered to lie on the table.

An engrossed bill for laying a duty on goods, wares, and merchandises,
imported into the United States, was read a third time, and, on a motion
made, ordered to be recommitted to a Committee of the whole House
immediately.

The House, accordingly, resolved itself into the said committee; and,
after some time, the committee rose, and reported the bill with
amendments, which were agreed to by the House.

Mr. MADISON made a motion further to amend the said bill, by adding to
the end thereof a clause for limiting the time of its continuance.

Mr. AMES expressed a doubt of the propriety of the motion. He thought
the bill ought to be commensurate with the wants of Government.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--For want of a proper knowledge of the true situation of
our affairs, we are unable to determine how far the present provision is
equal to the necessities of the Union, and this circumstance will tend
to add considerably to our embarrassment in limiting the duration. If we
make the time too short to supply the public wants, we shall not hold
out to the public creditors a sufficient security for the punctual
payment of their debts. If we should want to raise money by a loan, we
could only expect it according to the duration of the fund: this makes
the present motion a subject of serious consideration. Not that I object
to what the gentleman has in contemplation, but I wish such language to
be used, that shall designate the continuation of the law to be till the
wants are supplied and thereafter cease. I am not of opinion that it
should be for half a century, because I hope our national debt will be
extinguished in much less time; but really I must confess, at this
moment, I feel considerable embarrassment in determining in my mind the
period for which it should exist, whether an enumerated term of years,
or a general declaration during the continuance of the public wants.

Mr. LEE thought the operation of the law could not be well understood;
that it was a system of experiment, and ought to be temporary, in order
that a future Congress might make such amendments as time should
discover to be necessary. How perfect soever the theory might appear,
practice might prove it otherwise; he therefore wished its operation
limited for three or five years. He thought it would be wise in the
House to adopt the motion, in order to prevent any injustice which a
permanent and imperfect regulation might have on posterity. He expected
this would beget confidence in the Government, which was to him a very
desirable object.

Mr. WHITE.--The constitution having authorized the House of
Representatives alone to originate money bills, places an important
trust in our hands, which, as their protectors, we ought not to part
with. I do not mean to imply that the Senate are less to be trusted than
this House; but the constitution, no doubt for wise purposes, has given
the immediate Representatives of the People a control over the whole
Government in this particular, which for their interest they ought not
to let out of their hands. Besides, the constitution says further, that
no appropriation shall be for a longer term than two years, which of
consequence limits the duration of the revenue law to that period; when,
if it is found conducive to the public welfare, it may be continued by
the legislators appointed by the people, and who alone are authorized to
declare upon this question in the first instance.

Mr. LIVERMORE hoped but little time would be taken up in the discussion
of this subject; the people were anxiously waiting the result of their
deliberations; beside the impost was daily slipping away. He had no
doubt of the propriety of the motion, because from the acknowledged
imperfections of the bill, it would never do for a permanent system. If
the people, who consider themselves subjected to very high and very
unequal duties, find no termination of the grievance, they will
immediately adopt measures in their defence, to thwart the views of
Government; but if they understand the law as temporary, and only passed
in order to gain experience for forming a better system, they will be
induced to give it fair play, and bear the burthen without complaint,
trusting to the wisdom and justice of Congress for such alterations as
practice may show to be necessary.

Besides, the objects for which the revenue is now wanting, will decrease
annually; this will be an additional reason for limiting its duration.
He was not for a very short term; he thought five, seven, or ten years,
would be more eligible than two or three, but he was decidedly against
making it perpetual.

Mr. SINNICKSON had understood, that one of the objects of the bill was
the re-establishment of public credit; but it never could be imagined
that a law, limited to three or four years, could do this in any great
degree; nor could any advantage arise from loans negotiated and
terminated within such a short period. Under these impressions, he
conceived the motion struck at the credit of the new Government, which
the people had just established.

Mr. MADISON.--When he offered this amendment to the bill, he thought its
propriety was so obvious and striking, that it would meet no opposition.
To pass a bill, not limited in duration, which was to draw revenue from
the pockets of the people, appeared to be dangerous in the
administration of any Government; he hoped, therefore, the House would
not be less cautious in this particular than other nations are, who
profess to act upon sound principles. He imagined it might be considered
by their constituents as incompatible with the spirit of the
constitution, and dangerous to republican principles, to pass such a law
unlimited in its duration.

Besides the restoration of public credit, he thought the act had in view
the encouragement of a particular description of people, which might
lead them into enterprises of a peculiar nature, for the protection of
which the public faith seemed to be pledged. But would gentlemen infer
from hence, that no alteration ought to take place if the manufactures
were well established? The subject appeared to him in a twofold point of
view; first, to provide for the exigencies of Government, and second,
for the establishment of public credit; but he thought both these
objects could be obtained without making the bill perpetual. If the
Government showed a proper attention to the punctual performance of its
engagements, it would obtain the latter; the other would be secured by
making provision as the occasion demanded. If the bill was to be made
perpetual, it would be continued after the purpose for which it was
adopted had ceased; the error would in this case be irremediable;
whereas, if its limitation was determined, it would always be in the
power of the Government to make it commensurate with what the public
debts and contingencies required.

The constitution, as had already been observed, places the power in the
House of originating money bills. The principal reason why the
constitution had made this distinction was, because they were chosen by
the people, and supposed to be best acquainted with their interests and
ability. In order to make them more particularly acquainted with these
objects, the democratic branch of the Legislature consisted of a greater
number, and were chosen for a shorter period, so that they might revert
more frequently to the mass of the people. Now, if a revenue law was
made perpetual, however unequal its operation might be, it would be out
of the power of this House to effect an alteration; for if the President
chose to object to the measure, it would require two-thirds of both
Houses to carry it. Even if the House of Representatives were unanimous
in their opinion that the law ought to be repealed, they would not be
able to carry it, unless a great majority appeared in the Senate also.

Mr. BOUDINOT said, the time mentioned by the former Congress, and to
which they requested the concurrence of the several States, was, that
the impost duties might be continued for twenty-five years. This request
was made on full consideration, and they did not think it was more than
sufficient to discharge the principal and interest of the national debt.
He concluded, therefore, that it was better to let the law remain
without limitation; because when they found the purposes for which it
was intended were accomplished, it would be in the power of Congress to
repeal the law.

Mr. LAWRENCE thought the present was a subject of great importance, and
he lamented it was not brought forward at an earlier period, because he
feared the time would not allow that full discussion or deliberation
which ought to take place. He wished also that the House was acquainted
with the necessities of the United States, that so they might make
provision accordingly; but these two points were mere matter of
speculation as to their precise amount; yet he believed it was agreed on
all hands, that the ways and means provided in this bill for the support
of Government, the payment of interest and instalments of the foreign
and domestic debt, were, so far as agreed to, inadequate to the object.
If this be the case, the public debt must accumulate; and as we do not
know when the time may come for its extinguishment, the provision cannot
be limited; for every gentleman will agree, that if the demand for
revenue be increased, the fund ought to be commensurate to the object.
Is there any time when the civil list will cease its demand? If there is
not, there will be a perpetual call for revenue. He thought it
absolutely impossible to provide for the payment of the debts, if the
bill was limited to two, three, or four years; such a precarious
provision would never tend to the re-establishment of public credit. If
the bill was not limited, it would always be in the power of the
Legislature to lower the duties, or make such other alteration as might,
upon experience, be thought beneficial to the community; whereas if the
bill were limited, it would be thought improper to make any amendments
during the term for which it is enacted, although those amendments
appeared indispensably necessary. But why is this degree of caution
necessary? Will not the administration of public affairs be conducted in
future by representatives as good as ourselves? Will they have less
wisdom or virtue, to discover and pursue the good of their
fellow-citizens than we have?

Mr. BLAND.--Our public credit consists of two branches: first, as it
respects the evidences of our debt, in the hands of those from whom we
have had money or services; and secondly, as it respects our ability to
borrow in future. Now, the first branch of public credit depends upon
the punctuality with which the interest is paid; but this in foreign
nations, does not depend upon the limitation of the act. Do gentlemen
suppose our laws, like those of the Medes and Persians, unchangeable?
Can any person, who has read our constitution, believe that it is in our
power to pass a law without limitation? No, it is impossible. Every
person knows that a future Congress may repeal this and every other law
we pass, whenever they think proper. The constitution had particularly
intrusted the House of Representatives with the power of raising money;
great care was necessary to preserve this privilege inviolate; it was
one of the greatest securities the people had for their liberties under
this Government. Moreover, the importance of the House itself depended
upon holding the purse-strings; if they once part with this power, they
would become insignificant, and the other branch of the Legislature
might become altogether independent of them. For these reasons, he was
in favor of the motion of his honorable colleague, and hoped it would
obtain.

Mr. GERRY.--There seems to be a great variety of opinions entertained
by gentlemen on this question. But he thought they would all agree on
these two points: first, that there were very great demands upon the
federal treasury; and, secondly, that they had no kind of documents to
show what they were, or what the revenue bill would produce. Under these
circumstances, gentlemen must agree, that there is danger of passing a
law that would operate oppressively, and without reason. There was also
danger of erring in the mode of collecting, for want of experience to
guide them. From these considerations, there was no doubt but the act
would require the reconsideration of the Legislature in a short time;
there may be applications from the people of all quarters to repeal a
part of it. But what are their immediate representatives to do, in case
the bill be made perpetual? They may be convinced that a repeal would be
just and necessary; but it may not be in their power to remedy the
grievances of their constituents, however desirous they may be of doing
so; for, although this House may originate and carry a bill unanimously
through for the repeal, yet it will be in the power of the President,
and the minority of the other branch of Congress, to prevent a repeal.

Mr. HUNTINGDON thought it easy to see the danger of making this bill
perpetual: besides parting with the power which the constitution gave to
the House of Representatives, in authorizing them solely to originate
money bills, there would be another inconvenience, which was, extending
the revenue beyond what the nature of the public debt required. The
foreign debt was payable by instalments; it was saying nothing to allege
that the debt would accumulate, because the United States must make
provision for the annual extinguishment of a part. If the revenue,
arising from the impost, be insufficient for this purpose, recourse must
be had to some other fund, which will enable us to perform the
engagements of the late Congress. It is true the debt is large, and will
take time to pay it off, but he had no doubt but it would be done
according to contract, and with honor to the Union. How, then, can
gentlemen suppose the revenue ought to be perpetual, in order to be
commensurate with the object? If they contemplated the contraction of
more debts in future, the supposition might be true; but he saw no
reason why gentlemen should extend their views so far. He thought if a
future war, or some other untoward circumstance, should increase the
national debt, it ought to be provided for by the Government who were
acquainted with the necessity. He thought the House ought to consider
seriously before they parted with their powers; it was easy for them to
pass a bill to give power, but it was difficult to recall it. He had
seen many instances of this kind; one in particular in the State from
which he came, where the Legislature had given the appointment of
sheriffs, and some other little matters, out of their hands, and had
been a long time endeavoring to get it back; but they had not been able
to obtain it. He had no suspicions of any character in the Senate, but
the constitution had made that body in some degree perpetual, to obtain
a permanency in the laws; if, therefore, this revenue bill had once
their approbation, they might be inclined to continue it, even against
the sentiments of the people and of the House. Though he was not against
trusting the gentlemen who now composed the Senate, he was against
trusting their successors.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, was also in favor of the clause; he
conceived the only reason of weight urged against it, related to the
restoration of public credit; but he thought every person possessed of
the stock or debt of the United States would have the same feelings and
reasoning as the House; they would know that their demands depended upon
a higher source than Congress, and might be sure that we would do our
duty in making particular provision. If Congress neglected this, one
part of the creditors would compel them. If it was found that the United
States were not disposed to pay their debts, foreigners would find the
means to make them. Taking it therefore for granted, that Congress would
always provide for these objects, he would proceed to consider what
effect might arise from a permanent or temporary provision. If the
latter were made, the creditors would honor us for our exertions, and
confide in our continuing to provide for them in the manner we should
find upon experience most convenient to the community. If the system was
declared to be a perpetual provision for the payment of their interest,
it would give no hope, in the first place, for the redemption of the
capital; and in the second, if Congress were to alter it, and which, in
all probability they shortly must, the security would be impaired, and
an essential injury done to the public credit, which we are so desirous
to revive.

Mr. AMES considered this as a very important question; and in order that
his own mind might be fully enlightened, he had listened with the most
unwearied attention to the arguments urged on both sides; but he was far
from being satisfied that the motion was necessary or proper for the
House to adopt.

Gentlemen tell us they are willing to make the revenue commensurate with
the debt. If they do this, all the inconveniences resulting from the
imperfection of the system will be entailed upon us for a number of
years. Other gentlemen mention a year or two for its limitation. Can the
House listen seriously to such a proposition? If we were to tell our
creditors that we are making provision for them for one year, would it
tend to inspire them with confidence in our wisdom or justice? Would our
foreign creditors believe we were scrupulously fulfilling our
engagements with them? No: nothing less than a fixed, permanent system,
can beget confidence or give security. An illusory system of one or two
years' duration would engender distrust; its very visage would make the
public suspect deception. If we do not mean to deceive, why not make the
provision commensurate to the occasion? His idea of a temporary act was
_pro hac vice_, by way of experiment: but he thought the House could not
make the experiment with this bill, because the public credit would not
admit of it. If this act be made for one year, will it not be a
considerable expense to the public by going over all the ground again,
which had taken the House such a length of time to discuss?

What has been the conduct of Great Britain, in relation to her funds?
What has carried the credit of that kingdom to a superior eminence, but
the attention she has paid to public credit? He considered these
advantages as having made that nation rich and powerful. He believed a
like conduct on our part would produce the same consequences, because
our Government is of such a nature as to give the public creditors the
greatest security they could wish. If the revenue is appropriated, and
the law for collecting it is without any limitation, the funds cannot be
taken away without a positive act of injustice, to which both Houses of
the Legislature must assent by a majority of two-thirds, or three
independent parties must unite. It was therefore three to one in favor
of the public creditor, that the funds appropriated to his use would not
be annihilated. Under these circumstances, Government might more safely
be trusted. This, he observed, was not the case under despotic princes;
their will alone could tear away the security of the subject. Under a
pure democracy, the case was almost as bad; no confidence could be
placed, because the caprice and whim of one body could dictate a change.

Mr. PAGE expressed his surprise to find gentlemen opposed to the
limitation of the bill, who had complained so much of its imperfections.
He thought a measure of the kind now proposed absolutely necessary to
reconcile these gentlemen to particular parts of the bill. For his own
part, he had objections to some articles, and for that reason, if there
was no other, he would be in favor of the limitation. It had been
frequently asserted that half the revenue would be lost by smuggling.
Can this, then, he would ask, be a bill proper to perpetuate, or fit for
the restoration of the credit of the United States? He asked gentlemen
whether they would lend a hand to rivet round the necks of their
fellow-citizens a regulation which experience had convinced them was
unjust, unequal, and oppressive? Yet the gentleman from Massachusetts
(Mr. AMES) had declared that experience had convinced him that at least
one particular article was subjected to a duty of this kind.

Mr. GERRY asked his colleague if he advocated carrying the taxes to such
an extent as to accumulate sums in the treasury for which the United
States had no particular use? Yet if this revenue law were made
perpetual, it would collect money into the public coffers after the
national debt was paid. This would be such a temptation to the Executive
to possess itself by force of the treasures of the nation, as he hoped
would never be put in its way. If our commerce and population increased,
this revenue would increase in the same proportion. He could not,
therefore, bear the idea of all this money being collected into one
spot, unless there was an absolute demand for it. He thought it
incompatible with the liberty and security of the people, and therefore
hoped the House would agree to a short limitation.

Mr. MADISON, for the sake of accommodation, would make another
proposition. He was extremely sorry to differ with gentlemen about
modes, when their object appeared to be the same. He thought the spirit
of the constitution and the structure of the Government rendered it
improper to pass a perpetual revenue law. The arguments had been clear
on this point; but as there was an evident propriety in making the means
commensurate to the occasion, he was inclined to give the bill such a
perpetuity as would answer the purpose of providing for the public debt
and restoring the national credit. He thought this might be done by
modifying his motion so as to refer to the collection bill; for he
hoped, before that passed, the House would be able to ascertain the
appropriation, and could limit it accordingly. The words he would
propose were, that this act should not continue and be in force longer
than the ---- day of ----, unless otherwise limited by the act providing
for the appropriation. As he had heard it intimated that the yeas and
nays would be called on this question, he was desirous of rendering the
clause as satisfactory as possible.

Mr. AMES could not bear to lie under the imputation of inconsistency,
with which he was charged, inasmuch as he contended against the
limitation of a bill he had opposed as oppressive in some of its parts.
He believed the amendment now offered was new to almost every gentleman.
For his part, he had always supposed it was intended as a permanent
system. He remembered many gentlemen made use of this expression,
through the various debates which had taken place in the several stages
of the bill. He had understood it in this light, and had therefore
combated, with some degree of energy, such parts as appeared to him
impolitic or unjust. He imagined the gentlemen on both sides had labored
to make the bill as perfect as possible, with a view of making an
equitable provision for the public exigencies, which should affect all
parts of the Union with the greatest degree of impartiality.

Mr. SHERMAN observed, that when Congress applied to the several States
for the five per cent. impost, they judged it would enable them to
extinguish the national debt in twenty-five years; but, in addition to
this fund, they expected to make annual requisitions on the States, for
one and a half million of dollars at least; so that gentlemen could not
expect the whole to be paid by this single fund in a short time. He
wished a limitation to the law in general terms, such as until the debt,
foreign and domestic, is discharged. He thought a short term would made
an unfavorable impression upon the minds of the public creditors, and
tend in a great measure to cloud the happy prospects that began to
brighten the political hemisphere of this country.

Mr. GERRY expressed an intention of calling the yeas and nays if he was
supported, because he thought it a question in which the essential
interests of the people were deeply involved.

Mr. LAWRENCE said, he held his present opinion upon the purest
principles of patriotism, and an ardent love for his country's
happiness. He had no objection to the yeas and nays being taken, as he
was not inclined to disguise his sentiments.

Mr. PAGE was glad the yeas and nays were called, as it would give
gentlemen an opportunity of showing to their constituents their
approbation of a measure calculated to secure the blessings of liberty
to themselves and posterity.

Several members rose to speak on this question, when Mr. AMES moved the
adjournment, fearing gentlemen would grow warm upon the question.

Whereupon, the House adjourned.


SATURDAY, May 16.

Mr. SENEY, from Maryland, presented to the House an act of the
Legislature of that State, offering to the acceptance of Congress ten
miles square of territory, in any part of the said State, for the seat
of the Federal Government, which was read and ordered to lie on the
table.


_Duties on Imports._

The House resumed the consideration of the amendment proposed yesterday
to the bill for laying a duty on goods, wares, and merchandises imported
into the United States, and the said amendment read as follows: "And be
it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act shall be in
force until the ---- day of ----, and from thence until the end of the
next session of Congress which shall happen thereafter."

The question was called for, and Mr. LAWRENCE required the ayes and
noes.

Mr. JACKSON wished to say a few words on the bill. The ayes and noes
being called for, he conceived it his duty to state his reasons for his
vote. He declared himself to be in favor of the limitation, for the
reasons offered by honorable gentlemen yesterday. He said he had as
ardent a desire to re-establish public credit, and place it on a good
footing, as any member on that floor, yet he did not think making this
law perpetual would have that tendency. He had no doubt but every
subsequent Legislature would be equally desirous of doing justice to
the creditors of the Union, and he therefore felt no uneasiness in
leaving such provision to be made by them. If the next Legislature were
disposed to violate the public honor, would the law now under
consideration stand in their way? For his part, he could not conceive it
an insuperable bar. He believed there was not a member who liked every
part of the bill. Under these circumstances, what was to be expected but
complaints from the people, and a consequent repeal of the bill? He did
not wish to insinuate that the Senate would be so depraved as to oppose
the public voice, but they might misunderstand it; they were a permanent
body, and might be more inclined to support what they considered the
honor of the Government than the convenience of the people.

The House of Representatives appeared to him to be the body best
calculated to know and feel the interests of their immediate
constituents; they ought, therefore, to preserve the power of redressing
grievances, and not give too much into the hands of the Senate. He
acknowledged the claims which those that fought and bled for their
country had upon the justice of Congress; but he did not believe that
class of citizens would complain or murmur at this House for keeping the
purse strings in their hands, when it was considered necessary to the
security and happiness of the people.

Mr. WHITE did not see the necessity of calling the yeas and nays: he
thought the measure was intended to have one of these two objects,
either to show one part of the House had mistaken the interest of their
country, and ought to be held up to posterity, in order that their
memories may be charged with their want of knowledge; or that there is a
part of this House who think themselves more wise and patriotic than the
majority. He never called the yeas and nays in his life, nor believed he
ever should; but he was willing to have his vote appear, in all cases,
when gentlemen thought proper to perpetuate the decision of the House in
that way. On this occasion he would vote in favor of the amendment, and
would endeavor to answer the objections, which, if well founded, would
be a subject of great uneasiness in his mind, considering how he
intended to give his vote.

He would now proceed to examine, whether rendering this law perpetual
would be a wise and prudent measure. It had been well observed by the
gentleman from Georgia, (Mr. JACKSON,) that every part of the law would
bear harder on some States than on others; perhaps there was no State in
the Union which would not be in some degree dissatisfied. He could
perceive, by the sentiments of gentlemen in this House, that the
burthens would be peculiarly felt; under these impressions, gentlemen
have expressed themselves more warmly than perhaps they ought. There had
been predictions of the most dangerous consequences of high duties,
which he would not repeat; if these dangers were not imaginary, would it
be prudent in the House, to risk these consequences, and make these
dangers unavoidable by rendering the law perpetual.

Much pains had been taken to impose the burthens as equally as possible.
If the duty on molasses bears hard upon one State, the tonnage duty
would bear equally so upon others. But still it is probable, that there
are unequal pressures laid by the bill, which experience alone could
enable the Legislature to alter to the satisfaction of all parties. The
system was great, complex, and comprehensive; it embraces commerce,
manufactures, agriculture, finance, and, in short, every thing in which
a nation can be concerned. Will it be prudent, then, under our present
disadvantages, and without information, to enact a law affecting the
highest interests of the people, which can never be repealed but by the
consent of three independent bodies? Gentlemen have told us, that no
valuable purpose can be answered by making the law temporary; now, he
thought a valuable purpose could be answered by it. The two Houses of
Congress, with the qualified negative of the President, formed the
legislative power of the United States; they are distinct powers to be
exercised by both branches of the Legislature. The House had been told,
on a former occasion, that the Senate possessed greater powers than the
Representatives. He admitted that, in some instances, they had greater
powers; but with respect to revenue matters, they certainly had less,
and very properly so. Shall we then give up to a body, who has already a
superiority over us, those superior powers which we possess relative to
revenue? A perpetual system would give the Senate greater advantages
than constitutionally they ought to enjoy. He thought it of little
consequence for the House to possess the right of originating money
bills, if those money bills were made perpetual. The exercise of this
right would be lost, and he thought it necessary that every part of
Government should feel itself dependent upon the people. We have been
told, with truth, that the Senate are a virtuous body; they are so, and
he hoped would remain so, for ages yet to come, nay for ever; and, in
his legislative capacity, he would act upon no other supposition. But
still it ought to be remembered, that they would always be men, and
liable to all the errors, frailties, and infirmities, with the rest of
their fellow-mortals; besides, they were constituted in some measure for
purposes to which the other branch was incompetent; while this House was
constituted for purposes for which the Senate is unequal. It is a
well-grounded republican maxim, that taxation and representation should
depend each on the other. The people should be taxed only by
representatives chosen for that purpose. This principle was written in
the hearts of our British ancestors; it had been maintained by the best
blood of our citizens, and he hoped it would descend with the fullest
energy to our posterity. What, said he, are we about to do? A great
branch of revenue, indeed the only branch, to which an application is
now proper, or expected by the people, is about to be put out of our
hands for ever; for it would not be in the power of this House, or any
future House, to annihilate those funds without the consent of the
Senate and the concurrence of the President. Now, the Senate are not an
equal representation of the people; in that body the States have equal
numbers, while, in this House, the representation is proportioned to
their population. Delaware sends one, Georgia three, and Virginia ten.
Is it possible, in the nature of things, that two Senators can be as
well acquainted with the feelings and interest of the people of
Virginia, as ten men selected from among them, and taken from the
several parts of the State? Will the people be satisfied to have that
body able to continue a revenue system which their immediate
representatives think oppressive, or perhaps unnecessary? Certainly they
would not; whatever the wisdom and virtue of the Senate may be, he was
convinced they were not competent to those peculiar objects for which a
just representation was absolutely necessary. The Senate, it is true, is
not a House of Lords; they do not possess any properties materially
distinguishing them from the members of the House of Representatives;
but, though the distinction is not so striking in the one case as in the
other, yet it was nevertheless real. The House of Lords is created by
the King, and is a permanent body; the Senate is chosen by the State
Legislatures, and though the individuals have not a permanency in
office, yet the body never ceases to exist. These circumstances, in the
constitution of the Senate, afforded a powerful objection to the new
system of Government, and the people would never have adopted it, had
they supposed that the powers of this body were unlimited in continuing
a system of taxation, which had at any time met the approbation of their
particular representatives.[23]

Mr. TUCKER did not think it necessary to give his opinion otherwise than
by his vote, because gentlemen, who had yesterday delivered their
sentiments in favor of the clause, had anticipated what he had to say.
But as he found himself influenced by the call for the ayes and noes on
this question, he should be induced to state some of his reasons in
favor of the amendment. He said, he was glad the ayes and noes had been
called, and if it had not been done by any other gentleman, he should
have conceived himself bound to have done it; because he did not think
himself at liberty, but on very particular occasions, to make a law
perpetual. He wished to see a doctrine established, never to pass a law
without limitation, unless justified by some extraordinary
circumstances. Nothing, he thought, could ever justify such an act but
the immutability of the object, and the absolute necessity and
simplicity of every thing relating to it. If the House passed a
perpetual revenue law, which had not an immutable object, they would
abridge their own power, and destroy one of the great privileges of the
people. Every bill of this nature, more or less, narrows the powers of
this House, and throws it into the hands of the Executive and a minority
of the Senate; for it is to be considered, that whenever we pass a bill
on any subject, every matter in that bill contained is given up to the
Executive and one-third of the Senators, so much so that it is out of
the power of this House, even with a unanimous vote, to recover any part
of it.

Mr. SYLVESTER was in favor of the limitation clause. A good deal had
been said in the House respecting the jarring interests of the several
States. It had been confessed on all hands, that this was an
experimental law: he viewed it as such, and expected, in the course of a
few years, the Legislature would be able to discover the errors of this
day. But what advantage can result from their knowledge, if they have
not power to make the necessary alterations, or to build up a new system
more perfect than the old? He had examined the annals of history, but
was unable to discover that any nation had ever established a perpetual
revenue law. He imagined gentlemen would admit these reasons to be
sufficient to warrant the vote they were about to give.

Mr. SINNICKSON did not expect this was to be a perpetual law, incapable
of alteration; but he wished to see it a permanent system. The idea of a
temporary system was long ago said to be out of the contemplation of the
House. He should only observe, in addition to this, that our credit
depended essentially upon what should be done at this time. He thought
if the revenue existed merely upon the breath of the Legislature, for
one or two years at a time, we should never attain that object. He
thought that the public good required something substantial to be done
in favor of those who had lent the public money in the hour of distress.

Mr. BOUDINOT thought himself obliged to say a few words more, in order
to justify the part he should take in the division of the House on this
question. He conceived the manner in which the motion was brought before
the House, after the bill was supposed to be gone through, did not give
such opportunity for the members to consider the subject as its
importance seemed to require, and which might have been had if it had
been brought forward at an earlier period.

If, said he, we are to have the measures of the Parliament of Great
Britain hung about our necks in all our public proceedings, and
observations from their practice perpetually sounding in our ears, that
practice ought to be defined and established. He believed that in the
whole volumes of the statute law, there was not one single revenue act
to be found with a limitation. He believed that the revenue laws, passed
fifty, sixty, eighty, and near a hundred years ago, in that kingdom,
existed at the present moment. We have long seen and been convinced of
the infirmities of the former confederation, and shall we now rivet
those infirmities upon the present constitution? Are we never to stand
upon a certain and solid foundation? Is not our public credit totally
gone? Has not experience convinced us that the loss of it would have
been our total destruction, if the generous exertions we have lately
made had not revived some degree of confidence in our future measures?
Are we not so deeply in debt as to give us reason to believe that it
will require many years to emancipate ourselves? If this is the case,
will a revenue law for one or two years bring that relief which is
expected? Will this prevent an increase of the public debt? Will it
restore value to the evidences of that debt held by our creditors? He
would ask any man, whether, if the United States were in the situation
in which they were last war, he would be induced to lend money upon a
temporary and inadequate fund provided for two years? He believed the
answer would be in the negative.

Mr. MADISON withdrew his motion in order to introduce another, which he
hoped would reconcile both sides of the House. He joined those gentlemen
who opposed the clause in thinking that one or two years would be a
period insufficient to answer the purposes in contemplation. If the
House agree to the clause he would substitute for the one just
withdrawn, he would move to fill the blank with a more distant day. His
motion was, that this act shall not continue in force after the ---- day
of ---- unless otherwise provided in the act for the appropriation of
the revenue.

Mr. FITZSIMONS seconded the motion.

Mr. SHERMAN liked this motion better than the other. Although he was in
favor of leaving the law at large, he would vote for this clause, if the
blanks were filled up with a sufficient time to accomplish those objects
which the Government had in view in providing revenue.

Mr. AMES thought the question would recur when the appropriation or
collecting bill came before them; he would rather, for his own part,
decide the question at this moment, than consume the time of the House
with another debate. Besides the House was not in possession of an act
for appropriating the revenue; such a measure might never be agreed to;
therefore he hoped the decision would take place at this time rather
than be evaded.

Mr. FITZSIMONS was of opinion, that this revenue ought to be
appropriated to the payment of the public debts; what were the views of
other gentlemen he could not say. He was nevertheless in favor of
limiting the law, and that upon constitutional principles, though he
wished it commensurate to its object. Gentlemen had said a great deal
respecting the imperfection of the system, that it was the effect of
compromise; but nevertheless, he thought it as free from defects as it
was possible a revenue system could be formed with such materials as the
House possessed; but if it was imperfect, he did not see the
difficulties some gentlemen mentioned, in altering and amending it when
experience shall have pointed out its defects.

Mr. BOUDINOT acquiesced in the motion now brought forward for the sake
of accommodation, although he thought the bill would stand better
without any limitation clause whatever.

Mr. PAGE was against the latter part of this clause. It had been justly
said, that the bill would be oppressive; but, from the necessity of the
times, the people will submit to it. Shall we not let them see the end
of their burthen in the law itself? Are they to look into another bill
for that purpose? Perhaps after the Senate have agreed to this act, they
may oppose the limitation in the subsequent one; they may insist upon
having this in perpetuity, and then the object which the House have in
view will be defeated.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, moved a division of the question.

Mr. LEE wished to strike out that part of the motion which related to
the exception.

Mr. LIVERMORE seconded Mr. LEE.

The question was put, and that part of the clause lost.

The question now stood as originally introduced to the House.

The previous question was then demanded by five members: Shall the main
question be now put? And on the question, shall the main question be now
put? it was resolved in the affirmative.

And then the main question being put, that the House do agree to the
amendment proposed to the said bill, it was resolved in the
affirmative--ayes 41, noes 8.

The ayes and noes being called for by one-fifth of the members present:

Those who voted in the affirmative, are,

      Messrs. Abraham Baldwin, Egbert Benson, Theodorick Bland,
      Ædanus Burke, Daniel Carroll, Isaac Coles, Benjamin Contee,
      Thomas Fitzsimons, William Floyd, George Gale, Elbridge
      Gerry, Nicholas Gilman, Benjamin Goodhue, Samuel Griffin,
      Jonathan Grout, John Hathorn, Daniel Heister, Benjamin
      Huntington, James Jackson, Richard Bland Lee, George
      Leonard, Samuel Livermore, James Madison, junior, Andrew
      Moore, Peter Muhlenberg, John Page, Josiah Parker, George
      Partridge, Jeremiah Van Rensselaer, Joshua Seney, Thomas
      Scott, William Smith, William Smith, of South Carolina,
      Jonathan Sturgis, Peter Sylvester, Jonathan Trumbull, Thos.
      Tudor Tucker, John Vining, Jeremiah Wadsworth, Alexander
      White, and Henry Wynkoop.

Those who voted in the negative, are,

      Messrs. Fisher Ames, Elias Boudinot, Lambert Cadwalader,
      George Clymer, John Lawrence, Roger Sherman, Thomas
      Sinnickson, and George Thatcher.

The clause being added, it was agreed to fill the blank so as to read
the first day of June, 1796.

_Ordered_, That the said bill, with the amendments, be engrossed, and
read the third time to-day.[24]


MONDAY, May 18.

      _Resolved_, That leave be given to bring in a bill
      concerning the importation of certain persons into the
      United States, prior to the year 1808, and that Mr. PARKER,
      Mr. SINNICKSON, and Mr. MUHLENBERG, do prepare and bring in
      the same.


TUESDAY, May 19.

_Executive Departments._

On motion of Mr. BOUDINOT, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the whole House on the state of the Union. Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I rise, Mr. Chairman, with diffidence, to introduce a
subject to the consideration of the committee, which I had hopes would
have been brought forward by an abler hand; the pressing necessity of it
must alone be my excuse. The great executive departments which were in
existence under the late confederation, are now at an end, at least so
far as not to be able to conduct the business of the United States. If
we take up the present constitution, we shall find it contemplates
departments of an executive nature in aid of the President: it then
remains for us to carry this intention into effect, which I take it will
be best done by settling principles for organizing them in this place,
and afterwards appoint a select committee to bring in a bill for the
same.

I need say little to convince gentlemen of the necessity which presses
us into a pursuit of this measure. They know that our national debt is
considerable; the interest on our foreign loans, and the instalments
due, amount to two millions of dollars. This arrearage, together with
the domestic debt, is of great magnitude, and it will be attended with
the most dreadful consequences to let these affairs run into confusion
and ruin, for want of proper regulations to keep them in order.

I shall move the committee therefore to come to some such resolution as
this: That an officer be established for the management of the finances
of the United States, at the head of which shall be an officer to be
denominated the Secretary of Finance. I am not tenacious of the style,
perhaps some other may be proper, but the object I have in view is to
establish the department; after which we may go on to narrate the duties
of the officer, and accommodate the name to the acts he is to perform.
The departments under the late constitution are not to be models for us
to form ours upon by reason of the essential change which has taken
place in the Government, and the new distribution of legislative,
executive, and judicial powers.

If gentlemen then agree with me so far, I shall proceed to restrain the
Secretary of Finance, and all persons under him, from being concerned in
trade or commerce, and make it his duty to superintend the treasury and
the finances of the United States, examine the public debts and
engagements, inspect the collection and expenditure of the revenue, and
to form and digest plans for its improvement. There may be other duties
which gentlemen may add, as I do not pretend to have perfectly
enumerated them all. After this point is settled, we may then go to the
consideration of the War Department, and the Department of Foreign
Affairs; but, for the present, I would wish to confine ourselves to the
Department of Finance.

Mr. BENSON wished the committee to consider what he judged to be a
previous question, namely, how many departments there should be
established? He approved of the division mentioned by the gentleman; but
would, with his leave, move that there be established in aid of the
Chief Magistrate, three executive departments, to be severally
denominated the Department of Foreign Affairs, Treasury, and War. After
determining this question, if it was a proper division, the committee
might proceed to enumerate the duties which should be attached to each.

Mr. BOUDINOT said, he could apologize for not bringing the business on
in another way. It seemed to be a settled point in the House that a
Committee of the Whole was the proper place for determining principles
before they were sent elsewhere; he had therefore adopted that mode on
the present occasion, though his own judgment would incline him to
pursue that last mentioned by the gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. BLAND.)
He conceived the necessity of having such an office was indisputable;
the Government could not be carried on without it; but there may be a
question with respect to the mode in which the business of the office
shall be conducted; there may also be a question respecting the
constitution of it, but none with respect to the establishment of either
of the three departments he had mentioned.

Mr. BENSON said, his motion was founded upon the constitutional division
of these powers; the constitution contemplated them, because it gave the
President the right of requiring the opinion of the principal officer in
each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the
duties of their respective offices. If gentlemen were inclined to waive
the determination for the present, he had no objection; it was certainly
a subject of great importance, and required time for consideration.

Mr. VINING thought the gentleman should have added another department,
viz: the Home Department. The territorial possessions of the United
States, and the domestic affairs, would be objects of the greatest
magnitude, and he suspected would render it essentially requisite to
establish such a one.

Mr. BOUDINOT wished to confine the question to the Department of
Finance.

A motion was made by Mr. BLAND for the committee's rising.

Mr. MADISON hoped they would not rise until the principles were settled.
He thought it much better to determine the outlines of all business in a
Committee of the Whole. He was satisfied it would be found, on
experience, to shorten their deliberations. If the gentlemen who had
offered motions to the committee would withdraw them, he would offer one
which he judged likely to embrace the intentions of both gentlemen.

Mr. BENSON withdrew his motion, and Mr. MADISON moved, that it is the
opinion of this committee, that there shall be established an Executive
Department, to be denominated the Department of Foreign Affairs, at the
head of which there shall be an officer, to be called the Secretary to
the Department of Foreign Affairs, who shall be appointed by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and to be
removable by the President.

That there shall be a Treasury Department, &c.

That there shall be a War Department, &c.

Mr. VINING seconded the motion, and offered to amend it, by adding the
Domestic Department, _mutatis mutandis_. He said this department, in his
opinion, was of absolute necessity, more requisite than either of the
other three, except the Department of Finance; the present and
increasing duties of such a department will oblige them to make the
establishment.

Mr. LIVERMORE was not prepared to decide on the question even as now
brought forward, nor did he see a reason why the Department of Foreign
Affairs was placed at the head of the list. He thought the Treasury
Department of more importance, and consequently deserved the precedence.

As to the Domestic Department just mentioned by the gentleman from
Delaware, he thought its duties might be blended with the others, and
thereby save the United States the expense of one grand department. If
the gentleman, therefore, would wait to see what were the duties
assigned to them severally, he would be able to judge respecting his
motion with greater propriety.

Mr. VINING withdrew his motion for the present.

And the committee agreed to the establishment of the Department of
Foreign Affairs, and placing at the head thereof an officer to be called
the Secretary of Foreign Affairs; but when they came to the mode of
appointing the officer,

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) moved to strike out the words "who shall
be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate." He conceived the words to be unnecessary; besides, it looked as
if they were conferring power, which was not the case, for the
constitution had expressly given the power of appointment in the words
there used. He also objected to the subsequent part of this paragraph,
because it declared the President alone to have the power of removal.

Mr. PAGE saw no impropriety in passing an act to carry into execution
the views of the constitution, and therefore had no objection to repeat
those words in the resolution. He thought if the committee stopped
there, they would be under no difficulty respecting the propriety of
their measure, but if they went further they might meet with
considerable embarrassment.

Mr. MADISON remarked, that as there was a discretionary power in the
Legislature to give the privilege to the President alone of appointing
inferior officers, there could be no injury in declaring in the
resolution the constitutional mode of appointing the heads of
departments; however, if gentlemen were uneasy, he would not object to
strike it out.

Mr. LEE thought this officer was an inferior officer; the President was
the great and responsible officer of the Government; this was only to
aid him in performing his executive duties; hence he conceived the power
of appointing to be in the gift of the Legislature, and therefore the
words were proper.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina.)--This officer is at the head of a
department, and one of those who are to advise the President; the
inferior officers mentioned in the constitution are clerks and other
subordinate persons. The words are only a repetition of the words in the
constitution, and are consequently superfluous.

The question was taken on striking out those words, and carried in the
affirmative.

The committee proceeded to the discussion of the power of the President
to remove this officer.

Mr. SMITH said, he had doubts whether the officer could be removed by
the President. He apprehended he could only be removed by an impeachment
before the Senate, and that, being once in office, he must remain there
until convicted upon impeachment. He wished gentlemen would consider
this point well before they decided it.

Mr. MADISON did not concur with the gentleman in his interpretation of
the constitution. What, said he, would be the consequence of such
construction? It would in effect establish every officer of the
Government on the firm tenure of good behavior; not the heads of
departments only, but all the inferior officers of those departments,
would hold their offices during good behavior, and that to be judged of
by one branch of the Legislature only on the impeachment of the other.
If the constitution means this by its declarations to be the case, we
must submit; but I should lament it as a fatal error interwoven in the
system, and one that would ultimately prove its destruction. I think the
inference would not arise from a fair construction of the words of that
instrument.

It is very possible that an officer who may not incur the displeasure of
the President, may be guilty of actions that ought to forfeit his place.
The power of this House may reach him by the means of an impeachment,
and he may be removed even against the will of the President; so that
the declaration in the constitution was intended as a supplemental
security for the good behavior of the public officers. It is possible
the case I have stated may happen. Indeed, it may, perhaps, on some
occasion, be found necessary to impeach the President himself; surely,
therefore, it may happen to a subordinate officer, whose bad actions may
be connived at or overlooked by the President. Hence the people have an
additional security in this constitutional provision.

I think it absolutely necessary that the President should have the
power of removing from office; it will make him, in a peculiar manner,
responsible for their conduct, and subject him to impeachment himself,
if he suffers them to perpetrate with impunity high crimes or
misdemeanors against the United States, or neglects to superintend their
conduct, so as to check their excesses. On the constitutionality of the
declaration I have no manner of doubt.

Mr. BENSON.--If we refer to the constitution for light on this subject,
it will appear evident that the objection is not well founded. The
objection is this, that an officer ought not to be removed but by
impeachment; then every officer is appointed during good behavior. Now,
the constitution expressly declares, that the Judges, both of the
Supreme and Inferior Courts, shall hold their offices during good
behavior. If it is declared, that they are to hold their offices by this
particular tenure, it follows that the other officers of the Government
should hold them only at pleasure. He thought this an important
question, and one in which they were obliged to take the constitution by
construction. For although it detailed the mode of appointing to office,
it was not explicit as to the supersedure; this clause, therefore, would
be a mere declaration of the legislative construction on this point. He
thought the importance and necessity of making the declaration, that the
Chief Magistrate might supersede any civil officer was evident, and he
should therefore vote in favor of the clause as it stood.

Mr. VINING said, there were no negative words in the constitution to
preclude the President from the exercise of this power; but there was a
strong presumption that he was invested with it: because it was
declared, that all executive power should be vested in him, except in
cases where it is otherwise qualified; as, for example, he could not
fully exercise his executive power in making treaties, unless with the
advice and consent of the Senate--the same in appointing to office.

He viewed the power of removal, by impeachment, as a supplementary
security to the people against the continuance of improper persons in
office; but it did not consist with the nature of things, that this
should be the only mode of removal; it was attended with circumstances
that would render it insufficient to secure the public safety, which was
a primary object in every Government. Witness a transatlantic instance
of its incompetency--he meant the famous case of Mr. Hastings. With what
difficulty was that prosecution carried on! What a length of time did it
take to determine! What is to be done while the impeachment is
depending? For, according to the ideas of the gentleman from South
Carolina, (Mr. SMITH,) he cannot be removed but on conviction. If he
cannot be removed, I should suppose he cannot be suspended; and what
security have the people against the machinations of a bad man in
office? He had no doubt but the constitution gave this power to the
President; but if doubts were entertained, he thought it prudent to
make a legislative declaration of the sentiments of Congress on this
point. He was therefore in favor of the clause.

Mr. BLAND thought the power given by the constitution to the Senate,
respecting the appointment to office, would be rendered almost nugatory
if the President had the power of removal. If the first nomination of
the President should be disapproved by the Senate, and the second agreed
to, he had nothing to do but wait the adjournment of Congress, and then
fill the vacancy with his favorite; who, by thus getting into the
possession of the office, would have a considerable chance of permanency
in it. He thought it consistent with the nature of things, that the
power which appointed should remove; and would not object to a
declaration in the resolution, if the words were added, that the
President shall remove from office, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate. He agreed that the removal by impeachment was a
supplementary aid favorable to the people; but he was clearly of
opinion, that the same power that appointed had, or ought to have, the
power of removal.

Mr. JACKSON wished the motion had been referred to a sub-committee to
digest: it seemed to him they were building the house before the plan
was drawn. He wished to see the system reduced to writing, that he might
leisurely judge of the necessity and propriety of each office and its
particular duties.

With respect to the question before the House he was of opinion that if
the House had the power of removal by the constitution, they could not
give it out of their hands; because every power recognized by the
constitution must remain where it was placed by that instrument. But the
words in the constitution declare, in positive terms, that all civil
officers shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction
of, high crimes and misdemeanors; and however long it may take to
decide, in this way it must be done. He did not think the case of Mr.
Hastings ought to be brought forward as a precedent for conducting such
business in the United States. He believed, whenever an impeachment was
brought before the Senate, they would proceed with all imaginable speed
to its termination. He should, in case of impeachment, be willing to go
so far as to give the power of suspension to the President, and he
thought this all the security which the public safety required; it would
prevent the party from doing further mischief. He agreed with the
gentleman in the general principle, that the body who appointed ought to
have the power of removal, as the body which enacts laws can repeal
them; but if the power is deposited in any particular department by the
constitution, it is out of the power of the House to alter it.

Mr. MADISON did not conceive it was a proper construction of the
constitution to say, that there was no other mode of removing from
office than that by impeachment; he believed this, as applied to the
Judges, might be the case, but he could never imagine it extended in the
manner which gentlemen contended for. He believed they would not assert,
that any part of the constitution declared, that the only way to remove
should be by impeachment; the contrary might be inferred, because
Congress may establish offices by law; therefore, most certainly, it is
in the discretion of the Legislature to say upon what terms the office
shall be held, either during good behavior or during pleasure. Under
this construction, the principles of the constitution would be
reconcilable in every part; but under that of the gentleman from South
Carolina, it would be incongruous and faulty. He wondered how the
gentleman from Georgia (Mr. JACKSON) would reconcile his principles so
far as to permit the President to suspend the officer. He begged his
colleague (Mr. BLAND) to consider the inconvenience his doctrine would
occasion, by keeping the Senate constantly sitting, in order to give
their assent to the removal of an officer; they might see there would be
a constant probability of the Senate being called upon to exercise this
power, consequently they could not be a moment absent. Now, he did not
believe the constitution imposed any such duty upon them; why, then,
said he, shall we enjoin it, especially at such an expense of the public
treasure?

Mr. BOUDINOT would by no means infringe the constitution by any act of
his, for if he thought this motion would lead the committee beyond the
powers assigned to the Legislature, he would give it a decided negative;
but, on an impartial examination of that instrument, he could not see
the least foundation for such an objection; however, he was glad the
question had come forward, because he wished to give a legislative
construction to this part of the constitution.

The gentlemen who denied the power of the President to remove from
office, founded their opinion upon the fourth section of the second
article of the constitution, where it is declared, that all officers
shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of,
treason or bribery. If their construction is admissible, and no officer
whatever is to be removed in any other way than by impeachment, we shall
be in a deplorable situation indeed. Consider the extent of the United
States, and the difficulty of conducting a prosecution against an
officer, who, with the witnesses, resides a thousand miles from the seat
of Government. But suppose the officer should, by sickness, or some
other accident, be rendered incapable of performing the functions of the
office, must he be continued? And yet it is to be apprehended, that such
a disability would not furnish any good ground for impeachment; it could
not be laid as treason or bribery, nor perhaps as a high crime or
misdemeanor. Would gentlemen narrow the operation of the constitution in
this manner, and render it impossible to be executed?

Mr. WHITE thought no office under the Government was to be held during
pleasure, except those which are to be constituted by law; but all the
heads of departments are to be appointed by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate. He conceived that, in all cases,
the party who appointed ought to judge of the removal, except in those
cases which by the constitution are excepted; and in those cases
impeachment and conviction are the only mode by which they can be
removed.

Mr. THATCHER asked, why the Judges were particularly mentioned in the
constitution as holding their offices during good behavior, if it was
not supposed that, without this express declaration in their favor,
they, in common with all other officers not immediately chosen by the
State Legislatures and the people, would hold them during pleasure? The
clause respecting impeachments was particularly calculated for removing
unworthy officers of the other description. Holding this construction of
the constitution to be right, he was in favor of the clause as it stood.

Mr. SYLVESTER thought the constitution ought to have a liberal
construction, and therefore was of opinion that the clause relative to
the removal by impeachment was intended as a check upon the President,
as already mentioned by some gentlemen, and to secure to the people, by
means of their representatives, a constitutional mode of obtaining
justice against peculators and defaulters in office, who might be
protected by the persons appointing them. He apprehended the doctrine
held out by the gentleman from South Carolina would involve the
Government in great difficulties, if not in ruin, and he did not see it
was a necessary construction of the constitution. Why, then, should the
House search for a meaning, to make the constitution inconsistent with
itself, when a more rational one is at hand? He, however, inclined at
present to the sentiments of the gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. BLAND,)
who thought the Senate ought to be joined with the President in the
removal, as they were joined by the constitution in the appointment to
office.

Mr. GOODHUE was decidedly against combining the Senate in this business.
He wished to make the President as responsible as possible for the
conduct of the officers who were to execute the duties of his own branch
of the Government. If the removal and appointment were placed in the
hands of a numerous body, the responsibility would be lessened. He
admitted there was a propriety in allowing the Senate to advise the
President in the choice of officers; this the constitution had ordained
for wise purposes; but there could be no real advantage arising from the
concurrence of the Senate to the removal, but great disadvantages. It
might beget faction and party, which would prevent the Senate from
paying proper attention to the public business. Upon the whole, he
concluded the community would be served by the best men when the Senate
concurred with the President in the appointment; but if any oversight
was committed, it could best be corrected by the superintending agent.
It was the peculiar duty of the President to watch over the executive
officers; but of what avail would be his inspection, unless he had a
power to correct the abuses he might discover.

Mr. GERRY.--The constitution provides for the appointment of the public
officers in this manner: The President shall nominate, and by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other
public ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other
officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. Now, if
there be no other clause respecting the appointment, I shall be glad to
see how the heads of departments are to be removed by the President
alone. What clause is it that gives this power in express terms? I
believe there is none such. If there is a power of removal, besides that
by impeachment, it must vest somewhere. It must vest in the President,
or in the President and Senate, or in the President, Senate, and House
of Representatives. Now, there is no clause which expressly vests it in
the President. I believe no gentleman contends it is in this House,
because that would be that mingling of the executive and legislative
powers gentlemen deprecate. I presume, then, gentlemen will grant, that
if there is such a power, it vests with the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, who are the body that appoints. I
think we ought to be cautious how we step in between the President and
the Senate, to abridge the power of the one, or increase the other. If
the power of removal vests where I suppose, we, by this declaration,
undertake to transfer it to the President alone.

It has been mentioned, that it is proper to give this power to the
President, in order to make him more fully responsible for this officer.
I am for supporting the President to the utmost of my power, and making
him as responsible as possible. I would therefore vest every gift of
office, in the power of the Legislature, in the President alone; but I
cannot think we ought to attempt to give him authority to remove from
office, in cases where the constitution has placed it in other hands.

Mr. LIVERMORE considered this as a constitutional question, and was of
opinion, that the same power which appointed an officer, had the right
of removal also, unless it was restrained by an express declaration to
the contrary. As the President, by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate, is empowered to appoint ambassadors, certainly they have a
right to remove them and appoint others. In the case of the judges, they
must be appointed for life, or during good behavior. He had no idea,
that it could ever enter into the heart of any man living, that all
officers appointed under the constitution were to have a perpetuity in
office. The judges themselves would not have had this right, if it had
not been expressly given by the constitution, but would be removable in
like manner with ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls. He
took it, therefore, in the present case, that the President and the
Senate would have the power of removing the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs. The only question, therefore, which appears to be before the
committee is, whether we shall give this power to the President alone?
And with that he thought they had nothing to do. He supposed, if the
clause was left out, the President and the Senate would proceed, as
directed by the constitution, to appoint the officer; and hereafter, if
they judged it necessary, would remove him; but if they neglected to do
so, when it was necessary, by reason of his misdemeanors, this House
would impeach him, and so get rid of him on conviction.

Mr. BLAND.--It seems to be agreed on all hands, that there does exist a
power of removal; the contrary doctrine would be a solecism in
Government. If an officer embezzles the public money, or neglects or
refuses to do the duties of his appointment, can it be supposed there is
no way of getting rid of such a person? He was certain it was
essentially necessary such a power should be lodged somewhere, or it
would be impossible to carry the Government into execution. Their
inquiries were therefore reduced to this point: Does it reside,
agreeably to the constitution, in the President, or in the President and
the Senate? The constitution declares, that the President and the Senate
shall appoint, and it naturally follows, that the power which appoints
shall remove also. What would be the consequence of the removal by the
President alone, he had already mentioned, and need not repeat. A new
President might, by turning out the great officers, bring about a change
of the ministry, and throw the affairs of the Union into disorder: would
not this, in fact, make the President a monarch, and give him absolute
power over all the great departments of Government? It signifies nothing
that the Senate have a check over the appointment, because he can
remove, and tire out the good disposition of the Senate.

Mr. CLYMER said, the power of removal was an executive power, and as
such belonged to the President alone, by the express words of the
constitution: "the executive power shall be vested in a President of the
United States of America." The Senate were not an executive body; they
were a legislative one. It was true, in some instances, they held a
qualified check over the executive power, but that was in consequence of
an express declaration in the constitution; without such declaration,
they would not have been called upon for advice and consent in the case
of appointment. Why, then, shall we extend their power to control the
removal which is naturally in the Executive, unless it is likewise
expressly declared in the constitution?

The question on adding the words "by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate," as moved by Mr. BLAND, was put and lost.

The question was now taken, and carried by a considerable majority, in
favor of declaring the power of removal to be in the President.


WEDNESDAY, May 20.

_Treasury Department._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair. The resolution for
establishing the Treasury Department being under consideration:

Mr. GERRY.--We are now called upon, Mr. Speaker, to deliberate, whether
we shall place this all-important department in the hands of a single
individual, or in a Board of Commissioners. I presume the gentleman, who
has brought forward this string of propositions, means, that this
officer shall have power to examine into the state of the public debt
and expenses, to receive and disburse the revenue, to devise plans for
its improvement and expansion, and, in short, to superintend and direct
the receipts and expenditure, and govern the finances of the United
States; having under him officers to do the subordinate business of
registering and recording his transactions, and a Comptroller to control
his operations with respect to the accounts and vouchers.

Before this committee proceed one step farther in this business, they
ought seriously to consider the situation of this country, and what will
be the consequence of appointing such an officer; consider how it will
affect the public in general, the revenue, and even the Government
itself. He is declared, in the list of duties assigned him in the paper
read yesterday by the gentleman from New York, (Mr. BENSON,) to have the
power to form and digest the accounts, and to control all the officers
of the department. It is evident, that we put his integrity to the
trial, by such an arrangement. If he is disposed to embezzle the public
money, it will be out of the power of the Executive itself to check or
control him in his nefarious practices. The extension of his business to
the collectors of at least fifty seaports, (over whom the naval officer
can have no control, with respect to the money received,) will furnish
abundant opportunities for peculation. In addition to the moneys arising
from the impost, he may have to do with large sums derived from other
quarters, from the sale of the vacant lands, the money of defaulters now
due to the United States, and the revenue arising from taxes and
excises. Admit these innumerable opportunities for defrauding the
revenue, without check or control, and it is next to impossible he
should remain unsullied in his reputation, or innoxious with respect to
misapplying his trust.

Other great opportunities may arise in case of an anticipation of the
public revenue; or, if it is necessary to prevent the injury which a
rapid depreciation of the securities would occasion to public credit, he
may be employed in purchasing them, in order to advance the credit of
the Union. But what is to prevent the greatest imposition in this
business? Charging them to the public at their nominal value, it is not
in the power of the Government to check this species of speculation;
what then is the situation of your officer? He must subject himself to
suspicion: indeed, it is as much as his reputation is worth to come into
a place of this kind; he can hardly preserve his integrity. His honor,
credit, and character, must inevitably be injured. He cannot prove
himself innocent of the suspicion, because it is the negative side of
the question. He can offer nothing more in his defence than a mere
denial of the crime.

There is another point which ought to be well considered: This officer
is to digest and form the accounts. He can consequently give the
business such complexity, as to render it impossible to detect his
impositions; and as the inferior officers, who might discover the fraud,
are to be appointed by the principal, will they not consequently be men
after his own heart?

Taking these circumstances together, it must be very disagreeable to the
person appointed, provided he is an honest, upright man; it will be
disagreeable also to the people of the Union, who will always have
reason to suspect, that a partiality is shown to the collectors, and
other officers of the State to which he belonged. This has absolutely
been the case, and was productive of very great dissatisfaction. I would
be glad to know of the gentlemen, who are for vesting these powers in a
single person, where they will find the man who is capable of performing
the duties of a financier? For it is not the mere calling him a
financier, and giving him a large salary, that will enable him to
perform his functions in such a manner as to give satisfaction. We had
once a gentleman who filled such a department, and I believe the only
one in the United States who had knowledge and abilities by any means
competent to the business; but that gentleman is now employed in another
branch of the Government, and cannot be called to this trust. During the
late war, Congress thinking it necessary to employ a financier, were led
to inquire for a proper character to fill such an office; but not being
able to discover such a one in this country, in whose abilities they had
sufficient confidence, they wrote to Doctor Price a letter, to induce
him to come to America, and accept of an appointment under them, for the
superintendence of their finances. He wrote, in answer, that he felt
with gratitude the honor which they had done him by their application,
and signified, that he was desirous of rendering every service in his
power to aid the glorious cause in which America was embarked; but, from
his advanced situation in life, and infirmities of body, he was under
the necessity of declining. This circumstance serves to show how
difficult it is to get a proper person for so arduous an undertaking.
But it appears to me, that if we could fix upon a person equal to the
office, involving him in forming accounts, and such trifling business,
would divert his attention from the more important duties he is called
upon to perform. The proper business of finance, I take it, ought to be
to consider of the means to improve the revenue, and introducing economy
into the expenditures; to recommend general systems of finance, without
having any thing to do with the actual administration of them, because,
if he engages in the executive business, we shall be deprived of his
talents in more important concerns. If it should be granted that there
is a person of abilities to be found, adequate to the duties of the
office, I want to know where the advantage arises of appointing him
alone in preference to a Board? If you have commissioners, you have an
opportunity of taking one from each grand division of the United States,
namely, the Eastern, the Middle, and Southern Districts. If this person
is a member of the Board, is it not evident you will have every
advantage from his abilities in such a situation, as you would if he
were placed in office without control? If he was possessed of such
genius, he could employ it more usefully as a Commissioner of the Board
of Treasury, than when left to perform all the drudgery of the executive
part; because while his fine imagination was busied in reducing a chaos
to a beautiful system, his colleagues might perform those parts which
required less elevation of thought; by dividing the burthen, the
business would be done with more regularity and facility. Surely no
advantage to the public would arise from giving him the sole management
of the business, but much inconvenience might; besides, it must
unavoidably, as I said before, subject him to suspicions unfavorable to
his reputation. This has absolutely been realized; it is not a mere
chimera, a matter of speculation. We have had a Board of Treasury, and
we have had a Financier. Have not express charges, as well as vague
rumors, been brought against him at the bar of the public? They may be
unfounded, it is true; but it shows that a man cannot serve in such a
station without exciting popular clamor. It is very well known, I dare
say, to many gentlemen in this House, that the noise and commotion were
such as obliged Congress once more to alter their Treasury Department,
and place it under the management of a Board of Commissioners. We have
seen speculations excited from this quarter against the Government
itself, and painful insinuations of design by his appointment to the
Senate. I mention these circumstances to exhibit to your view the
inconveniencies to which an officer is subjected by constituting an
office of this nature. If the gentleman I have alluded to had been a
member of the Board of Treasury, he would not have been subjected to the
charges which were brought against him. In such a situation, he could
have rendered the services his great abilities enabled him to do,
without exposing his character to be torn to pieces by malevolence or
detraction.

I am desirous of supporting the President; but the Senate requires to be
supported also in their constitutional rights. To this body belongs the
confidence of the States; while the President rests his support upon
them he will be secure. They, with this House, can give him proper
information of what is for the public interest, and, by pursuing their
advice, he will continue to himself that good opinion which is justly
entertained of him. If we are to establish a number of such grand
officers as these, the consequences appear to me pretty plain. These
officers, bearing the titles of minister at war, minister of state,
minister for the finances, minister of foreign affairs, and how many
more ministers I cannot say, will be made necessary to the President. If
by this establishment we make them more respectable than the other
branches of the Government, the President will be induced to place more
confidence in them than in the Senate; the people will also be led to
consider them as more consequential persons. But all high officers of
this kind must have confidence placed in them; they will in fact be the
chancellors, the ministers of the nation. It will lead to the
establishment of a system of favoritism, and the principal magistrate
will be governed by these men. An oligarchy will be confirmed upon the
ruin of the democracy; a Government most hateful will descend to our
posterity, and all our exertions in the glorious cause of freedom will
be frustrated: we shall go on till we reduce the powers of the President
and Senate to nothing but a name. This surely, sir, does not comport
with the conduct of the House. We have been very tenacious of giving a
title to the President, lest it should be implied we desired to increase
his power. We would call him by no other appellation than merely
President of the United States. I confess I was not such a stickler
about titles as all this, because I did not consider that the liberties
of the people could be hurt by such means; but I am not clear that the
constitution authorizes us to bestow titles; it is not among the
enumerated powers of Congress. But if the constitution did authorize
it--[A call to order was made by some of the members, and Mr. GERRY was
desired to confine himself to the point; the subject of titles was not
before the House.][25] Mr. GERRY proceeded, and said the Senate were
constitutionally the highest officers of Government, except the
President and Vice President; that the House was about to supersede
them, and place over their heads a set of ministers who were to hold the
reins of Government, and all this to answer no good purpose whatever;
because the same services could be obtained from subordinate officers.

In short, a Board of Treasury would conduct the business of finance with
greater security and satisfaction than a single officer. He had a very
good opinion of the gentleman who formerly administered the finances of
the United States, and doubted if another of equal qualities could be
found; but it was impossible for any person to give satisfaction in such
a station. Jealousy would unavoidably be entertained; besides, no
inconvenience resulted from the present arrangement of that department;
therefore, there could be no good reason to induce a change. If the
House was truly republican and consistent, they would not admit
officers, with or without titles, to possess such amazing powers as
would eventually end in the ruin of the Government. Under these
impressions, he moved to amend the resolution so as to read, "there
shall be established a Treasury Department, at the head of which there
shall be three commissioners, to be denominated the Board of Treasury."

Mr. WADSWORTH.--My official duty has led me often to attend at the
treasury of the United States, and, from my experience, I venture to
pronounce that a Board of Treasury is the worst of all institutions.
They have doubled our national debt. (I do not mean by this observation
to censure any man who has been in that office: I presume they were
honest men, and did as well as could be done under such a system.) But I
do not remember a single instance, in any one board, that I found them
to have a system that would give even tolerable satisfaction; there
appeared a want of confidence in the members of them all: they seemed to
have no fixed principles to guide them, nor responsibility for their
conduct.

I have had also transactions at the treasury whilst it was managed by a
Superintendent of Finance. As to what fell from the gentleman last up,
(though without intention, I dare say, to affect or prejudice the
character of that officer, it may possibly have such an effect,) I think
it necessary to state my sentiments, which are formed from my own
experience as well as from report. I had great transactions with him,
and must say that there did appear to be system in his management, and
responsibility in his negotiations. I dare risk my fortune and character
with him, because there was unity in the officer, and somebody in whom I
could confide. The nature of the office is better calculated to give
satisfaction than the other. I will not pretend to enumerate the savings
he made, by introducing economy throughout the whole departments under
Congress, because I do not know them all; but they were very
considerable. The administration of the finances was clear to the
meanest capacity. Receipts and expenditures were stated simply; they
were published to the world. The heads of the Treasury Department, the
Board of Commissioners, I do not believe have closed their accounts to
this very day. I do not say it is for want of ability, will, or honesty,
that this event has not taken place. I conceive it to be owing to their
want of system in conducting their business. I wish the committee had
before them the transactions of the board for one single month; they
would find what I have remarked to be too well founded. Instead of
system and responsibility, they would find nothing but confusion and
disorder, without a possibility of checking their accounts. I know I am
heard by one gentleman who is acquainted with these truths by
experience.[26]

I beg leave to repeat once more, that under boards of treasury, there
never was a possibility of the public knowing their situation; there is
no possibility of getting on with the public accounts and closing them;
there have not been the transactions of more than one of the great
departments completely settled, owing to a radical defect in their
constitution; they cannot proceed with that unity and decision necessary
to insure justice. As to what the gentleman said, with respect to the
difficulty of getting a proper officer to fill the department, I will
just observe, that I do not believe it impossible, and am therefore
prepared to attempt it.

Mr. BENSON stated, that in the year 1781, from the very great
derangement of public affairs, Congress were induced to place the
Treasury Department under the superintendence of an individual. It is
true, after the conclusion of the war, in the latter end of 1783, or
beginning of 1784, Congress again changed their system, and placed the
department in the hands of three commissioners, to be taken, as the
gentleman has said, one from the Eastern, one from the Middle, and one
from the Southern district; which regulation I think induced above
twenty applications. Some gentlemen on this floor will doubtless
recollect an observation that was made at that time, that if this trust
had been to be reposed in one responsible individual, not perhaps more
than three of the candidates would have had confidence to come forward
as applicants for the office.

For his part, he conceived, that it required the same abilities in every
individual of the commissioners, as was necessary if a single person was
placed at the head of the department. If men competent to the
undertaking are so difficult to be found, you will increase the
embarrassment of the President threefold by making the arrangement the
gentleman contends for. The principle upon which the gentleman advocates
the appointment of a Board of Treasury, would apply in favor of a change
in the constitution, and we ought to have three Presidents of the United
States instead of one, because their business might be done with more
regularity and facility; but he did not think the argument to be well
founded.

Mr. BALDWIN thought that there were very few gentlemen who had much to
do with public business, but had turned their attention to this
question. He had employed his reflection upon the subject for some time,
and his sentiments were against the establishment of a Board of
Treasury. He was persuaded there was not so much responsibility in
boards as there was in individuals, nor is there such good ground for
the exercise of the talents of a financier in that way. Boards were
generally more destitute of energy than was an individual placed at the
head of a department. The observations of the gentleman from
Massachusetts were of great weight, so far as they inferred the
necessity of proper checks in the department having care of the public
money; if they had system, energy, and responsibility, he should be in
favor of them; but his experience had convinced him of the contrary. He
was not an advocate for an unlimited authority in this officer. He hoped
to see proper checks provided; a Comptroller, Auditors, Register, and
Treasurer. He would not suffer the Secretary to touch a farthing of the
public money beyond his salary. The settling of the accounts should be
in the Auditors and Comptroller; the registering them to be in another
officer, and the cash in the hands of one unconnected with either. He
was satisfied that in this way the treasury might be safe, and great
improvements made in the business of revenue.

Mr. MADISON had intended to have given his sentiments on this subject;
but he was anticipated in some things by the gentleman last up. He
wished, in all cases of an executive nature, that the committee should
consider the powers that were to be exercised, and where that power was
too great to be trusted to an individual, proper care should be taken so
to regulate and check the exercise, as would give indubitable security
for the perfect preservation of the public interest, and to prevent that
suspicion which men of integrity were ever desirous of avoiding. This
was his intention in the present case. If the committee agreed to his
proposition, he intended to introduce principles of caution, which he
supposed would give satisfaction on that point. As far as was
practicable, he would have the various business of this important branch
of the Government divided and modified, so as to lull at least the
jealousy expressed by the gentleman from Massachusetts; indeed, he
supposed, with the assistance of the committee, it might be formed so as
to give satisfaction. He had no doubt but that the offices might be so
constituted as to restrain and check each other; and unless an unbounded
combination took place, which he could by no means suppose was likely to
be the case, that the public would be safe and secure under the
administration. He would favor the arrangement mentioned by the worthy
gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. BALDWIN,) and after that was
separated from the Secretary's duties, he believed the officer would
find sufficient business to employ his time and talents in rendering
essential services to his country. This arrangement he considered would
answer most of the objections which had been urged.

If a board is established, the independent officers of Comptroller and
Auditor are unknown; you then give the aggregate of these powers to the
board, the members of which are equal; therefore you give more power to
each individual than is proposed to be trusted in the Secretary; and if
apprehensions are to be entertained of a combination, they apply as
forcibly in the case of two or three commissioners combining, as they do
in the case of the Secretary, Comptroller, and other officers. If
gentlemen permit these sentiments to have their full weight, and
consider the advantages arising from energy, system, and responsibility,
which were all in favor of his motion, he had no doubt of their
according with him on this question.

Mr. BOUDINOT considered the question to be, whether the department
should be under the direction of one or more officers. He was against
boards, because he was convinced by experience that they are liable to
all the objections which gentlemen had stated. He wished the committee
had it in their power to turn to the transactions of this department
since the revolution, to examine the expenditures under former boards of
treasury, and under the Superintendent of Finance; it would so confound
them, that he was sure no gentleman would offer another argument in
favor of boards. He was not acquainted with the management under the
present board. He had not been in the habit of doing business with them.
But between the administration of the former and the Superintendent of
Finance, there was an intolerable comparison. He was far from being
astonished at the jealousy and suspicion entertained of that valuable
officer; he rather wondered that the clamor was not more loud and
tremendous. He could not repeat all the causes there were for accusation
against him, but surely they were not inconsiderable. He remembered one
hundred and forty-six supernumerary officers were brushed off in one
day, who had long been sucking the vital blood and spirit of the nation.
Was it to be wondered at, if this swarm should raise a buzz about him?
The reform which daily took place made him no inconsiderable number of
enemies. The expenditures under the Board of Treasury had been enormous.
They were curtailed in the quartermasters, commissaries of provision and
military stores, in the hospital, and every great department established
by Congress; so that, besides those who were offended by a removal,
every one who was affected by this economy, or parsimony, if they will
call it so, were incensed against him. It was impossible to gain friends
among those people by a practice of this kind. He would state a
circumstance which might give the committee some small idea of what the
savings under the Superintendent were. The expenditure of hay at a
certain post was one hundred and forty tons; such was the estimate laid
before him; yet twelve tons carried the post through the year, and the
supply was abundant, and the post was as fully and usefully occupied as
it had ever been before.

The question on the amendment proposed by Mr. GERRY was taken and lost;
after which the resolutions respecting the Treasury and War Department,
as proposed by Mr. MADISON, were both agreed to.

Mr. VINING then proposed the establishment of the Domestic Department
upon the same principles; but, on motion of Mr. BOUDINOT, the committee
rose and reported the resolutions agreed to.--Adjourned.


THURSDAY, May 21.

_Executive Departments._

The House proceeded to consider the resolution reported yesterday from
the Committee of the whole House on the state of the Union, and the same
being amended to read as follows:

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee that
      there ought to be established the following executive
      departments, viz: A Department of Foreign Affairs, at the
      head of which shall be an officer to be called Secretary to
      the United States for the Department of Foreign Affairs,
      removable by the President. A Treasury Department, at the
      head of which shall be an officer to be called Secretary to
      the United States for the Treasury Department, removable by
      the President. A Department of War, at the head of which
      shall be an officer to be called Secretary to the United
      States for the Department of War, removable by the
      President.

      _Resolved_, That this House doth concur with the committee
      in the said resolution; and that a committee, to consist of
      eleven members, be appointed to prepare and bring in a bill
      or bills pursuant thereto.

The members elected were, Mr. BALDWIN, Mr. VINING, Mr. LIVERMORE, Mr.
MADISON, Mr. BENSON, Mr. BURKE, Mr. FITZSIMONS, Mr. BOUDINOT, Mr.
WADSWORTH, Mr. GERRY, and Mr. CADWALADER.


FRIDAY, May 22.

_Contested Election._[27]

The House resumed the consideration of the report on Mr. SMITH'S case.

After some desultory conversation on the recommitment and mode of
proceeding, it was agreed to examine the evidence in favor of Mr.
SMITH, the facts alleged by Doctor Ramsay, in proof that Mr. SMITH was
not seven years a citizen of the United States, being admitted.
Whereupon, it being moved and seconded, that the House do agree to the
following resolution:

      _Resolved_, That it appears to this House, upon full and
      mature consideration, that the said WILLIAM SMITH had been
      seven years a citizen of the United States, at the time of
      his election.

Mr. SMITH.--As the House are inclined to hear the observations I have to
make, I shall begin with admitting the facts stated in the memorial of
Doctor Ramsay, hoping the House will excuse the egotism into which I am
unavoidably drawn. I was born in Charleston, South Carolina, of a family
whose ancestors were among the first settlers of that colony, and was
sent to England for my education when I was but twelve years of age. In
1774, I was sent to Geneva, to pursue my studies, where I resided until
1778. In November, that year, I went to Paris, where I resided upwards
of two months in the character of an American gentleman. Immediately on
my arrival there, I waited on Doctor Franklin, Mr. Adams, and Mr. A.
Lee, the Commissioners from Congress to the court of France, as a
citizen of America, and was received as such by them. In January, 1779,
I left Paris for London, whither I went to procure the means of
embarking for America, from the gentleman who had been appointed my
guardian by my father when I was first sent to Europe in 1770, and from
whom alone I had any hope of obtaining such means. But in this endeavor,
I was disappointed, and remained some time in England, with the hope of
receiving remittances from Charleston. Here again my expectation was
defeated. The rapid depreciation of the continental money rendered the
negotiation of money transactions extremely difficult, and thus I
remained till the fall of Charleston. I took this opportunity of
studying the law, but could not be called to the bar, because I had not
taken the oath of allegiance to Great Britain, which is a necessary
qualification. After the surrender of Charleston, the whole State of
South Carolina fell into the hands of the enemy, and it was impossible
at that time to return. No sooner, however, did I acquire the means, and
an opportunity offered, than I prepared myself to go back to America. I
quitted London for that purpose, in October or November, 1782, not in a
vessel bound to Charleston, then a British garrison, and which I
certainly should have done, had I considered myself a British subject,
and which would have been most convenient, as there were vessels
constantly going from London to Charleston; but I travelled to Ostend,
and there embarked in a neutral vessel bound to St. Kitt's, from whence
it was my intention to proceed to a Danish island, and thence to some
American port in North Carolina or Georgia, from whence I could reach
the American camp. In the beginning of January, 1783, I sailed from
Ostend, but was detained a considerable time by contrary winds, and in
the middle of the month of February, was shipwrecked on the coast of
England, and was obliged to return to London in order to procure another
passage. These circumstances unavoidably prevented my return to
Charleston, until some time in November, 1783.

On my arrival at Charleston, I was received by my countrymen as a
citizen of the State of South Carolina, and elected by their free
suffrage a member of the Legislature in November, 1784. In the August
following I was chosen, by the Governor and Council, a member of the
Privy Council, and this election was confirmed by the Legislature the
October following. In September, the same year, I was elected one of the
Wardens of the City of Charleston. In November, 1786, I was again
elected into the Legislature; again in November, 1788; I was elected at
the same time that I was elected to the House of Representatives of the
United States, the September preceding having been chosen again a Warden
of the city.

After having stated these facts, he went on adverting to the laws
referred to in the report of the committee, which, he said, he conceived
to be applicable to the present case.

In September, 1779, a question was discussed in the Legislature of South
Carolina, respecting the young men who were sent abroad for their
education, and it was determined that it was most for the interest of
the State, that they should be allowed to continue in Europe till they
were twenty-two years of age; after which the law provided they should
be doubly taxed if they did not return. This law might fairly be
supposed to recognize the citizenship of all the young men in a similar
predicament with himself. It allowed them all to be absent until they
were twenty-two years of age; but even after that period it did not
deprive them of the right of citizenship; it only subjected them to the
penalty of a double tax. This he contended was a sort of compact with
him, that if he chose to be absent after that time, he should suffer a
certain penalty, which, in its own nature, implied that his citizenship
remained; but before he attained that age, South Carolina was in such a
situation that her best friends were compelled to be absent, and take
refuge in distant countries. It was not till some time after that the
friends of the American cause began to assemble in that State; the
absentee law, therefore, never operated on him, and he never was doubly
taxed.

In February, 1782, the Legislature met at Jacksonburg, and discriminated
between friend and foe, between American and British subjects, by
disposing of the estates of the latter, and banishing them; from an
inspection of the law passed at that time, it would be evident in what
light they viewed him. He had landed property in the State, but was
himself in England; yet they did not attempt to confiscate his
property, or subject him to an amercement. The absentee law was his
safeguard, he had the permission of the State to be abroad.

If the Legislature in 1782 recognized as citizens some of those persons
whose estates were confiscated for adhering to Great Britain, and for
being disaffected to America _a fortiori_, did it not recognize as a
citizen one whose estate was not forfeited, who had not been deemed
worthy of punishment, and who had been absent under the sanction of the
law?

By the constitution of South Carolina it appears, that no person was
eligible to a seat in the Legislature until he had resided three years,
nor to a seat in the Privy Council until he had resided five years in
the State. He had a seat in both those bodies before he had resided two
years in the State of South Carolina, and no objection was ever made on
that score. He could not have been qualified for either, had not the
people of South Carolina deemed his residence in that State, such a
residence as gained him a qualification; or had they not supposed the
qualification required in the constitution applied only to new comers
and new citizens, for whom that residence was necessary to wean them
from their local prejudices and national habits, and to attach them to
the commonwealth. Had they not, in short, supposed him to have been a
citizen during the revolution, and attached to his native State by every
tie which could bind an individual to any country. Three years'
residence was either not required of him, or his former residence was
deemed within the meaning of the constitution.

An act to confer the right of citizenship on aliens was passed March 26,
1784. For the purpose of possessing the subordinate rights of
citizenship, such as an exemption from the alien duty, a residence of
one year, and taking the oath of allegiance, was sufficient. To confer a
right of voting at elections, a person must have been admitted a citizen
two years prior to his voting; but for the higher privileges of a
citizen, being eligible to offices of trust, to a seat in the
Legislature and Privy Council, the alien must have been naturalized by
law. Now, in November, 1784, he was elected into the Legislature, and
took his seat without objection in January, 1785, and was elected into
the Privy Council, October, 1785; all without being naturalized by law.

In October, 1785, when he was elected to the Council, his election was
opposed, but the objection now brought forward was not then made; and
the memorialist himself, who was a member of the Legislature, voted in
favor of the choice; though, unquestionably, unless he was considered by
the Legislature as a citizen before he returned to Charleston, nothing
had afterwards occurred to make him so, and the alien act of 1784
positively required a naturalization by act of Assembly to give him a
qualification.

The constitution of South Carolina is silent as to citizenship, but
allowed any person to vote at elections who had resided a year in the
State, and paid a certain tax; to be a member of the Assembly he must
have resided three, and to be a Privy Councillor five years previous to
his election, but nothing was said about citizenship. The act of 1784,
however, expressly defined who should and who should not be deemed
citizens; and, consequently, all persons who did not become citizens
must have been held to be aliens, and considered so, till they had
conformed to the alien act of 1784. Now, as he was admitted to offices
of trust, to which aliens were not admissible, and as he was admitted to
them without having the rights of citizenship conferred upon him, in
pursuance of that act, it followed clearly, that the people of South
Carolina and the Legislature acknowledged him to be a citizen by virtue
of the revolution.

He went on to observe, that, from the doctrine laid down by the
memorialist, it was difficult to ascertain when he did become a citizen
of South Carolina. When he was admitted to the bar in 1784, he did no
act which made him a citizen, the bare act of taking an oath of
qualification to an office could not convert an alien to a citizen. The
constitution seemed to imply a mere residence of a year, by giving a
right to vote, gave a right of citizenship; if that were the case, and
if his residence prior to the revolution was considered such a residence
as the constitution required, then he was a citizen, by virtue of the
constitution, after having resided a year in Carolina. Now, it was
clear, his residence prior to the war was deemed such a residence as the
constitution required; because he was admitted to vote and admitted to a
seat in the Legislature and Council by right of such residence, not
having had the requisite residence since the war, and yet being deemed
qualified. If, therefore, that part of the constitution which gave a
right of voting, in consequence of a year's residence and paying a
certain tax, virtually conferred citizenship, by giving a right to vote,
(and it appeared absurd that a right to vote should be given to persons
not citizens,) and if, also, his residence, prior to the revolution, was
deemed a sufficient residence, then he was a citizen by virtue of the
constitution.

The points that seemed most to be relied upon by the memorialist were:

1st. That residence was actually necessary to confer citizenship, or, in
other words, that a person could not become a citizen of a country, till
he has resided in it.

2d. That a person could not become a citizen till he was of age to
choose his country.

In answer to the first, he denied that residence in the country was
absolutely necessary. Was it to be supposed, he asked, that when a man
sent his son into another country for his education and improvement, the
son was thereby to lose any political benefits which might, during such
temporary absence, accrue to his country? If his father had lived a few
years longer, would there have arisen any question on this subject?
Would he not, though absent, have acquired, according to the
petitioner's own positions, a right of citizenship? And should his
death, at such an early period, not be deemed a sufficient misfortune
for him, without using that as a pretence for making him an alien? Those
who represented him in Carolina as his guardians, who were _in loco
parentis_, were residents in Carolina at the declaration of
independence.

His property was in Carolina, his money in the treasury, assisting to
carry on the war. The declaration of independence affected him as much,
though at Geneva, as it did those in Carolina; his happiness, that of
his dearest connections, his property, were deeply interested in it: his
fate was so closely connected with that of Carolina, that any revolution
in Carolina was a revolution to him. Though a minor, as soon as he heard
of the independence of America, he considered himself an American
citizen.

If a person could not become a citizen of a country without residing in
it, what should be said of those gentlemen who had been in Europe during
the war, and were now in high office in America? Several of them went to
Europe before the war, were there at the declaration of independence,
and did not return to America till after the war, or about the close of
it. When did their citizenship commence? According to the petitioner,
they could not become citizens of America until they returned to
America, and took an oath of allegiance to the States; but Congress
employed them in offices of great confidence, before they had returned
to America, or taken such oath. Congress, therefore, considered them
citizens, by virtue of the revolution.

It had been said, that Carolina had called on her young men to come to
her assistance. This was not the true state of the case. Carolina
thought that her young men who were abroad for their education, should
not be taken from their studies till they were twenty-two years of age,
and doubly taxed them after that. His guardian wrote to him that he had
permission of the Legislature to be absent till he was twenty-two, and
that he should be doubly taxed after that age.

It has been also said, that Carolina tendered an oath, to discover who
were friends, and who were enemies. In March, 1778, the Legislature of
South Carolina passed an act to oblige every free male inhabitant of
that State, above sixteen years of age, to take an oath of allegiance to
the State. As there were notoriously many persons then in the State who
were inimical to its liberties, such a step was necessary to give a
reasonable cause for obliging them to quit the country. With that view,
the oath was generally tendered only to those who were suspected or
known not to be friendly to the cause. He had been informed by several
persons, who were zealous partisans, and then in Carolina, that they had
never taken any oath of allegiance, and that it had not been required
of them on this occasion.

The act directed, that those who did not take it, should quit the State;
and, if they returned, should be dealt with as traitors, and suffer
death. Let us examine whether this act can, in any respect, apply to the
present question. 1st. It particularly mentioned "inhabitants of the
State of South Carolina." It could not, therefore, apply to persons who
were abroad. 2dly. It directed that the oath should be taken before a
justice of peace in Carolina; this could not, therefore, extend to a
person then at Geneva. 3dly. It was directed to be taken in one month
after the passing of the act; and it was not possible that I should hear
of the existence of such an act in less than three months. 4thly. It was
directed, that if the persons refused to take it, they should quit the
State; but I was already out of it. 5thly. Those who refused to take it,
were prevented from acquiring or conveying property, and rendered
incapable of exercising any profession. But on my return to Carolina, I
took peaceable possession of my estate, part of which consisted of lands
and houses, which had been mine since the year 1770; and I was
immediately admitted to the exercise of the profession for which I was
educated. 6thly. The act directed, that if any person returned to
Carolina, after having refused to take the oath, he should be put to
death as a traitor; and, yet, on my return, never having taken the oath,
I was elected a member of the Legislature, and a Privy Councillor; and,
instead of being deemed a criminal myself, I acted as Attorney General
to punish others; and yet the petitioner, in one of his late
publications, lays great stress on the applicability of this act.

2dly. There could be no doubt that a minor might be a citizen, from the
very words of the constitution, which admitted a person to be a member
of the House of Representatives at twenty-five, and yet required a
citizenship of seven years. This was of itself a sufficient refutation
of every thing contained in the petition on this head. The constitution
acknowledged that a person might be a citizen at eighteen; if so, there
was no reason why a person might not be one at sixteen or fourteen.

Mr. LEE said, the committee had now to determine, whether Mr. SMITH was
a citizen of South Carolina during his absence from home, or not. If the
laws of that State recognized him as such, the question was determined,
because this House could not dispute a fact of that kind. From the
reference that has been made to the constitution and laws of South
Carolina, and the circumstances which took place under them, with
respect to Mr. SMITH, it was convincing that he was acknowledged there
to be a citizen in consequence of the revolution.

Mr. MADISON.--I think the merit of the question is now to be decided,
whether the gentleman is eligible to a seat in this House or not; but
it will depend on the decision of a previous question, whether he has
been seven years a citizen of the United States or not.

From an attention to the facts which have been adduced, and from a
consideration of the principles established by the revolution, the
conclusion I have drawn is, that Mr. SMITH was, on the declaration of
independence, a citizen of the United States; and unless it appears that
he has forfeited his right, by some neglect or overt act, he had
continued a citizen until the day of his election to a seat in this
House. I take it to be a clear point, that we are to be guided, in our
decision, by the laws and constitution of South Carolina, so far as they
can guide us; and where the laws do not expressly guide us, we must be
guided by principles of a general nature, so far as they are applicable
to the present case.

It were to be wished, that we had some law adduced, more precisely
defining the qualities of a citizen or an alien; particular laws of this
kind have obtained in some of the States; if such a law existed in South
Carolina, it might have prevented this question from ever coming before
us; but since this has not been the case, let us settle some general
principle before we proceed to the presumptive proof arising from public
measures under the law, which tend to give support to the inference
drawn from such principles.

It is an established maxim, that birth is a criterion of allegiance.
Birth, however, derives its force sometimes from place, and sometimes
from parentage; but, in general, place is the most certain criterion; it
is what applies in the United States; it will, therefore, be unnecessary
to investigate any other. Mr. SMITH founds his claim upon his
birthright; his ancestors were among the first settlers of that colony.

It is well known to many gentlemen on this floor, as well as to the
public, that the petitioner is a man of talents, one who would not
lightly hazard his reputation in support of visionary principles: yet I
cannot but think he has erred in one of the principles upon which he
grounds his charge. He supposes, when this country separated from Great
Britain, the tie of allegiance subsisted between the inhabitants of
America and the king of that nation, unless, by some adventitious
circumstance, the allegiance was transferred to one of the United
States. I think there is a distinction which will invalidate his
doctrine in this particular, a distinction between that primary
allegiance which we owe to that particular society of which we are
members, and the secondary allegiance we owe to the sovereign
established by that society. This distinction will be illustrated by the
doctrine established by the laws of Great Britain, which were the laws
of this country before the revolution. The sovereign cannot make a
citizen by any act of his own; he can confer denizenship; but this does
not make a man either a citizen or subject. In order to make a citizen
or subject, it is established, that allegiance shall first be due to
the whole nation; it is necessary that a national act should pass to
admit an individual member. In order to become a member of the British
Empire, where birth has not endowed the person with that privilege, he
must be naturalized by an act of Parliament.

What was the situation of the people of America, when the dissolution of
their allegiance took place by the declaration of independence? I
conceive that every person who owed this primary allegiance to the
particular community in which he was born, retained his right of birth,
as a member of a new community; that he was consequently absolved from
the secondary allegiance he had owed to the British sovereign. If he
were not a minor, he became bound, by his own act, as a member of the
society who separated with him from a submission to a foreign country.
If he were a minor, his consent was involved in the decision of that
society to which he belonged by the ties of nature. What was the
allegiance, as a citizen of South Carolina, he owed to the King of Great
Britain? He owed his allegiance to him as a king of that society to
which, as a society, he owed his primary allegiance. When that society
separated from Great Britain, he was bound by that act, and his
allegiance transferred to that society, or the sovereign which that
society should set up; because it was through his membership of the
society of South Carolina that he owed allegiance to Great Britain.

This reasoning will hold good, unless it is supposed that the separation
which took place between these States and Great Britain, not only
dissolved the union between those countries, but dissolved the union
among the citizens themselves: that the original compact, which made
them altogether one society, being dissolved, they could not fall into
pieces, each part making an independent society; but must individually
revert into a state of nature; but I do not conceive that this was, of
necessity, to be the case; I believe such a revolution did not
absolutely take place. But in supposing that this was the case, lies the
error of the memorialist. I conceive the colonies remained as a
political society, detached from their former connection with another
society, without dissolving into a state of nature; but capable of
substituting a new form of government in the place of the old one, which
they had, for special considerations, abolished. Suppose the State of
South Carolina should think proper to revise her constitution, abolish
that which now exists, and establish another form of government: surely
this would not dissolve the social compact. It would not throw them back
into a state of nature. It would not dissolve the union between the
individual members of that society. It would leave them in perfect
society, changing only the mode of action, which they are always at
liberty to arrange. Mr. SMITH being then, at the declaration of
independence, a minor, but being a member of that particular society,
he became, in my opinion, bound by the decision of the society, with
respect to the question of independence and change of Government; and if
afterwards he had taken part with the enemies of his country, he would
have been guilty of treason against that Government to which he owed
allegiance, and would have been liable to be prosecuted as a traitor.

So far as we can judge by the laws of Carolina, and the practice and
decision of that State, the principles I have adduced are supported; and
I must own, that I feel myself at liberty to decide, that Mr. SMITH was
a citizen at the declaration of independence, a citizen at the time of
his election, and, consequently, entitled to a seat in this Legislature.

Mr. JACKSON.--I differ widely from the gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
MADISON) on the subject of allegiance and the social compact, and hold
the principles advanced by him exceedingly dangerous to many of the
States, and in particular to the one I have the honor to represent. The
situation of America, at the time of the revolution, was not properly to
be compared to a people altering their mode or form of government. Nor
were there two allegiances due, one to the community here, another to
that of Great Britain. We were all on a footing; and I contend the
principle is right, in some degree, of a total reversion to a state of
nature amongst individuals, and to a mere parental or patriarchal
authority, where the heads had families dependent on them; the former,
or individual pursued that line which appeared right in his own eyes,
and the cause which he thought just; and, in the latter case, the
children followed the will of the father, who chose for them, as the
person who brought them into life, and whose fortunes they were to
inherit. I conceive the whole allegiance or compact to have been
dissolved. Many of the States were a considerable period without
establishing constitutions or forms of government, and during that
period we were in a little better state than that of nature; and then it
was that every man made his election for an original compact, or tie,
which, by his own act, or that of his father for him, he became bound to
submit to. And what, sir, would otherwise be the result? And if the
gentleman's doctrines of birth were to be supported, those minors, who,
with British bayonets, have plundered and ravaged, nay, cruelly
butchered their more virtuous neighbors--the sons of the most inveterate
traitors, whose names deservedly sounded in every bill of confiscation;
and the minors, sons of those who sheltered themselves under the shade
of the British King, and supported his armies, if not with arms, with
the resources of war, until the hour of danger was over--those, I say,
after the blood of thousands has been spilt in the establishment of our
government, can now come forward and sneer at the foolish patriots who
endured every hardship of a seven years' war, to secure to them the
freedom and property they had no hand in defending. Sir, did we fight
for this? Was it for this the soldier watched his numerous nights, and
braved the inclemency of the seasons? Will he submit, after having
gained his point at the expense of property and the loss of
constitution, to have those sentiments established? If he will, he has
fought to little purpose indeed.

Sir, I again contend, that when the revolution came on we were all alike
with respect to allegiances, and all under the same social tie. An
Englishman born did not conceive himself more liable to be condemned for
treason than an American, had the enemy succeeded; nor would there have
been any distinction in the laws on coming to a trial. But, sir, how
should this primary allegiance be known to belong to the less, or
American community, where the majority did not prevail. In Georgia, the
majority were opposed to American measures; agreeably to the gentleman's
reasoning, the minors must have been all on the British side; and yet
many of them, on arriving to years of discretion, behaved well and
valiantly with us. To corroborate this, sir, I will remark, that, for a
considerable period, we had no general or federal government, or form of
constitution, and yet were in arms. I would ask what state we were in
then? Neighbor was against neighbor, and brother against brother. But,
sir, the gentleman says the hardened minor will not return. Sir,
experience has proved the contrary. The Middle and Eastern States,
except Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York, never had the enemy long
with them; there was not the same trial of men, and they knew not the
audacity of those villains. After having received their equivalent for,
in many cases, feigned losses, from the British crown, they are daily
returning and pushing into office. It is necessary we should guard
against them. Britain, although humiliated, yet has a longing eye upon
this country; she has yet posts in it. Although it is improbable that so
many of these people will get into Congress as to form a corrupt
majority, yet they have ambition and resentment enough to attempt it. At
this moment, sir, in Georgia, are some of the most daring, bringing
ejectments for estates which their fathers had deservedly forfeited,
although themselves had imbrued their hands in the blood of their
fellow-citizens.

Now, to the present case: Highly as I regard the gentleman (Mr. SMITH)
as a valuable member, and esteem his abilities, I can only form my
opinion on the leave given him by the State to be absent. If that
principle is introduced into the resolution, I will vote in favor of Mr.
SMITH'S eligibility; but if not, I must decline voting.

Which he accordingly did when the question was put.

Mr. TUCKER hoped that the yeas and nays would be taken on this question,
not because he had any doubt in his own mind of Mr. SMITH'S right to a
seat, but because he had been solicited by Dr. Ramsay to have the yeas
and nays taken.

The yeas and nays were taken as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Benson, Boudinot, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Clymer, Coles, Contee, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Gilman,
      Goodhue, Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Lee, Leonard,
      Livermore, Madison, Moore, Muhlenberg, Page, Van
      Rensselaer, Seney, Schureman, Scott, Sinnickson, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Sturgis, Sylvester, Thatcher, Trumbull, Tucker,
      Vining, White, and Wynkoop.

      Jonathan Grout voted in the negative.

Adjourned until Monday.


THURSDAY, May 28.

_Western Lands._

The House, on motion of Mr. SCOTT, went into a Committee of the Whole on
the State of the Union, for the purpose of considering certain
resolutions he had prepared respecting the disposal of the land in the
Western Territory. Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair.

Mr. SCOTT presumed there was little need of argument to prove to the
Committee the necessity of taking speedy measures with respect to the
unsettled lands in the Western Territory. The dissolution of the Board
of Treasury, and the death of the late Geographer of the United States,
are adventitious circumstances, which tend to increase the necessity.
Gentlemen are acquainted with the number of sales which have been made
to some of the citizens of the United States; they consequently know
that the United States are under an obligation to complete the surveys
of those lands which they have made sale of. They know, also, that until
this is done, they cannot receive a farthing of the millions of dollars
due on those contracts; they will not only be unable to receive the
principal, but will be paying interest for the same. Besides this, there
are other considerations for putting the business on a new footing. The
mode hitherto pursued of selling lands has been very expensive to the
United States. Perhaps, on inquiry, we shall find, that the specie it
has cost us in getting the land surveyed and sales completed, would have
purchased as many certificates as we get for the sale of the land. The
lands are also proposed to be sold in too great quantities. It is very
difficult to form a company for the purchase of a million acres. It
ought to be sold in small quantities, to make the sales more certain and
numerous; and, consequently, increase the public income. On this
principle, it will be well to open a land office, and grant the soil in
such quantities as may suit the applications. By this means more may be
expected for the purchase, than when it is struck off, at a wholesale
price, by the million acres; and in this way the land office will be
conducted without expense, which will be fixed on the purchaser, so that
the whole money the lands may bring will come into the treasury without
deduction.

There are other considerations why a land office should be opened for
the sale of that territory in the way just mentioned. There are, at this
moment, a great number of people on the ground, who are willing to
acquire by purchase a right to the soil they are seated upon. Allured by
its fertility, the agreeableness of the climate, and the prospect of
future ease to themselves and families, they would not seek a change.
Kentucky, already full, at least there are no more valuable lands to be
got there with a clear title, can receive no more emigrants. They,
therefore, turn their wishful eyes upon the lands of the Union. They
hope to get them of Congress upon as good terms as they can procure them
of the speculators. What will these men think, who have placed
themselves on a vacant spot, anxiously waiting its disposition by the
Government, to find their pre-emption right engrossed by the purchaser
of a million of acres? Will they expose themselves to be preyed upon by
these men? They might submit to this, but they have other offers.

There are seven thousand souls waiting for lands; they will have them
here or elsewhere; but there is some danger, if they cannot be
accommodated within the boundaries of the United States, they will do
one of two things: either move into the Spanish territory, where they
are not altogether uninvited, and become an accession of power to a
foreign nation, forming to us a dangerous frontier; or they will take
this course, move on the United States territory, and take possession
without your leave. What then will be the case? They will not pay you
money. Will you then raise a force to drive them off? That has been
tried: troops were raised, and sent under General Harmer, to effect that
purpose. They burnt the cabins, broke down the fences, and tore up the
potato patches; but three hours after the troops were gone, these people
returned again, repaired the damage, and are now settled upon the lands
in open defiance of the authority of the Union. But, nevertheless, they
are willing to pay an equitable price for those lands; and if they may
be indulged with a pre-emption to the purchase, no men will be better
friends to the Government. They went on the ground with an intention of
purchasing, and are kept there by a hope that the Government will see
their interest, and dispose of the land upon reasonable terms. But if
you do not listen to their request, if you neglect or despise their
offers, and they prove too weak to resist the omnipotent arm of
Government, they will have recourse to a neighboring Power for
protection. Hopes of that protection are now held out to them; it is my
duty to inform you of the fact. They will be led to think their interest
is separate from yours on the Atlantic shores. It will take prudent
management to prevent the fatal effects of a commotion in that country.
One of the most unhappy things we could do, would be to refuse selling
those lands in less quantities than by the million of acres: it would
certainly be a cause of disgust, if not of separation. If the object
was to prevent the settlement of the country, it would be another thing;
but that cannot be accomplished, it is not in the power of any force on
earth to prevent the increase of the population now begun; it is
therefore much better that we should incline them to friendship, than
oblige them to become our enemies. The emigrants who reach the Western
country will not stop until they find a place where they can securely
seat themselves. Your lands first offer: their fertility and
agreeableness will tempt them to pitch there; but to secure them, they
must have a well-grounded hope that the lands they cultivate may become
their own. To encourage this, you must open that territory to them, and
let them have lands for pay. You must go further, you must open the land
office in that country, because it will be impossible for the indigent
persons to travel for an office-right. You can then establish a
government among them, and derive advantages from them which are now
totally lost. They wish for your government and laws, and will be
gratified with the indulgence; but they wish also to acquire property
under them; they wish for your lands, and what good reason can be
offered to warrant a denial? If they cannot get your land, they must go
further, and obtain it of foreigners, who are desirous of having them at
any rate, who will give them lands without pay.

These observations are sufficient, no doubt, to evince the necessity of
doing something with respect to the Western territory, and something
different from what has hitherto been done. In order that the Committee
may have a full view of my ideas, I will read the plan I have in my
hand, upon which a law may be founded.

He here read a previous resolution, to be followed by the plan, which
was to this effect:

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      an act of Congress ought to pass for establishing and
      regulating a land-office, for the sale of the vacant and
      unappropriated land in the Western territory.

      [Here, by way of separate resolutions, followed in detail
      the constituent parts of this office, and the routine in
      which the business should be conducted, directing the
      expense of the office to be supported by the fees payable
      before the warrants and patents were delivered.]

Mr. CLYMER did not believe the committee were prepared for a decision at
this time. He considered the subject to be as intricate and difficult as
it was interesting; and therefore hoped full time would be given for
investigation. Many persons had purchased large quantities of lands of
the late Congress, with a view to sell them out in small lots, to
accommodate the people who are inclined to settle upon them. If Congress
now open a land office for the sale of small quantities, it will no
doubt overcast the prospect of advantage which induced the former, and
may induce future purchasers to apply for large grants. These
observations, and others which would readily occur to every gentleman,
would satisfy the committee that they ought not to precipitate the
business. For this reason, he moved the rising of the committee.

Mr. MADISON had no objection to the rising of the committee, as the
means of obtaining information; but he thought the business deserving of
the earliest attention. The clear and full manner in which the gentleman
from Pennsylvania had opened the subject to the view of the committee,
left no doubt on his mind of the propriety of taking some early measures
to accomplish the business in the manner suggested by that gentleman.
The facts and intelligence mentioned were too important to be passed
lightly over. He should, for the present, agree to rise, but hoped the
subject would be resumed in the House.

The question was taken on the first resolution moved by Mr. SCOTT, and
passed in the affirmative; the others remaining on the table.

The committee then rose and reported progress.


FRIDAY, June 5.

_Admission of Rhode Island into the Union._

Mr. BENSON presented for consideration, the resolution which he
yesterday gave notice of his intention of introducing in relation to the
admission of Rhode Island into the Union, and moved that the House
immediately go into a Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union,
for the purpose of discussing his proposition.

The resolution is in the following words:

      The Congress of the United States do resolve and declare it
      to be their most earnest desire, that the Legislature of
      the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, do
      recommend to the people of that State to choose delegates
      to meet in convention and to whom the constitution of the
      United States is to be submitted, conformably to the
      unanimous resolution of the United States in Congress
      assembled, of the 28th of September, 1787.

Mr. PAGE.--I think of Rhode Island as the worthy gentleman from New York
does; but, as a member of Congress, I doubt the propriety of this body
interfering in the business. If I put myself, for a moment, into the
situation of a citizen of a State that has refused to accede to the
constitution of the United States, I must admit that I should watch your
actions with a jealous eye; I should be apprehensive of undue influence,
if I were to see you throw your weight into the scale. But what occasion
is there for adopting such a resolution? Are gentlemen afraid to leave
them to their own unbiased judgment? For my part I am not: it will
demonstrate the goodness of the constitution, if it be adopted upon
mature consideration, without any aid but its own intrinsic value. As to
amendments, when we come to consider of them, I dare say they will be
such as to make the constitution more agreeable; but, for the present, I
think it improper to have any thing to do with the gentleman's motion;
I hope he may be prevailed upon to withdraw it; he has done his duty by
bringing it forward; but if it does not meet the approbation of the
House, it will be a useless waste of time to give it any further
discussion. The gentleman has shown sufficiently his attachment to the
Federal Government, by the earnestness he shows to have it adopted
throughout the United States. But, in addition to this, let him consider
where such measures may lead us. Because the Legislature of Rhode Island
have neglected or refused to submit the consideration of the
constitution to a convention, we are to recommend it, and express a most
earnest desire that they will comply. But suppose they decline doing
what you require, what is next to be done? I hope gentlemen will
hesitate before they go any further. I think we should be employed more
in the line of our duty, by attending to the interests of our
constituents, and completing the organization of a Government they
ordered, than to spend our time about business which is not within our
powers. Why should we interfere with the concerns of our sister States
who have not yet joined the new Government? I trust the gentleman will
see the impropriety of his motion, and agree to withdraw it.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--I think we ought to go into committee,
and hear what the gentleman has to say on the subject. Though I must
acknowledge I am at present against the adoption of the resolution he
has proposed; yet it is possible, when he has stated his reasons, and
pointed out the necessity of it, that I may alter my opinion; but I
wonder why the gentleman has omitted North Carolina.

Mr. SHERMAN.--I think Rhode Island stands in a different situation from
North Carolina. When this constitution was formed in the convention,
North Carolina was represented there; she, as well as the adopting
States, submitted that instrument to a convention of the people; but not
having adopted it, she has again called a convention, and is proceeding
to reconsider it as fast as convenient; so that such a request as is now
proposed would be unnecessary with respect to them. As Rhode Island did
not send members to the first convention, there was a delicacy in
transmitting the proceedings to them, and Congress could not, perhaps,
apply to them with the same propriety as to another. But all we are now
to consider, I believe, is, that we invite the State of Rhode Island to
join our confederacy; what will be the effect of such a measure we
cannot tell till we try it.

Mr. MADISON.--I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are cases in which it is
prudent to avoid coming to a decision at all, and cases where it is
desirable to evade debate; if there were not cases of this kind, it
would be unnecessary to guard our discussions with the previous
question.[28] My idea on the subject now before the House is, that it
would be improper in this body to expose themselves to have such a
proposition rejected by the Legislature of the State of Rhode Island. It
would likewise be improper to express a desire on an occasion where a
free agency ought to be employed, which would carry with it all the
force of a command. How far this is contemplated on the present
occasion, I cannot tell; but I heartily wish that as little may be said
about it as possible. I conceive this to be one of the cases to which
the previous question is applicable; and, if the gentleman means to call
the House to a direct decision on this motion, I shall step between, and
interpose the previous question.

Mr. AMES.--I am against the previous question being taken, because I
wish the House to consider the motion made by the gentleman from New
York; it is admitted to be a question of considerable importance; if it
is, it ought to be considered; otherwise, we are shutting the door on
information, and putting it out of our power to ascertain the propriety
or impropriety of the motion.

I should be glad to know if any gentleman contemplates the State of
Rhode Island dissevered from the Union; a maritime State, situated in
the most convenient manner for the purpose of smuggling, and defrauding
our revenue. Surely, a moment's reflection will induce the House to take
measures to secure this object. Do gentlemen imagine that State will
join the Union? If they do, what is the injury arising from the adoption
of the resolution intended to be submitted to the committee? Is there
any impropriety in desiring them to consider a question which they have
not yet decided? It has been suggested by an honorable gentleman, that
this desire will operate as a demand. If a wish of Congress can bring
them into the Union, why should we decline to express such a wish?

The previous question being insisted upon, was put--"Shall the main
question be now put?" and it was determined in the negative. Adjourned.


MONDAY, June 8.

MICHAEL JENIFER STONE, from Maryland, appeared, and took his seat.


TUESDAY, June 16.

_Department of Foreign Affairs._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
for establishing an executive department, to be denominated the
Department of Foreign Affairs. Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair.

The first clause, after recapitulating the title of the officer and his
duties, had these words: "To be removable from office by the President
of the United States."

Mr. WHITE.--The constitution gives the President the power of
nominating, and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
appointing to office. As I conceive the power of appointing and
dismissing to be united in their natures, and a principle that never was
called in question in any Government, I am averse to that part of the
clause which subjects the Secretary of Foreign Affairs to be removed at
the will of the President. In the constitution, special provision is
made for the removal of the judges; that I acknowledge to be a deviation
from my principle; but as it is a constitutional provision, it is to be
admitted. In all cases not otherwise provided for in the constitution, I
take it, that the principle I have laid down is the governing one. Now
the constitution has associated the Senate with the President in
appointing the heads of departments. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is
the head of a department; for the words of the law declare, that there
shall be a department established, at the head of which shall be an
officer to be so denominated. If, then, the Senate are associated with
the President in the appointment, they ought also to be associated in
the dismission from office. Upon the justness of this construction, I
take the liberty of reviving the motion made in the Committee of the
Whole, for striking out these words: "to be removable from office by the
President of the United States."

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--The gentleman has anticipated me in his
motion; I am clearly in sentiment with him that the words ought to go
out. It is in the recollection of the committee, that when the subject
was last before us, this power was excepted to; and although the words
were then allowed to stand, it was generally understood that it should
be further debated. I then was opposed to giving this power to the
President, and am still of opinion that we ought not to make this
declaration, even if he has the power by the constitution.

I would premise that one of these two ideas is just: either that the
constitution has given the President the power of removal, and therefore
it is nugatory to make the declaration here; or it has not given the
power to him, and therefore it is improper to make an attempt to confer
it upon him. If it is not given to him by the constitution, but belongs
conjointly to the President and Senate, we have no right to deprive the
Senate of their constitutional prerogative; and it has been the opinion
of sensible men that the power was lodged in this manner. A publication
of no inconsiderable eminence in the class of political writings on the
constitution, has advanced this sentiment. The author, or authors, (for
I have understood it to be the production of two gentlemen of great
information,) of the work published under the signature of _Publius_,
has these words:

"It has been mentioned as one of the advantages to be expected from the
co-operation of the Senate in the business of appointments, that it
would contribute to the stability of the administration. The consent of
that body would be necessary to displace as well as appoint. A change of
the Chief Magistrate, therefore, would not occasion so violent or so
general a revolution in the officers of the Government, as might be
expected if he were the sole disposer of offices. Where a man in any
station has given satisfactory evidence of his fitness for it, a new
President would be restrained from attempting a change in favor of a
person more agreeable to him, by the apprehension that the
discountenance of the Senate might frustrate the attempt, and bring some
degree of discredit upon himself. Those who can best estimate the value
of a steady administration, will be most disposed to prize a provision
which connects the official existence of public men with the approbation
or disapprobation of that body, which, from the greater permanency of
its own composition, will, in all probability, be less subject to
inconstancy than any other member of the Government."

Here this author lays it down, that there can be no doubt of the power
of the Senate in the business of removal. Let this be as it may, I am
clear that the President alone has not the power. Examine the
constitution; the powers of the several branches of Government are there
defined; the President has particular powers assigned him; the Judiciary
have in like manner powers assigned them; but you will find no such
power as removing from office given to the President. I call upon
gentlemen to show me where it is said that the President shall remove
from office. I know they cannot do it. Now, I infer from this, that, as
the constitution has not given the President the power of removability,
it meant that he should not have that power; and this inference is
supported by that clause in the constitution which provides that all
civil officers of the United States shall be removed from office on
impeachment for, and on conviction of treason, bribery, or other high
crimes and misdemeanors. Here is a particular mode described for
removing; and if there is no other mode directed, I contend that the
constitution contemplated only this mode.

I imagine, sir, we are declaring a power in the President which may
hereafter be greatly abused; for we are not always to expect a Chief
Magistrate in whom such entire confidence can be placed as in the
present. Perhaps gentlemen are so much dazzled with the splendor of the
virtues of the present President, as not to be able to see into
futurity. The framers of the constitution did not confine their views to
the first person who was looked up to to fill the Presidential chair. If
they had, they might have omitted those checks and guards with which
the powers of the Executive are surrounded. They knew, from the course
of human events, that they could not expect to be so highly favored of
heaven as to have the blessing of his administration more than seven or
fourteen years; after which, they supposed a man might get into power,
who, it was possible, might misbehave. We ought to follow their example,
and contemplate this power in the hands of an ambitious man, who might
apply it to dangerous purposes. If we give this power to the President,
he may, from caprice, remove the most worthy men from office. His will
and pleasure will be the slight tenure by which an office is to be held,
and of consequence you render the officer the mere state-dependant, the
abject slave of a person who may be disposed to abuse the confidence his
fellow-citizens have placed in him.

Mr. HUNTINGTON.--I think the clause ought not to stand. It was well
observed that the constitution was silent respecting the removal,
otherwise than by impeachment. I would likewise add, that it mentions no
other cause of removal than treason, bribery, or other high crimes and
misdemeanors. It does not, I apprehend, extend to cases of infirmity or
incapacity. Indeed, it appears hard to me, that after an officer has
become old in an honorable service, he should be impeached for this
infirmity. The constitution, I think, must be the only rule to guide us
on this occasion; as it is silent with respect to the removal, Congress
ought to say nothing about it, because it implies that we have a right
to bestow it, and I believe this power is not to be found among the
enumerated powers delegated by the constitution to Congress.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--I wish the words to be struck out, because I conceive
them to be unnecessary in this place. I do conceive, Mr. Speaker, that
this officer will be the mere creature of the law; and that very little
need be said to prove to you that of necessity this ought to be the
case. I apprehend, likewise, that it requires but a small share of
abilities to point out certain causes for which a person ought to be
removed from office, without being guilty of treason, bribery, or
malfeasance; and the nature of things demands that it should be so.
Suppose, sir, a man becomes insane by the visitation of God, and is
likely to ruin our affairs, are the hands of Government to be confined
from warding off the evil? Suppose a person in office, not possessing
the talents he was judged to have at the time of the appointment, is the
error not to be corrected? Suppose he acquires vicious habits, an
incurable indolence, or total neglect of the duties of his office, which
forebode mischief to the public welfare, is there no way to arrest the
threatened danger? Suppose he becomes odious and unpopular by reason of
the measures which he pursues, (and this he may do without committing
any positive offence against the law,) must he preserve his office in
despite of the public will? Suppose him grasping at his own
aggrandizement, and the elevation of his connections, by every means
short of the treason defined by the constitution, hurrying your affairs
to the precipice of destruction, endangering your domestic tranquillity,
plundering you of the means of defence, by alienating the affections of
your allies, and promoting the spirit of discord; is there no way
suddenly to seize the worthless wretch, and hurl him from the pinnacle
of power? Must the tardy, tedious, desultory road, by way of
impeachment, be travelled to overtake the man who, barely confining
himself within the letter of the law, is employed in drawing off the
vital principle of the Government? Sir, the nature of things, the great
objects of society, the express objects of this constitution, require
that this thing should be otherwise. Well, sir, this is admitted by
gentlemen; but they say the Senate is to be united with the President in
the exercise of this power. I hope, sir, that is not the case; because
it would involve us in the most serious difficulty. Suppose a discovery
of any of those events which I have just enumerated were to take place
when the Senate is not in session, how is the remedy to be applied? This
is a serious consideration, and the evil could be avoided no other way
than by the Senate's sitting always. Surely no gentleman of this House
contemplates the necessity of incurring such an expense. I am sure it
will be very objectionable to our constituents; and yet this must be
done, or the public interest be endangered by keeping an unworthy
officer in place until that body shall be assembled from the extremes of
the Union. It has been said that there is a danger of this power being
abused if exercised by one man. Certainly the danger is as great with
respect to the Senate, who are assembled from various parts of the
continent, with different impressions and opinions. It appears to me
that such a body is more likely to misuse this power than the man whom
the united voice of America calls to the Presidential chair. As the
nature of the Government requires the power of removal, I think it is to
be exercised in this way by a hand capable of exerting itself with
effect, and, the power must be conferred upon the President by the
constitution, as the executive officer of the Government.

Mr. MADISON.--If the construction of the constitution is to be left to
its natural course with respect to the executive powers of this
Government, I own that the insertion of this sentiment in law may not be
of material importance, though, if it is nothing more than a mere
declaration of a clear grant made by the constitution, it can do no
harm; but if it relates to a doubtful part of the constitution, I
suppose an exposition of the constitution may come with as much
propriety from the Legislature, as any other department of the
Government. If the power naturally belongs to the Government, and the
constitution is undecided as to the body which is to exercise it, it is
likely that it is submitted to the discretion of the Legislature, and
the question will depend upon its own merits.

I am clearly of opinion with the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr.
SMITH,) that we ought in this, and every other case, to adhere to the
constitution, so far as it will serve as a guide to us, and that we
ought not to be swayed in our decisions by the splendor of the character
of the present Chief Magistrate, but to consider it with respect to the
merit of men who, in the ordinary course of things, may be supposed to
fill the chair. I believe the power here declared is a high one, and, in
some respects, a dangerous one; but, in order to come to a right
decision on this point, we must consider both sides of the question: the
possible abuses which may spring from the single will of the First
Magistrate, and the abuse which may spring from the combined will of the
Executive and the Senatorial disqualification.

When we consider that the First Magistrate is to be appointed at present
by the suffrages of three millions of people, and in all human
probability in a few years' time by double that number, it is not to be
presumed that a vicious or bad character will be selected. If the
Government of any country on the face of the earth was ever effectually
guarded against the election of ambitious or designing characters to the
first office of the State, I think it may with truth be said to be the
case under the constitution of the United States. With all the
infirmities incident to a popular election, corrected by the particular
mode of conducting it, as directed under the present system, I think we
may fairly calculate that the instances will be very rare in which an
unworthy man will receive that mark of the public confidence which is
required to designate the President of the United States. Where the
people are disposed to give so great an elevation to one of their
fellow-citizens, I own that I am not afraid to place my confidence in
him, especially when I know he is impeachable for any crime or
misdemeanor before the Senate, at all times; and that, at all events, he
is impeachable before the community at large every four years, and
liable to be displaced if his conduct shall have given umbrage during
the time he has been in office. Under these circumstances, although the
trust is a high one, and in some degree, perhaps, a dangerous one, I am
not sure but it will be safer here than placed where some gentlemen
suppose it ought to be.

Mr. VINING.--I hoped, Mr. Chairman, after the discussion this subject
had received on a former occasion, that it would have been unnecessary
to re-examine it. The arguments against the clause are reiterated: but,
I trust, without a chance of success. They were fully answered before;
and I expect the impressions made at that time are not already effaced.
The House, as well as the Committee of the Whole, have determined that
those words shall be inserted in the bill; the special committee could
therefore do no less than place them where they are; a deference is due
to the decision of the House.

The House has determined to make a declaration of their construction of
the constitution. I am perfectly in sentiment with the majority on this
occasion; and contend, that if this power is not in the President, it is
not vested in any body whatever. It cannot be within the legislative
power of the Senate, because it is of an adverse nature; it cannot be
within the executive power of the Senate, because they possess none but
what is expressly granted by the constitution. If gentlemen will point
out where the constitution confers this power upon the Senate, I will
read my recantation, and subscribe to the justness of their doctrine.

I am not satisfied that removability shall be acquired only by
impeachment. Were the advocates of this doctrine aware of its
consequences, when they advanced it? The Senate has the sole power of
trying impeachments; the President is here out of the question. If no
officer can be constitutionally removed but by impeachment, it applies
to subordinate officers as well as heads of departments. For the
constitution only gives power to Congress to establish officers by law,
and vests the appointment in the President. If these officers are not
removable but by impeachment, what is to become of our affairs, when any
of the accidents occur which were enumerated by the gentleman from
Massachusetts (Mr. SEDGWICK)? Are we to take the circuitous route of
impeachment? The dilatory and inefficient process by that mode, will not
apply the remedy to the evil till it is too late to be of advantage.
Experience has fixed an eternal stigma upon the system of impeachment;
witness the case I mentioned, the other day, of Warren Hastings before
the British Lords; what delays and uncertainty with the forms of trial,
details of evidence, arguments of counsel, and deliberate decision! I
ask gentlemen, can there be a greater evil than this in any Government?
Why, then, will gentlemen advocate a doctrine so obnoxious to the
principles of the constitution, when a more favorable construction is at
hand?

Mr. WHITE.--Mention has been made of impeachments, as the only mode of
removing an officer. I will explain my ideas on this point, in order
that the committee may be masters of my particular objections to the
clause. I consider impeachments necessary to be employed in cases
respecting an officer who is appointed during good behavior. Thus the
judges can only be removed by impeachment. The President and Vice
President hold their offices for the terms mentioned in the
constitution, not liable to be removed from office in any other way.
These circumstances are a deviation from my general principle; but have
nevertheless a proper ground to be supported on. The electors who
appoint the President, cannot assemble to exercise the authority which
would naturally be in them. With respect to the judges, it is found
necessary for the proper and uncorrupt administration of justice, and
the security of freedom, to have them independent in their stations, so
that they be not removable at pleasure. To them, therefore, the doctrine
of impeachment is peculiarly applicable. It may properly be extended
further, in cases where the President is desirous of retaining an
officer who ought not to be retained. This House has the power of
controlling him, and may impeach the officer before the Senate. In
either of these three cases impeachments are necessary.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--This is a question, Mr. Speaker, that requires full
consideration, and ought only to be settled on the most candid
discussion. It certainly involves the right of the Senate to a very
important power. At present, I am so impressed with the importance of
the subject, that I dare not absolutely decide on any principle,
although I am firmly persuaded we ought to retain the clause in the
bill; and, so far as it has been examined, I agree that it is a
legislative construction of the constitution, necessary to be settled
for the direction of your officers. But if it is a deviation from the
constitution, or in the least degree an infringement upon the authority
of the other branch of the Legislature, I shall most decidedly be
against it. But I think it will appear, on a full consideration of this
business, that we can do no otherwise than agree to this construction,
in order to preserve to each department the full exercise of its powers,
and to give this House security for the proper conduct of the officers
who are to execute the laws.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--I have attended to the arguments of the
gentlemen who oppose the motion for striking out, and I apprehend that
their reasoning is not perfectly consistent. The construction of some
gentlemen is, that the power of removal is given to the President by the
constitution. Others are of opinion that the constitution is silent; and
therefore the House ought to give it. To oppose these adverse arguments,
I must return to my strong ground on which my opponents dare not
venture. I state again, that if the constitution has given the power, it
is unnecessary to give it here; or if it has not given it, we have no
right to confer it, because it is not within the enumerated powers
delegated to Congress.

Gentlemen have said that it is proper to give a legislative construction
of the constitution. I differ with them on this point. I think it an
infringement of the powers of the Judiciary. It is said, we ought not to
blend the legislative, executive, or judiciary powers, further than is
done by the constitution; and yet the advocates for preserving each
department pure and untouched by the others, call upon this House to
exercise the powers of the judges in expounding the constitution. What
authority has this House to explain the law? But if it has this
privilege, the Senate is also invested with it as part of the
Legislature; and, in exercising it on the present question, we shall be
likely to differ. If the constitution is silent, and gentlemen admit
this, it is possible the Senate may view it with a favorable eye to
their own right, and reject the bill on account of this clause. A great
deal of mischief has arisen in the several States, by the Legislatures
undertaking to decide constitutional questions. Sir, it is the duty of
the Legislature to make laws; your judges are to expound them.

Mr. GERRY.--Some gentlemen consider this as a question of policy; but to
me it appears a question of constitutionality, and I presume it will be
determined on that point alone. The best arguments I have heard urged on
this occasion came from the honorable gentleman from Virginia, (Mr.
MADISON.) He says the constitution has vested the executive power in the
President; and that he has a right to exercise it under the
qualifications therein made. He lays it down as a maxim, that the
constitution vesting in the President the executive power, naturally
vests him with the power of appointment and removal. Now I would be glad
to know from that gentleman by what means we are to decide this
question. Is his maxim supported by precedent drawn from the practice of
the individual States? The direct contrary is established. In many cases
the Executives are not in particular vested with the power of
appointment; and do they exercise that power by virtue of their office?
It will be found that other branches of the Government make
appointments. How then can gentlemen assert that the powers of
appointment and removal are incident to the Executive Department of
Government? To me it appears at best but problematical. Neither is it
clear to me that the power that appoints naturally possesses the power
of removal. As we have no certainty on either of these points, I think
we must consider it as established by the constitution.

It appears very clear to me, that however this power may be distributed
by the constitution, the House of Representatives have nothing to do
with it. Why then should we interfere in the business? Are we afraid
that the President and Senate are not sufficiently informed to know
their respective duties? Our interposition argues that they want
judgment, and are not able to adjust their powers without the wisdom of
this House to assist them; to say the least on this point, it must be
deemed indelicate for us to intermeddle with them. If the fact is, as we
seem to suspect, that they do not understand the constitution, let it go
before the proper tribunal; the judges are the constitutional umpires on
such questions. Why, let me ask gentlemen, shall we commit an infraction
of the constitution for fear the Senate or President should not comply
with its directions?

Mr. AMES.--When this question was agitated at a former period, I took no
part in the debate. I believe it was then proposed, without any idea or
intention of drawing on a lengthy discussion, and to me it appeared to
be well understood and settled by the House; but since it has been
reiterated and contested again, I feel it my bounden duty to deliver the
reasons for voting in the manner I then did, and shall now do. Mr.
Chairman, I look upon every question which touches the constitution as
serious and important, and therefore worthy of the fullest discussion,
and the most solemn decision. I believe, on the present occasion, we may
come to something near certainty, by attending to the leading principles
of the constitution. In order that the good purposes of a Federal
Government should be answered, it was necessary to delegate considerable
powers; and the principle upon which the grant was made, intended to
give sufficient power to do all possible good, but to restrain the
rulers from doing mischief.

The constitution places all executive power in the hands of the
President, and could he personally execute all the laws, there would be
no occasion for establishing auxiliaries; but the circumscribed powers
of human nature in one man, demand the aid of others. When the objects
are widely stretched out, or greatly diversified, meandering through
such an extent of territory as that the United States possess, a
minister cannot see with his own eyes every transaction, or feel with
his hands the minutiæ that pass through his department. He must
therefore have assistants. But in order that he may be responsible to
his country, he must have a choice in selecting his assistants, a
control over them, with power to remove them when he finds the
qualifications which induced their appointment cease to exist. There are
officers under the constitution who hold their office by a different
tenure--your judges are appointed during good behavior; and from the
delicacy and peculiar nature of their trust, it is right it should be
so, in order that they may be independent and impartial in administering
justice between the Government and its citizens. But the removability of
the one class, or immovability of the other, is founded on the same
principle, the security of the people against the abuse of power. Does
any gentleman imagine that an officer is entitled to his office as to an
estate? Or does the Legislature establish them for the convenience of an
individual? For my part I conceive it intended to carry into effect the
purposes for which the constitution was intended.

The executive powers are delegated to the President, with a view to have
a responsible officer to superintend, control, inspect, and check the
officers necessarily employed in administering the laws. The only bond
between him and those he employs, is the confidence he has in their
integrity and talents; when that confidence ceases, the principal ought
to have power to remove those whom he can no longer trust with safety.
If an officer shall be guilty of neglect or infidelity, there can be no
doubt but he ought to be removed; yet there may be numerous causes for
removal which do not amount to a crime. He may propose to do a
mischief; but I believe the mere intention would not be cause of
impeachment. He may lose the confidence of the people upon suspicion, in
which case it would be improper to retain him in service; he ought to be
removed at any time, when, instead of doing the greatest possible good,
he is likely to do an injury to the public interest by being continued
in the administration.

I presume gentlemen will generally admit that officers ought to be
removed when they become obnoxious; but the question is, how shall this
power be exercised? It will not, I apprehend, be contended, that all
officers hold their offices during good behavior. If this be the case,
it is a most singular Government. I believe there is not another in the
universe that bears the least semblance to it in this particular; such a
principle, I take it, is contrary to the nature of things. But the
manner how to remove is the question. If the officer misbehaves, he can
be removed by impeachment; but in this case is impeachment the only mode
of removal? It would be found very inconvenient to have a man continued
in office after being impeached, and when all confidence in him was
suspended or lost. Would not the end of impeachment be defeated by this
means? If Mr. Hastings, who was mentioned by the gentleman from Delaware
(Mr. VINING) preserved his command in India, could he not defeat the
impeachment now pending in Great Britain? If that doctrine obtains in
America, we shall find impeachments come too late; while we are
preparing the process, the mischief will be perpetrated, and the
offender will escape. I apprehend it will be as frequently necessary to
prevent crimes as to punish them; and it may often happen that the only
prevention is by removal. The superintending power possessed by the
President, will perhaps enable him to discover a base intention before
it is ripe for execution. It may happen that the Treasurer may be
disposed to betray the public chest to the enemy, and so injure the
Government beyond the possibility of reparation; should the President be
restrained from removing so dangerous an officer, until the slow
formality of an impeachment was complied with, when the nature of the
case rendered the application of a sudden and decisive remedy
indispensable?

But it will, I say, be admitted, that an officer may be removed. The
question then is, by whom? Some gentlemen say by the President alone;
and others, by the President, by and with the advice of the Senate. By
the advocates of the latter mode, it is alleged, that the constitution
is in the way of the power of removal being by the President alone. If
this is absolutely the case, there is an end to all further inquiry. But
before we suffer this to be considered as an insuperable impediment, we
ought to be clear that the constitution prohibits him the exercise of
what, on a first view, appears to be a power incident to the executive
branch of the Government. The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) has
made so many observations to evince the constitutionality of the clause,
that it is unnecessary to go over the ground again. I shall therefore
confine myself to answer only some remarks made by the gentleman from
South Carolina, (Mr. SMITH.) The powers of the President are defined in
the constitution; but it is said, that he is not expressly authorized to
remove from office. If the constitution is silent also with respect to
the Senate, the argument may be retorted. If this silence proves that
the power cannot be exercised by the President, it certainly proves that
it cannot be exercised by the President, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate. The power of removal is incident to Government;
but not being distributed by the constitution, it will come before the
Legislature, and, like every other omitted case, must be supplied by
law.

Mr. LIVERMORE.--I am for striking out this clause, Mr. Chairman, upon
the principles of the constitution, from which we are not at liberty to
deviate. The honorable gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. SEDGWICK,)
calls the Minister of Foreign Affairs the creature of the law, and that
very properly; because the law establishes the office, and has the power
of creating him in what shape the Legislature pleases. This being the
case, we have a right to create the office under such limitations and
restrictions as we think proper, provided we can obtain the consent of
the Senate; but it is very improper to draw as a conclusion, from having
the power of giving birth to a creature, that we should therefore bring
forth a monster, merely to show we had such power. I call that creature
a monster that has not the proper limbs and features of its species. I
think the creature we are forming is unnatural in its proportions. It
has been often said, that the constitution declares the President, by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint this
officer. This, to be sure, is very true, and so is the conclusion which
an honorable gentleman (Mr. WHITE) from Virginia drew from it, that an
officer must be discharged in the way he was appointed.

I believe, Mr. Chairman, this question depends upon a just construction
of a short clause in the constitution. "The President shall have power,
by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of Supreme
Court, and all other officers of the United States." Here is no
difference with respect to the power of the President to make treaties
and appoint officers, only it requires in the one case a larger majority
to concur than in the other. I will not by any means suppose that
gentlemen mean, when they argue in favor of removal by the President
alone, to contemplate the extension of the power to the repeal of
treaties; because, if they do, there will be little occasion for us to
sit here. But let me ask these gentlemen, as there is no real or
imaginary distinction between the appointment of ambassadors and
ministers, or Secretaries of Foreign Affairs, whether they mean that the
President should have the power of recalling or discarding ambassadors
and military officers, for the words in the constitution are "all other
officers," as well as he can remove your Secretary of Foreign Affairs.
To be sure, they cannot extend it to the judges; because they are
secured under a subsequent article, which declares they shall hold their
offices during good behavior; they have an inheritance which they cannot
be divested of, but on conviction of some crime. But I presume gentlemen
mean to apply it to all those who have not an inheritance in their
offices. In this case, it takes the whole power of the President and
Senate to create an officer, but half the power can uncreate him. Surely
a law passed by the whole Legislature cannot be repealed by one branch
of it; so I conceive, in the case of appointments, it requires the same
force to supersede an officer as to put him in office.

I acknowledge, that the clause relative to impeachment is for the
benefit of the people; it is intended to enable their representatives to
bring a bad officer to justice who is screened by the President; but I
do not conceive, with the honorable gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr.
SMITH,) that it by any means excludes the usual ways of superseding
officers. It is said in the constitution, that the House shall have the
power of choosing their own officers. We have chosen a clerk, and, I am
satisfied, a very capable one; but will any gentleman contend we may not
discharge him and choose another and another as often as we see cause?
And so it is in every other instance; where they have the power to make,
they have likewise the power to unmake. It will be said by gentlemen,
that the power to make does not imply the power of unmaking; but I
believe they will find very few exceptions in the United States.

Mr. SHERMAN.--I wish, Mr. Chairman, that the words may be left out of
the bill, without giving up the question either way as to the propriety
of the measure. Many of the honorable gentlemen who advocate this clause
have labored to show that the President has, constitutionally, the power
of removal. If this be a well-founded opinion, they ought not to let the
words remain in the bill, because they are of such a nature as to imply
that he had not the power before it was granted him by the law.

If gentlemen would consent to make a general law, declaring the proper
mode of removal, I think we should acquire a greater degree of
unanimity, which, on this occasion, must be better than carrying the
question against a large minority.

The call for the question being now very general, it was put, shall the
words "to be removable by the President," be struck out?

It was determined in the negative; being yeas 20, nays 34.


WEDNESDAY, June 24.

_Department of Foreign Affairs._

The engrossed bill "for establishing an Executive Department, to be
denominated the Department of Foreign Affairs," was read the third time.

Mr. SUMTER.--This bill appears to my mind so subversive of the
constitution, and in its consequences so destructive to the liberties of
the people, that I cannot consent to let it pass without expressing my
detestation of the principle it contains. I do it in this public manner,
in order to fulfil what I think to be my duty to my country, and to
discharge myself of any concern in a matter that I do not approve.

Mr. PAGE discovered the fate of the bill; he knew it must pass, but,
nevertheless, he would decidedly give it his negative, and he hoped the
respectable minority which he had the honor of voting with hitherto on
the question of removability, would unite with him firmly in their
opposition; and in order to record to their constituents the sentiments
they maintained, he moved to take the question by the yeas and nays.

One-fifth of the members present joined in requiring the yeas and nays;
whereupon they were taken, and are,

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Clymer, Contee, Fitzsimons, Gilman,
      Goodhue, Griffin, Hartley, Heister, Huger, Lawrence, Lee,
      Madison, Moore, Muhlenberg, Schureman, Scott, Sedgwick,
      Seney, Sinnickson, Sylvester, Trumbull, and Vining.--29.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Coles, Gerry, Grout, Hathorn, Huntington,
      Jackson, Leonard, Livermore, Matthews, Page, Parker,
      Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Sherman, Smith, of Maryland,
      Smith, of South Carolina, Stone, Sturgis, Sumter, Thatcher,
      Tucker, and White.--22.

So the question was determined in the affirmative, and the clerk
directed to carry the bill to the Senate, and desire their concurrence.


_Department of War._

The House then went into a committee on the bill for establishing the
Department of War. Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair.

Mr. BENSON proposed, with respect to the Secretary's being removable by
the President, a similar amendment to that which had been obtained in
the bill establishing the Department of Foreign Affairs.

Mr. SHERMAN thought it unnecessary to load this bill with any words on
that subject; he conceived the gentleman ought to be satisfied with
having had the principle established in the other bill.

Mr. PAGE was of the same opinion, but further thought it argued a doubt,
even in the mind of the majority, of the truth of their principles, and
they wanted, by repetition, to force that upon the mind which was not
impressed by right reason. The question on the amendment was taken
without further debate, and carried in the affirmative, twenty-four to
twenty-two.

Some other small alterations being made, the committee rose, and
reported the bill as amended; which being partly considered, the House
adjourned.


THURSDAY, June 25.

_Department of War._

The House resumed the consideration of the amendments reported by the
Committee of the Whole to the bill for establishing the War Department;
which being agreed to, the bill was ordered to be engrossed.


_Treasury Department._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
for establishing the Treasury Department, Mr. TRUMBULL in the chair. The
second clause being under consideration,

Mr. PAGE objected to the words making it the duty of the Secretary to
"digest and report plans for the improvement and management of the
revenue, and the support of the public credit;" observing that it might
be well enough to enjoin upon him the duty of making out and preparing
estimates; but to go any further would be a dangerous innovation upon
the constitutional privilege of this House; it would create an undue
influence within these walls, because members might be led, by the
deference commonly paid to men of abilities, who give an opinion in a
case they have thoroughly studied, to support the minister's plan, even
against their own judgment. Nor would the mischief stop here; it would
establish a precedent which might be extended, until we admitted all the
ministers of the Government on the floor, to explain and support the
plans they have digested and reported: thus laying a foundation for an
aristocracy or a detestable monarchy.

Mr. TUCKER.--The objection made by the gentleman near me is,
undoubtedly, well founded. I think it proper to strike out all the words
alluded to, because the following are sufficient to answer every
valuable purpose, namely, "to prepare and report estimates of the public
revenue and public expenditures." If we authorize him to prepare and
report plans, it will create an interference of the executive with the
legislative powers; it will abridge the particular privilege of this
House; for the constitution expressly declares, that all bills for
raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives. How can
the business originate in this House, if we have it reported to us by
the Minister of Finance? All the information that can be required, may
be called for, without adopting a clause that may undermine the
authority of this House, and the security of the people. The
constitution has pointed out the proper method of communication between
the executive and legislative departments; it is made the duty of the
President to give, from time to time, information to Congress of the
state of the Union, and to recommend to their consideration such
measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. If revenue plans
are to be prepared and reported to Congress, here is the proper person
to do it; he is responsible to the people for what he recommends, and
will be more cautious than any other person to whom a less degree of
responsibility is attached. Under this clause, you give the Secretary of
the Treasury a right to obtrude upon you plans, not only undigested, but
even improper to be taken up.

I hope the House is not already weary of executing and sustaining the
powers vested in them by the constitution; and yet it would argue that
we thought ourselves less adequate to determine than any individual what
burthens our constituents are equal to bear. This is not answering the
high expectations that were formed of our exertions for the general
good, or of our vigilance in guarding our own and the people's rights.
In short, Mr. Chairman, I can never agree to have money bills originated
and forced upon this House by a man destitute of legislative authority,
while the constitution gives such power solely to the House of
Representatives; for this reason, I cheerfully second the motion for
striking out the words.

Mr. BENSON.--If the proposed amendment prevail, the bill will be nearly
nugatory. The most important service that can be rendered by a gentleman
who is at the head of the Department of Finance, is that of digesting
and reporting plans for the improvement of the revenue, and supporting
public credit; and, for my part, I shall despair of ever seeing your
revenue improved, or the national credit supported, unless the business
is submitted into the hands of an able individual. I thought this
subject was well understood, from the debate on the original motion. It
was then insisted upon by an honorable gentleman, Mr. GERRY, who opposed
the appointment of a Secretary of the Treasury, that his important
duties ought to be "to consider of the means of improving the revenue,
and introducing economy into the expenditures, and to recommend general
systems of revenue." Now, what more than this is required by the clause?

For my part, I am at a loss to see how the privilege of the House is
infringed. Can any of the Secretary's plans be called bills? Will they
be reported in such a form even? But admitting they were, they do not
become bills, unless they are sanctioned by the House; much less is the
danger that they will pass into laws without full examination by both
Houses and the President. From this view of the subject, so far is the
clause from appearing dangerous, that I believe it discovers itself to
be not only perfectly safe, but essentially necessary; and without it is
retained, the great object of the bill will be defeated.

Mr. GOODHUE.--We certainly carry our dignity to the extreme, when we
refuse to receive information from any but ourselves. It must be
admitted, that the Secretary of the Treasury will, from the nature of
his office, be better acquainted with the subject of improving the
revenue or curtailing expense, than any other person; if he is thus
capable of affording useful information, shall we reckon it hazardous to
receive it? For my part, when I want to attain a particular object, I
never shut my ears against information likely to enable me to secure it.

Mr. PAGE.--I can never consent to establish, by law, this interference
of an executive officer in business of legislation; it may be well
enough in an absolute monarchy, for a minister to come to a Parliament
with his plans in his hands, and order them to be enregistered or
enacted; but this practice does not obtain even in a limited monarchy
like Britain. The minister there, who introduces his plans, must be a
member of the House of Commons. The man would be treated with
indignation, who should attempt in that country to bring his schemes
before Parliament in any other way. Now, why we, in the free republic of
the United States, should introduce such a novelty in legislation, I am
at a loss to conceive. The constitution expressly delegates to us the
business of the revenue; our constituents have confidence in us, because
they suppose us acquainted with their circumstances; they expect, in
consequence of this knowledge, we will not attempt to load them with
injudicious or oppressive taxes; but they have no such security, if we
are blindly to follow perhaps an unskilful minister. It does not answer
me, Mr. Chairman, to say the House has a right of deliberating and
deciding upon these plans, because we may be told, if you prune away
this part or that part of the system, you destroy its efficiency.
Therefore we must act with caution; we must either take or reject the
whole; but if we reject the whole, sir, we are to depend upon ourselves
for a substitute. How are we to form one? For my part, I should not
despair, that the united wisdom of this House could procure one; but if
we are to do this in the second instance, why cannot we attempt it in
the first? I have no objection to our calling upon this or any other
officer for information; but it is certainly improper to have him
authorized by law to intrude upon us whatever he may think proper. I
presume, sir, it is not supposed by the worthy gentleman from New York
(Mr. BENSON) that we shall be at a loss to conceive what information
would be useful or proper for us to require, that we must have this
officer to present us with what he chooses. When the President requires
an opinion of him, the constitution demands him to give it; so under the
law, let him send his opinion in here when it is asked for. If any
further power is given him, it will come to this at last: we, like the
Parliament of Paris, shall meet to register what he dictates. Either
these reports of the Secretary are to have weight, or they are not; if
they are to have weight, the House acts under a foreign influence, which
is altogether improper and impolitic; if they are to have no weight, we
impose a useless duty upon the officer, and such as is no mark of our
wisdom.

Mr. AMES hoped the subject might be treated with candor and liberality;
he supposed the objections were made on those principles, and therefore
required a serious answer. The worthy gentleman who first expressed his
aversion to the clause seemed to be apprehensive that the power of
reporting plans by the Secretary would be improper, because it appeared
to him to interfere with the legislative duty of the House, which the
House ought not to relinquish.

Whenever it is a question, Mr. Speaker, said he, whether this House
ought, or ought not, to establish offices to exercise a part of the
power of either branch of the Government, there are two points which I
take into consideration, in order to lead my mind to a just decision;
first, whether the proposed disposition is useful; and, second, whether
it can be safely guarded from abuse. Now I take it, sir, that the House
by their order for bringing in a bill to establish the Treasury
Department in this way, have determined the point of utility; or, have
they erred in adopting that opinion, I will slightly make an inquiry,
How does it tend to general utility? The Secretary is presumed to
acquire the best knowledge of the subject of finance of any member of
the community. Now, if this House is to act on the best knowledge of
circumstances, it seems to follow logically that the House must obtain
evidence from that officer; the best way of doing this will be publicly
from the officer himself, by making it his duty to furnish us with it.
It will not be denied, sir, that this officer will be better acquainted
with his business than other people can be. It lies within his
department to have a comprehensive view of the state of the public
revenues and expenditures. He will, by his superintending power over the
collection, be able to discover abuses, if any, in that department, and
to form the most eligible plan to remedy or prevent the evil. From his
information respecting money transactions, he may be able to point out
the best mode for supporting the public credit; indeed, these seem to me
to be the great objects of his appointment.

Mr. LIVERMORE.--I shall vote for striking out the clause, because I
conceive it essentially necessary so to do. The power of originating
money bills within these walls, I look upon as a sacred deposit which we
may neither violate nor divest ourselves of, although at first view it
may appear of little importance who shall form a plan for the
improvement of the revenue. Although every information tending to effect
this great object may be gratefully received by this House, yet it
behoves us to consider to what this clause may lead, and where it may
terminate. Might it not, by construction, be said that the Secretary of
the Treasury has the sole right of digesting and reporting plans for the
improvement of the revenue? This construction may appear a little
extraordinary, but it is not more so than some constructions heretofore
put upon other words; but however extraordinary it may be, it may take
place, and I think the best way to avoid it, will be to leave out the
words altogether. It is certainly improper that any person, not
expressly intrusted by our constituents with the privilege of taking
their money, should direct the quantum and the manner in which to take
it.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--If the principle prevails for curtailing this part of the
Secretary's duty, we shall lose the advantages which the proposed system
was intended to acquire. The improvement and management of the revenue
is a subject that must be investigated by a man of abilities and
indefatigable industry, if we mean to have our business advantageously
done. If honorable gentlemen will for a moment consider the peculiar
circumstances of this country, the means of information attainable by
the individual members of this House, and compare them with the object
they have to pursue, they will plainly perceive the necessity of calling
to their aid the advantages resulting from an establishment like the one
contemplated in the bill; if they weigh these circumstances carefully,
their objections, I trust, will vanish.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--A proper jealousy for the liberty of the people is
commendable in those who are appointed and sworn to be its faithful
guardians; but when this spirit is carried so far as to lose sight of
its object, and instead of leading to avoid, urges on to the precipice
of ruin, we ought to be careful how we receive its impressions. So far
is the present measure from being injurious to liberty, that it is
consistent with the true interest and prosperity of the community. Are
gentlemen apprehensive we shall be led by this officer to adopt plans we
should otherwise reject? For my part, I have a better opinion of the
penetration of the representation of the people than to dread any such
visionary phantom.

Let us consider whether this power is essentially necessary to the
Government. I take it to be conceded by the gentlemen, that it is
absolutely so. They say they are willing to receive the information
because it may be serviceable, but do not choose to have it communicated
in this way. If the Secretary of the Treasury is the proper person to
give the information, I can see no other mode of obtaining it that would
be so useful. Do gentlemen mean that he shall give it piecemeal, by way
of question and answer? This will tend more to mislead than to inform
us. If we would judge upon any subject, it would be better to have it in
one clear and complete view, than to inspect it by detachments; we
should lose the great whole in the minutiæ, and, instead of a system,
should present our constituents with a structure composed of discordant
parts, counteracting and defeating the operation of each other's
properties.

Mr. HARTLEY rose to express his sentiments, as he did on every occasion,
with diffidence in his own abilities; but he looked upon the clause as
both unsafe and inconsistent with the constitution. He thought the
gentleman last up proved too much by his arguments; he proved that the
House of Representatives was, in fact, unnecessary and useless; that one
person could be a better judge of the means to improve and manage the
revenue, and support the national credit, than the whole body of
Congress. This kind of doctrine, Mr. Chairman, is indelicate in a
republic, and strikes at the root of all legislation founded upon the
great democratic principle of representation. It is true, mistakes, and
very injurious ones, have been made on the subject of finance by some
State Legislatures; but I would rather submit to this evil, than, by my
voice, establish tenets subversive of the liberties of my country.

Notwithstanding what I have said, I am clearly of opinion it is
necessary and useful to take measures for obtaining other information
than what members can acquire in their characters as citizens;
therefore, I am in favor of the present bill; but I think these words
too strong. If it was modified so as to oblige him to have his plans
ready for this House when they are asked for, I should be satisfied; but
to establish a legal right in an officer to obtrude his sentiments
perpetually on this body is disagreeable, and it is dangerous, inasmuch
as the right is conveyed in words of doubtful import, and conveying
powers exclusively vested by the constitution in this House.

Mr. GERRY expressed himself in favor of the object of the clause; that
was, to get all the information possible for the purpose of improving
the revenue, because he thought this information would be much required,
if he judged from the load of public debt, and the present inability of
the people to contribute largely towards its reduction.

He could not help observing, however, the great degree of importance
they were giving this, and the other executive officers. If the doctrine
of having prime and great ministers of state was once well established,
he did not doubt but we should soon see them distinguished by a green or
red ribbon, or other insignia of court favor and patronage. He wished
gentlemen were aware of what consequences these things lead to, that
they might exert a greater degree of caution.

The practice of Parliament in Britain is first to determine the sum they
will grant, and then refer the subject to a Committee of Ways and Means:
this might be a proper mode to be pursued in this House.

Do gentlemen, said he, consider the importance of the power they give
the officer by the clause? Is it not part of our legislative authority?
And does not the constitution expressly declare that the House solely
shall exercise the power of originating revenue bills? Now, what is
meant by reporting plans? It surely includes the idea of originating
money bills, that is, a bill for improving the revenue, or, in other
words, for bringing revenue into the treasury. For if he is to report
plans, they ought to be reported in a proper form, and complete. This
is giving an indirect voice in legislative business to an executive
officer. If this be not the meaning of the clause, let gentlemen say
what is, and to what extent it shall go; but if my construction is true,
we are giving up the most essential privilege vested in us by the
constitution. But what does this signify? The officer is responsible,
and we are secure. This responsibility is made an argument in favor of
every extension of power. I should be glad to understand the term.
Gentlemen say the Secretary of the Treasury is responsible for the
information he gives the House--in what manner does this responsibility
act? Suppose he reports a plan for improving the revenue, by a tax which
he thinks judicious, and one that will be agreeable to the people of the
United States; but he happens to be deceived in his opinion, that his
tax is obnoxious, and excites a popular clamor against the
minister--what is the advantage of his responsibility? Nothing. Few men
deserve punishment for the error of opinion; all that could be done
would be to repeal the law, and be more cautious in future in depending
implicitly on the judgment of a man who had led us into an impolitic
measure. Suppose the revenue should fall short of his estimate, is he
responsible for the balance? This will be carrying the idea further than
any Government hitherto has done. What then is the officer to be
responsible for, which should induce the House to vest in him such
extraordinary powers?

Mr. LAWRENCE.--I do not see consequences so dangerous as some gentlemen
seem to apprehend; nor did they appear to them, I believe, when the
subject was last under consideration. I recollect, Mr. Chairman, that
some difficulty was made about establishing this office, because it was
feared we could not find men of sufficient abilities to fill it. The
duties were then properly deemed of a high and important nature, and
enumerated as those proposed in the bill. It was supposed by an
honorable gentleman, that the powers here expressed might be lodged in a
board, because an individual was incompetent to undertake the whole. But
now we have the wonderful sagacity of discovering, that if an individual
is appointed, he will have capacity to form plans for improving the
revenue in such an advantageous manner, as to supersede the necessity of
having the representatives of the people consulted on the business: he
will not only perform the usual duties of a Treasury Board, but be
adequate to all purposes of legislation. I appeal to the gentleman for
his usual candor on this occasion, which will assure us that he has
wire-drawn his arguments.

Mr. MADISON.--After hearing and weighing the various observations of
gentlemen, I am at a loss to see where the danger lies. These are
precisely the words used by the former Congress, on two occasions, one
in 1783, the other in a subsequent ordinance, which established the
Revenue Board. The same power was also annexed to the office of
Superintendent of Finance, but I never yet heard that any inconvenience
or danger was experienced from the regulation; perhaps, if the power had
been more fully and frequently exercised, it might have contributed more
to the public good.

There is a small probability, though it is but small, that an officer
may derive a weight from this circumstance, and have some degree of
influence upon the deliberations of the Legislature; but compare the
danger likely to result from this clause, with the danger and
inconvenience of not having well-formed and digested plans, and we shall
find infinitely more to apprehend. Inconsistent, unproductive, and
expensive schemes, will be more injurious to our constituents than the
undue influence which the well-digested plans of a well-informed officer
can have. From a bad administration of the Government, more detriment
will arise than from any other source. The want of information has
occasioned much inconvenience and unnecessary burthens under some of the
State Governments. Let it be our care to avoid those rocks and shoals in
our political voyage, which have injured, and nearly proved fatal to,
many of our cotemporary navigators.

A gentleman has asked, what is meant by responsibility? I will answer
him. There will be responsibility in point of reputation, at least a
responsibility to the public opinion with respect to his abilities; and
supposing there is no personal responsibility, yet we know that men of
talents and ability take as much care for the preservation of their
reputation as any other species of property of which they are possessed.
If a superior degree of wisdom is expected to be displayed by them, they
take pains to give proofs that they possess it in the most unequivocal
manner; this of itself will ensure us no small degree of exertion.

With respect to originating money bills, the House has the sole right to
do it; but if the power of reporting plans can be construed to imply the
power of originating revenue bills, the constitution is inconsistent
with itself, in giving the President authority to recommend such
measures as he may think expedient or necessary; but the construction is
too unnatural to require further investigation.

I have admitted there is a small probability of a small inconvenience,
but I do not think it any more an argument against the clause, than it
would be an argument against having windows in a house, that it is
possible the wind and the rain may get in through the crevices.

Mr. STONE was not afraid of giving the officer the power of reporting
plans, because he was sure Congress would, in every case, decide upon
their own judgment. A future Congress would not pay such a deference,
even to their predecessors, as to follow in their footsteps, unless they
were convinced of the good policy of their measures. He thought if the
House wanted to make use of the information acquired by the Secretary,
they ought to give him notice of their intention; consequently,
something of this kind was proper in the bill.

Mr. SHERMAN thought the principle held up by the clause, was absolutely
necessary to be received. It was of such a nature as to force itself
upon them; therefore it was in vain to attempt to elude it by
subterfuge. It was owing to the great abilities of a financier, that
France had been able to make the exertions we were witnesses of a few
years ago, without embarrassing the nation. This able man, after
considerably improving the national revenue, was displaced; but such was
the importance of the officer, that he has been restored again.

Mr. _Baldwin_.--I do not see what we are guarding against by striking
out the words, unless gentlemen mean to go so far as to introduce a
prohibitory clause, and declare that the Secretary of the Treasury shall
be restrained from digesting or preparing plans for the improvement of
the revenue. If there is any evil in having him attend to this branch of
the business, I cannot see how to avoid it. Suppose the officer is a bad
man, and there are others like him in this House, (for this must be what
the gentlemen are afraid of;) and suppose he has prepared a scheme for
peculation, which he hopes to get adopted by making dupes of the honest
part; how are you to hinder it from being brought forward? Cannot his
friends introduce it as their own, by making and seconding a motion for
that purpose? Will you restrain him from having access to the members
out of doors? And cannot he infuse his dangerous and specious arguments
and information into them as well in the closet, as by a public and
official communication? But, Mr. Chairman, can this House, or if it can,
will it prevent any of their constituents from bringing before them
plans for the relief of grievances or oppressions? Every individual of
the community can bring business before us by petition, memorial, or
remonstrance, provided it be done in a decent manner. How then do you
propose to restrain the Secretary of the Treasury?

I think the clause is very well as it stands, and shall therefore be
against the amendment.

Mr. PAGE'S motion for striking out the clause being put and negatived:

The question on Mr. FITZSIMON'S motion to amend the bill, by striking
out the word report, and inserting prepare, was taken and carried by a
great majority.

After which the House adjourned.


FRIDAY, June 26.

A number of the members attending the interesting conference which
to-day took place with the Senate on the impost and tonnage bills, no
business was done in this House.


_Saturday_, June 27.

_Revenue Bill._

Mr. _Boudinot_, from the managers on the part of this House in the
conference with the Senate on the subject of the amendments to the
Impost Bill, reported that the conference had agreed to pass the bill as
amended by the Senate, with some additional amendments, viz: the duty on
distilled spirits of Jamaica proof, to be reduced from fifteen cents to
ten cents per gallon. The duty on all other spirits, to be reduced from
twelve to eight cents per gallon. The duty on beer, ale, porter, or
cider, imported in casks, from eight to five cents per gallon. The duty
on beer imported in bottles, from twenty-five to twenty cents per
gallon. The duty on coal, from three to two cents per bushel.


MONDAY, July 13.

_Western Lands._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the state of
the Union. Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair.

Mr. SCOTT requested that the report of the committee on the Western
Territory might be read, which was read accordingly, as follows:

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      an act of Congress should pass for establishing a Land
      Office, and to regulate the terms of granting vacant and
      unappropriated lands in the Western Territory.

Mr. SCOTT.--In endeavoring, sir, to open the interesting subject now
before you, I shall avoid the repetition of those ideas which I threw
out on a former occasion, as far as my memory will serve me, and the
nature of the subject will permit.

This subject, sir, will appear of great magnitude in point of interest,
if we consider the extent of the territory; I think I shall not be far
beyond the mark, if I say it is one thousand miles long by five hundred
broad; nor if I say it is sufficient to contain two millions of farms;
nevertheless, for greater caution, say it will contain one million,
(which is notoriously and greatly within the real contents,) and that
each of these farms may be peopled by six souls, they will amount to six
millions of inhabitants, double the number of the present inhabitants of
the United States. From this view, it is an object of great concern. It
will appear also an object of concern, if we contemplate the climate,
the soil, and the waters of that country; consider that it lies in the
heart of the temperate zone; its soil infinitely more rich and more
fertile than any in the Atlantic States; its waters pure and good--in a
word, it is such a territory as must command inhabitants, and will be
peopled. Its situation in the middle of our continent, gives the climate
a salubrity that accommodates it to the emigrants from both Northern and
Southern States. It is meeting them on a middle ground, softening the
harsh restrictions of the rugged North, and breathing bland the zephyr
grateful to the sun-scorched South. In short, it is such as gives to all
who have seen it the utmost satisfaction--it is both healthy and
agreeable.

It may perhaps be objected, that the measure now proposed will lead or
tend to a depopulation of the Atlantic States, and therefore ought not
to be adopted. This is a circumstance I by no means wish. I am as far
from desiring a depopulation of the Atlantic shores, as I am from
fearing it on this ground. I am confident it will not operate in any
considerable degree to bring about that event; but if it should be
thought it would, that could be no solid objection against the measure.
Whilst the desire of emigration continues, and lands are to be procured,
settlers will find their way into that territory; nor is it in the power
of Congress to withhold lands altogether, because they are to be got of
others on better terms. There is superior encouragement held out to the
people settling on the other side of the river Mississippi, where the
soil is fertile, and the climate equally agreeable. In proof of this
assertion, I will read to the committee the translation of a kind of
proclamation issued by the Governor of the Spanish posts at the
Illinois. [This paper contains an invitation to all persons inclined to
settle in the Western country, offering as inducements, lands without
charge, exemptions from taxes, protection in civil and religious
liberties, besides provision and the implements of husbandry.] After
this, Mr. S. proceeded: Now, sir, if Congress fear to sell their lands
lest it tend to depopulate the Atlantic States, what must they apprehend
from propositions like these? They will certainly have all the effect
which encouragement from this quarter can have. It may be said, that
Americans will not venture to live under the Spanish Government, or
settle a Spanish colony. To this it may be replied, that when people,
from their necessities or inclinations, are determined to emigrate, in
order to mitigate their distresses, they think little of the form of
government; all they care for is relief from their present or
approaching wants and troubles.

Nobody will emigrate from the Atlantic States but a certain description
of men, and they will go whether you hold out this encouragement to them
or not; they will pay little regard to Congressional restrictions. And
here let me make one remark, drawn from my own observation. The forming
settlements in a wilderness upon the frontiers, between the savages and
the least populated of the civilized parts of the United States,
requires men of enterprising, violent, nay, discontented and turbulent
spirits. Such always are our first settlers in the ruthless and savage
wild; they serve as pioneers to clear the way for the more laborious and
careful farmer. These characters are already in that country by
thousands, and their number is daily increasing, and will continue to
increase; for congenial spirits will assimilate maugre all our endeavors
to the contrary. But how will you prevent them? I should be glad to see
a plan for hemming in the emigration to that territory; I think the
thing wholly impracticable, therefore it becomes the immediate interest
of Congress, to direct the emigration to a proper point; direct it to
their own territory, rather than be inactive spectators of its silent,
though rapid course to the Spanish and British dependencies; rather sell
your lands and get something for them, than let your citizens leave your
dominions. By improving a part, you add to the value of the remainder;
their population will produce a hardy race of husbandmen and warriors,
always at the command of the United States, to support and defend your
liberty and property. These being facts, I leave it to the wisdom of the
House to draw the inference.

I will make one further remark, with respect to the encouragement or
discouragement of emigration. Suppose it was in the power of Congress to
stop the course of the impetuous current, which has already won its way
through insuperable obstructions, and spread itself over the fertile
lands of the Ohio. I ask, with perfect security, if it is not such an
act of contumacy, and inconsistency with the fundamental principles of
the Government, that Congress could not adopt it? Consider that many of
your citizens are destitute of the comforts, nay, the common necessaries
of life, without a prospect of providing for the subsistence of
themselves and families: I ask, would Congress prevent the emigration of
such persons if they could? I think not; they would not act as kind
protecting fathers to their people if they did. I presume this would be
too serious an objection for any man to face, with a restraining
proposition. I question if any man would be hardy enough to point out a
class of citizens by name, that ought to be the servants of the
community; yet, unless that is done, to what class of the people could
you direct such a law? But if you passed such an act, it would be
tantamount to saying that there is some class which must remain here,
and by law must be obliged to serve the others, for such wages as they
please to give.

This being the case, let us make the best of liberty, our people, and
our land. Your citizens, I tell you, are already there by thousands;
they are going by thousands more, and are every hour growing up into
consequence. They never expect to return into the Atlantic States; plant
them in your soil, add this wealth of population to your own, and form
an empire illustrious as it is extended. Remember, ye sages of my
country, an historic truth recorded for your instruction, that empire
has been slowly, but invariably, moving from East to West; emigration
has uniformly receded in that direction, from the time that our common
parents quitted the garden of Eden, till the present hour; nor doubt but
it will continue to pursue that course, as long as there are lands to be
inhabited.

Much will depend upon the energy and force of the Government established
in that country; it ought to be such as will furnish sufficient power
for its own internal purposes, and also to secure it to the Union. But
that is not the only tie by which its union is held. That country is
attached to the Atlantic States by its natural situation. To be
convinced of this truth, nothing more is necessary than to look upon
the chart: all the commerce of that country must come through the States
upon the sea-coast. We know, at Pittsburg, that we are a thousand miles
nearer to the market than settlers at the mouth of the Ohio river. When
we export our produce by that and the Mississippi, we know we can get
easier home with our returns by the way of Philadelphia, than the others
can by turning up and stemming the current of the Mississippi.
Therefore, the imports for all that territory must come through the
United States. From these considerations, I conclude it would be madness
in the extreme for them to think of a separation, unless they were
driven to it by a fatal necessity; they will be too sensible of its ill
effects ever to attempt it.

But suppose, for a moment, that they break off from the Union, and even
become our enemies, it would be good policy in us to get as much as we
can from them first, especially as they are disposed to give it us; let
us make them extinguish part of our national debt before they leave us.
The soil and climate of that country, as I said before, will be great
inducements for emigrants to settle there. If they were to break off,
they would know how to get money enough from the sale of the territory
to support their Government, without any other resource whatever. If I,
as a resident in that country, had the remotest view of a separation
from the Atlantic States, I should be sorry to see Congress sell an acre
of that land; for selling it, in that case, would be neither more nor
less than preventing us from putting the money into our pockets when we
became independent. If they meditate independency, the most likely way
to make them so, will be to let their lands alone, in order to supply
them with funds sufficient to support them in the measure. If they are
sold, it will not be in their power.

I apprehend it will be found that a Land Office will effect these
objects better than any other plan that can be devised. If this should
be effectual, and no doubt can be entertained but it will, the
inhabitants of the United States cannot, with a good grace, be called
upon for heavy taxes in order to pay the interest on a debt which can be
so easily and properly extinguished. Every individual who contemplates
the subject, will see how much it is his interest to buy a few dollars
in certificates, and purchase a piece of land with them, which will
annihilate the debt, and prevent the demand for taxes to pay the
interest; besides, it will remain as a security to reimburse the
principal to the proprietor, as the population of the country extends;
but, at all events, it would be but advancing four or five years'
interest, and the whole debt would be absorbed.

If we mean to sell our lands for ready money, or mean to trust, we have
a superior advantage. It is more probable that the necessitous person
who wants the land for the subsistence of himself and family, will labor
harder to procure a property of this kind, and secure it for himself,
than the speculator who never means to pay a farthing until he has
received it from the sale of the land; besides, the necessitous person
is better able to buy of Government than of the speculator, because he
can get it cheaper. The purchasers of large tracts retail out their land
to this class of men, and certainly charge them something for their
trouble. But if we sell on credit, as under the Proprietary Government
was the practice in Pennsylvania, those who take out small quantities
get their land surveyed, and set themselves down; they cultivate the
ground, and erect buildings for their own accommodation. Land, in this
improved state, furnishes a better security to Government for any
arrearage of purchase money, than a large tract sold on speculation, and
which lies in the same state of nature as it did when it was disposed
of, perhaps adding thereto the expense of making the survey. If the land
must revert to Congress at last for default of payment, we get nothing
in the latter case; whereas, when sold in lots, if a man has settled
himself down, and paid for his warrant and survey, which costs the Union
nothing, but for the first price and interest thereon, it must strike
every gentleman's mind that it would be disagreeable, after a man had
made a settlement for three or four years, to have to turn out. Rather
than do this, he would make every exertion to discharge the price: if
his situation was so wretched as not to furnish the means, some of his
neighbors, on such security, might befriend him; but at any rate
Government would be secure. By this argument, I do not mean to insist
that Congress should sell their lands on trust; they may do so, or sell
for ready pay, as their wisdom may think eligible. I shall be satisfied
either way.

I think the convenience of the people is a subject not unworthy of being
taken into view. My plan proposes that they should be able to perfect
their titles on the spot. I fear not the objection which has been
raised. It may be said, the titles ought not to be completed until it
was done immediately under the eye of Congress. Let this be as it may, I
will make one remark: can we not have every tie, every check, and
security upon these officers that we have upon the collectors of the
revenue? I think there is as much room for confidence in the one case as
in the other. We can take care that the Secretary of the Land Office
shall send in his accounts of patents and warrants. I think we may
depend here upon a true return.

The Receiver of the office shall take nothing but public securities,
which are not quite so great a temptation to embezzlement or illicit
practices as money. The Surveyor will be a check upon both. I think the
gentlemen employed in this business cannot be of very trifling
character. In short, this department may be as well checked and balanced
as any other; the expense of it will be nothing, because the officer may
be supported out of the fees. This being the case, I shall conclude with
moving that the committee adopt the resolution reported by the
committee, and recommend it to the House to appoint a select committee
to bring in a bill accordingly.

Mr. FITZSIMONS asked if it would not be better to settle all the
principles of the bill first, that the select committee might not lose
their labor, as had been once or twice experienced, for want of this
precaution.

He was in favor of some measure of this kind, though he had some doubts
of the necessity there was supposed to be of establishing a Land Office.

The question was now taken on the resolution, and agreed to.


_Compensation of the President, &c._

Mr. VINING wished to call the attention of the House to a business he
apprehended not very lengthy; it was the report of a committee on the
subject of compensation to be made to the President, Vice President, the
members of the Senate and House of Representatives, for their services;
he wished gentlemen to consider the situation of every one concerned in
this business, themselves, and the continent at large. He hoped they
would consent to take it up, and he flattered himself the discussion
would not last longer than a day.

Mr. WHITE wished to go into a Committee of the Whole on the business.

Mr. FITZSIMONS did not like to enter upon a lengthy discussion of a
point that was incapable of much elucidation by reasoning; he therefore
was against going into a committee at this stage of the business. He
observed, that the committee had reported something, and the members had
been pretty generally consulted on the same. He hoped the House would
despatch the business without delay or loss of time, if they were at all
inclined to take it up.

Mr. WHITE thought it necessary to go into a committee, because there
were a number of things mentioned, the reasons for which appeared to him
very uncertain.

Mr. VINING said it was a subject of considerable delicacy, and he
supposed very few gentlemen would be inclined to speak three or four
times on a point; yet this was all the advantage gained by going into a
committee. He was no more interested than others; every gentleman might
judge of his own case, but after it had been before a committee of
twelve, in order to get the fullest sense of the House upon the subject,
he was inclined to receive it without so much circumlocution. He
observed, that the business had originated in a Committee of the Whole,
and it was unusual to recommit it without showing some reasons why.

Mr. WHITE gave up his motion for a Committee of the Whole, and said,
before he consented to the report, he should be glad to know in what
style it was expected that the President would live. He observed there
was provision for the expenses of a house, furniture, secretaries,
clerks, carriages and horses. Perhaps the sum proposed might be too much
or too little. He should like to see an estimate of how much was
necessary for keeping the table, the equipage, &c. before he decided. He
hoped the committee would elucidate this subject.

There was another thing he wished to inquire of them. The Vice
President's salary was charged at five thousand dollars; he could not
conceive upon what principle that sum was reported. Did it bear a
proportion to his services, or was it in proportion to what the members
of the Senate and this House were to be allowed? There is nothing which
obliges him to be attentive to his business. No doubt but the gentleman
who holds that office at present will be regardful and diligent in
executing the business assigned him; yet there is nothing to prevent the
Vice President from residing at home and receiving his salary, without
coming within the walls of the Senate room. The Union is obliged to
support him; but I, said he, would make that support conditional; he
should have a liberal provision while in public life, but no longer. As
to delicacy, I know of none, sir, that ought to be used while we are in
pursuit of the public good. I speak therefore with candor what are my
sentiments on this subject. Other gentlemen, no doubt, do the same; but
I am clearly for examining into the principles before I agree to the
conclusion.

Mr. PAGE was sorry to see gentlemen spinning out the time to little
purpose; certainly, after having the subject under consideration for
nearly three months, they might be able to decide.

If this business was fixed, and gentlemen knew they were to have but
moderate salaries, it might perhaps tend to make them more expeditious;
but at all events, they ought to know the rate at which they attend, in
order to regulate their expenses. To some it might be a matter of no
concern, because they could bear every thing of this kind for a
twelvemonth, without inconvenience; but they ought to consider the
situation of others. We are, said he, keeping the President here without
any provision for his support; but in this we may think ourselves right,
because, in his patriotic ardor, his love for his country, he told us he
was willing to pursue that illustrious example which he set during the
period of our calamity; he refused compensation for his services. But
the constitution requires that he shall receive a compensation, and it
is our duty to provide it. We must also provide something for our own
expenses, or it may reduce gentlemen not better prepared than I am to
depend upon a friend for what the public ought to furnish.

Mr. VINING had said the subject was delicate, but he did not conceive
there was any indelicacy in asking or answering questions on this or any
other occasion, where the good of his country was concerned.

Mr. LAWRENCE did not know, whether the sum proposed was enough for the
President or not; but according to the terms of the constitution, it
ought to be granted as one sum, because he is to receive no other
emolument whatever from the United States, or either of them. Now, if it
is declared he shall receive twenty thousand dollars, and, exclusive of
that sum, we make him an allowance for furniture, horses, carriages,
&c., such an allowance is an emolument beyond the compensation
contemplated in the constitution; but I have no objection to blend these
sums together, declaring the whole to be the compensation required by
the constitution. Besides, if we establish salaries for his secretaries
and clerks, we establish them officers of the Government; this will be
improper, because it infringes his right to employ a confidential person
in the management of those concerns, for which the constitution has made
him responsible. For these reasons, Mr. L. moved to strike out all that
related to horses, carriages, furniture, &c.

Mr. SHERMAN thought it much better to give a net sum, because the
President would then have no accounts to settle with the United States.

Mr. SEDGWICK considered this a constitutional question, and therefore
thought it deserved serious investigation. The provision made in the
report, for paying the expenses of enumerated articles, does not leave
the President in the situation intended by the constitution, which was,
that he should be independent of the Legislature, during his continuance
in office; that he should have a compensation for his services, not to
be increased or diminished during that period; but there is nothing that
will prevent us from making further allowances, provided that the twenty
thousand dollars is all that is given as a compensation. By this
construction, one of the most salutary clauses in the constitution will
be rendered nugatory. From these considerations, he was led to believe
that the report was founded on unconstitutional principles.

Mr. BALDWIN said, the Committee of the Whole, when the business was
before them, had not determined any thing on this point; that,
consequently, the select committee were to frame a report upon such
principles as they judged proper. In order then to have every thing
distinct and accurate, they had brought their opinion forward in the
form it now appears. If it be deemed proper to grant an aggregate sum,
the House would no doubt add to the twenty thousand dollars, what it was
supposed these expenses would amount to.

However, he did not think the constitution was infringed; it was
intended that the compensation should not be increased or diminished,
during the President's continuance in office. Now it might be as well
fixed, by making the allowance in part money, and part furniture, &c. as
by declaring a precise sum; it will still be a stated compensation.

Mr. TUCKER thought furniture and plate ought always to be provided by
government, because, if it was necessary for every new President to buy
these articles, it might put him to great inconvenience, unless he
received a year's salary in advance; besides, when he retired from his
situation, they would not sell for half the first cost. He therefore
wished this part of the report to stand, together with the rent of a
house; but would join in striking out all the rest.

Mr. MADISON did not think the report interfered with either the spirit
or letter of the constitution, and therefore was opposed to any
alteration, especially with respect to the property of a fixed nature.
He was sure, if the furniture and plate, and house rent, could be
allowed, some of the other articles might also. The horses and carriages
will cost money, and sell for little, after being used for four years;
this will be a certain loss to the President, or his family; besides the
House have already undertaken to defray expenses of this kind, and so
set a precedent for the enumeration which had been reported.

Mr. WHITE said, if a certain sum was assigned for the expenses, the
report would be better; but as it now stood, there was no certainty in
it. One President might circumscribe it to a quarter part of the expense
another would; consequently, the compensation could not be fixed.

He admitted the propriety of paying the salary in advance for the first
year, as mentioned by the gentleman from South Carolina. He expected
this would be sufficient to defray the extra expenses, without
subjecting the President to any inconvenience.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--If the Legislature may provide the house and furniture,
they may go further on the same principle, and provide for the rest; he
was satisfied it should be so, because it could be no infringement on
the constitution.

Mr. LIVERMORE hoped the words would be struck out; indeed he was sorry
they had ever been put in. The clause in the constitution is intended to
tie down the Legislature, as well as the President; they shall make him
no compliments while in office, he shall receive nothing but a fixed
compensation for his services. Give him then this compensation, let it
be equal to his usefulness; but do not direct him to employ so much to
one use, and so much to another; it cannot be called a compensation when
you direct how it is to be expended; besides, it was wrong on another
account; why should we pretend to direct him in the style in which he
shall live? Let him have a salary, and expend it in the manner he shall
think proper.

Mr. PAGE was for striking out all the words, because he conceived it
would be against the spirit of the constitution. It would be much more
handsome to make one general provision, than to be thus particular in
enumerating the articles of expense. It has been hinted, that these
articles of expense would amount to half the sum mentioned in the report
to be given as a compensation; if so, he would propose to strike out all
that related to the subject, and so insert twenty-five or thirty
thousand, as the House shall deem most eligible.

Mr. STONE thought the President ought to be at liberty to live in any
style he thought proper, and that the House ought to give him such
compensation as they thought his services merited. If you furnish him
with a house, horses, and carriages, you declare that this is the house,
the horses, and the carriages which he shall use. There is certainly
some degree of indelicacy in this; if he was a private gentleman, he
would be at liberty to use such as he liked best. Suppose he dislikes
them, and will not have them, he is guilty of a breach of the law, is it
intended by the House to impeach him for it? I apprehend it is not, for
no part of the constitution gives us a right to dictate to him on this
head. He would rather let the President set the example how he ought to
live, than see the Legislature direct him. Economy is by no means
disadvantageous to the United States; if the President chooses to live
in an economical manner, we ought not to prevent him.

Mr. VINING thought, as the President was the representative of the
nation, that there ought to be a proper degree of dignity attached to
the office; he did not wish for splendor, but hoped to avoid the
appearance of penury. If he was right in this opinion, the House had a
right to show what they expected of the President, and, consequently,
had a right to enter into the enumeration proposed in the report, and
establish a uniform rule of conduct in the presidential chair.

With respect to its constitutionality, his mind was perfectly easy, the
constitution appeared to be silent; if so, the House had the right of
interfering. He wondered how gentlemen could agree to provide plate and
furniture, yet hesitate with respect to the clerks and secretary. Were
not the latter as necessary as the former? If so, they ought to be
equally provided for.

The question on Mr. LAWRENCE'S motion was now taken, and decided in the
affirmative.

Mr. PAGE now moved to strike out twenty thousand dollars, and insert
thirty thousand.

Mr. SMITH inquired whether it was the intention of the House to saddle
the President with the expense incurred, in consequence of their
resolution of the 15th April. He understood that near ten thousand
dollars had been laid out in purchasing furniture, and putting the house
in order for his reception; it might be disagreeable to the President to
take it. Perhaps he would be a considerable loser by such a bargain, and
many of the things might be of a nature he disliked. He thought the
House had been inconsistent with itself in ordering these things for the
President, and then refusing to let them be applied to his use.

Mr. SHERMAN thought the House need not be embarrassed on this point. The
expense is to be paid by the United States, and the furniture will be
their property, to do what they please with. Neither did he think the
House inconsistent, because it was the object of the Legislature, by
their former vote, to provide only for the temporary accommodation of
the President.

Mr. BENSON said, the business had been properly conducted. It was not in
contemplation to throw the furniture or any other expense upon the
President. He presumed the property belonged to the United States, but
they would sell to the President such part as he chose to purchase. As
to the house, the President was not confined to it; he might give it up
when he pleased, and take another if he thought proper.

The question on striking out twenty thousand and inserting thirty
thousand was divided, and the first part was agreed to, but the latter
rejected.

It was now moved to strike out the words secretary and clerks.

Mr. MADISON thought the Executive Magistrate ought not to have the power
of creating officers; yet if he appointed his secretary and clerks, and
they were recognized, either with respect to salary or official acts,
they became officers of the Government.

Mr. BENSON did not think it necessary to recognize any such officers;
they were to be esteemed the mere instruments of the President, and not
as sharing in the administration.

The motion was put, and carried in the affirmative, and then the House
adjourned.


THURSDAY, July 16.

_Compensation of the President, &c._

The House resumed the consideration of the Report of the Committee on
the Compensation to the President, Vice President, and Members of
Congress.

The blank occasioned by striking out on Monday last, was now proposed to
be filled.

Mr. LIVERMORE moved to fill it with 18,000 dollars.

Mr. BURKE said, there were some members of the committee in favor of
15,000 dollars; others indeed were for a much larger sum--he believed
they went so far as 70,000 dollars; that 20,000 dollars was an
accommodation, and as such he had agreed to it; but he was of opinion
that 15,000 dollars was sufficient; that 20,000 had been once agreed to,
but the expenses were added at a subsequent meeting of the committee;
now, as the House had concurred in striking out 20,000 dollars, and a
proposition was come forward more correspondent to his judgment, he
should give it support.

Mr. FITZSIMONS presumed it was not a question before the House what the
report of the committee had been, nor were the sentiments any gentleman
had there delivered to operate against the sense expressed by the
committee in their report; if any thing done in committee was to
influence the decision of the House, it must be the report, which spoke
the sense of the majority. He further presumed, that when the 20,000
dollars were struck out, after all the expense had been erased, it was
in the contemplation of the honorable mover to increase the sum so as to
include both articles. It was with this view he voted in favor of
striking out the 20,000 dollars.

Mr. TUCKER said it might happen, that the expenses a President would
incur at the first entering on the office would be so great as to injure
his private fortune and distress his family. A quarter's salary might be
insufficient to defray the expense; yet if the President continued but
three months in office, this sum would be all he was entitled to. He
thought it just and requisite to provide against accidents of this kind,
if it could be done consistently with the constitution. With this object
in view, he would propose that the President's compensation should be
26,000 dollars for the first year, and 16,000 dollars for every other
year; that 10,000 dollars should be paid him in advance, on his coming
to the chair, and the remainder in quarterly payments. Its amount, he
said, would be nearly what was proposed by the gentleman from New
Hampshire (Mr. LIVERMORE); and if the House was disposed to fix on that
sum, as a proper compensation, they might, without any material change,
admit his proposition; but if they meant to grant either a greater or a
less sum, he hoped they would accommodate it to his principle.

Mr. STONE said, that a sum of 25,000 dollars would be as small a sum as
would answer the purpose; and provided that amount should be agreed to,
the expense of the Executive would be less to the people than that of
any Government in the world. If it is considered that the unavoidable
expense will be great, and that the assistance of two or more
secretaries will be necessary for the President to discharge his high
and important trust, and that it cannot be expected that persons in such
a station should be in straitened or dependent circumstances, this sum
will not be found to exceed the absolute expense, with a moderate
compensation for the services of the President. It is also a maxim of
sound policy, that executive officers should be independent.

Mr. WHITE.--Sir, I do not say that 25,000 dollars will or will not be
sufficient; but in order to determine the necessary sum, I should wish
to know the style in which the President is expected to live. If a style
of magnificence and splendor is to be adopted, the sum is too small; and
if economy is pursued, it may be too much. Until this is known, it will
be extremely difficult to decide upon a proper sum; and when I give my
vote, I wish to give it on such information as will satisfy my mind with
respect to its propriety, and show my constituents the reasonableness of
the measure. Will he live in a more expensive style than the former
Presidents of Congress, or will he live nearly in the same? If so, what
was that expense, or what will be the probable increase? How was that
money applied, and what will now be necessary? If these questions can
be answered, gentlemen may decide with more precision than they can
while the subject is left afloat.

Mr. BALDWIN said, it was impossible to get the information the gentleman
required, the committee had made all the examination in their power with
respect to the actual expense of supporting the office. They found
former Presidents of Congress, whose office, by the by, was less
important, and whose assistants were less numerous, expended 7,000,
8,000, and so on to 13,000 dollars annually. From this, some gentlemen
were led to believe 17,000 dollars might be sufficient in this instance.
But we were, said he, left without any thing satisfactory on this
subject, and when the question was pressed on the committee, they varied
from 15,000 to 25,000 dollars; we were therefore obliged to average the
sum.

We were satisfied that it must be left to experiment to determine what
the allowance ought to be; and we were certain that the gentleman who
had to make the first experiment would do it in such a manner as to give
satisfaction to every body. He knows the way to blend dignity and
economy; and I would rather, on this account, make the allowance too
much than too little. I would, therefore, prefer making the experiment
at 25,000 dollars; a sum that, in the President's hands, will give
umbrage to no one.

Mr. BOUDINOT made some further observations respecting the examination
made by the committee, from which it appeared that the expenses of the
President of the United States would exceed the expenses of the late
President of Congress in a variety of cases. Two secretaries would be
wanting; they must be men of abilities and information; but the
committee conceived extra provision would be made for them by the House.
If the whole was to be comprehended in one grant to the President, he
would rather increase the sum reported by the committee than diminish
it. Originally he was in favor of allowing 16,000; but then he thought
the expense of secretaries, carriages, furniture, &c., was to be an
additional allowance. Since the House had determined otherwise, he
favored an addition to the 20,000 dollars.

Mr. JACKSON was disposed to move 30,000 dollars; but he was willing to
accommodate, and agree to 25,000 dollars.

Mr. VINING observed, that the committee had no documents whereby they
could form a judgment; they had no light to guide them. They could not
foresee what ambassadors and foreign ministers might be sent to this
country, nor the expenses the President must necessarily incur upon that
account, to support the honor and dignity of the United States. He
further remarked, that there are cases in which generosity is the best
economy, and no loss is ever sustained by a decent support of the
Magistrate. A certain appearance of parade and external dignity is
necessary to be supported. Did I, said he, represent a larger State, I
would speak with more confidence on the subject. We are haunted by the
ghost of poverty; we are stunned with the clamor of complaint throughout
the States. But under the auspices of an energetic Government, our funds
will be established and augmented, and, I make no doubt, will be found
sufficient to answer all the purposes of the Union. But our calculations
ought not to be confined to the present moment alone. If it should be
contended by any gentleman, that we have it not in our power to support
the Government in a proper style, then there is an end of the business.
We should remember that the present time is the season for organizing
the Government. A patient and mature deliberation is requisite to
investigate it, and by that means the amount of the civil list will be
increased; in future, the sessions will be short, and the load of
expense greatly diminished. He was opposed to any reduction of the sum,
as he had always thought it too small, and would rather propose to fill
the blank with 30,000 dollars.

Mr. PAGE mentioned that 30,000 dollars had been proposed; though he
thought the sum adequate, it was not sufficient to support pomp and
parade. Those, he said, were entirely out of the question. He had made a
calculation upon the probable necessary expenses, and found, that
exclusive of that dignity and pageantry talked of, this sum would
suffice. If he had contemplated the splendor and pageantry alluded to,
he should not have thought of 30,000 dollars, nor 40,000 dollars, for he
believed 100,000 dollars insufficient. But if the committee, upon
investigation, were convinced that 20,000 dollars would be a
compensation for his services, exclusive of an allowance for his
expenses, when the whole was taken together it must at least amount to
30,000 dollars; for this reason he moved to fill the blank with that
sum.

The question on 30,000 dollars was put, and rejected.

Mr. PAGE then moved 25,000 dollars, which was carried; affirmative 30,
negative 17.

The House then proceeded to the second part of the report, viz: "That
there be paid in like quarterly payments to the Vice President of the
United States, 5,000 dollars per annum."

Mr. WHITE.--I do not like the principle on which this provision is made
for the Vice President; there is nothing, I believe, in the constitution
which gives him a right to an annual sum; it fixes no duty upon him as
Vice President, requiring a constant attendance. He may be called upon
to act as President, and then I would give him the salary of the
President; at other times, he is to preside as President of the Senate,
then I would pay him for his services in that character. On this
principle, I shall move to strike out the clause; if that is agreed to,
I propose to offer one, allowing him the pay of President, when he acts
as President; and a daily pay during the time he acts as President of
the Senate.

Mr. PAGE would second the motion for striking out five thousand dollars,
but with a different view from what had been intended by his worthy
colleague. He wished it struck out, in order to introduce a larger sum.
His idea was, that a proper proportion was not observed between the
salary of the First and Second Magistrates. As to the utility of the
office, he had nothing to say. He had no hand in forming the
constitution; if he had, perhaps he should never have thought of such an
officer; but as we have got him, we must maintain him; and those
gentlemen who talk of respectability being attached to high offices,
must admit, in a comparative view, that he is not supported with
dignity, provided a situation derives its dignity from the money given
him by way of salary; for his part, he thought money, abstractedly
considered, could not bestow dignity. Real dignity of character proceeds
from a much nobler source; but he apprehended the people of the United
States, whose representative the Vice President was, would be displeased
to see so great a distinction made between the President and him.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, the arguments of the honorable gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. WHITE) did not strike him with any force, nor did he see
the impropriety spoken of. One reason why the pay of the members of the
Senate and House is per diem is, because they contemplate their being
together but a very inconsiderable part of their time; but I suppose,
said he, that every gentleman who has considered the subject, has
determined in his own mind that the Vice President ought to remain
constantly at the seat of Government; he must always be ready to take
the reins of Government when they shall fall out of the hands of the
President; hence it will be necessary that he should, for this cause, if
not for any other, preclude himself from every object of employment, and
devote his whole time to prepare himself for the great and important
charge for which he is a candidate. Under these circumstances, it is
necessary that he should be provided with a constant salary, to support
that rank which we contemplate for him to bear; I therefore conceive it
must be such a perpetual salary as the President is entitled to receive.
If the principles of the motion are inadmissible, it cannot be supported
by argument, because very little information can be obtained on which to
ground our reasoning.

Mr. SENEY said, that, according to the constitution, a compensation is
to be made for services performed. The Vice President may absent himself
the whole time. He proposed giving him a handsome allowance while
employed, but thought he ought to be paid per diem.

Mr. SHERMAN adverted to the circumstance of salaries being allowed to
Lieutenant Governors in the several States where such officers are
appointed; so that, according to this mode, the grant made to the Vice
President would correspond with the practice of the States
individually. It appeared also, he said, to be necessary, inasmuch as
this officer would be taken from all other business.

Mr. WHITE.--If I thought, sir, the attendance of the Vice President as
necessary as that of the President, I would not hesitate to allow him an
annual salary; but I do not conceive it to be so necessary; it is not
made so by the constitution. If he had been appointed Vice President as
a perpetual counsel for the President, it would have altered the case;
he would then have had services to render, for which we ought to
compensate him. The honorable gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr.
SEDGWICK) has intimated that he will be precluded from following any
other business; there is nothing in the constitution which precludes him
from following what profession he thinks proper. I am willing to pay him
a full and liberal allowance for all the services he renders; but I do
not think we are authorized to institute sinecures for any man.

It ought to be considered that the Vice President has personal
advantages from the appointment to that office; it holds him up as the
successor of the President; the voice of the people is shown to be
considerably in his favor; and if he be a deserving person, there will
be but little doubt of his succeeding to the presidential chair; not
that I would make this an argument to diminish his compensation. I would
pay him amply for all the services he renders, at least as amply as the
Government and circumstances of the people will admit. When performing
the duties of President, he should receive the salary as such.

The constitution has stipulated, that the President shall be compensated
for his services, that we shall ascertain it by law; but it has not said
one syllable with respect to the pay of the Vice President; hence I
consider it would be improper to pay him on any other principle than in
proportion to his services. If these require five thousand dollars a
year, it may be made to amount to that sum, at so much per diem.

As to the observations of the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. SHERMAN,)
that Lieutenant Governors receive salaries in the several States, and
therefore it will be proper to grant one to the Vice President, in order
to comport with the practice of the States individually, I shall only
remark, that in some States they have no such officer; in others, where
they have such an officer, they give him no pay at all; in some, they
are paid according to their attendance on business, in the manner that I
propose to pay the Vice President. But admitting that every State had an
officer of this kind, and that they paid him a salary like that proposed
in the report, it would be no argument why the General Government should
pursue a practice inconsistent with that economy and sense of propriety
which it ought to be the study of the Representatives of the people of
the United States to preserve to their constituents.

Mr. MADISON.--I do not concur, Mr. Speaker, in sentiment, with my
colleague on this subject. I conceive, sir, if the constitution is
silent on this point, that it is left to the Legislature to decide
according to its nature and its merits. The nature of the office will
require that the Vice President shall always be in readiness to render
that service which contingencies may require; but I do not apprehend it
to be in our power to derive much advantage from any guides furnished by
the examples of the several States; because we shall find them
differently provided for by the different Governments. If we consider
that the Vice President may be taken from the extremity of the
continent, and be from the nature of his office obliged to reside at or
within the convenient reach of the seat of Government, to take upon him
the exercise of the President's functions, in case of any accident that
may deprive the Union of the services of their first officer, we must
see, I think, it will often happen that he will be obliged to be
constantly at the seat of Government. No officer under a State
Government can be so far removed as to make it inconvenient to be called
upon when his services are required; so that, if he serve without a
salary, it may be he can reside at home, and pursue his domestic
business; therefore the application in that case does not appear to me
to be conclusive.

My colleague says that he will derive advantages from being in the line
of appointment to the presidential chair. If he is to be considered as
the apparent successor of the President, to qualify himself the better
for that office, he must withdraw from his other avocations, and direct
his attention to the obtaining a perfect knowledge of his intended
business.

The idea that a man ought to be paid only in proportion to his services,
holds good in some cases, but not in others. It holds good in
legislative business, but not in the executive or judicial departments.
A judge will be sometimes unemployed, as in the case of the Vice
President; yet it is found necessary to claim the whole of his time and
attention to the duties for which he is appointed. If the principle of
proportioning the allowance to the quantum of services performed
obtains, it will be found that the Judiciary will be as dependent on the
legislative authority, as if the Legislature was to declare what shall
be their salary for the succeeding year; because, by abridging their
services at every session, we could reduce them to such a degree, as to
require a very trifling compensation indeed. Neither do I, Mr. Speaker,
consider this as a sinecure; but that will appear from the reasons
already given. The office of a judge is liable, in some degree, to the
same objection; but these kinds of objections are levelled against the
institutions themselves. We are to consider his appointment as a part of
the constitution; and if we mean to carry the constitution into full
effect, we ought to make provision for his support, adequate to the
merits and nature of the office.

Mr. AMES said that the Vice President's acceptance of his appointment
was a renunciation of every other avocation. When a man is taken from
the mass of the people for a particular office, he is entitled to a
compensation from the public; during the time in which he is not
particularly employed, he is supposed to be engaged in political
researches for the benefit of his country.

Every man is eligible, by the constitution, to be chosen to this office;
but if a competent support is not allowed, the choice will be confined
to opulent characters. This is an aristocratic idea, and contravenes the
spirit of the constitution.

Mr. SENEY.--This, sir, is a subject of a delicate nature, and the
discussion of it rather disagreeable; but I think it my duty to declare
my sentiments freely upon it. No argument has been adduced to convince
me that the Vice President ought to receive an allowance any more than
the other members of the Legislature. He cannot be compelled to perform
any duty. This is an important subject, and ought to be maturely
considered, as a great deal depends on the decision which will now take
place.

Mr. BURKE observed that the situation of our finances was so much
embarrassed, as to dis-empower us from giving such ample salaries as we
might, under different circumstances, think necessary; that it was but
reasonable the Vice President should receive a compensation adequate to
the second officer in the Government. He will be subject to extra
expenses by living at the seat of Government, and will be obliged to
maintain his dignity. Mr. B. further suggested that the sum might not be
fully sufficient, but in our present situation, it was as much as we
could afford.

Mr. AMES, in his reply to Mr. SENEY'S observations, pointed out the
difference of the situation of the Vice President and the members of the
Legislature.

Mr. SEDGWICK made some additional remarks of a similar nature, and
further observed, it would be necessary that the members of the House
should return and associate with their constituents, in order to learn
their sentiments and their feelings, and witness their situation and
wants, that they may consequently resume their former occupations: but
with respect to the Vice President, his acceptance must be considered as
an abandonment of every other pursuit; he must reside at the seat of
Government, and will necessarily incur extra expenses in consequence of
his office.

Mr. STONE.--I am for giving such salaries to the officers of this
Government, as will render them easy in their situation. But we are
confined by the constitution; salaries are to be given for services
performed; they are considered in no other light. The Vice President
cannot be viewed in any other light than that of the President of the
Senate. I am for his being paid per diem, but would allow him a
generous support. I do not think five thousand dollars are sufficient; I
would allow him a larger sum, which allowance, per diem, would amount to
what would be fully adequate.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, said, that by the constitution the Vice
President could not be considered as a Senator, and therefore could not,
with any propriety, be paid as such. Considering him as an officer in
the Government, next in dignity to the President, and particularly
designated by the constitution, he must support a correspondent dignity
in his style of living, and consequently ought to have a competent
allowance for that purpose. He did not think five thousand dollars would
be considered too much, and would vote for that sum. The idea of a daily
allowance must be given up, as inapplicable to the situation assigned
him by the constitution. He is there recognized as Vice President, and
as such ought to be provided for. A daily pay of twenty-five or thirty
dollars would appear a large compensation; yet if Congress sat but one
hundred days, which, in all probability, would be the length of their
future sessions, it would be insufficient for his support. But suppose
it one hundred and fifty days; this, at thirty dollars per day, would
come so near the proposed salary, that the saving would be an
inconsiderable trifle; but if the session was longer, it might amount to
more than is contemplated by any gentleman.

Mr. PAGE was clearly for making the allowance by annual salary, because
the office was permanent; a daily allowance could not be relied upon,
because if the Senate sat but a few days, it would be incompetent, even
at one hundred dollars per day; whereas, if the session was of long
continuance, that sum would be more than the services could require, if
they are to hold a comparison with those of the President. If the House
agreed to strike out the five thousand dollars he would propose eight
thousand, which was not one third of what was given to the President.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--The question seems to turn merely on this point, whether
the Vice President shall receive a per diem allowance, or an annual
salary? The constitution ought to serve as the ground on which to
determine it; therefore we are to consider the point of view in which
this office is placed by that instrument. The second article calls him
into view with the President; he is to be elected in the same manner as
the President, in order to obtain the second best character in the Union
to fill the place of the first, in case it should be vacated by any
unforeseen accident. The constitution considers him a respectable
officer; he is to supersede the President, when it shall happen that the
First Magistrate dies or is removed on impeachment and conviction. These
are the great objects of his appointment. His duty as President of the
Senate is only collateral; consequently he ought to be respected, and
provided for according to the dignity and importance of his principal
character. If still inferior duties were attached to him, would it be an
argument for reducing the compensation to an equality with what ought to
be granted, if he performed such inferior duties only? I apprehend it is
a principle of this nature which urges gentlemen on to press the
amendment. I cannot see any reason for differing with the constitution
on a point in which I think it ought to guide our decision.

I think there is an affinity between the duration of the office and the
compensation. The constitution establishes the office for four years;
the compensation ought to be made commensurate with that idea.

The question on Mr. WHITE'S motion was taken and lost, as was Mr. PAGE'S
motion for striking out 5,000 and inserting 8,000 dollars.

The proposition being then agreed to,

The House proceeded to consider the following: That the daily pay of the
members of the Senate, and House of Representatives, for their
attendance at the time appointed for the meeting of their respective
Houses, and for the time they shall be going to, and returning
therefrom, allowing the travel of twenty miles for each day, be six
dollars, and of the Speaker of the House of Representatives twelve
dollars.

Mr. SEDGWICK moved to amend this proposition, so as to give to the
members of the Senate six dollars per day, and five to the members of
the House of Representatives. His reason for introducing this
distinction was, that the convention had made it in the constitution.
The Senators are required to be of an advanced age, and are elected for
six years. Now this term taken out of the life of a man, passed the
middle stage, may be fairly deemed equal to a whole life; for it was to
be expected, that few, if any, of the Senators could return to their
former occupations when the period for retirement arrived; indeed after
six years spent in other pursuits, it may be questioned whether a man
would be qualified to return with any prospect of success.

He did not say six dollars was more than a compensation for their
services and expenses; but as economy ought to be particularly studied
by the Legislature, he had moved to reduce it. He hoped gentlemen would
pay some deference to the public opinion, on the present occasion; this
he thought to be in favor of small salaries. Not but a different
sentiment might prevail in some of the States; perhaps different
circumstances might warrant the difference of opinion. It was probable
that five dollars laid out in that part of the Union from which he came,
would be more advantageous to the person, than a like sum laid out at
the other extremity of the continent; but he believed, nevertheless,
that something would be left to those gentlemen out of the five dollars
per day, after their expenses were paid; but even if a little
self-denial was the consequence of this reduction, it would do but
little harm; whereas the precedent might have a salutary influence upon
the future administration of the Government.

Mr. JACKSON.--I am opposed to this discrimination, because all have
alike abandoned their particular pursuits in life, and all have equally
engaged in the service of their common country. On what principle can
this distinction then be contended for? Is it expected that a Senator
shall eat more, or drink more costly liquors, than a member of the House
of Representatives? I presume it is not; their expenses must be nearly
equal. I can see but one reason that can be assigned for this
difference, which is, that the Senate may sit longer than the House; but
considering they are to receive pay accordingly, this reason is of no
weight. The duties of both Houses are equal, and the pay ought to be
alike.

I will submit to the gentleman who brought this motion forward, whether
it is not much worse to the personal interest of men in business to be
taken off in the prime of life, than after the successful pursuit of
some profession at an advanced age, when the natural and proper time of
retirement arrives; and if so, his argument falls to the ground. But if
the reverse is true, it will not support his motion, because, if we look
around, our senses will inform us that this House contains as venerable
and aged members as any within the walls of the Senate; thus again we
are upon a footing. Now, unless gentlemen mean that we should depress
ourselves, and thereby set the Senate above us, I cannot conceive what
foundation there will be for a discrimination.

Mr. LEE.--I am in favor of the motion for discriminating between the
Senate and this House, because the constitution has done it in a variety
of modes. The qualifications are superior; a Senator must be a man
advanced in life, and have been nine years a citizen of the United
States; while a younger man who has been but seven years a citizen, may
obtain a seat in this House.

The constitution has made a difference in the mode of election. The
Senators are selected with peculiar care; they are the purified choice
of the people, and the best men are likely to be preferred by such a
choice; those who have shown the fullest proofs of their attachment to
the public interest, and evinced to their countrymen their superior
abilities. In order to bring forth such characters to partake of our
public councils, I think every motive of honor and of interest ought to
be called into action. If men are not brought forth who will maintain
their own dignity, and promote the public interest by a firm and
independent conduct, regardless of every risk, regardless of the voice
of calumny or popular clamor, our Government will soon lose its
importance and its energy. I contemplate, Mr. Speaker, the Senate as a
barrier between the Executive and this branch of the Legislature,
shielding the people from any apprehension of being attacked by an
aspiring Magistracy on the one hand, and on the other from being
desolated by the anarchy often generated by a time-servingness to
veering popularity. We shall gain these desirable objects at a trifling
price, if we make a distinction of two or three dollars per day--a
trifling allowance indeed to our most worthy sages. But, said the
gentleman last up, there are as young men in the Senate as in this
House; although there be, the time will come when none but the most
venerable and respectable of our citizens, men whose hoary heads are
silvered over with the honors of an experienced old age, men illustrious
by their virtues and capacity, will have the public confidence ensured
to them by the purity and notoriety of their principles.

Now is the time to deliberate and view every future circumstance which
may arise from our decision; the importance of this principle hereafter,
is infinitely above every advantage which the present members may derive
from it. By it alone you may secure dignity and permanency to the
Government, and happiness under its administration.

It is with difficulty, Mr. Speaker, that you can draw forth men of age
and much experience to participate in the political concerns of their
country. Retirement and reflection are incident to that period of life;
they are sought for, and, when obtained, they are highly prized. The
wise and virtuous sage, who from the monitions of nature has discovered
that his remaining years will be but few, must be incited by every
motive that can operate on the human heart to continue those labors
which he seeks to bury the remembrance of in the deeps of solitude.
Honor may stimulate the ingenuous mind; but interest is a great reason
of action, and may be usefully employed to influence old age.

What I have now urged is in favor of the constitutional distinction; I
approve of the amendment, but I wish the sum had been left out, that the
provision might be determined according to the sense of the House, and
not affect the principal question of discrimination. I am satisfied,
sir, that there is no heart within these walls but beats with patriotic
ardor, and has determined to pursue the noblest object, the public good.
Nothing but the anxiety I feel for this, as connected with the present
question, could have induced me to trouble the House with a repetition
of what was dilated upon, on a former occasion. Let it then be
considered, that on our decision depend the dignity of the Legislature,
and the perpetuity of that Government, the glory and the hopes of the
people of America, which, if now disappointed, must be succeeded by
confusion and gloomy despair.

Mr. WHITE.--I object, sir, to a discrimination. I cannot perceive that
difference in the constitution alluded to by the gentlemen. Among the
Senators and the people in some of the ancient commonwealths, an
artificial and political distinction was established, which was the case
at Rome, in particular. There the Senators were considered as possessing
some degree of divinity, and the rest of the people were not admitted to
associate with them. Can it be supposed that the name of Senators will
render those members superior to their fellow-citizens? I cannot see any
difference in the general estimation between a Senator and a
Representative, however great their sentiments may vary in their
respective States; and cannot conceive why any discrimination should be
made in their allowances.

The independence of the members of this House may be injured by such a
distinction; and the Senate, at some future day, may have it in their
power to carry points, and be enabled to prolong the session, when it
may be of great inconvenience to the House.

Mr. MADISON was of opinion that a discrimination was necessary; he
observed, that it had been evidently contemplated by the constitution,
to distinguish in favor of the Senate, that men of abilities and firm
principles, whom the love and custom of a retired life might render
averse to the fatigues of a public one, may be induced to devote the
experience of years, and the acquisitions of study, to the service of
their country. And unless something of this kind is adopted, it may be
difficult to obtain proper characters to fill the Senate, as men of
enterprise and genius will naturally prefer a seat in the House,
considering it to be a more conspicuous situation.

Mr. MOORE did not see the propriety of the discrimination proposed; the
business of each House is equal, or if there is a difference in their
legislative concerns, it is in favor of the House. He had no idea of
giving the public money for such an idle purpose as the support of a
fanciful dignity and superiority. His idea of the business was, each
member ought to be compensated for his services, and nothing further.

Mr. VINING.--The arguments brought forward by my honorable friend from
Virginia, (Mr. LEE,) have not proved satisfactory to my mind, that his
favorite opinion with respect to discrimination is right. He has told us
that the sages of America will be selected, and placed in this
distinguished situation. True, sir, I expect venerable and respectable
characters will find their way into every branch of the Government; but
when I consider the mode in which the Senate is elected, I apprehend we
may have there men whose wealth has created them the influence necessary
to get in. If any thing is to be expected by this refined choice, it is
that men of rank and opulence will draw the regard of the small and
select circle of a State Legislature; while the Representatives in this
House, being the choice of their fellow-citizens, among whom rank and
dignity are rather unpopular, will consist of men in middling
circumstances. Now if any thing is to be drawn from arguments like
these, it is in favor of this House. But the whole of this is a subject
on which we are better able to decide from our feelings, than from our
discussions.

I am against the motion for another reason, sir; it goes to reduce the
compensation, which I think is already set too low, to furnish good
security for the happy administration of the Government. In considering
this subject, there are two important objects necessary to engage the
attention of the Legislature. First, that the compensation be not made
an object for indigence to pursue; and second, that it be not so low as
to throw the business of legislation into the hands of rich and aspiring
nabobs, but such as to compensate a man in the middle grade of life.
These are generally men of business, who are fittest to conduct the
concerns of their fellow-citizens. Now, in compensating this class of
men, (for I would have the compensation proportioned to this class,) I
do not take into consideration the sacrifices they make, by dedicating
their time and abilities to the service of their country; but I confine
myself merely to a compensation for their time and services. If the
compensation is made an object for indigence, we shall have the sessions
protracted to an extreme length, and the expense will be increased; if
we make the reward barely commensurate with the services, you will have
men of abilities, who will despatch the public business, and return to
their private pursuits. If the business is done without pay, it may be
productive of the most enormous evils. Were every member of the British
House of Commons allowed a thousand guineas a year, they would be less
venal; we should not find them purchasing their seats, and selling their
votes, for places and pensions. The very money given in this way would
furnish a handsome compensation for every member, and add something
considerable, annually, to their sinking fund.

I apprehend, in establishing a compensation, we shall put it in the
power of gentlemen, while here, to live as independent as they can at
home. Perhaps I hazard a conjecture, when I say there is not a gentleman
on this floor, I am certain there are not many, but have found, from
experience, that six dollars per day is adequate to that object;
certainly it cannot be the wish of any man to make the public service
unpleasant, by rendering the situation of the members of Congress less
eligible than a solitary retirement from patriotic pursuits would be.
Any man who lives decently, will find six dollars a day not more than
sufficient to defray the expense of a casual residence in a splendid
city.

The experiment has been made. If a gentleman keeps a servant and his
horses, and means to reciprocate the civilities he receives, I again
assert the compensation is inadequate. It is true, we may live for two
dollars a day; but how? There is a dignity attached to the situation of
a Representative, with respect to his country; and the compensation
might be seven or eight dollars per day, without granting the members
more than a bare compensation. From all these considerations, I am
induced to hope that gentlemen will indulge a little, and rather support
an increase, than a diminution of pay.

As to the discrimination, it has been once decided against by a
considerable majority; I have no doubt but it will now meet a similar
fate; but be the decision of the House what it may, with respect to the
quantum, or manner of compensation, I shall never fear to deliver my
sentiments. On the present occasion, I wish them known to my
constituents, and I am much mistaken if they are not coincident with
their own.

Mr. SENEY.--I am sorry, sir, that the question of discrimination has
been brought before the House. Can any reason be assigned for making
this distinction? Are the services of the Senate of more importance than
those of the Representatives? I think not. Gentlemen have brought
forward the constitution upon this occasion, but I conceive it to be
opposite to the very principle they mean to advocate. This will destroy
the independence of the several branches, which is to be strictly
observed. If a discrimination should be established in favor of the
Senate, will it not naturally tend to create a sense of inferiority in
the minds of the Representatives? And the time may come when they may
find it their interest to become subservient to the views of the Senate.
I feel so sensibly, sir, the impropriety and unconstitutionality of this
measure, that had I the most distant idea it would comport with the
sentiments of a majority of the members of this House, I should call for
the yeas and nays on a division of the House upon the question. But as I
do not conceive that to be the case, I shall waive the proposition for
the present.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, that whenever he had a motion to make before the
House, he endeavored to satisfy himself of the reasonableness and
propriety of it. If he thought it proper, he did not consider the mode
of decision that might be adopted of any material consequence; but in
determining the present question, he hoped the yeas and nays would not
be called. There is a principle in mankind which revolts at the idea of
inferiority; a proposition, for example, shall be made, that has for its
object the establishment of a superiority (howsoever necessary;) that
principle is alarmed and excited to opposition; to discuss such a
question as the present, we ought to be divested of every partiality and
prejudice, that might bias our judgment in deciding an affair that will
not bear the test of reason and experience. I conceive the precedence of
the Senate has been clearly pointed out by the Constitution. There are
grades in society which are necessary to their very existence. This is a
self-evident proposition; it is recognized by every civilized nation,
and by the House in the report before us. For what reason have we made a
difference between the President and Vice President? Is it not on
account of his superior station and his dignity? And between the Vice
President and the Senate? This distinction is likewise established by
the constitution in the difference of the terms for which the members of
the Senate and those of the House of Representatives are chosen. The
time for which the Senate is chosen, demonstrates the propriety of a
difference being made in the pay they ought to receive; the duties of
their office require they should renounce every other avocation; their
attention will be wholly taken up in the discharge of public business;
therefore they should have an adequate and an independent allowance. The
generality of the members being so far advanced in years, will drop
every idea of engaging any more in their several professions, after
having once engaged in the service of their country. Their age, wisdom,
and experience, all warrant this discrimination. He concluded by saying,
that the real dignity of the House was, he thought, so far from being
diminished by adopting the proposition, that he conceived it was
essentially connected with it.

Mr. STONE thought the House ought not to assist in elevating one branch
of the Government more above the other than the constitution had done.
This had given influence to the Senate by a negative in the cases of
treaties and appointments. It had given importance to the House, by
vesting them with the sole power of originating money bills. But both
these powers could be exercised without a discrimination being made in
the pay of the members; therefore he inferred that it was not
contemplated by the constitution to make any such distinction.

A discrimination may eventually operate to the public injury; the House
of Representatives may be desirous of terminating the session, but the
Senate, finding the compensation they receive quite agreeable, may be
inclined to protract it. He thought the true way of deciding on this
subject, was to make the same allowance to both, and let it be such as
not to induce them to protract the session on the one hand, or have a
tendency to hurry over the business on the other.

Mr. JACKSON said, in reply to the inquiry of Mr. SEDGWICK--"Why have we
made a difference between the President and the Vice President?" that
the whole of the President's time would be taken up in the duties of his
station; that the Vice President might retire to his farm whenever he
thought proper. We refer, said he, to the wisdom of the Senate; but how
is this superior wisdom to be discerned? If on this account a
distinction is to be made, it necessarily follows that a difference
should be made between the members of this House, and those of the
Senate. We cannot be too cautious how we establish an undue
pre-eminence, and give an influence and importance to one branch of the
Legislature over the other. All governments incline to despotism, as
naturally as rivers run into the sea. Despotism makes its way gradually,
by slow and imperceptible steps; despotic power is never established all
at once; we shall, ere we are aware, get beyond the gulf, and then we
shall be astonished how we reached there. The services of the Senate are
not more arduous than ours; their proper business is legislation, and I
will never consent to any discrimination. If I imagined the question
would be determined in favor of discrimination, I would call the yeas
and nays, and should it be determined in favor of it, I will still call
them on purpose that my constituents may see that I have voted against a
measure which I look upon as injurious to the Government.

Mr. PAGE.--If he thought the discrimination proposed would have the
tendency which some gentlemen apprehended, he would be the last man on
the floor to support it. He would be as careful as any man how he
extended the influence of any part of the Government, or gave it the
least inclination towards aristocracy. But he apprehended gentlemen were
deceived in their principle--he did not believe the doctrine that money
confers importance, and he wished to evince to the world, that money,
under this Government would have no such effect. The Senate having more
duties to perform, may require a larger pecuniary gratification; but
this will not add to their importance. It will require something of this
kind to stimulate gentlemen to undertake the service; for his part, he
might consent to come here for two years, in order to assist in public
business, but no inducement, hardly, could engage him to undertake it
for six years. On this consideration, he thought the Senate ought to
have annual salaries, and to such an amount as would render their
situation independent and eligible.

If gentlemen are afraid of an aristocracy, they ought to be careful not
to make the compensation too low, so as to exclude men of middling
fortunes; the men of rank and distinguished opulence might serve without
any pecuniary compensation; but the Government would not be safe, if it
was exclusively in such hands. He wished to discriminate in favor of the
Senate, but he would rather increase their pay to eight dollars, than
reduce that of the members of this House, while he considered it but a
moderate compensation.

The question on Mr. SEDGWICK'S motion was taken, and lost by a
considerable majority.

The House having now gone through the report, it was _Ordered_, that a
bill or bills be brought in, pursuant thereto, and that Messrs. BURKE,
STONE, and MOORE, be a committee to prepare and bring in the same: with
instructions to insert a clause or clauses, making provision for a
reasonable compensation to the Secretary of the Senate, and Clerk of the
House of Representatives, respectively, for their services.

After which the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, July 22.

_Western Lands._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the state of the Union, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair; and, after some time
spent therein, the committee rose and reported that they had had the
state of the Union under consideration, and come to a resolution
thereupon, which was read and then delivered in at the clerk's table,
where the same was twice read, and agreed to by the House, as follows:

      _Resolved_, That an act of Congress ought to pass for
      establishing a Land Office, and for regulating the terms
      and manner of granting vacant and unappropriated lands, the
      property of the United States; that the said office be
      under the superintendence of the Governor of the Western
      Territory; that the land to be disposed of be confined to
      the following limits, viz:

      That the tracts or parcels to be disposed of to any one
      person, shall not exceed ---- acres; that the price to be
      required for the same shall be ---- per acre; and that
      every person actually settled within the said limits shall
      be entitled to the pre-emption of a quantity not exceeding
      ---- acres, including his settlement.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in, pursuant to the said
resolution, and that Mr. SCOTT, Mr. SYLVESTER, and Mr. MOORE, do prepare
and bring in the same.


THURSDAY, July 23.

_Home Department._

On motion of Mr. VINING, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the state of the Union, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair.

Mr. VINING introduced a resolution for the adoption of the committee, by
which it is declared: That an Executive department ought to be
established, and to be denominated the Home Department; the head of
which to be called the Secretary of the United States for the Home
Department; whose duty it shall be to correspond with the several
States, and to see to the execution of the laws of the Union; to keep
the great seal, and affix the same to all public papers when necessary;
to keep the lesser seal, and to affix it to commissions, &c.; to make
out commissions, and enregister the same; to keep authentic copies of
all public acts, &c., and transmit the same to the several States; to
procure the acts of the several States, and report on the same when
contrary to the laws of the United States; to take into his custody the
archives of the late Congress; to report to the President plans for the
protection and improvement of manufactures, agriculture, and commerce;
to obtain a geographical account of the several States, their rivers,
towns, roads, &c.; to report what post-roads shall be established; to
receive and record the census; to receive reports respecting the Western
Territory; to receive the models and specimens presented by inventors
and authors; to enter all books for which patents are granted; to issue
patents, &c.; and, in general, to do and attend to all such matters and
things as he may be directed to do by the President.

Mr. BENSON objected to some of the duties mentioned in the resolution.
He thought the less the Government corresponded with particular States
the better, and there could be no necessity for an officer to see to
the execution of the laws of the United States, when there was a
Judiciary instituted with adequate powers.

Mr. WHITE was not convinced that there was a necessity for establishing
a separate department for all or any of the duties contained in the
resolution. The correspondence with the States belonged to the
Executive. To see to the execution of the laws was the duty of the
Judiciary. The great seal might be kept by the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs; the lesser seal might be deposited in the same hands.
Commissions might be made out by the departments to which the officer is
connected. The Secretary of the Senate and Clerk of the House might
transmit the public acts, and keep records thereof. What have Congress
to do with the acts of States? If they interfere with the constitutional
powers of the Government, the Judges will prevent their operation. The
papers of the late Congress may be distributed among the officers to
which they relate; the rest may be deposited with the officers of
Congress. The want of the reports on manufactures, agriculture, and
commerce, may be supplied by Congress. The post-roads may be left to the
Postmaster General. The census must be returned to Congress, and they
will preserve it among their files. And it can hardly be thought
necessary to establish a great department for the purpose of receiving
the models, specimens, and books presented by authors and inventors. If
none of these things are requisite to be done by a great department, why
should the United States incur the expense which such an arrangement
must necessarily draw along with it.

Mr. HUNTINGTON thought the Secretary of Foreign Affairs was not so much
overcharged with business but that he might attend to the major part of
the duties mentioned in the resolution.

Mr. VINING said, he had waited until the great Executive departments
were established; but none of those had embraced the duties contained in
his proposition, which he conceived to be of great importance; many of
the duties were as essential as those of any other department, except
the Treasury. As for their belonging to the Executive, as was said by
the gentleman from Virginia, he admitted it; but they were,
nevertheless, as proper to be put into the hands of a principal officer
under the President, as the War office, or office of Foreign Affairs;
the duties of these were especially within the Executive department of
the Government. He conceived that the President ought to be relieved
from the inferior duties of his station, by officers assigned to attend
to them under his inspection; he could then, with a mind free and
unembarrassed with the minutiæ of business, attend to the operations of
the whole machine.

If the office was admitted to be necessary, and he was certain the
performance of the duties were useful and essential, the expense could
be no solid objection, because the information it would furnish would
more than counterbalance that article.

The question he conceived to be reduced to this, whether a confidential
officer would not be more useful than any other, and whether the duties
could be distributed among the officers already instituted. For his
part, he conceived most of them foreign to either of those officers; and
that they could not be performed with advantage any other way than by an
officer appointed specially for the purpose. He thought every gentleman
would admit that the duties were important, and he assured them that his
only reason for bringing the motion forward was, to provide for the
public good. He had no personal motives in pressing it; he disclaimed
every idea of serving any particular man by the arrangement, and rested
it solely upon its merits.

Mr. SEDGWICK believed the honorable gentleman in his assertions, that he
had no personal motive in pressing this business. He believed that he
thought it essential, and if his sentiments were the same, he would join
the gentleman in supporting the motion; but after duly considering the
subject, he was inclined to believe that the office was unnecessary, and
that it would be squandering the public money, at a time when the
greatest economy is requisite. He thought the principal part of the
duties might be assigned to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs; and he
would, if the committee negatived the present motion, introduce another
for that purpose.

Mr. GERRY thought the burthens of the people would be sufficiently great
in providing the supplies absolutely necessary for the support of the
Government; therefore it would be improper to add expenses which might
possibly be avoided. The people are viewing the proceedings of Congress
with an attentive solicitude, and if they observe that we erect offices
for which there is no apparent necessity, they will be apt to think we
are providing sinecures for men whom we favor; they will reluctantly pay
what is extracted from their earnings to a Government which they think
is regardless of economy. They will suspect a further view in the change
of Government. They will suppose that we contemplate the establishment
of a monarchy, by raising round the Executive a phalanx of such men as
must be inclined to favor those of whom they hold their places.

Mr. VINING.--Why do gentlemen say that such an office is unnecessary,
when they are forced to admit that all the duties are essential? Or how
can they say it is more expensive to establish it in this way than in
another? Suppose these duties distributed in the manner which some
gentlemen have mentioned, is it not fairly to be presumed that the
departments to which any of them are attached, will require an extra pay
for these extra services? If so, will there be any economy in this mode
of procedure? All that is to be wished for, is to have a confidential
person employed, let his salary be what you please: if it is not worth
fifteen hundred dollars per annum, let it be five hundred. But it would
be better to have a principal to manage the business than to have it
consigned to clerks in the other departments.

Mr. LAWRENCE said that something was necessary to be done with respect
to the business brought forward by the honorable gentleman from
Delaware. He conceived that an officer of the rolls, or some inferior
officer, ought to be appointed to transact the business detailed in the
resolution; he did not insist upon making a great department.

Mr. SEDGWICK agreed with the gentleman from New York; but, he thought,
the business might be thrown into some other department, and save to the
Union the expense of the one which the gentleman from Delaware wished to
establish, by the name of the Home Department. He thought the resolution
proposed altogether so improper, that he hoped the committee would rise.

A desultory conversation arose, whether the committee should decide upon
the resolution or not; after which a question was taken on the rising of
the committee, and decided in the negative.

Then the question was put on the first part of Mr. VINING'S proposition,
viz: "That an Executive Department ought to be established, to be
denominated the Home Department;" and lost by a considerable majority.


FRIDAY, July 24.

_Committee of Ways and Means._

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--The finances of America have frequently been mentioned
in this House as being very inadequate to the demands. I have ever been
of a different opinion, and do believe that the funds of this country,
if properly drawn into operation, will be equal to every claim. The
estimate of supplies necessary for the current year appears very great
from a report on your table, and which report has found its way into the
public newspapers. I said on a former occasion, and I repeat it now,
notwithstanding what is set forth in the estimate, that a revenue of
three millions of dollars in specie, will enable us to provide every
supply necessary to support the Government, and pay the interest and
instalments on the foreign and domestic debt. If we wish to have more
particular information on these points, we ought to appoint a Committee
of Ways and Means, to whom, among other things, the estimate of supplies
may be referred, and this ought to be done speedily, if we mean to do it
this session.

Mr. GERRY said, the estimate reported by a committee was as accurate as
possible. From this it appeared, that eight millions of dollars would be
necessary for the support of Government, for the interest and
instalments becoming due, and for the arrearages already due. He
remarked, that we had been already dunned on this subject by foreigners,
and that Congress would have to make provision for their payment. If
three millions of dollars were employed to this use, it would only be
carrying the arrearages into another year; but, as they must be paid at
last, he recommended making an immediate exertion as a better way of
giving satisfaction than procrastination would be. He thought it best to
lay the real situation of this country before the House, and not
endeavor to make things appear better than they really are.

With respect to the publication of the estimate in the papers, he knew
nothing about it; he admitted that it was such a one as ought not to be
published by order of Congress. He approved of the idea of appointing a
Committee of Ways and Means, if it were only to ascertain what part of
the interest on the debt should be paid, and what of the principal
extinguished within the current year, from the funds already provided.


FRIDAY, July 31.

Mr. SCOTT, from the committee appointed for the purpose, brought in a
bill for establishing a Land Office for the Western Territory, which was
read and laid on the table.

On motion,

      _Resolved_, That a standing committee be appointed to
      examine the enrolled bills, and to present the same to the
      President for his approbation and signature.

Messrs. WHITE and PARTRIDGE were accordingly appointed.

Mr. WHITE, of the committee appointed to examine into the measures taken
by Congress and the State of Virginia, respecting the lands reserved for
the use of the officers and soldiers of said State, &c., brought in a
report, which was read and laid on the table.

The House then resumed the consideration of the amendments agreed upon
in Committee of the Whole, to the bill for registering and clearing
vessels; which being finished, the bill was ordered to be engrossed for
a third reading on Monday next.

A message from the Senate informed the House that they had passed the
bill for establishing the Treasury Department, with amendments; to which
they desired the concurrence of the House.

Mr. SEDGWICK, from the committee appointed for the purpose, brought in a
bill to provide for the safe keeping of the acts, records, and great
seal of the United States, for the publication, preservation, and
authentication of the acts of Congress, &c.; which was read and laid on
the table.


MONDAY, August 3.

A message from the Senate informed the House that they had passed the
bill for the establishment of light-houses, beacons, and buoys, with
several amendments; to which they desired the concurrence of this House.

The amendments of the Senate were immediately considered and agreed to.

The engrossed bill for regulating the coasting trade was read a third
time; and, on motion, recommitted to a Committee of the Whole, to be
taken up to-morrow.

The bill for establishing a Land Office for the Western Territory was
read a second time, and made the order of the day for Thursday.

The bill to provide for the safe keeping of the acts, records, great
seal, &c., was read, and made the order of the day for Friday.

The report of the committee on amendments to the constitution was, on
motion of Mr. MADISON, made the order of the day for Wednesday sennight.

Mr. BENSON made a motion as follows:

      _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to join with a
      committee of the Senate to be appointed for the purpose, to
      consider of and report when it will be convenient and
      proper that an adjournment of the present session of
      Congress should take place; and to consider and report such
      business now before Congress, necessary to be finished
      before the adjournment, and such as may be conveniently
      postponed to the next session; and also to consider and
      report such matters not now before Congress, but which it
      will be necessary should be considered and determined by
      Congress before an adjournment.


TUESDAY, August 4.

_Compensation of Members._

Mr. BURKE, from the committee appointed for the purpose, brought in a
bill for allowing a compensation to the members of both Houses, and to
their respective officers; this bill provides that the compensation
shall be as follows, viz:

To each member of the Senate and House, six dollars per day.

The Speaker of the House, twelve dollars per day.

To the Secretary of the Senate, and Clerk of the House, each fifteen
hundred dollars a year, and two dollars a day each during the session of
the Legislature; one principal clerk to each, at three dollars a day
during the session; one engrossing clerk to each, at two dollars a day
during the session.

Serjeant-at-arms, three dollars a day during the session.

Doorkeeper to the House and Senate, each seven hundred and thirty
dollars a year.

Assistant doorkeepers, during the session, one dollar and fifty cents a
day each. This bill was laid on the table.


WEDNESDAY, August 5.

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
bill for allowing compensation to the members of the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States, and to the officers of both
Houses, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair.

Mr. GOODHUE moved to strike out six dollars, as the pay of each member
per diem.

Mr. CARROLL inquired, if it was not out of order for the committee to
alter principles, after they had been settled by the House.

Mr. PAGE wanted to know whether the gentleman meant to increase or
diminish the sum, for he presumed it was not intended to be left a blank
altogether; but he hoped the House would do neither. It had been
settled, after mature deliberation, at six dollars; the House certainly
thought that sum enough, and if it was more, that it would be too much;
he was satisfied with this determination, and would adhere to it.
Perhaps the gentleman meant to strike out the six dollars, in order to
make a discrimination between the members of this House and the Senate;
if so, he had better move to increase the compensation of the Senators,
and here he would second him, because he thought their services required
more.

He would once more mention his fears relative to a small sum. He dreaded
the abuse of economy, and was suspicious that a parsimonious provision
would throw the Government into the hands of bad men, by which the
people might lose every thing they now held dear. He thought few would
serve for a smaller sum than he would, and he was confident the
allowance was as moderate as any man could expect. Gentlemen who come a
great distance are put to considerable expense, and their domestic
arrangements destroyed: instead of laying up money by their attendance
here, it was almost certain they would spend part of their private
estates.

If it is meant that the republic should be provided with good and
wholesome laws, a proper provision should be made to bring into the
councils of the Union such men as are qualified to secure them well; it
is not to be expected that the spirit of patriotism will lead a man into
the perpetual habit of making such exertions and sacrifices as are too
often necessary in the hour of danger. No man ought to be called into
the services of his country, and receive less than will defray the
expenses he incurs by performing his duty. If he does, the public
affairs, in the time of tranquillity, will get exclusively into the
hands of nabobs and aspiring men, who will lay the foundation of
aristocracy, and reduce their equals to the capacity of menial servants
or slaves.

Mr. SEDGWICK seconded the motion for striking out. He had endeavored to
view this subject impartially, uninfluenced by any local considerations
or circumstances; and under these impressions, he was led to believe,
from all the information he had received, whether from abroad, or from
an examination in his own mind, of the effects it would produce, that it
would be expedient to establish the compensation at a lower sum. He
really did not see any solid ground for the apprehensions which his
worthy friend from Virginia (Mr. PAGE) had discovered. He had heard it
often said, that if salaries and allowances to public officers were
small, you would not be able to command the services of good men; but it
was contradicted by the fact. He would instance the late appointments,
and ask gentlemen whether they conceived better men could have been
procured, if the compensation had been doubled? If it was fair to
reason by experience and analogy, he should conclude there would be no
difficulty in procuring good and respectable men, to serve in this
House, at a less rate than six dollars per day. He had never yet
observed that men of small property shrunk from the expense of serving
in the councils of their country.

He thought the practice of the States was opposed to so high a
compensation; many of the State Legislatures allowed their members a
dollar and ten shillings a day, and yet they were served by good men.

He had been informed that it was thought by men of sense and
intelligence, that although six dollars might not be too great an
allowance for the services of the members of this House, yet,
considering the present circumstances of the people, it would be good
policy to reduce the same. He inclined to this opinion himself.

Impressed with these ideas, and knowing that it was generally the
opinion of the people, that six dollars was more than a moderate
compensation to the members of this House, he should support the motion
for striking out with a view to reduce the sum.

Mr. VINING said, the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CARROLL) had taken the
subject up in a proper point of view, by inquiring into the point of
order. He begged gentlemen to consider the manner in which the subject
had been discussed already--twice in the House, and twice in committee;
every decision had been the same; why should the point so often
determined be again agitated? It is contrary to all parliamentary
proceeding, and the House will never know when principles are settled.

He was certain that six dollars was but a moderate compensation, if a
member is to reside at the metropolis of the United States. He would
admit that they could live for less, in some more central part of the
country; but the gentlemen from the eastward should recollect that a
small allowance would be an argument for removing Congress from this
city, and when that time arrived, he should consent to a lower sum, but
not till then.

Mr. FITZSIMONS did not expect to hear the subject discussed again; he
thought it unnecessary, because he believed every gentleman would decide
more upon his own feelings than upon the arguments that could be
adduced; he would, however, just remind the committee, that six dollars
was about the average of what the members from the several States had
under the late confederation.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--According to the observation made by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, it will be deemed insolent to reason on this subject: what
I offered before, I brought forward with candor; but shall we be
precluded from debate, because a subject has been once discussed? Sir,
when I moved, some days ago, to reduce the pay of the members to five
dollars, I was rather indifferent about it; but since then, I have been
so well convinced of the necessity there is for such a measure, that I
cannot decline pressing it once more upon the committee.

Mr. STONE thought the public mind would not be much influenced by the
trifling difference between five and six dollars. They pay greater
regard to the decisions of the House, on more important subjects. The
gentleman from Massachusetts says his correspondents inform him, that
the public mind is agitated on this subject; if we are to judge what is
the state of the public mind from what our friends say, I should be apt
to think the public mind quite unconcerned on the present question; for
among all my correspondents, not one has deigned to notice it.

The question was now taken on striking out, and there appeared sixteen
in favor of it, and thirty-five against it; so the motion passed in the
negative.

Mr. MADISON renewed the motion for making a difference in the pay of the
members of the Senate and the House of Representatives, which was also
lost.

Mr. GOODHUE moved to strike out twelve dollars, the pay assigned the
Speaker, and insert ten.

Mr. PAGE hoped his motion would share the fate of the two last; he was
certain that twelve dollars was not more than a compensation for the
Speaker's services; three times the sum would not induce him to accept
such a situation.

Mr. BURKE was against the motion, because he thought that twelve dollars
was not a reward for the Speaker's labor. The Speaker of the House of
Commons in England has an annual salary of £8000 sterling.

Mr. CARROLL thought the Chair of the House of Representatives was one of
the most important and dignified offices under the Government, and as
such ought to be provided for.

This motion was lost by a great majority.

The committee rose and reported progress.


THURSDAY, August 6.

_Compensation of Members._

The House then again went into a Committee of the Whole, on the bill for
allowing a compensation to the members of Congress; and after some time
spent therein, the committee rose and reported the bill as amended: then
the House proceeded to consider the same.

Mr. THATCHER moved to insert five dollars instead of six, as the pay of
the members.

Mr. PARTRIDGE observed, that money was more valuable now than it had
been some years past; if, therefore, six dollars was the average of what
the delegates received heretofore, five dollars was now equal to that
sum. In short, he was convinced that six dollars was too much, and in
justice to his constituents, and his own conscience, he would vote
against it, and perpetuate his vote by calling the yeas and nays upon
the question.

Mr. GERRY.--I was not present when this subject was last before the
House, therefore I cannot say what was understood on this point; but I
have seen some account of the debate in the papers, from which I am led
to believe, that gentlemen view this matter in a very narrow point of
light. It appears to me a question, in which one's popularity is more
concerned than any thing else. Gentlemen perhaps suppose that by voting
for five instead of six dollars, they will establish such a character
for economy and patriotism as will redound to their honor; but I can
easily conceive, that men of knowledge and sentiment, yes, our
constituents in general, will discover, in a glaring light, the ruinous
consequences of such a measure in a very short period. The difference of
pay, as it now stands in the bill, and what my colleague has moved for,
is one dollar a day, and on this important question the yeas and nays
are to be called. For my part, I shall deliver my sentiments freely; I
am willing to leave the question to the people to decide; I care not
about the pay, and I can assure them I never wish to have a seat in this
House again: but I wish to guard against the subversion of the public
liberty--against the introduction of pensions--against exposing the
Legislature to corruption.

I would have gentlemen consider the principles upon which they are to
pay the President, their Judges and themselves; the constitution says,
the members of this House and the Senate shall receive a compensation
for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the
Treasury of the United States. The President shall receive, at stated
times, a compensation for his services, neither to be increased nor
diminished; the Judges shall, at stated times, receive for their
services a compensation, not to be diminished during their continuance
in office; hence it appears that the provision for the three branches is
to be made on the same principle, namely a compensation for their
services. Now, though it is certainly a little embarrassing that we
should have to estimate the value of our own services, yet we are bound
to do it, and that upon a fixed principle. It has been said, that the
Parliament of Britain receive no pay. This may be the case, but if they
examine back, they will find that pay, of a mark per day, was regularly
established for them. If we consider the difference of the value of
money two or three centuries ago, we shall find this no inconsiderable
allowance. But the policy of the British ministry has been, of late, to
extend the influence of the Crown; the pay of members has dropped into
disuse; but every one knows by what means a majority in Parliament is
obtained and secured. Now, such is the extent of these means, that I
venture to say, two important members of the House of Commons receive
more per annum than the whole compensation given to the members of both
Houses of Congress. I leave it to the world to judge, whether the
people are likely to be better served by men who receive their wages of
the Monarch, and who own themselves the servants of the Crown, or by
those who are immediately paid by and dependent upon themselves. While
Britain had funds enough to support this plan, they did tolerably well;
but when the evil extended itself, and they feared they could no longer
continue it without having recourse to other means, they bethought
themselves of unconstitutional ones; they were desirous of obtaining a
revenue out of this country, and placing upon our establishment men whom
they could not provide for at home. This cause lost them America, and
this cause will lose them every dependency, where they attempt to play
the like game.

From this view, the importance of an independent Legislature may be
seen. Will gentlemen then say, that to gratify a thoughtless regard for
economy, they will risk the most invaluable part of the Government? If
gentlemen say it is justice to their constituents, I am willing to
appeal to their tribunal; let them know the reason upon which we act,
and I will abide by their determination; but I am against being
influenced by an apprehension that the people will disapprove our
conduct. I am not afraid of being left out, even if it were thought a
disgrace to be left out. I would risk that disgrace rather than agree to
an establishment which I am convinced would end in the ruin of the
liberties of my fellow-citizens. It would give my heart more
satisfaction to fall the victim of popular resentment, than to establish
my popularity at the expense of their dearest interest.

As I mentioned before, the principle upon which we fix our own pay must
go through the other branches of the Government. Your President ought to
be retrenched to 16 or 18,000 dollars; your judges must be kept poor;
and I leave gentlemen to consider the happy consequences arising from a
dependent and corrupt Judiciary. Your Legislature may be corrupt, and
your Executive aspiring; but a firm, independent Judiciary will stop the
course of devastation, at least it will shield individuals from rapine
and injustice; but remove this security, and tyranny and oppression will
rush forward as a flood, and overwhelm the country.

It has been said, that the proposed compensation bears no proportion to
the pay of the members of the State Legislatures; let me ask, do members
of the State Legislatures forego their business? Do they leave their
State and relinquish their occupations? Does the lawyer neglect his
client? Does the merchant forego his commerce, or the farmer his
agriculture? No, sir, the short period they are in session, and the
opportunity of being in the vicinity affords them of going home, even
during their sitting, enables them to pursue their other avocations,
while performing their duties in the Legislature. But are not gentlemen
who come from the most distant parts of the Union, compelled to
relinquish every thing to attend here? The representation from the
States is so small, that a member can be ill spared at any time; his
absence must give him pain, when even that absence is necessary, but
cannot be often allowed. In short, I would have the allowance such, as
to secure the services of men of abilities in every rank of life; or if
that cannot be obtained, I would have all that part of the bill struck
out, which relates to a compensation for the services of the members of
this House.

Mr. PAGE said, if gentlemen were satisfied that five dollars per day was
enough to compensate them and defray their expenses, because they
resided in a part of the Union where every thing was to be procured so
much cheaper, they might receive that sum and leave the residue in the
Treasury; by this means they would demonstrate their love of economy and
disinterestedness.

Mr. VINING thought gentlemen who were satisfied with four or five
dollars, might move to amend the clause, so as to make it read "not
exceeding six dollars per day," and then they might charge as much less
as they deemed prudent.

Mr. BOUDINOT said, that whatever measures he supported, he did it upon
principle, not from a desire of acquiring popularity; he was satisfied
that six dollars per day was not extravagant compensation, but
considering the situation of the country, and the delicacy of their own
situation, he would vote for five dollars, and he thought it sufficient
to secure men of ability. He asked the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr.
GERRY) if he expected the paltry consideration of getting a dollar a day
more, was to induce men of abilities and integrity to come forward and
render their country their services?

He admitted that many gentlemen would find it difficult to bear all
their expenses with five dollars a day; but the compensation could not
be on a principle of discrimination, and therefore the House could not
make particular provision for such gentlemen. Others might think a less
sum sufficient, but no discrimination could here take place; it was
therefore necessary to accommodate, and upon this principle he hoped the
House would agree to five dollars per day; nor would this be any
variation from the principle established by the committee who reported
the bill. They had taken the pay of the delegates to the late Congress,
and struck an average, which was found to be about five dollars and a
half; they had reported six, but from the principles he had before
mentioned, he thought it better to agree to five.

Mr. GERRY.--The gentleman from Jersey, who was last up, says he does not
think six dollars per day more than sufficient; but that he will, from a
principle of delicacy, vote for five. I am as great a friend to delicacy
as any man, but I would not sacrifice essentials to a false delicacy. It
seems, from such sentiments, as if we were afraid to administer a
constitution which we are bound to administer. How are those sentiments
reconcilable to the oath we have taken? The constitution requires that
we shall, by law, compensate the services of the members of both Houses.

It has been said, that money is now more valuable than it was a few
years since. I admit the fact, sir, but four dollars per day was better
under the old plan of Government than six or eight under this, because a
delegate was then engaged for the whole year, but now he is to attend at
intervals. Some members were continued several years successively, and
consequently found it more advantageous. But this mode of reasoning is
fallacious; the question ought to be determined upon its own merits. But
if gentlemen are for sacrificing justice and propriety to delicacy, or
any other motive, let them come forward and agree to what I mentioned
before; let them strike out all that relates to their own compensation;
they are called upon by their own arguments to do this.

Mr. SEDGWICK did not rise to speak to the question, but merely to reply
to some observations that have fallen from the gentlemen who opposed the
present motion, particularly his colleague. The want of candor and
liberality might render gentlemen unpleasant in their situation; but the
consequences arising from such causes, were often still more unpleasant.
His colleague had insinuated, in a pointed manner, that the gentlemen
who were in favor of a reduction, were actuated by motives not only
improper and unworthy of a man of character, but such as appeared base
to his mind. It was said, that those who proposed this reduction, did it
merely to court popularity. Whether the gentleman, his colleague, who
brought forward the motion to-day, sacrificed more at that shrine than
his colleague who had opposed it, he left to those to determine who
noticed their conduct; but he believed they could never be charged with
such meanness. For his own part, if he had sacrificed in this way, as
his conduct had always been consistent with his sentiments, it must have
been known, and his character would long ere this have been blasted in
the manner it would have justly deserved. If he had done it heretofore,
he hoped the stigma would not be affixed upon him, for a conduct founded
upon the solid and substantial reasons he had advanced when the subject
was last before the House.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--The gentleman from Massachusetts makes me say, that six
dollars a day is not too much. I said it was not extravagant, but more
than I thought was proper upon due consideration of the circumstances of
this country. This is still my opinion, and upon it I shall ground my
vote. I believe no gentleman in this House regards his popularity, when
set in competition with his duty; my conduct has ever been open, and I
leave the world to judge from that what are my principles. I shall
therefore take no further notice of what has been said on that subject,
but conclude with wishing, for the honor of the House, and the dignity
of the gentlemen, that all our debates may be conducted with candor and
moderation.

Mr. AMES wished the call for the yeas and nays was withdrawn; because he
thought they lost their usefulness by a too frequent use. He was in
favor of the motion, but he did not wish to have his name entered on the
minutes on that account.

Mr. PARTRIDGE said, it was well known he never courted popularity; he
never sought a seat in this House, or any other public body; but he
insisted upon his right, as a member, to call for the yeas and nays,
when he thought the public interest might be benefited by it; however,
as the bill was not to be finished to-day, he would waive that call.

The question was taken on Mr. GOODHUE'S motion, and passed in the
negative, by a large majority.

The bill was ordered to be engrossed, and the House adjourned.


THURSDAY, August 13.

_Amendments to the Constitution._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr.
BOUDINOT in the chair, and took the amendments under consideration. The
first article ran thus: "In the introductory paragraph of the
constitution, before the words 'We the people,' add 'Government being
intended for the benefit of the people, and the rightful establishment
thereof being derived from their authority alone.'"

Mr. SHERMAN.--I believe, Mr. Chairman, this is not the proper mode of
amending the constitution. We ought not to interweave our propositions
into the work itself, because it will be destructive of the whole
fabric. We might as well endeavor to mix brass, iron, and clay, as to
incorporate such heterogeneous articles; the one contradictory to the
other. Its absurdity will be discovered by comparing it with a law.
Would any legislature endeavor to introduce into a former act a
subsequent amendment, and let them stand so connected? When an
alteration is made in an act, it is done by way of supplement; the
latter act always repealing the former in every specified case of
difference.

Besides this, sir, it is questionable whether we have the right to
propose amendments in this way. The constitution is the act of the
people, and ought to remain entire. But the amendments will be the act
of the State Governments. Again, all the authority we possess is derived
from that instrument; if we mean to destroy the whole, and establish a
new constitution, we remove the basis on which we mean to build. For
these reasons, I will move to strike out that paragraph and substitute
another.

The paragraph proposed was to the following effect:

      _Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
      United States in Congress assembled_, That the following
      articles he proposed as amendments to the constitution, and
      when ratified by three-fourths of the State Legislatures
      shall become valid to all intents and purposes, as part of
      the same.

Under this title, the amendments might come in nearly as stated in the
report, only varying the phraseology so as to accommodate them to a
supplementary form.

Mr. MADISON.--Form, sir, is always of less importance than the
substance; but on this occasion, I admit that form is of some
consequence, and it will be well for the House to pursue that which,
upon reflection, shall appear to be the most eligible. Now it appears to
me, that there is a neatness and propriety in incorporating the
amendments into the constitution itself; in that case the system will
remain uniform and entire; it will certainly be more simple, when the
amendments are interwoven into those parts to which they naturally
belong, than it will if they consist of separate and distinct parts. We
shall then be able to determine its meaning without references or
comparison; whereas, if they are supplementary, its meaning can only be
ascertained by a comparison of the two instruments, which will be a very
considerable embarrassment. It will be difficult to ascertain to what
parts of the instrument the amendments particularly refer; they will
create unfavorable comparisons; whereas, if they are placed upon the
footing here proposed, they will stand upon as good foundation as the
original work.

Nor is it so uncommon a thing as gentlemen suppose; systematic men
frequently take up the whole law, and, with its amendments and
alterations, reduce it into one act. I am not, however, very solicitous
about the form, provided the business is but well completed.

Mr. SMITH did not think the amendment proposed by the honorable
gentleman from Connecticut was compatible with the constitution, which
declared, that the amendments recommended by Congress, and ratified by
the Legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, should be part
of this constitution; in which case it would form one complete system;
but according to the idea of the amendment, the instrument is to have
five or six suits of improvements. Such a mode seems more calculated to
embarrass the people than any thing else, while nothing in his opinion
was a juster cause of complaint than the difficulties of knowing the
law, arising from legislative obscurities that might easily be avoided.
He said, that it had certainly been the custom in several of the State
Governments, to amend their laws by way of supplement. But South
Carolina had been an instance of the contrary practice, in revising the
old code; instead of making acts in addition to acts, which is always
attended with perplexity, she has incorporated them, and brought them
forward as a complete system, repealing the old. This is what he
understood was intended to be done by the committee; the present copy of
the constitution was to be done away, and a new one substituted in its
stead.

Mr. LIVERMORE was clearly of opinion, that whatever amendments were
made to the constitution, they ought to stand separate from the original
instrument. We have no right, said he, to alter a clause, any otherwise
than by a new proposition. We have well-established precedents for such
a mode of procedure in the practice of the British Parliament, and the
State Legislatures throughout America. I do not mean, however, to assert
that there has been no instance of a repeal of the whole law on enacting
another; but this has generally taken place on account of the complexity
of the original, with its supplements. Were we a mere legislative body,
no doubt it might be warrantable in us to pursue a similar method; but
it is questionable whether it is possible for us, consistent with the
oath we have taken, to attempt a repeal of the constitution of the
United States, by making a new one to substitute in its place; the
reason of this is grounded on a very simple consideration. It is by
virtue of the present constitution, I presume, that we attempt to make
another; now, if we proceed to the repeal of this, I cannot see upon
what authority we shall erect another; if we destroy the base, the
superstructure falls of course. At some future day it may be asked upon
what authority we proceeded to raise and appropriate public moneys. We
suppose we do it in virtue of the present constitution; but it may be
doubted whether we have a right to exercise any of its authorities while
it is suspended, as it will certainly be from the time that two-thirds
of both Houses have agreed to submit it to the State Legislatures; so
that, unless we mean to destroy the whole constitution, we ought to be
careful how we attempt to amend it in the way proposed by the committee.
From hence, I presume it will be more prudent to adopt the mode proposed
by the gentleman from Connecticut, than it will be to risk the
destruction of the whole by proposing amendments in the manner
recommended by the committee.

Mr. VINING disliked a supplementary form, and said it was a bad reason
to urge the practice of former ages, when there was a more convenient
method of doing the business at hand. He had seen an act entitled an act
to amend a supplement to an act entitled an act for altering part of an
act entitled an act for certain purposes therein mentioned. If gentlemen
were disposed to run into such jargon in amending and altering the
constitution, he could not help it; but he trusted they would adopt a
plainness and simplicity of style on this and every other occasion,
which should be easily understood. If the mode proposed by the gentleman
from Connecticut was adopted, the system would be distorted, and, like a
careless written letter, have more attached to it in a postscript than
was contained in the original composition.

The constitution being a great and important work, ought all to be
brought into one view, and made as intelligible as possible.

Mr. CLYMER was of opinion with the gentleman from Connecticut, that the
amendments ought not to be incorporated in the body of the work, which
he hoped would remain a monument to justify those who made it; by a
comparison, the world would discover the perfection of the original, and
the superfluity of the amendments. He made this distinction, because he
did not conceive any of the amendments essential, but as they were
solicited by his fellow-citizens, and for that reason they were
acquiesced in by others; he therefore wished the motion for throwing
them into a supplementary form might be carried.

Mr. STONE.--It is not a matter of much consequence, with respect to the
preservation of the original instrument, whether the amendments are
incorporated or made distinct; because the records will always show the
original form in which it stood. But in my opinion, we ought to mark its
progress with truth in every step we take. If the amendments are
incorporated in the body of the work, it will appear, unless we refer to
the archives of Congress, that GEORGE WASHINGTON, and the other worthy
characters who composed the convention, signed an instrument which they
never had in contemplation. The one to which he affixed his signature
purports to be adopted by the unanimous consent of the delegates from
every State there assembled. Now if we incorporate these amendments, we
must undoubtedly go further, and say that the constitution so formed was
defective, and had need of alteration; we therefore purpose to repeal
the old and substitute a new one in its place. From this consideration
alone, I think we ought not to pursue the line of conduct drawn for us
by the committee. This perhaps is not the last amendment the
constitution may receive; we ought therefore to be careful how we set a
precedent which, in dangerous and turbulent times, may unhinge the
whole.

Mr. LIVERMORE.--The mode adopted by the committee might be very proper,
provided Congress had the forming of a constitution in contemplation;
then they, or an individual member, might propose to strike out a clause
and insert another, as is done with respect to article 3, section 2. But
certainly no gentleman acquainted with legislative business would
pretend to alter and amend, in this manner, a law already passed. He was
convinced it could not be done properly in any other way than by the one
proposed by the gentleman from Connecticut.

Mr. GERRY asked, if the mode could make any possible difference,
provided the sanction was the same; or whether it would operate
differently in any one instance? If it will not, we are disputing about
form, and the question will turn on the expediency. Now one gentleman
tells you, that he is so attached to this instrument, that he is
unwilling to lose any part of it; therefore, to gratify him, we may
throw it into a supplementary form. But let me ask, will not this as
effectually destroy some parts, as if the correction had been made by
way of incorporation? or will posterity have a more favorable opinion
of the original, because it has been amended by distinct acts? For my
part, I cannot see what advantage can accrue from adopting the motion of
the honorable gentleman from Connecticut, unless it be to give every one
the trouble of erasing out of his copy of the constitution certain words
and sentences, and inserting others. But, perhaps, in our great
veneration for the original composition, we may go further, and pass an
act to prohibit these interpolations, as it may injure the text.

It is said that the present form of the amendments is contrary to the
5th article. I will not undertake to define the extent of the word
amendment, as it stands in the fifth article; but I suppose if we
proposed to change the division of the powers given to the three
branches of the Government, and that proposition is accepted and
ratified by three-fourths of the State Legislatures, it will become as
valid, to all intents and purposes, as any part of the constitution; but
if it is the opinion of gentlemen that the original is to be kept
sacred, amendments will be of no use, and had better be omitted;
whereas, on the other hand, if they are to be received as equal in
authority we shall have five or six constitutions, perhaps differing in
material points from each other, but all equally valid; so that they may
require a man of science to determine what is or is not the
constitution. This will certainly be attended with great inconvenience,
as the several States are bound not to make laws contradictory thereto,
and all officers are sworn to support it, without knowing precisely what
it is.

Mr. STONE asked the gentleman last up, how he meant to have the
amendments incorporated? Was it intended to have the constitution
republished, and the alterations inserted in their proper places? He did
not see how it was practicable to propose amendments, without making out
a new constitution, in the manner brought forward by the committee.

Mr. LAWRENCE could not conceive how gentlemen meant to engraft the
amendments into the constitution. The original one, executed by the
convention at Philadelphia, was lodged in the archives of the late
Congress; it was impossible for this House to take, and correct, and
interpolate that without making it speak a different language: this
would be supposing several things which never were contemplated. But
what would become of the acts of Congress? They will certainly be
vitiated, unless they are provided for by an additional clause in the
constitution.

Mr. BENSON said, that this question had been agitated in the select
committee, and determined in favor of the form in which it was reported;
he believed this decision was founded in a great degree upon the
recommendation of the State conventions, which had proposed amendments
in this very form. This pointed out the mode most agreeable to the
people of America, and therefore the one most eligible for Congress to
pursue; it will likewise be the most convenient way. Suppose the
amendments ratified by the several States; Congress may order a number
of copies to be printed, into which the alterations will be inserted,
and the work stand perfect and entire.

Mr. MADISON.--The gentleman last up has left me but one remark to add,
and that is, if we adopt the amendment, we shall so far unhinge the
business, as to occasion alterations in every article and clause of the
report.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped the committee would not agree to the alteration,
because it would perplex the business. He wished the propositions to be
simple and entire, that the State Legislatures might decide without
hesitation, and every man know what was the ground on which he rested
his political welfare. Besides, the consequent changes which the motion
would induce, were such as, he feared, would take up some days, if not
weeks; and the time of the House was too precious to be squandered away
in discussing mere matter of form.

Mr. JACKSON.--I do not like to differ with gentlemen about form; but as
so much has been said, I wish to give my opinion; it is this: that the
original constitution ought to remain inviolate, and not be patched up,
from time to time, with various stuffs resembling Joseph's coat of many
colors.

Some gentlemen talk of repealing the present constitution, and adopting
an improved one. If we have this power, we may go on from year to year,
making new ones; and in this way, we shall render the basis of the
superstructure the most fluctuating thing imaginable, and the people
will never know what the constitution is. As for the alteration proposed
by the committee, to prefix before "We the people" certain dogmas, I
cannot agree to it; the words, as they now stand, speak as much as it is
possible to speak; it is a practical recognition of the right of the
people to ordain and establish Governments, and is more expressive than
any other mere paper declaration.

But why will gentlemen contend for incorporating amendments into the
constitution? They say, that it is necessary for the people to have the
whole before them in one view. Have they precedent for this assertion?
Look at the constitution of Great Britain; is that all contained in one
instrument? It is well known, that _magna charta_ was extorted by the
barons from King John some centuries ago. Has that been altered since by
the incorporation of amendments? Or does it speak the same language now,
as it did at the time it was obtained? Sir, it is not altered a tittle
from its original form. Yet there have been many amendments and
improvements in the constitution of Britain since that period. In the
subsequent reign of his son, the great charters were confirmed with some
supplemental acts. Is the _habeas corpus_ act, or the statute _De
Tallagio non concedendo_ incorporated in _magna charta_? And yet there
is not an Englishman but would spill the last drop of his blood in
their defence; it is these, with some other acts of Parliament and
_magna charta_, that form the basis of English liberty. We have seen
amendments to their constitution during the present reign, by
establishing the independence of the judges, who are hereafter to be
appointed during good behavior; formerly they were at the pleasure of
the Crown. But was this done by striking out and inserting other words
in the great charter? No, sir, the constitution is composed of many
distinct acts; but an Englishman would be ashamed to own that, on this
account, he could not ascertain his own privileges or the authority of
the Government.

The constitution of the Union has been ratified and established by the
people; let their act remain inviolable; if any thing we can do has a
tendency to improve it, let it be done, but without mutilating and
defacing the original.

Mr. SHERMAN.--If I had looked upon this question as mere matter of form,
I should not have brought it forward or troubled the committee with such
a lengthy discussion. But, sir, I contend that amendments made in the
way proposed by the committee are void. No gentleman ever knew an
addition and alteration introduced into an existing law, and that any
part of such law was left in force; but if it was improved or altered by
a supplemental act, the original retained all its validity and
importance, in every case where the two were not incompatible. But if
these observations alone should be thought insufficient to support my
motion, I would desire gentlemen to consider the authorities upon which
the two constitutions are to stand. The original was established by the
people at large, by conventions chosen by them for the express purpose.
The preamble to the constitution declares the act: but will it be a
truth in ratifying the next constitution, which is to be done perhaps by
the State Legislatures, and not conventions chosen for the purpose? Will
gentlemen say it is "We the people" in this case? Certainly they cannot;
for, by the present constitution, we, nor all the Legislatures in the
Union together, do not possess the power of repealing it. All that is
granted us by the 5th article is, that whenever we shall think it
necessary, we may propose amendments to the constitution; not that we
may propose to repeal the old, and substitute a new one.

Gentlemen say, it would be convenient to have it in one instrument, that
people might see the whole at once; for my part, I view no difficulty on
this point. The amendments reported are a declaration of rights; the
people are secure in them, whether we declare them or not; the last
amendment but one provides that the three branches of Government shall
each exercise its own rights. This is well secured already; and, in
short, I do not see that they lessen the force of any article in the
constitution; if so, there can be little more difficulty in
comprehending them whether they are combined in one, or stand distinct
instruments.

Mr. SMITH read extracts from the amendments proposed by several of the
State conventions at the time they ratified the constitution, from
which, he said, it appeared that they were generally of opinion that the
phraseology of the constitution ought to be altered; nor would this mode
of proceeding repeal any part of the constitution but such as it
touched, the remainder will be in force during the time of considering
it and ever after.

As to the observations made by the honorable gentleman from Georgia,
respecting the amendments made to the constitution of Great Britain,
they did not apply; the cases were nothing like similar, and,
consequently, could not be drawn into precedent. The constitution of
Britain is neither the _magna charta_ of John, nor the _habeas corpus_
act, nor all the charters put together; it is what the Parliament wills.
It is true, there are rights granted to the subject that cannot be
resumed; but the constitution, or form of government, may be altered by
the authority of Parliament, whose power is absolute without control.

Mr. SHERMAN.--The gentlemen who oppose the motion say we contend for
matter of form; they think it nothing more. Now we say we contend for
substance, and therefore cannot agree to amendments in this way. If they
are so desirous of having the business completed, they had better
sacrifice what they consider but a matter of indifference to gentlemen,
to go more unanimously along with them in altering the constitution.

The question on Mr. SHERMAN'S motion was now put and lost.[29]


FRIDAY, August 14.

ABIEL FOSTER, from New Hampshire, appeared and took his seat.


SATURDAY, August 15.

_Amendments to the Constitution._

FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE.

Article 1. Section 9. Between paragraphs two and three insert, "no
religion shall be established by law, nor shall the equal rights of
conscience be infringed."

Mr. SYLVESTER had some doubts of the propriety of the mode of expression
used in this paragraph. He apprehended that it was liable to a
construction different from what had been made by the committee. He
feared it might be thought to have a tendency to abolish religion
altogether.

Mr. VINING suggested the propriety of transposing the two members of the
sentence.

Mr. GERRY said, it would read better if it was, that no religious
doctrine shall be established by law.

Mr. SHERMAN thought the amendment altogether unnecessary, inasmuch as
Congress had no authority whatever delegated to them by the constitution
to make religious establishments; he would, therefore, move to have it
struck out.

Mr. CARROLL.--As the rights of conscience are, in their nature, of
peculiar delicacy, and will little bear the gentlest touch of
governmental hand; and as many sects have concurred in opinion, that
they are not well secured under the present constitution, he said he was
much in favor of adopting the words. He thought it would tend more
towards conciliating the minds of the people to the Government than
almost any other amendment he had heard proposed. He would not contend
with gentlemen about the phraseology, his object was to secure the
substance in such a manner as to satisfy the wishes of the honest part
of the community.

Mr. MADISON said, he apprehended the meaning of the words to be, that
Congress should not establish a religion, and enforce the legal
observation of it by law, nor compel men to worship God in any manner
contrary to their conscience. Whether the words are necessary or not, he
did not mean to say, but they had been required by some of the State
Conventions, who seemed to entertain an opinion that under the clause of
the constitution, which gave power to Congress to make all laws
necessary and proper to carry into execution the constitution, and the
laws made under it, enabled them to make laws of such a nature as might
infringe the rights of conscience, and establish a national religion; to
prevent these effects he presumed the amendment was intended, and he
thought it as well expressed as the nature of the language would admit.

Mr. HUNTINGTON said, that he feared, with the gentleman first up on this
subject, that the words might be taken in such a latitude as to be
extremely hurtful to the cause of religion. He understood the amendment
to mean what had been expressed by the gentleman from Virginia; but
others might find it convenient to put another construction upon it. The
ministers of their congregations to the eastward were maintained by the
contributions of those who belonged to their society; the expense of
building meeting-houses was contributed in the same manner. These things
were regulated by by-laws. If an action was brought before a Federal
Court on any of these cases, the person who had neglected to perform his
engagements could not be compelled to do it; for a support of ministers,
or building of places of worship, might be construed into a religious
establishment.

By the charter of Rhode Island, no religion could be established by law;
he could give a history of the effects of such a regulation; indeed the
people were now enjoying the blessed fruits of it. He hoped, therefore,
the amendment would be made in such a way as to secure the rights of
conscience, and a free exercise of the rights of religion, but not to
patronize those who professed no religion at all.

Mr. MADISON thought, if the word national was inserted before religion,
it would satisfy the minds of honorable gentlemen. He believed that the
people feared one sect might obtain a pre-eminence, or two combine
together, and establish a religion to which they would compel others to
conform. He thought if the word national was introduced, it would point
the amendment directly to the object it was intended to prevent.

Mr. LIVERMORE was not satisfied with that amendment; but he did not wish
them to dwell long on the subject. He thought it would be better if it
was altered, and made to read in this manner, that Congress shall make
no laws touching religion, or infringing the rights of conscience.

Mr. GERRY did not like the term national, proposed by the gentleman from
Virginia, and he hoped it would not be adopted by the House. It brought
to his mind some observations that had taken place in the conventions at
the time they were considering the present constitution. It had been
insisted upon by those who were called anti-federalists, that this form
of Government consolidated the Union; the honorable gentleman's motion
shows that he considers it in the same light. Those who were called
anti-federalists at that time complained that they had injustice done
them by the title, because they were in favor of a Federal government,
and the others were in favor of a national one; the federalists were for
ratifying the constitution as it stood, and the others not until
amendments were made. Their names then ought not to have been
distinguished by federalists and anti-federalists, but rats and
anti-rats.

Mr. MADISON withdrew his motion, but observed that the words "no
national religion shall be established by law," did not imply that the
Government was a national one; the question was then taken on Mr.
Livermore's motion, and passed in the affirmative, thirty-one for, and
twenty against it.


_Amendments to the Constitution._

RIGHT OF INSTRUCTION.

"The freedom of speech and of the press, and the right of the people
peaceably to assemble and consult for the common good, and to apply to
the Government for a redress of grievances," being the clause under
consideration, Mr. TUCKER, of South Carolina, moved to add thereto these
words--_to instruct their representatives_.

Mr. HARTLEY wished the motion had not been made, for gentlemen
acquainted with the circumstances of this country, and the history of
the country from which we separated, differed exceedingly on this
point. The members of the House of Representatives, said he, are chosen
for two years, the members of the Senate for six.

According to the principles laid down in the Constitution, it is
presumable that the persons elected know the interests and the
circumstances of their constituents, and being checked in their
determinations by a division of the Legislative power into two branches,
there is little danger of error. At least it ought to be supposed that
they have the confidence of the people during the period for which they
are elected; and if, by misconduct, they forfeit it, their constituents
have the power of leaving them out at the expiration of that time--thus
they are answerable for the part they have taken in measures that may be
contrary to the general wish.

Representation is the principle of our Government; the people ought to
have confidence in the honor and integrity of those they send forward to
transact their business; their right to instruct them is a problematical
subject. We have seen it attended with bad consequences, both in England
and America. When the passions of the people are excited, instructions
have been resorted to and obtained, to answer party purposes; and
although the public opinion is generally respectable, yet at such
moments it has been known to be often wrong; and happy is that
Government composed of men of firmness and wisdom to discover, and
resist popular error.

If, in a small community, where the interests, habits, and manners are
neither so numerous nor diversified, instructions bind not, what shall
we say of instructions to this body? Can it be supposed that the
inhabitants of a single district in a State, are better informed with
respect to the general interests of the Union, than a select body
assembled from every part? Can it be supposed that a part will be more
desirous of promoting the good of the whole than the whole will of the
part? I apprehend, sir, that Congress will be the best judges of proper
measures, and that instructions will never be resorted to but for party
purposes, when they will generally contain the prejudices and acrimony
of the party, rather than the dictates of honest reason and sound
policy.

In England this question has been considerably agitated. The
representatives of some towns in Parliament have acknowledged, and
submitted to the binding force of instructions, while the majority have
thrown off the shackles with disdain. I would not have this precedent
influence our decision; but let the doctrine be tried upon its own
merits, and stand or fall as it shall be found to deserve.

It appears to my mind, that the principle of representation is distinct
from an agency, which may require written instructions. The great end of
meeting is to consult for the common good; but can the common good be
discerned without the object is reflected and shown in every light. A
local or partial view does not necessarily enable any man to comprehend
it clearly; this can only result from an inspection into the aggregate.
Instructions viewed in this light will be found to embarrass the best
and wisest men. And were all the members to take their seats in order to
obey instructions, and those instructions were as various as it is
probable they would be, what possibility would there exist of so
accommodating each to the other as to produce any act whatever? Perhaps
a majority of the whole might not be instructed to agree to any one
point, and is it thus the people of the United States propose to form a
more perfect union, provide for the common defence, and promote the
general welfare?

Sir, I have known within my own time so many inconveniences and real
evils arise from adopting the popular opinions on the moment, that,
although I respect them as much as any man, I hope this Government will
particularly guard against them, at least that they will not bind
themselves by a constitutional act, and by oath, to submit to their
influence; if they do, the great object which this Government has been
established to attain, will inevitably elude our grasp on the uncertain
and veering winds of popular commotion.

Mr. PAGE.--The gentleman from Pennsylvania tells you, that in England
this principle is doubted; how far this is consonant with the nature of
the Government I will not pretend to say; but I am not astonished to
find that the administrators of a monarchical Government are
unassailable by the weak voice of the people; but under a democracy,
whose great end is to form a code of laws congenial with the public
sentiment, the popular opinion ought to be collected and attended to.
Our present object is, I presume, to secure to our constituents and to
posterity these inestimable rights. Our Government is derived from the
people; of consequence the people have a right to consult for the common
good; but to what end will this be done, if they have not the power of
instructing their representatives? Instruction and representation in a
republic, appear to me to be inseparably connected; but were I the
subject of a monarch, I should doubt whether the public good did not
depend more upon the prince's will than the will of the people. I should
dread a popular assembly consulting for the public good, because, under
its influence, commotions and tumults might arise that would shake the
foundation of the monarch's throne, and make the empire tremble in
expectation. The people of England have submitted the crown to the
Hanover family, and have rejected the Stuarts. If instructions upon such
a revolution were considered binding, it is difficult to know what would
have been the effects. It might be well, therefore, to have the doctrine
exploded from that kingdom; but it will not be advanced as a substantial
reason in favor of our treading in the same steps.

The honorable gentleman has said, that when once the people have chosen
a representative, they must rely on his integrity and judgment during
the period for which he is elected. I think, sir, to doubt the authority
of the people to instruct their representatives, will give them just
cause to be alarmed for their fate. I look upon it as a dangerous
doctrine, subversive of the great end for which the United States have
confederated. Every friend of mankind, every well-wisher of his country,
will be desirous of obtaining the sense of the people on every occasion
of magnitude; but how can this be so well expressed as in instructions
to their representatives? I hope, therefore, that gentlemen will not
oppose the insertion of it in this part of the report.

Mr. CLYMER.--I hope the amendment will not be adopted; but if our
constituents choose to instruct us, that they may be left at liberty to
do so. Do gentlemen foresee the extent of these words? If they have a
constitutional right to instruct us, it infers that we are bound by
those instructions; and as we ought not to decide constitutional
questions by implication, I presume we shall be called upon to go
further, and expressly declare the members of the Legislature bound by
the instruction of their constituents. This is a most dangerous
principle, utterly destructive of all ideas of an independent and
deliberative body, which are essential requisites in the Legislatures of
free Governments; they prevent men of abilities and experience from
rendering those services to the community that are in their power,
destroying the object contemplated by establishing an efficient General
Government, and rendering Congress a mere passive machine.

Mr. SHERMAN.--It appears to me, that the words are calculated to mislead
the people, by conveying an idea that they have a right to control the
debates of the Legislature. This cannot be admitted to be just, because
it would destroy the object of their meeting. I think, when the people
have chosen a representative, it is his duty to meet others from the
different parts of the Union, and consult, and agree with them to such
acts as are for the general benefit of the whole community. If they were
to be guided by instructions, there would be no use in deliberation; all
that a man would have to do, would be to produce his instructions, and
lay them on the table, and let them speak for him. From hence I think it
may be fairly inferred, that the right of the people to consult for the
common good can go no further than to petition the Legislature, or apply
for a redress of grievances. It is the duty of a good representative to
inquire what measures are most likely to promote the general welfare,
and, after he has discovered them, to give them his support. Should his
instructions, therefore, coincide with his ideas on any measure, they
would be unnecessary; if they were contrary to the conviction of his own
mind, he must be bound by every principle of justice to disregard them.

Mr. JACKSON was in favor of the right of the people to assemble and
consult for the common good; it had been used in this country as one of
the best checks on the British Legislature in their unjustifiable
attempts to tax the colonies without their consent. America had no
representatives in the British Parliament, therefore they could instruct
none, yet they exercised the power of consultation to a good effect. He
begged gentlemen to consider the dangerous tendency of establishing such
a doctrine; it would necessarily drive the House into a number of
factions. There might be different instructions from every State, and
the representation from each State would be a faction to support its own
measures.

If we establish this as a right, we shall be bound by those
instructions; now, I am willing to leave both the people and
representatives to their own discretion on this subject. Let the people
consult and give their opinion; let the representative judge of it; and
if it is just, let him govern himself by it as a good member ought to
do; but if it is otherwise, let him have it in his power to reject their
advice.

What may be the consequence of binding a man to vote in all cases
according to the will of others? He is to decide upon a constitutional
point, and on this question his conscience is bound by the obligation of
a solemn oath; you now involve him in a serious dilemma. If he votes
according to his conscience, he decides against his instructions; but in
deciding against his instructions, he commits a breach of the
constitution, by infringing the prerogative of the people, secured to
them by this declaration. In short, it will give rise to such a variety
of absurdities and inconsistencies, as no prudent Legislature would wish
to involve themselves in.

Mr. GERRY.--By the checks provided in the constitution, we have good
grounds to believe that the very framers of it conceived that the
Government would be liable to maladministration, and I presume that the
gentlemen of this House do not mean to arrogate to themselves more
perfection than human nature has as yet been found to be capable of; if
they do not, they will admit an additional check against abuses which
this, like every other Government, is subject to. Instruction from the
people will furnish this in a considerable degree.

It has been said that the amendment proposed by the honorable gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. TUCKER) determines this point, "that the people
can bind their representatives to follow their instructions." I do not
conceive that this necessarily follows. I think the representative,
notwithstanding the insertion of these words, would be at liberty to act
as he pleased; if he declined to pursue such measures as he was directed
to attain, the people would have a right to refuse him their suffrages
at a future election.

Now, though I do not believe the amendment would bind the
representatives to obey the instructions, yet I think the people have a
right both to instruct and bind them. Do gentlemen conceive that on any
occasion instructions would be so general as to proceed from all our
constituents? If they do, it is the sovereign will; for gentlemen will
not contend that the sovereign will presides in the Legislature. The
friends and patrons of this constitution have always declared that the
sovereignty resides in the people, and that they do not part with it on
any occasion; to say the sovereignty vests in the people and that they
have not a right to instruct and control their representatives is absurd
to the last degree. They must either give up their principle, or grant
that the people have a right to exercise their sovereignty to control
the whole Government, as well as this branch of it. But the amendment
does not carry the principle to such an extent, it only declares the
right of the people to send instructions; the representative will, if he
thinks proper, communicate his instructions to the House, but how far
they shall operate on his conduct, he will judge for himself.

The honorable gentleman from Georgia (Mr. JACKSON) supposes that
instructions will tend to generate factions in this House; but he did
not see how it could have that effect, any more than the freedom of
debate had. If the representative entertains the same opinion with his
constituents, he will decide with them in favor of the measure; if other
gentlemen, who are not instructed on this point, are convinced by
argument that the measure is proper, they will also vote with them;
consequently the influence of debate and of instruction is the same.

The gentleman says further, that the people have the right of
instructing their representatives; if so, why not declare it? Does he
mean that it shall lie dormant and never be exercised? If so, it will be
a right of no utility. But much good may result from a declaration in
the constitution that they possess this privilege; the people will be
encouraged to come forward with their instructions, which will form a
fund of useful information for the Legislature. We cannot, I apprehend,
be too well informed of the true state, condition, and sentiment of our
constituents, and perhaps this is the best mode in our power of
obtaining information. I hope we shall never shut our ears against that
information which is to be derived from the petitions and instructions
of our constituents. I hope we shall never presume to think that all the
wisdom of this country is concentrated within the walls of this House.
Men, unambitious of distinctions from their fellow-citizens, remain
within their own domestic walk, unheard of and unseen, possessing all
the advantages resulting from a watchful observance of public men and
public measures, whose voice, if we would descend to listen to it, would
give us knowledge superior to what could be acquired amidst the cares
and bustles of a public life; let us then adopt the amendment, and
encourage the diffident to enrich our stock of knowledge with the
treasure of their remarks and observations.

Mr. MADISON.--I think the committee acted prudently in omitting to
insert these words in the report they have brought forward; if,
unfortunately, the attempt of proposing amendments should prove
abortive, it will not arise from the want of a disposition in the
friends of the constitution to do what is right with respect to securing
the rights and privileges of the people of America, but from the
difficulties arising from discussing and proposing abstract propositions
of which the judgment may not be convinced. I venture to say, that if we
confine ourselves to an enumeration of simple, acknowledged principles,
the ratification will meet with but little difficulty. Amendments of a
doubtful nature will have a tendency to prejudice the whole system; the
proposition now suggested partakes highly of this nature. It is doubted
by many gentlemen here; it has been objected to in intelligent
publications throughout the Union; it is doubted by many members of the
State Legislatures. In one sense this declaration is true, in many
others it is certainly not true; in the sense in which it is true, we
have asserted the right sufficiently in what we have done; if we mean
nothing more than this, that the people have a right to express and
communicate their sentiments and wishes, we have provided for it
already. The right of freedom of speech is secured; the liberty of the
press is expressly declared to be beyond the reach of this Government;
the people may therefore publicly address their representatives, may
privately advise them, or declare their sentiments by petition to the
whole body; in all these ways they may communicate their will. If
gentlemen mean to go further, and to say that the people have a right to
instruct their representatives in such a sense as that the delegates are
obliged to conform to those instructions, the declaration is not true.
Suppose they instruct a representative, by his vote, to violate the
constitution; is he at liberty to obey such instructions? Suppose he is
instructed to patronize certain measures, and from circumstances known
to him, but not to his constituents, he is convinced that they will
endanger the public good; is he obliged to sacrifice his own judgment to
them? Is he absolutely bound to perform what he is instructed to do?
Suppose he refuses, will his vote be the less valid, or the community be
disengaged from that obedience which is due to the laws of the Union? If
his vote must inevitably have the same effect, what sort of a right is
this in the constitution, to instruct a representative who has a right
to disregard the order, if he pleases? In this sense the right does not
exist, in the other sense it does exist, and is provided largely for.

The honorable gentleman from Massachusetts asks if the sovereignty is
not with the people at large. Does he infer that the people can, in
detached bodies, contravene an act established by the whole people? My
idea of the sovereignty of the people is, that the people can change the
constitution if they please; but while the constitution exists, they
must conform themselves to its dictates. But I do not believe that the
inhabitants of any district can speak the voice of the people; so far
from it, their ideas may contradict the sense of the whole people; hence
the consequence that instructions are binding on the representative is
of a doubtful, if not of a dangerous nature. I do not conceive,
therefore, that it is necessary to agree to the proposition now made; so
far as any real good is to arise from it, so far that real good is
provided for; so far as it is of a doubtful nature, so far it obliges us
to run the risk of losing the whole system.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--I am opposed to this motion, because I
conceive it will operate as a partial inconvenience to the more distant
States. If every member is to be bound by instructions how to vote, what
are gentlemen from the extremities of the continent to do? Members from
the neighboring States can obtain their instructions earlier than those
from the Southern ones, and I presume that particular instructions will
be necessary for particular measures; of consequence, we vote perhaps
against instructions on their way to us, or we must decline voting at
all. But what is the necessity of having a numerous representation? One
member from a State can receive the instructions, and by his vote answer
all the purposes of many, provided his vote is allowed to count for the
proportion the State ought to send; in this way the business might be
done at a less expense than having one or two hundred members in the
House, which had been strongly contended for yesterday.

Mr. STONE.--I think the clause would change the Government entirely;
instead of being a Government founded upon representation, it would be a
democracy of singular properties.

I differ from the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON), if he thinks
this clause would not bind the representative; in my opinion, it would
bind him effectually, and I venture to assert, without diffidence, that
any law passed by the Legislature would be of no force, if a majority of
the members of this House were instructed to the contrary, provided the
amendment became part of the constitution. What would follow from this?
Instead of looking in the code of laws passed by Congress, your
Judiciary would have to collect and examine the instructions from the
various parts of the Union. It follows very clearly from hence, that the
Government would be altered from a representative one to a democracy,
wherein all laws are made immediately by the voice of the people.

This is a power not to be found in any part of the earth except among
the Swiss cantons; there the body of the people vote upon the laws, and
give instructions to their delegates. But here we have a different form
of Government; the people at large are not authorized under it to vote
upon the law, nor did I ever hear that any man required it. Why, then,
are we called upon to propose amendments subversive of the principles
of the constitution, which were never desired?

Several members now called for the question, and the Chairman being
about to put the same:

Mr. GERRY.--Gentlemen seem in a great hurry to get this business
through. I think, Mr. Chairman, it requires a further discussion; for my
part, I had rather do less business and do it well, than precipitate
measures before they are fully understood.

The honorable gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) stated, that if the
proposed amendments are defeated, it will be by the delay attending the
discussion of doubtful propositions; and he declares this to partake of
that quality. It is natural, sir, for us to be fond of our own work. We
do not like to see it disfigured by other hands. That honorable
gentleman brought forward a string of propositions; among them was the
clause now proposed to be amended: he is no doubt ready for the
question, and determined not to admit what we think an improvement. The
gentlemen who were on the committee, and brought in the report, have
considered the subject, and are also ripe for a decision. But other
gentlemen may crave a like indulgence. Is not the report before us for
deliberation and discussion, and to obtain the sense of the House upon
it; and will not gentlemen allow us a day or two for these purposes,
after they have forced us to proceed upon them at this time? I appeal to
their candor and good sense on the occasion, and am sure not to be
refused; and I must inform them now, that they may not be surprised
hereafter, that I wish all the amendments proposed by the respective
States to be considered. Gentlemen say it is necessary to finish the
subject, in order to reconcile a number of our fellow-citizens to the
Government. If this is their principle, they ought to consider the
wishes and intentions which the convention has expressed for them; if
they do this, they will find that they expect and wish for the
declaration proposed by the honorable gentleman over the way (Mr.
TUCKER), and, of consequence, they ought to agree to it; and why it,
with others recommended in the same way, were not reported, I cannot
pretend to say; the committee know this best themselves.

The honorable gentleman near me (Mr. STONE) says, that the laws passed
contrary to instruction will be nugatory. And other gentlemen ask, if
their constituents instruct them to violate the constitution, whether
they must do it. Sir, does not the constitution declare that all laws
passed by Congress are paramount to the laws and constitutions of the
several States; if our decrees are of such force as to set aside the
State laws and constitutions, certainly they may be repugnant to any
instructions whatever, without being injured thereby. But can we
conceive that our constituents would be so absurd as to instruct us to
violate our oath, and act directly contrary to the principles of a
Government ordained by themselves? We must look upon them to be
absolutely abandoned and false to their own interests, to suppose them
capable of giving such instructions.

If this amendment is introduced into the constitution, I do not think we
shall be much troubled with instructions; a knowledge of the right will
operate to check a spirit that would render instruction necessary.

The honorable gentleman from Virginia asked, will not the affirmative of
a member who votes repugnant to his instructions bind the community as
much as the votes of those who conform? There is no doubt, sir, but it
will; but does this tend to show that the constituent has no right to
instruct? Surely not. I admit, sir, that instructions contrary to the
constitution ought not to bind, though the sovereignty resides in the
people. The honorable gentleman acknowledges that the sovereignty vests
there; if so, it may exercise its will in any case not inconsistent with
a previous contract. The same gentleman asks if we are to give the power
to the people in detached bodies to contravene the Government while it
exists. Certainly not; nor does the proposed proposition extend to that
point; it is only intended to open for them a convenient mode in which
they may convey their sense to their agents. The gentleman therefore
takes for granted what is inadmissible, that Congress will always be
doing illegal things, and make it necessary for the sovereign to declare
its pleasure.

He says the people have a right to alter the constitution, but they have
no right to oppose the Government. If, while the Government exists, they
have no right to control it, it appears they have divested themselves of
the sovereignty over the constitution. Therefore, our language, with our
principles, must change, and we ought to say that the sovereignty
existed in the people previous to the establishment of this Government.
This will be ground for alarm indeed, if it is true; but I trust, sir,
too much to the good sense of my fellow-citizens ever to believe that
the doctrine will generally obtain in this country of freedom.

Mr. VINING.--If, Mr. Chairman, there appears on one side too great an
urgency to despatch this business, there appears on the other an
unnecessary delay and procrastination equally improper and unpardonable.
I think this business has been already well considered by the House, and
every gentleman in it; however, I am not for an unseemly expedition.

Mr. LIVERMORE was not very anxious whether the words were inserted or
not, but he had a great deal of doubt on the meaning of this whole
amendment; it provides that the people may meet and consult for the
common good. Does this mean a part of the people in a township or
district, or does it mean the representatives in the State Legislatures?
If it means the latter, there is no occasion for a provision that the
Legislature may instruct the members of this body.

In some States the representatives are chosen by districts. In such
case, perhaps, the instructions may be considered as coming from the
district; but in other States, each representative is chosen by the
whole people. In New Hampshire it is the case; the instructions of any
particular place would have but little weight, but a legislative
instruction would have considerable influence upon each representative.
If, therefore, the words mean that the Legislature may instruct, he
presumed it would have considerable effect, though he did not believe it
binding. Indeed, he was inclined to pay a deference to any information
he might receive from any number of gentlemen, even by a private letter;
but as for full binding force, no instructions contained that quality.
They could not, nor ought they to have it, because different parties
pursue different measures; and it might be expedient, nay, absolutely
necessary, to sacrifice them in mutual concessions.

The doctrine of instructions would hold better in England than here,
because the boroughs and corporations might have an interest to pursue
totally immaterial to the rest of the kingdom; in that case, it would be
prudent to instruct their members in Parliament.

Mr. GERRY wished the constitution amended without his having any hand in
it; but if he must interfere, he would do his duty. The honorable
gentleman from Delaware had given him an example of moderation and
laconic and consistent debate that he meant to follow; and would just
observe to the worthy gentleman last up, that several States had
proposed the amendment, and among the rest, New Hampshire.

There was one remark which escaped him, when he was up before. The
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. STONE) had said that the amendment would
change the nature of the Government, and make it a democracy. Now he had
always heard that it was a democracy; but perhaps he was misled, and the
honorable gentleman was right in distinguishing it by some other
appellation; perhaps an aristocracy was a term better adapted to it.

Mr. SEDGWICK opposed the idea of the gentleman from New Hampshire, that
the State Legislature had the power of instructing the members of this
House; he looked upon it as a subornation of the rights of the people to
admit such an authority. We stand not here, said he, the representatives
of the State Legislatures, as under the former Congress, but as the
representatives of the great body of the people. The sovereignty, the
independence, and the rights of the States are intended to be guarded by
the Senate; if we are to be viewed in any other light, the greatest
security the people have for their rights and privileges is destroyed.

But with respect to instructions, it is well worthy of consideration how
they are to be procured. It is not the opinion of an individual that is
to control my conduct: I consider myself as the representative of the
whole Union. An individual may give me information, but his sentiments
may he in opposition to the sense of the majority of the people. If
instructions are to be of any efficacy, they must speak the sense of the
majority of the people, at least of a State. In a State so large as
Massachusetts it will behoove gentlemen to consider how the sense of the
majority of the freemen is to be obtained and communicated. Let us take
care to avoid the insertion of crude and indigested propositions, more
likely to produce acrimony than that spirit of harmony which we ought to
cultivate.

Mr. LIVERMORE said that he did not understand the honorable gentleman,
or was not understood by him; he did not presume peremptorily to say
what degree of influence the legislative instructions would have on a
representative. He knew it was not the thing in contemplation here; and
what he had said respected only the influence it would have on his
private judgment.

Mr. AMES said there would be a very great inconvenience attending the
establishment of the doctrine contended for by his colleague. Those
States which had selected their members by districts would have no right
to give them instructions, consequently the members ought to withdraw;
in which case the House might be reduced below a majority, and not be
able, according to the constitution, to do any business at all.

According to the doctrine of the gentleman from New Hampshire, one part
of the Government would be annihilated; for of what avail is it that the
people have the appointment of a representative, if he is to pay
obedience to the dictates of another body?

Several members now rose, and called for the question.

Mr. PAGE was sorry to see gentlemen so impatient; the more so, as he saw
there was very little attention paid to any thing that was said; but he
would express his sentiments if he was only heard by the Chair. He
discovered clearly, notwithstanding what had been observed by the most
ingenious supporters of the opposition, that there was an absolute
necessity for adopting the amendment. It was strictly compatible with
the spirit and the nature of the Government; all power vests in the
people of the United States; it is therefore a Government of the people,
a democracy. If it were consistent with the peace and tranquillity of
the inhabitants, every freeman would have a right to come and give his
vote upon the law; but, inasmuch as this cannot be done, by reason of
the extent of territory, and some other causes, the people have agreed
that their representatives shall exercise a part of their authority. To
pretend to refuse them the power of instructing their agents, appears to
me to deny them a right. One gentleman asks how the instructions are to
be collected. Many parts of this country have been in the practice of
instructing their representatives; they found no difficulty in
communicating their sense. Another gentleman asks if they were to
instruct us to make paper money, what we would do. I would tell them,
said he, it was unconstitutional; alter that, and we will consider on
the point. Unless laws are made satisfactory to the people, they will
lose their support, they will be abused or done away; this tends to
destroy the efficiency of the Government.

It is the sense of several of the conventions that this amendment should
take place; I think it my duty to support it, and fear it will spread an
alarm among our constituents if we decline to do it.

Mr. WADSWORTH.--Instructions have frequently been given to the
representatives of the United States; but the people did not claim as a
right that they should have any obligation upon the representatives; it
is not right that they should. In troublous times, designing men have
drawn the people to instruct the representatives to their harm; the
representatives have, on such occasions, refused to comply with their
instructions. I have known, myself, that they have been disobeyed, and
yet the representative was not brought to account for it; on the
contrary he was caressed and re-elected, while those who have obeyed
them, contrary to their private sentiments, have ever after been
despised for it. Now, if people considered it an inherent right in them
to instruct their representatives, they would have undoubtedly punished
the violation of them. I have no idea of instructions, unless they are
obeyed; a discretional power is incompatible with them.

Mr. BURKE.--I am not positive with respect to the particular expression
in the declaration of rights of the people of Maryland, but the
constitutions of Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, all of
them recognize, in express terms, the right of the people to give
instruction to their representatives. I do not mean to insist
particularly upon this amendment; but I am very well satisfied that
those that are reported and likely to be adopted by this House are very
far from giving satisfaction to our constituents; they are not those
solid and substantial amendments which the people expect; they are
little better than whip-syllabub, frothy and full of wind, formed only
to please the palate; or they are like a tub thrown out to a whale, to
secure the freight of the ship and its peaceable voyage. In my judgment,
the people will not be gratified by the mode we have pursued in bringing
them forward. There was a committee of eleven appointed; and out of the
number I think there were five who were members of the convention that
formed the constitution. Such gentlemen, having already given their
opinion with respect to the perfection of the work, may be thought
improper agents to bring forward amendments. Upon the whole, I think it
will be found that we have done nothing but lose our time, and that it
will be better to drop the subject now, and proceed to the organization
of the Government.

The question was now called for from several parts of the House; but a
desultory conversation took place before the question was put. At length
the call becoming general, it was stated from the Chair, and determined
in the negative, 10 rising in favor of it, and 41 against it.


TUESDAY, August 18.

_Amendments to the Constitution._

Mr. GERRY moved, "That such of the amendments to the constitution
proposed by the several States, as are not in substance comprised in the
report of the select committee appointed to consider amendments, be
referred to a Committee of the whole House; and that all amendments
which shall be agreed to by the committee last mentioned be included in
one report."

Mr. TUCKER remarked, that many citizens expected that the amendments
proposed by the conventions would be attended to by the House, and that
several members conceived it to be their duty to bring them forward. If
the House should decline taking them into consideration, it might tend
to destroy that harmony which had hitherto existed, and which did great
honor to their proceedings; it might affect all their future measures,
and promote such feuds as might embarrass the Government exceedingly.
The States who had proposed these amendments would feel some degree of
chagrin at having misplaced their confidence in the General Government.
Five important States have pretty plainly expressed their apprehensions
of the danger to which the rights of their citizens are exposed. Finding
these cannot be secured in the mode they had wished, they will naturally
recur to the alternative, and endeavor to obtain a federal convention;
the consequence of this may be disagreeable to the Union; party spirit
may be revived, and animosities rekindled destructive of tranquillity.
States that exert themselves to obtain a federal convention, and those
that oppose the measure, may feel so strongly the spirit of discord, as
to sever the Union asunder.

If in this conflict the advocates for a federal convention should prove
successful, the consequences may be alarming; we may lose many of the
valuable principles now established in the present constitution. If, on
the other hand, a convention should not be obtained, the consequences
resulting are equally to be dreaded; it would render the administration
of this system of government weak, if not impracticable; for no
government can be administered with energy, however energetic its
system, unless it obtains the confidence and support of the people.
Which of the two evils is the greatest would be difficult to ascertain.

It is essential to our deliberations that the harmony of the House be
preserved; by it alone we shall be enabled to perfect the organization
of the Government--a Government but in embryo, or at best but in its
infancy.

My idea relative to this constitution, whilst it was dependent upon the
assent of the several States, was, that it required amendment, and that
the proper time for amendment was previous to the ratification. My
reasons were, that I conceived it difficult, if not impossible, to
obtain essential amendments by the way pointed out in the constitution;
nor have I been mistaken in this suspicion. It will be found, I fear,
still more difficult than I apprehended; for perhaps these amendments,
should they be agreed to by two-thirds of both Houses of Congress, will
be submitted for ratification to the Legislatures of the several States,
instead of State conventions, in which case the chance is still worse.
The Legislatures of almost all the States consist of two independent,
distinct bodies; the amendments must be adopted by three-fourths of such
Legislatures; that is to say, they must meet the approbation of the
majority of each of eighteen deliberative assemblies. But,
notwithstanding all these objections to obtaining amendments after the
ratification of the constitution, it will tend to give a great degree of
satisfaction to those who are desirous of them, if this House shall take
them up, and consider them with that degree of candor and attention they
have hitherto displayed on the subjects that have come before them;
consider the amendments separately, and, after fair deliberation, either
approve or disapprove of them. By such conduct, we answer in some degree
the expectations of those citizens in the several States who have shown
so great a tenacity to the preservation of those rights and liberties
they secured to themselves by an arduous, persevering, and successful
conflict.

I have hopes that the States will be reconciled to this disappointment,
in consequence of such procedure.

A great variety of arguments might be urged in favor of the motion; but
I shall rest it here, and not trespass any further upon the patience of
the House.

Mr. _Madison_ was just going to move to refer these amendments, in order
that they might be considered in the fullest manner; but it would be
very inconvenient to have them made up into one report, or all of them
discussed at the present time.

Mr. _Vining_ had no objection to the bringing them forward in the
fullest point of view; but his objection arose from the informality
attending the introduction of the business.

The order of the House was to refer the report of the committee of
eleven to a Committee of the Whole, and therefore it was improper to
propose any thing additional.

A desultory conversation arose on this motion, when Mr. _Vining_ moved
the previous question, in which, being supported by five members, it was
put, and the question was,--Shall the main question, to agree to the
motion, be now put? The yeas and nays being demanded by one-fifth of the
members present, on this last motion, they were taken as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Burke, Coles, Floyd, Gerry, Griffin, Grout,
      Hathorn, Livermore, Page, Parker, Van Renssellaer, Sherman,
      Stone, Sturgis, Sumter, and Tucker.--16.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Baldwin, Benson, Boudinot, Brown,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Foster, Gilman,
      Goodhue, Hartley, Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Lee,
      Madison, Moore, Muhlenberg, Partridge, Schureman, Scott,
      Sedgwick, Seney, Sylvester, Sinnickson, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Vining, Wadsworth, and Wynkoop.--34.

So the motion was lost.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate had passed
the bill providing for expenses which may attend negotiations or
treaties with the Indian tribes, and the appointment of commissioners
for managing the same, with an amendment, to which they desire the
concurrence of the House.


THURSDAY, September 3.

_Permanent Seat of Government._

Mr. _Scott_, agreeably to notice given, moved the following: "That a
permanent residence ought to be fixed for the General Government of the
United States at some convenient place, as near the centre of wealth,
population, and extent of territory, as may be consistent with
convenience to the navigation of the Atlantic Ocean, and having due
regard to the particular situation of the Western country."

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, to take into
consideration the motion presented by Mr. _Scott_, on Thursday last, for
establishing the permanent residence of Congress, Mr. BOUDINOT in the
chair.

Mr. _Goodhue_.--The motion before the committee I consider too
indefinite for the House to decide upon satisfactorily; I wish,
therefore, to add something which may bring the question to a point. It
is well known that the gentlemen from the Eastward are averse to taking
up this business at this time. Not that the subject was improper for our
discussion, but that the present session is drawing to a period, and
there remains yet much important business to be transacted before the
adjournment; but their opinion being overruled by a late vote of the
House, they have since taken it into consideration, and are now ready
and willing to come to a decision. The Eastern members, with the members
from New York, have agreed to fix a place upon national principles,
without a regard to their own convenience, and have turned their minds
to the banks of the Susquehanna. This is a situation as nearly central
as could be devised, upon some of the principles contained in the
resolution. It is, however, supposed to be considerably to the southward
of the centre of the population. Motives of convenience would have led
us to fix upon the banks of the Delaware, but it was supposed it would
give more lasting content to go further south. They were, therefore,
unitedly of opinion, that the banks of the river Susquehanna should be
the place of the permanent residence of the General Government; and that
until suitable buildings could be there erected for accommodation, they
should remain in the city of New York. Agreeably to these ideas, I move
the following resolution:

      _Resolved_, That the permanent seat of the General
      Government ought to be in some convenient place on the east
      bank of the river Susquehanna, in the State of
      Pennsylvania; and that until the necessary buildings be
      erected for the purpose, the seat of Government ought to
      continue at the city of New York.

Mr. STONE said, it ought to be "Government of the United States,"
instead of General Government.

Mr. LEE.--The House are now called upon to deliberate on a great
national question; and I hope they will discuss and decide it with that
dispassionate deliberation which the magnitude of the subject requires.
I hope they will be guided in this discussion and decision, by the great
principles on which the Government is founded. I have, with a view,
therefore, of bringing them before a committee, drawn up a preamble,
which recognizes them, in the words following:

      Whereas the people of the United States have assented to
      and ratified a constitution for their Government, to
      provide for their defence against foreign danger, to secure
      their perpetual union and domestic tranquillity, and to
      promote their common interests; and all these great objects
      will be the best effected by establishing the seat of
      Government in a station as nearly central as a convenient
      water communication with the Atlantic Ocean, and an easy
      access to the Western Territory will permit; and as it will
      be satisfactory to the people of the United States, and
      give them a firm confidence in the justice and wisdom of
      their Government, to be assured that such a station is
      already in the contemplation of Congress; and that proper
      measures will be taken to ascertain it, and to provide the
      necessary accommodations, as soon as the indispensable
      arrangements for carrying into effect the constitution can
      be made, and the circumstances of the United States will
      permit;

      _Resolved_, That a place, as nearly central as a convenient
      communication with the Atlantic Ocean, and an easy access
      to the Western Territory, will permit, ought to be selected
      and established as the permanent seat of the Government of
      the United States.

I wish the principles to be recognized, that the people of the United
States may be able to judge whether, in the measures about to be
adopted, they are carried into execution by this House. If these great
principles are not observed, it will be an unhappy fulfilment of those
predictions which have been made by the opponents of the constitution;
that the general interest of America would not be consulted; that
partial measures would be pursued; and that, instead of being influenced
by a general policy, directed to the good of the whole, one part of the
Union would be depressed and trampled on, to benefit and exalt the
other. Instead of accomplishing and realizing those bright prospects
which shone upon us in the dawn of our Government, and for which our
patriots fought and bled, we shall find the whole to be a visionary
fancy. I flatter myself, that before the House decides on the question
before them, those principles will be recognized, if it is meant they
shall be regarded.

Mr. CARROL seconded Mr. LEE'S motion.

Mr. SHERMAN said, if they were both adopted, or blended together, they
would only amount to a preamble, and determine nothing. He thought the
first preamble the best, inasmuch as it stated the principles simply and
concisely.

Mr. HARTLEY.--Several places have been mentioned, and some have been
offered to Congress as proper situations for the Federal Government.
Many persons wish it seated on the banks of the Delaware, many on the
banks of the Potomac. I consider this as the middle ground between the
two extremes. It will suit the inhabitants to the north better than the
Potomac could, and the inhabitants to the south better than the Delaware
would. From this consideration, I am induced to believe, it will be a
situation more accommodating and agreeable than any other. Respecting
its communication with the Western Territory, no doubt but the
Susquehanna will facilitate that object with considerable ease and great
advantage; and as to its convenience to the navigation of the Atlantic
Ocean, the distance is nothing more than to afford safety from any
hostile attempt, while it affords a short and easy communication with
navigable rivers and large commercial towns. Nay, its intercourse may be
without land carriage, if proper measures are pursued to open the
navigation to the Delaware and Chesapeake. Perhaps, as the present
question is only intended to be on general principles, it may be
improper to be more minute than the honorable mover has been; but I
think it would be better to come to the point at once, and fix the
precise spot, if we could. With this view, I mention Wright's Ferry, on
the Susquehanna. Not, however, that the House should decide upon it,
until they have ascertained its advantages, which will, perhaps, come
more properly forward when the question on the preamble is determined.

Mr. THATCHER was against a preamble being prefixed to the resolution of
the committee, because the House had, on every occasion when preambles
were brought forward, rejected them. He thought this a prudent conduct,
because it avoided embarrassments. He observed, that it was not
unfrequently the case that the preambles occasioned more difficulty in
understanding the laws than the most intricate part of the laws
themselves; and, therefore, the committee would act wisely to reject
such trammels. He conceived, moreover, that the motion was out of order,
as it was a substitute for one before the committee.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) looked upon the motion as a preamble to a
preamble, both of which he conceived unnecessary; nay, he doubted the
truth of some of the assertions. So far from cementing the Union, by a
measure of the kind in contemplation, he rather feared it would have a
tendency to rend the Union in two; for which reason he was against
adopting it.

Mr. TUCKER wished the proposition might lie on the table, to give
gentlemen time to consider it.

Mr. LEE conceived it proper to adopt the preamble as a guide to their
decision. No gentlemen pretended to say it contained improper
principles. As to the whole being a preamble to a preamble, he did not
conceive that to be the case, because the resolution, subsequent to the
preamble, decided, that Congress should select a place for their
permanent residence. He did not conceive how gentlemen could refuse
their assent to a self-evident proposition. He thought such conduct
would give an alarm to the inhabitants of the United States; it amounted
to a declaration, that, on this important question, they would not be
governed by principles founded on rectitude and good policy.

Mr. MADISON.--I cannot, Mr. Chairman, discover why the opposition to my
colleague's preamble is so strenuous. Is it contended to be out of
order? I submit that to the decision of the Chair. Does it contain any
thing which is not true? I appeal, on that point, to the candid judgment
of the committee. Are the truths in it applicable to the great object we
are about to decide? I appeal to the justice and policy of the people of
the United States.

I flatter myself the Chair will decide with me, that the proposition is
strictly in order; that the committee will agree, that its contents are
substantial truths; and the whole world, that they are applicable to the
important point now under consideration.

It declares the principles which ought to govern our decision on this
question, and will, therefore, stand properly prefixed to the motion
offered by the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. GOODHUE.) By it we
declare our sentiments, and engage to conform to them, in fixing upon a
seat for the residence of Congress. Is there any thing improper or
unwise in this determination? An honorable gentleman near me (Mr.
TUCKER) says, that he feels himself embarrassed on this occasion; that
the propositions are a bandage over his eyes, to lead him blindfolded to
an object he cannot tell what. I must beg leave to differ from him. They
appear to me to contain those luminous truths which ought to guide him
through his embarrassment to the object which I am sure his justice and
patriotism are in pursuit of. I hope, therefore, he will agree with us
in adopting the motion, unless something more essential is offered
against it.

Mr. SHERMAN.--The resolution connected with the preamble contains a
proposition which, I think, ought not to be adopted. It selects a place,
having a convenient water-communication with the Atlantic. Now, it may
be just and expedient to fix upon a place at some distance from a
navigable river, therefore it may not agree with the intention of the
committee. As to the principles which are to guide our decisions, they
are as well expressed in the propositions of the gentleman from
Pennsylvania as in the substitute, and as free from ambiguity.

The question on Mr. LEE'S motion was taken, and determined in the
negative; yeas 17, nays 34.

Mr. TUCKER declared, that the majority for fixing upon any set of
principles whatever, could not govern his mind with regard to the fact.
If, on the whole, he did not think that place best, which the principles
adopted seemed to lead to, he certainly could not vote for it. Of what
use, then, was it to establish principles which could not govern the
conduct of the House? But the principles offered are vague, and lead to
no certain conclusion. What is the centre of wealth, population, and
territory? Is there a common centre? Territory has one centre,
population another, and wealth a third. Now, is it intended to determine
a centre from these three centres? This was not a practicable mode of
settling the place; and it was to be doubted whether the centre of
wealth ought at all to be considered. The centre of population is
variable, and a decision on that principle now, might establish the seat
of Government at a very inconvenient place to the next generation. The
centre of territory may be ascertained, but that will lead to a
situation entirely ineligible; consequently, whether these centres were
considered separately or together, they furnish no satisfactory
direction, no possible guide to the committee. The only way, then, to
come at a result yielding satisfaction, would be to consider the several
places to be proposed, according to their merits; and this would be done
by gentlemen in the course of the business. He was, therefore, against
settling any principles by vote.

Mr. MADISON.--I move to strike out the word wealth, because I do not
conceive this to be a consideration that ought to have much weight in
determining the place where the seat of Government ought to be. The two
other principles, I admit, are such as ought to have their influence;
but why wealth should is not so clear. Government is intended for the
accommodation of the citizens at large; an equal facility to communicate
with Government is due to all ranks; whether to transmit their
grievances or requests, or to receive those blessings which the
Government is intended to dispense. The rich are certainly not less able
than those who are indigent to resort to the seat of Government, or to
establish the means necessary for receiving those advantages to which,
as citizens, they are entitled.

I should rather suppose, if any distinctions are to be made, or superior
advantages to be enjoyed from the presence of the Government, that the
Government ought rather to move toward those who are the least able to
move toward it, and who stand most in need of its protection.

The question on this motion was taken, and passed in the negative; yeas
22, nays 28.

The question on Mr. SCOTT'S motion was then taken, and adopted; yeas 32,
nays 18.

Mr. GOODHUE'S motion was now taken into consideration.

Mr. LEE hoped that gentlemen would show how the banks of the Susquehanna
conformed with the principles laid down in the resolution adopted by the
House; how it communicated with the navigation of the Atlantic, and how
it was connected with the Western Territory. He hoped they would also
point out its other advantages, respecting salubrity of air and
fertility of soil. He expected all these advantages ought to be combined
in the place of the residence of the Federal Government, and every other
requisite to cement the common interest of America.

Mr. Hartley wished some gentleman had risen to satisfy the inquiries of
the honorable member, who could have given a description of the
advantages of that situation in better language than himself. But as no
gentleman had offered to undertake the subject, he thought himself bound
to make him an answer; and he trusted, in doing this, he should clearly
show that all the advantages contemplated would result from adopting the
motion. But he wished it had extended further, and selected the place
most convenient on the banks of the Susquehanna, as then the answer
would be more pointed and decisive. He had already mentioned Wright's
Ferry, and would consider that as the proper spot. Now, Wright's Ferry
lies on the east bank of the Susquehanna, about thirty-five miles from
navigable water; and, from a few miles above, is navigable to the source
of the river, at Lake Otsego, in the upper part of the State of New
York. The Tioga branch is navigable a very considerable distance up, and
is but a few miles from the Genesee, which empties into Lake Ontario.
The Juniata is navigable, and nearly connects with the Kisskemanetas,
and that with the Ohio; besides the West Branch connects with the
Alleghany River; forming a communication with the distant parts even of
Kentucky, with very little land carriage. The great body of water in
that river renders it navigable at all seasons of the year. With respect
to the settlements in the neighborhood of Wright's Ferry, he would
venture to assert it was as thickly inhabited as any part of the country
in North America. As to the quality of the soil, it was inferior to none
in the world, and though that was saying a good deal, it was not more
than he believed a fact. In short, from all the information he had
acquired, and that was not inconsiderable, he ventured to pronounce,
that in point of soil, water, and the advantages of nature, there was no
part of the country superior. And if honorable gentlemen were disposed
to pay much attention to a dish of fish, he could assure them their
table might be furnished with fine and good from the waters of the
Susquehanna; perhaps not in such variety as in this city, but the
deficiency was well made up in the abundance which liberal nature
presented them of her various products. It was in the neighborhood of
two large and populous towns, one of them the largest inland town in
America. Added to all these advantages, it possessed that of centrality,
perhaps, in a superior degree to any which could be proposed.

Mr. LEE asked the gentleman what was the distance of Wright's Ferry from
Yorktown, and whether that town, as it had once accommodated Congress,
could do it again? If a permanent seat is established, why not go to it
immediately? And why, let me ask, shall we go and fix upon the banks of
a rapid river, when we can have a more healthful situation? And here he
would inquire if the Codorus Creek, which runs through Yorktown into the
Susquehanna, was, or could be made navigable?

Mr. HARTLEY answered, that Yorktown was ten miles from the Ferry, that
it contained about five hundred houses, besides a number of large and
ornamental public buildings; that there was no doubt, but if Congress
deemed it expedient to remove immediately there, they could be
conveniently accommodated; but as gentlemen appeared to be inclined to
fix the permanent residence on the east banks of the Susquehanna, he was
very well satisfied it should be there.

Mr. MADISON.--The gentleman who brought forward this motion was candid
enough to tell us, that measures have been preconcerted out of doors,
and that the point was determined; that more than half the territory of
the United States, and nearly half its inhabitants have been disposed
of, not only without their consent, but without their knowledge. After
this, I hope the gentleman will extend his candor so much further, as to
show that the general principles now to be established are applicable to
their determination, in order that we may reconcile this fate to our own
minds, and submit to it with some degree of complacency.

I hope, if the seat of Government is to be at or near the centre of
wealth, population, and extent of territory, that gentlemen will show
that the permanent seat there proposed is near the permanent centre of
wealth, population and extent of territory, and the temporary seat, near
the temporary centre. I think we may, with good reason, call upon
gentlemen for an explanation on these points, in order that we may know
the ground on which the great question is decided, and be able to assign
to our constituents satisfactory reasons for what some of them may
consider a sacrifice of their interest, and be instrumental in
reconciling them, as far as possible, to their destiny.

Mr. GOODHUE thought the question, stated by the gentleman from Virginia,
was proper to be asked, and proper to be answered. The gentlemen from
the eastward, as he said before, were in favor of the Susquehanna; that
in contemplating the geographical centre of territory, they found the
banks of that river to be near the place. In point of population, they
considered the Susquehanna was south of that centre; but, from a spirit
of conciliation, they were inclined to go there, although the principle
and their own convenience would not lead them beyond the banks of the
Delaware. He believed the centre of population would not vary
considerably for ages yet to come, because he supposed it would
constantly incline more toward the Eastern, and manufacturing States,
than toward the Southern, and agricultural ones.

Mr. JACKSON.--I was originally opposed to the question coming forward,
and am so still. I thought the subject ought not to be touched till the
States, who have not yet acceded to the Union, might have an opportunity
of giving their voice. I agree with the gentleman from Virginia. I am
sorry that the people should learn that this matter has been
precipitated; that they should learn, that the members from New England
and New York had fixed on a seat of Government for the United States.
This is not proper language to go out to freemen. Jealousies have
already gone abroad. This language will blow the coals of sedition, and
endanger the Union. I would ask, if the other members of the Union are
not also to be consulted? Are the eastern members to dictate in this
business, and fix the seat of Government of the United States? Why not
also fix the principles of Government? Why not come forward, and demand
of us the power of Legislation, and say, give us up your privileges, and
we will govern you? If one part has the power to fix the seat of
Government, they may as well take the Government from the other. This
looks like aristocracy: not the united, but the partial voice of America
is to decide. How can gentlemen answer for this, who call themselves
representatives, on the broad basis of national interest?

I deny the fact of the territorial centrality of the place proposed.
From New York, to the nearest part of the province of Maine, it is two
hundred and fifty miles; and from New York, to the nearest part of the
upper district of Georgia, from which my colleague, General Matthews,
comes, is eleven hundred miles; and from the proposed place on the
Susquehanna, it is four hundred miles to the nearest part of Maine, and
nine hundred to the nearest part of that district; the proportion is
more than two to one. But the gentlemen should have an eye to the
population of Georgia; one of the finest countries in the world cannot
but rapidly extend her population; nothing but her being harassed by the
inroads of savages has checked her amazing increase, which must, under
the auspices of peace and safety, people her western regions. Georgia
will soon be as populous as any State in the Union. Calculations ought
not to be made on its present situation.

North Carolina is not yet in the Union, and perhaps the place may give
umbrage to her, which ought, at this moment, to be cautiously avoided.
I should, therefore, think it most advisable to postpone the decision
for this session at least. But, if we are to decide, I own, I think the
Potomac a better situation than the Susquehanna, and I hope it will be
selected for that purpose.

Mr. GOODHUE.--If gentlemen examine this subject with candor, they will
find that the banks of the Susquehanna are as near the geographical
centre as can be fixed upon. It is from the extreme of the Province of
Maine about seven hundred and sixty miles; to Savannah, in Georgia,
about seven hundred and sixty; and about seven hundred and thirty, or
seven hundred and forty, from Kentucky; so that it is rather south of
the centre of territory.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--When this subject was under discussion some time since,
it appeared to be the wish of gentlemen from the eastward, and of the
members from this State, that the question should not now be decided.
They urged several reasons why it would be improper. I thought those
reasons weighty, and was for postponing the consideration till our next
meeting. But it was answered, that the business was important; that the
citizens of the United States were uneasy and anxious; that as factions
did not now exist, it was the proper time to decide the question. What
was the representation to do? Was it not necessary for them to consult,
and fix upon a proper place?

They are, in a degree, disinterested, because they have no expectation
that the seat of Government will be fixed in any of the Eastern States.
On the other hand, there is a well-grounded expectation, that it will be
fixed either in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, or Jersey. We are
called on to determine a question in which we conceive ourselves
unbiased, and shall decide it on those principles that will reflect
honor on the House. I trust it will be found that we have fixed on those
principles, and that this resolution will be confirmed by Congress. We
do not decide for the Union, nor for the Southern States, we decide for
ourselves; and if our reasons are substantial, I trust that gentlemen
will meet us in the determination.

There are several principles which have been agreed to in the general
resolution; and I believe it will be shown, with exactness, that the
place proposed will come within these principles. The first respects
population. Is the House to consider the present, or the expected
population? The resolution has a determinate meaning; it speaks of the
population at the present period; and to calculate on this principle no
gentleman can say is unjust. The representation in this House is itself
a demonstration of it. The population of this country may be pretty
safely determined by the proportion of representatives in this House;
for it is established on this ground. I therefore believe, that the
principle of population inclines to this place, in preference to a more
southern situation.

But, in taking the principle of territory, are the House to calculate on
the uninhabited wilderness? Shall they take the Lake of the Woods on one
side, and the Missouri on the other, and find a geographical centre? If
so, to what an extent must they go? The inhabited and populated part of
the country ought chiefly to be considered. If St. Croix is taken as the
eastern limit, and St. Mary as the southern, the centre of the line will
be found to fall pretty near the Susquehanna.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--I beg leave to ask, if there really is any impropriety in
gentlemen's consulting together, who have a uniformity of interest, upon
a question which has been said to be of such infinite importance? My
colleague has barely stated that such a consultation has taken place,
and that, in consequence of it, men's minds have been induced to run in
a current. Is there any thing wrong in this? Let those, then, who are
determined not to consult, nor have any communication on such a subject,
decide for themselves. I should think myself lost to that regard I owe
to my country, and to my immediate constituents in particular, should I
abstract myself from the contemplation of the benefits that would flow
from knowing the feelings and sentiments of those with whom I am to act.
Instead of being an evidence to that aristocratic spirit which has been
mentioned, it is only a proof that men, attentive to their business, had
preferred that way, which every honest man had in view. I have
contemplated the subject with great anxiety, and though I cannot declare
that my local situation has had no influence on my mind, yet I will say
I endeavored to prevent its having any. I believe that the true
interests of the country will be best answered by taking a position
eastward and northward of the Susquehanna.

The Delaware is one extreme, the Potomac another; but when I reflect how
anxious some gentlemen are for the one, and some for the other, I am
willing to accommodate both parties, by advancing to a middle ground, to
which I hope the public mind will be reconciled. I was also influenced
in fixing this opinion, by the sentiment of the celebrated Montesquieu.
He had laid it down, that in a country partaking of northern and
southern interests, of a poor and productive soil, the centre and the
influence of Government ought to incline to that part where the former
circumstances prevailed; because necessity stimulates to industry,
produces good habits and a surplus of labor; because such parts are the
nurseries of soldiers and sailors, and the sources of that energy which
is the best security of the Government.

The Susquehanna is, in my opinion, south-west of the centre of wealth,
population, and resources of every kind. I would beg leave, gentlemen,
to suggest another idea. In my view, on the principles of population,
the Susquehanna is far beyond the centre; for I do not think it just,
on this subject, to take the constitutional computation. Will any
gentlemen pretend, that men, who are merely the subject of property or
wealth, should be taken into the estimate; that the slaves of the
country, men who have no rights to protect, (being deprived of them
all,) should be taken into view, in determining the centre of
Government? If they were considered, gentlemen might as well estimate
the black cattle of New England.

I would ask, if it is of no importance to take a position in which the
credit of the Government may procure those supplies that its necessities
might require? Will the strength and riches of the country be to the
north or to the south of the Susquehanna? Certainly to the north.

It is the opinion of all the Eastern States, that the climate of the
Potomac is not only unhealthy, but destructive to northern
constitutions. It is of importance to attend to this, for whether it be
true or false, such are the public prepossessions. Vast numbers of
Eastern adventures have gone to the Southern States, and all have found
their graves there; they have met destruction as soon as they arrived.
These accounts have been spread, and filled the Northern people with
apprehension.

Mr. VINING.--Although I must acknowledge myself a party to the bargain,
yet I had no share in making it. It is to me an unexpected bargain.
Though the interest of the State which I have the honor to represent is
involved in it, I am yet to learn of the committee, whether Congress are
to tickle the trout on the stream of the Codorus, to build their
sumptuous palaces on the banks of the Potomac, or to admire commerce
with her expanded wings, on the waters of the Delaware. I have, on this
occasion, educated my mind to impartiality, and have endeavored to
chastise its prejudices.

I confess to the House, and to the world, that, viewing this subject,
with all its circumstances, I am in favor of the Potomac. I wish the
seat of Government to be fixed there; because I think the interest, the
honor, and the greatness of this country require it. I look on it as the
centre from which those streams are to flow that are to animate and
invigorate the body politic. From thence, it appears to me, the rays of
Government will most naturally diverge to the extremities of the Union.
I declare, that I look on the Western Territory in an awful and striking
point of view. To that region the unpolished sons of earth are flowing
from all quarters; men, to whom the protection of the laws, and the
controlling force of the Government, are equally necessary. From this
great consideration, I conclude that the banks of the Potomac are the
proper station.

Mr. SENEY mentioned Peach Bottom, on the Susquehanna, about fifteen
miles above tide-water, as the proper place.

Mr. GOODHUE did not wish the particular spot pointed out, because some
inconvenience would result from such a measure; however, he was free to
declare, that his own idea was in favor of a situation near Wright's
Ferry.

Mr. HEISTER moved to insert Harrisburg in the resolution. He conceived
the spot to be more eligible than any yet mentioned; from hence there
was an uninterrupted navigation to the sources of the river, and through
this place runs the great Western road leading to Fort Pitt, and the
Western Territory. A water communication can be effected at small
expense with Philadelphia. The waters of the Swetara, a branch of the
Susquehanna, about eight miles below Harrisburg, run to the north-east,
and are navigable fifteen miles from thence to the Tulpehoken, a branch
of the Schuylkill; a canal may be cut across, of about a mile and a
half, the ground has been actually surveyed, and found practicable; this
will unite the Susquehanna and Delaware, and open a passage for the
produce of an immense tract of country. It is but little further from
Philadelphia than is Wright's Ferry; and, on many accounts, he thought
it a preferable situation for the permanent seat of Government.

Mr. MADISON meant to pay due attention to every argument that could be
urged on this important question. Facts had been asserted, the
impressions of which he wished to be erased, if they were not well
founded. It has been said, that the communication with the Western
Territory, by the Susquehanna, is more convenient than by the Potomac. I
apprehend this is not the case; and the propriety of our decision will
depend, in a great measure, on the superior advantages of one of these
two streams. It is agreed, on all hands, that we ought to have some
regard to the convenience of the Atlantic navigation. Now, to embrace
this object, a position must be taken on some navigable river; to favor
the communication with the Western Territory, its arms ought likewise to
extend themselves towards that region. I did not suppose it would have
been necessary to bring forward charts and maps, as has been done by
others, to show the committee the comparative situation of those rivers.
I flattered myself it was sufficiently understood, to enable us to
decide the question of superiority; but I am now inclined to believe,
that gentlemen have embraced an error, and I hope they are not
determined to vote under improper impressions. I venture to pledge
myself for the demonstration, that the communication with the Western
Territory, by the Potomac, is more certain and convenient than the
other. And if the question is as important as it is admitted to be,
gentlemen will not shut their ears to information; they will not
precipitate the decision; or if they regard the satisfaction of our
constituents, they will allow them to be informed of all the facts and
arguments that lead to the decision of a question in which the general
and particular interests of all parts of the Union are involved.

Mr. STONE found gentlemen had determined on a step that was not
generally liked; he wished, therefore, the committee to rise, and give
all of them an opportunity of trying to mend the bargain that had been
made; perhaps they might find, upon reflection, that they ought to
decide the question on more national principles than they seemed yet to
be governed by.

Mr. SENEY could not say how far the motion was agreeable to every part
of America; but he believed it would be acceptable to a very
considerable part of the State he had the honor to represent.

Mr. SUMTER was in favor of the committee's rising, in order to give
gentlemen time to ascertain the facts necessary to guide them to a
decision. There was one impropriety which struck him forcibly; the
resolution adopted as a principle that the seat of Government ought to
be in a convenient place for the navigation of the Atlantic Ocean. But
the situation mentioned in the resolution under consideration had no
communication whatever with the Atlantic navigation. It had been said,
that the Susquehanna afforded the most convenient communication with the
Western Territory. He believed the Hudson possessed superior advantages;
it connected with the country about the Lakes and the Ohio. From New
York to Albany was navigable; from thence to Schenectady, there was a
short portage; after ascending Schenectady, there was a short portage of
half a mile to the Mohawk; from thence, another short portage to Wood
Creek, and thence into Lake Ontario, which connects with Lake Erie; and
from thence are portages to the Wabash, Miami, Muskingum or Alleghany,
all falling into the Ohio. But the Potomac possessed advantages superior
to these; and was, both on account of communicating with the Atlantic
and Western Territory, much to be preferred to the Susquehanna. He
assured gentlemen that he was unbiased in giving a preference to the
Potomac; because, if he studied his own convenience, he should consider
New York as more eligible than either. It accommodated the Atlantic
navigation in a superior manner, and had its pretensions to a connection
with the Western waters, as he had already shown. He hoped, however,
that the subject would be debated with candor and good temper, and
decided in the way most likely to promote the general interests and
harmony of the Union.

Mr. SHERMAN was against taking up the subject so soon; but since it had
been determined against him,--gentlemen, he presumed, had endeavored to
make up their minds,--he had turned his attention to it, and was now
prepared to decide.

Mr. CLYMER knew the advantages possessed by the Susquehanna in
communicating with the Western country; they were mentioned by his
colleague; but, with the additional circumstance that the Juniata branch
afforded a convenient navigation to a road lately laid out by the State
of Pennsylvania, which connected with the Kisskaminetas, from whence was
a short voyage down the Alleghany, and shorter still down that to the
Ohio, at Pittsburg. He questioned much if the navigation by the Potomac
was so convenient.

Mr. STONE did not mean to govern his vote on this occasion by what was
said to be the sense of the citizens of Maryland; because they were, he
apprehended, divided in opinion. One part or the other would be
particularly benefited, as the seat of Government should be fixed either
on the Susquehanna or Potomac, because those rivers watered its
territory. Perhaps the majority of the present inhabitants would prefer
the Susquehanna; but as their settlements extended westward, and the
population increased, the majority would be favored by the Potomac.

Mr. SENEY did not mean to determine this question on the principle of
benefiting, exclusively, the citizens of Maryland; he considered himself
as a Representative of the Union, and should decide on the principle of
general convenience.

Mr. TUCKER hoped the committee would rise, in order to give gentlemen
time to consider the subject maturely, and to prepare themselves to come
forward and discuss, fairly and fully, the advantages and disadvantages
of the rival places. He could not believe they meant to decide a
question of this importance on the superficial discussion which had
taken place.

The question, on the committee's rising, was now put, and it passed in
the negative; for it 23, against it 27.

Mr. STONE.--We are called upon, sir, to determine a question that has
not been introduced to our notice more than two hours and a half; a
question too, as admitted on both sides, of the highest importance to
the interests and harmony of the Union. I cannot help thinking it a
hardship to be compelled so abruptly to a decision; but since it must be
the case, I shall take the liberty of suggesting a few of my thoughts,
in order to justify the vote I mean to give.

There are a variety of considerations and doubts in my mind, respecting
the two rivers that have been mentioned. These doubts are increased when
a particular place is named upon one of them; but had gentlemen told us,
that they had settled this point also, it might have precluded any sort
of debate whatever; because when an agreement had taken place, not only
as to the banks of the Susquehanna, but as to the favored spot on those
banks, we should not have entertained a single hope that we could have
changed the position. But, as gentlemen differ among themselves on this
point, perhaps they will permit us to participate with them in selecting
the place most likely to give general satisfaction. But how can they
suppose we are prepared on this head, without a general consideration of
all the places which may offer themselves along the east bank of the
river.

I am not apprised, sir, of the extent of this continent certainly,
because I never calculated it by figures, or measured it on the map; but
if there is the smallest degree of accuracy in the draft that has been
handed about, no man, who takes a view of it, in my opinion, will doubt
a single moment, whether the Susquehanna is the river, which nearly
equally divides the territory of the United States, in its extent north
and south, that separates, in equal parts, the country east and west.
The eastern part, I take it, is little, if any thing, more than half as
large as what lies west. We observe that the course of the main branch
tends more toward the Atlantic Ocean, than it does toward the Western
Territory; but even its western inclination goes only toward the lakes
Erie and Ontario, through the middle of which runs the boundary line of
the United States. How can this, then, be supposed a direct or
convenient communication with that part of the country which is usually
termed, and is in fact, the Western Territory?

In fixing the permanent residence, we ought not only to have in view the
immediate importance of the States, but also what is likely to be their
weight at a future day; not that we should consider a visionary
importance, or chimerical expectation, but such a one as can be
demonstrated with as much certainty as effects follow their causes. I
apprehend the increase of population to the eastward is merely
conditional; there is nothing to invite people to settle in the northern
parts of this continent, in preference to the southern; even if they
were settled there, every principle which encourages population would
operate to induce them to emigrate to the southern and western parts. We
know the northern climate is severe, the winters long, and summers
short, and that the soil is less fertile. Were we not assuredly
acquainted that this was the case on the continent of America, we should
be led to the same conclusion, by reasoning from our knowledge of the
other parts of the globe. Men multiply in proportion to the means of
support, and this is more abundant in a mild than a severe climate.
Hence, I infer, that the climate, and means of subsistence, will ever
operate as a stimulus to promote the population of the Southern, in
preference to the Northern States. This doctrine is daily exemplified.
If we advert to the situation of that part of the Western country,
called Kentucky, and compare its increase of population since the war,
with any part of the Eastern States, we shall find men multiplied there
beyond any thing known in America; and if we consider its natural
advantages, we shall conclude it will be an important part of the Union.
The river which has been mentioned by the southern gentlemen is, as far
as I am acquainted, extremely well calculated to furnish Government with
the key of that country; and a river, I believe, richer in its exports
than any I have contemplated on the face of the earth.

A call was now made to order, and Mr. STONE sat down. A desultory
conversation took place on the point of order. It was contended, that
the question was on the insertion of Harrisburg, in the proposition
offered by Mr. GOODHUE; whereas Mr. STONE was speaking to the main
question.

Messrs. CARROLL, LEE and MADISON insisted that Mr. STONE was in order,
inasmuch as Mr. HEISTER'S motion necessarily involved the main question,
and was inseparable from it.

But it was decided by the Chair to be out of order; whereupon the
question was taken, without further debate, on inserting Harrisburg, and
it was determined in the negative.

The main question being now before the committee,

Mr. STONE proceeded. I feel myself unhappy to be obliged to address
gentlemen, who are not disposed to attend to any thing I may say; but as
gentlemen have chosen this time for discussing the subject, they will
not think it improper in me to persist in detailing my ideas. When I was
interrupted by the call to order, I was about to show the importance of
the Potomac to the United States. Its waters afford a practical, safe,
and short communication with the Ohio and Mississippi, beyond comparison
preferable to the Susquehanna. If it is intended that the people settled
upon those great rivers should communicate with the General Government,
after ascending the former they must proceed a vast distance northward,
up the Alleghany, against a rapid stream, before they can reach the
Susquehanna. I am inclined to believe a land-carriage would be better
than such a laborious round-about water communication. Now the Potomac,
as I am informed, connects with the Youghiogheny, a river less rapid
than the Alleghany, and is itself communicable with the Atlantic. In
this case, the Potomac will be the highway for such vast quantities of
wealth as to give every superiority; and, however we may determine at
this day, it will not be long before the seat of Government must be
carried thither. The vast population that is extending itself through
the Western country requires that the Government should take a position
favorable to its convenience; because new settlements at a vast distance
from the old are more exposed to temptation than others; but in the
present case, it is proper for us to guard against the operation of a
foreign country, which seems to be forming settlements near our
frontiers to rival ours. It may be the more necessary, inasmuch as we
ought to keep the boundary line distinct between the Spaniards and
savages, as I fear, do what we will, we run the greatest risk of
entering into a quarrel with them; for, it is well known, that
emigrants, in forming new settlements, are not much concerned about an
ascertainment of jurisdiction; they are generally bold, enterprising
spirits, who feel some aversion to strict government; it is therefore
necessary that the Government should approach toward them, and be placed
in such situation as would give it the greatest possible influence over
them. Beside their contiguity to a rival nation, they are independent in
their condition; they want hardly any thing this country can give; their
soil is rich and fertile; their exports will furnish them with every
foreign article from the southward which they can require. Their
interests are more strongly connected with the Southern States than the
Southern States are with the Eastern. The advantages of this Government
are felt, in a peculiar manner, by the mercantile and commercial States;
the agricultural States have not the same strong reasons for maintaining
the Union. Hence we may apprehend that the Western country may be
inclined, as it advances its importance, to drop off. The Susquehanna is
no bond by which to hold them; its direction is more northern than
westerly. Upon the whole, I am inclined to believe that it would not
give general satisfaction at the present day; and the inequality would
daily grow more striking, until we should be compelled to remove again
to where there was a probability of finding a centre of territory as
well as population. I have thrown out these ideas in a crude manner, but
gentlemen have forced me to it by their urgency to take the question; I
could wish to be allowed time for further discussion, and I believe it
would be no ill sacrifice of a day, if we were to put off the
determination till to-morrow.

Mr. LEE observed, that since gentlemen would not admit of a moment's
delay; since they seemed to declare, that they had settled the matter
without giving an opportunity for full discussion; since the House were
hurried to a decision on a point that involved the welfare of the
community, duty to his country, duty to the better half of the territory
of the United States, called on him to come forward with another
proposition.

He then moved to strike out the words "east bank of the Susquehanna,"
and to insert a clause to this effect; that, whereas the banks of the
Potomac united all the aforesaid advantages, with fertility of soil,
salubrity of climate, &c. Resolved, That the permanent seat of
Government ought to be fixed somewhere on the banks of the said river.

He flattered himself that these two rival places would be considered
with an attention that would do honor to the House; that their several
advantages would be fully compared, and that such a decision would
result as would be for the lasting benefit of the United States.

He then stated at large the comparative advantages of the Potomac; its
great and increasing improvements; the extent of its navigation; its
direct communication with the Western country, and its easy
communication with the Eastern and Southern States.

The House, he said, were now to determine whether regard was to be had
to the people of the Western Territory, to the greater portion of the
territory of the Union; in point of climate, it was extremely
salubrious; in fertility of soil, it was exceeded by no country on
earth. Thither would emigrants flock from all quarters.

He asked whether this Government was intended for a temporary or a
lasting one? Whether it was to be a fleeting vision, or to continue for
ages? He hoped the result would proclaim that the Government was
calculated for perpetuity; and that the common interests of the country
had been consulted. If that was done, the Government would be removed to
the Potomac; if not, we should stop short of it; and what would be the
consequence? He said he was averse to sound alarms, or introduce terrors
into the House; but if they were well founded, he thought it his duty.
It was well known with what difficulty the constitution was adopted by
the State of Virginia. It was then said, that there would be
confederacies of the States east of Pennsylvania, which would destroy
the Southern States; that they would unite their councils in discussing
questions relative to their particular interests, and the Southern
States would be disregarded. To these suspicions, it was answered, no!
It was contended that the magnanimous policy, arising from mutual
interests and common dangers would unite all the States, and make them
pursue objects of general good. But if it should be found that there
were such confederacies as were predicted, that the Northern States did
consult their partial interests, and form combinations to support them,
without regarding their Southern brethren, they would be alarmed, and
the faith of all south of the Potomac would be shaken. It would be shown
to them, that what had been predicted by the enemies to the constitution
had come to pass; that the Northern States had not waited till the
Government was organized before they sacrificed the Southern people to
their own interests.

Let the seat of Government be fixed where it may, Virginia had not
solicited Congress to place the seat of Government in her State. She
only contended, that the interests of the Southern and Western country
should be consulted; and he declared that these interests would be
sacrificed, if Congress fixed upon any place but the Potomac. The
greater part of Virginia was distant from that river. Many parts were
not nearer than New Jersey. She wished not to have the seat on the
Potomac but for the general good; it was not for the benefit of that
State, but for the benefit of the Union.

Mr. LAWRENCE said, it was improper and unnecessary to hold out terrors
to the fancy of members. The true way to convince them, was to address
their understandings. He was certain there was no dangerous confederacy
which the gentleman had talked of; and believed the conduct of the
Northern States would bear the strictest scrutiny; that, if probed to
the bottom, it would be found fair and candid. He remembered in the
debate upon the Tonnage bill, a gentleman from Virginia observed, that
could the moderate and equal policy of that day's proceedings have been
foreseen in the convention of Virginia, many objections that were there
produced against the constitution would have been thereby obviated.

He trusted, that, in conducting the business before them, gentlemen
could find no cause, eventually, to entertain different sentiments from
what he then delivered.

Mr. MADISON.--I acknowledge, that, on a former day, I made the
observation alluded to with singular complacency. I said, I had found a
moderation and liberality prevailing here, which I sincerely believed,
if foreseen in the convention of Virginia, would have obviated a very
powerful objection to the adoption of the Federal constitution. But,
give me leave now to say, that if a Prophet had risen in that body, and
brought the declarations and proceedings of this day into view, that I
as firmly believe Virginia might not have been a part of the Union at
this moment.

A motion was now made for the committee to rise, and several gentlemen
said, they wished it to prevail, in order that an opportunity might be
afforded for a fuller discussion.

Mr. SEDGWICK hoped the committee would not rise. Will it be contended,
that the majority shall not govern; and shall the minority, because they
cannot carry their points, accuse the House of want of candor? Are we to
be told, that an important State would not have joined the Union, had
they known what would have been the proceedings of this House. Gentlemen
have brought forward this business themselves; they have precipitated
the House into it. We prayed, we supplicated for time; and now
gentlemen, from some causes not explained, wish to postpone the matter,
in order to have time to deliberate. He believed that a deliberation of
six weeks would not alter a single opinion, and therefore it was not
proper to consume the public time uselessly.

Mr. MADISON.--When I alluded to the proceedings of this day, I
contemplated the manner in which the business was conducted; and though
I acknowledge that a majority ought to govern, yet they have no
authority to deprive the minority of a constitutional right; they have
no authority to debar us the right of free debate. An important and
interesting question being under consideration, we ought to have time
allowed for its discussion. Facts have been stated on one side, and
members ought to be indulged on the other with an opportunity of
collecting and ascertaining other facts. We have a right to bring
forward all the arguments which we think can, and ought to have an
influence on the decision. It is unusual, on a partial discussion, even
of questions of inferior magnitude, to decide in the course of a single
day. How, then, can gentlemen reconcile their conduct of this day to the
liberality they have hitherto shown? This manner of proceeding would
mark a genius in this body which will contradict the expectations of its
warmest friends. I hope nothing will be fixed by a hasty determination.
I said before, and repeat it again, that I wish to make some
observations on what has been advanced, for which at present there is
not time. But, if there was, I do not wish to address a determined and
silent majority. No, sir, if this be the temper of to-day, let me
appeal to a more favorable temper to-morrow. If gentlemen refuse this
appeal, I must submit; but I will, to the last moment, assert my right,
and remonstrate against a precipitate decision.

Mr. BURKE observed, that the Northern States had had a fortnight to
manage this matter, and would not now allow the Southern States a day.
What was the conduct of gentlemen? A league has been formed between the
Northern States and Pennsylvania.

Mr. FITZSIMONS interrupted Mr. BURKE, and denied the assertion, as it
respected Pennsylvania.

Mr. BURKE then proceeded, and said that the Eastern members had combined
with some other States, he could not positively say which, but the first
information that was furnished was given this morning, every gentleman
had heard it as well as himself, but that had nothing to do with his
object; he wanted time to get information; and called on gentlemen, for
the honor of the House, to comply with this request.

Mr. WADSWORTH said, he rejoiced to hear the gentlemen calling for time,
and crying out fair play. He remembered when he entreated the gentleman
who spoke last, and others, not to precipitate themselves into this
situation; his entreaties had been of no avail. Knowing that the pride
of a majority was one of those things to which he had to submit, he,
with all the New England members, solicited for time. With respect to
bargaining, he believed that it would reflect no honor on either side of
the House. He said he must either give his vote now, or submit to more
bargaining. He was willing that the whole business of bargaining should
be exposed; he would not excuse himself; he did not dare to go to the
Potomac. He feared that the whole of New England would consider the
Union as destroyed. Since the matter had been so prematurely brought on,
since members had been forced, and, as it were, dragged by the throat to
this business, he hoped it was now finished.

The question was now put, on the rising of the committee, and carried:
Whereupon the committee rose and reported progress, and then the House
adjourned.


THURSDAY, September 4.

_Seat of Government._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
Resolution for establishing a permanent Seat of Government, Mr. BOUDINOT
in the chair.

Mr. STONE wished to hear the sentiments of the gentleman who first
brought forward this business: he expected to derive some advantage from
that gentleman's knowledge of the country, which, he presumed, was
pretty accurate, as it was derived from actual observation.

After waiting some time,

Mr. STONE repeated his request, under an apprehension that he had not
the honor of being heard by the worthy gentleman.

Mr. GOODHUE rose and said, he had given his sentiments yesterday, but,
if the gentleman desired it, he was ready to repeat them.

Mr. STONE said, he addressed his request to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania.

Mr. SCOTT.--I understood the gentleman so, and I have no objection to
giving my sentiments on the occasion. The resolution I laid on the table
has been honored with the vote of a majority of the committee. It
contains such principles as, I believe, ought to govern in the
settlement of the grand question: they have declared, that they mean to
be governed by these principles, and this is a declaration to the world
that their hearts are good. What may follow in consequence of that
resolution, cannot impeach the motive, it can only prove, that our heads
are uninformed; an error of the head is pardonable, but an error of the
heart is not easily forgiven.

Whether the spot which has been moved is the right spot or not, seems to
be the matter under inquiry. I had prepared myself with documents, which
I should have produced had they been needed, to prove, that the State I
have the honor to represent involves, within its limits the centre of
wealth and population of the United States, taking the sea-coast for a
guide; for all that has been said of the importance of the Western
country, has not prevailed on me to imagine, that all the vacant
territory should be taken into view, the same as the settled and
cultivated parts; my resolution had no other idea but that the Atlantic
States should consent to go as near that territory as their convenience
would allow. I am convinced that going further than would suit the
Atlantic States would injure the Western country itself.

Mr. MADISON said, if this delay should not have produced any alteration
in the sentiments of the gentlemen, it will at least soften that hard
decision which seems to threaten the friends of the Potomac. He hoped
that all would concur in the great principle on which they ought to
conduct and decide this business; an equal attention to the rights of
the community. No government, he said, not even the most despotic,
could, beyond a certain point, violate that idea of justice and equal
right which prevailed in the mind of the community. In Republican
Governments, justice and equality form the basis of the system; and
perhaps the structure can rest on no other that the wisdom of man can
devise. In a Federal Republic, give me leave to say, it is even more
necessary and proper, that a sacred regard should be paid to these
considerations. For beyond the sense of the community at large, which
has its full agency in such a system, no such Government can act with
safety. The Federal ingredient involves local distinctions, which not
only produce local jealousies, but give, at the same time, a greater
local capacity to support, and insist upon equitable demands. In a
Confederacy of States, in which the people operate, in one respect as
citizens, and in another as forming political communities, the local
Governments will ever possess a keener sense and capacity, to take
advantage of those powers, on which the protection of local rights
depends. If these great rights be the basis of republics, and if there
be a double necessity of attending to them in a Federal Republic, it is
further to be considered, that there is no one right, of which the
people can judge with more ease and certainty, and of which they will
judge with more jealousy, than of the establishment of the permanent
seat of Government; and I am persuaded, that however often this subject
may be discussed in the representative body, or however the attention of
the committee may be drawn to it, the observations I have made will be
more and more verified. We see the operation of this sentiment fully
exemplified in what has taken place in the several States. In every
instance where the seat of Government has been placed in an uncentral
position, we have seen the people struggling to place it where it ought
to be. In some instances they have not yet succeeded, but I believe they
will succeed in all. In many they have actually gained their point.

With respect, however, to the Federal Government, there is one
consideration that shows, in a peculiar manner, the necessity and policy
of paying a strict attention to this principle. One of the greatest
objections which has been made by the opponents of the system, which has
been allowed most weight by its friends, is the extent of the United
States. It has been asserted by some, and almost feared by others, that
within so great a space, no free Government can exist. I hope and trust,
that the opinion is erroneous; but, at the same time, I acknowledge it
to have a certain degree of force, and it is incumbent on those who wish
well to the Union, to diminish this inconvenience as much as possible.
The way to diminish it, is to place the Government in that spot which
will be least removed from every part of the empire. Carry it to a
remote position, and it will be equivalent to an extension of our
limits; and if our limits are already extended so far as warrants, in
any degree, the apprehension before mentioned, we ought to take care not
to extend them further.

The seat of Government is of great importance, if you consider the
diffusion of wealth that proceeds from this source. I presume that the
expenditures which will take place, where the Government will be
established by those who are immediately concerned in its
administration, and by others who may resort to it, will not be less
than half a million dollars a year. It is to be regretted that those who
may be most convenient to the centre should enjoy this advantage to a
higher degree than others; but the inequality is an evil imposed by
necessity; we diminish it as we place the source from which those
emanations of wealth are to proceed as near the centre as possible.

If we consider, sir, the effects of Legislative power on the aggregate
community, we must feel equal inducements to look for the centre, in
order to find the proper seat of Government. Those who are most adjacent
to the seat of Legislation will always possess advantages over others.
An earlier knowledge of the laws, a greater influence in enacting them,
better opportunities for anticipating them, and a thousand other
circumstances, will give a superiority to those who are thus situated.
If it were possible to promulgate our laws, by some instantaneous
operation, it would be of less consequence in that point of view where
the Government might be placed; but if, on the contrary, time is
necessary for this purpose, we ought, as far as possible, to put every
part of the community on a level.

If we consider the influence of the Government in its Executive
Department, there is no less reason to conclude that it ought to be
placed in the centre of the Union. It ought to be in a situation to
command information relative to every part of the Union, to watch every
conjuncture, to seize every circumstance that can be improved. The
Executive eye ought to be placed where it can best see the dangers which
may threaten, and the Executive arm, whence it may be extended most
effectually to the protection of every part. Perhaps it is peculiarly
necessary, that, in looking for the position, we should keep our eye as
much as possible towards our Western borders; for a long time dangers
will be most apt to assail that quarter of the Union.

He was sure, that if justice required us to take any one position in
preference to another, we had every inducement, both of interest and of
prudence to fix on the Potomac, as most satisfactory to our Western
brethren. It is impossible to reflect a moment on the possible severance
of that branch of the Union without seeing the mischiefs which such an
event must create. The area of the United States divided into two equal
parts, will leave, perhaps, one half on the west side of the Alleghany
Mountains. From the fertility of the soil, the fineness of the climate,
and every thing that can favor a growing population, we may suppose the
settlement will go on with every degree of rapidity which our
imagination can conceive.

If the calculation be just, that we double in twenty-five years, we
shall speedily behold an astonishing mass of people on the Western
waters. Whether this great mass will form a permanent part of the
confederacy, or whether it will be separated into an alien, a jealous
and a hostile people, may depend on the system of measures that is
shortly to be taken. The difference, he observed, between considering
them in the light of fellow-citizens, bound to us by a common affection,
obeying common laws, pursuing a common good, and considering them in the
other light, presents one of the most interesting questions that can
occupy an American mind. Instead of peace and friendship, we shall have
rivalship and enmity; instead of being a great people, invulnerable on
all sides, and without the necessity of those military establishments
which other nations require, we shall be driven into the same expensive
and dangerous means of defence. We shall be obliged to lay burthens on
the people, to support establishments which, sooner or later, may prove
fatal to their liberties. It is incumbent on us, if we wish to act the
part of magnanimous legislators, or patriotic citizens, to consider
well, when we are about to take a step of such vast importance, that it
be directed by the views he had described; we must consider what is
just, what is equal, and what is satisfactory.

On a candid view of the two rivers, he flattered himself that the seat
which would most correspond with the public interest would be found on
the banks of the Potomac. It was proper that we should have some regard
to the centre of territory; if that was to have weight, he begged leave
to say, that there was no comparison between the two rivers. He defied
any gentleman to cast his eye in the most cursory manner over a map and
say that the Potomac is not much nearer this centre than any part of the
Susquehanna. If we measure from the banks of the Potomac to the most
eastern parts of the United States, it is less distant than to the most
southern. If we measure this great area diagonally, the Potomac will
have the advantage. If you draw a line perpendicularly to the direction
of the Atlantic coast, we shall find that it will run more equally
through the Potomac than through any part of the Union; or, if there be
any difference between one side and the other, there will be a greater
space on the south-west than on the north-east. All the maps of the
United States show the truth of this. From the Atlantic coast to that
line which separates the British possessions from the United States, the
average distance is not more than one hundred and fifty miles. If you
take the average breadth of the other great division of the United
States, it will be found to be six, seven, and eight hundred miles.

From this view of the subject, which is not easy to describe by words,
but which will strike every eye that looks on a map, I am sure that if
the Potomac is not the geographical centre, it is because the
Susquehanna is less so.

Mr. CLYMER begged to set the gentleman right; his colleague, if he
understood him, had only related the communication by the north-western
branches, but there was a communication by the Juniata, a branch of the
Susquehanna, about fifteen miles above Harrisburg, tending westerly, and
navigable eighty miles, from whence to the Connemagh was a portage, with
a road actually laid out of about forty miles, hence you descend the
Kisskaminetas to the Alleghany, and from thence to Pittsburg is thirty
miles.

Mr. SCOTT knew this communication pretty well, but we who live in that
country never take it into consideration, as the waters are too small to
afford a certainty of communication, but even here the portage was
greater than between the Potomac and Youghiogheny.

Mr. CLYMER said, with respect to the navigation of the Juniata, that it
was in evidence before the House of Assembly of Pennsylvania, when they
were considering the means of uniting that navigation with the western
waters, that produce to the amount of fourteen hundred bushels had been
brought down it to Middletown.

Mr. MADISON proceeded and said, he wished every fact to be ascertained
that could throw any light upon the subject. Taking the Susquehanna, as
it was practicable for navigation, it would be found, that through that
route of communication, Fort Pitt would be four or five hundred miles
from the proposed seat on its banks, and that the distance by land was
not less than two hundred and fifty miles; whereas, through the Potomac
the distance from the proposed spot on its banks to Fort Pitt was not
calculated at more than two hundred and fifty miles, and he believed the
distance by land would be found not to exceed one hundred and sixty or
one hundred and seventy miles.

Whether we measure the distance by land or water, then, the result is in
favor of the Potomac. If we consider the progress already made in
opening this great channel, its title becomes still stronger. Let me
add, that it has been found, on accurate research, that the waters
communicating with the Ohio are not more than two or three miles distant
from the sources of the Potomac. This is a fact of peculiar importance.

The gentleman from Massachusetts yesterday raised great objections
against the Potomac, because it was, as he supposed, subject to
periodical maladies, from which the other river was free. I am not
authorized, from personal experience, or very particular information, to
draw a comparison between them; but there are some general facts that
may serve to show, that if there is any difference, it is more likely to
be in favor of the Potomac than of the Susquehanna. The position
contemplated on the banks of the former is considerably further from
tide water than the place proposed on the latter. On this account,
therefore, we have little reason to suppose that the Potomac is more
unhealthy. If we regard their comparative situations, westwardly, the
spot on the Potomac is almost as much further to the west, as it is
distant from the proposed spot on the Susquehanna; and he well knew
that, generally speaking, as were tire towards the Western and upper
country, we are generally removed from the causes of those diseases to
which southern situations are exposed. As the two places are moreover in
the same latitude, the objection advanced, with respect to that point,
cannot apply to one more than the other. It is only their western or
eastern position, their remoteness from, or their proximity to the lower
country, and to fresh or stagnant waters, that can possibly affect the
question. It is not because we advance so much to the south that we
advance to the centre, it is because we go more to the west. I do not
know that there is a difference of more than a degree and five or six
minutes between the latitude of New York and the place proposed on the
Potomac.

Mr. AMES never intended that this question should be carried through the
committee by the strength of a silent majority; he had confidence in the
weight of the arguments to be urged in favor of the Susquehanna, and he
was willing to put the decision of the question on that ground. He would
now come forward, and give the reasons of his opinion, especially as
gentlemen had entered fully into the reasons which guided their own to a
different conclusion. He did not conceive it would be necessary for him,
coming from the part of the United States from which he did, to disclaim
the local views and narrow prejudices with which the subject teemed. He
had feared, when the question was first brought forward, that the minds
of gentlemen would be highly fermented, indeed so much, that he almost
despaired of coming to a proper decision, nor did he think these
apprehensions were illusive, if he judged from what had already taken
place. He had observed that some gentlemen, whose discernments were
clear and who were generally guided by the straight line of rectitude,
had been most surprisingly warped on the present occasion; he was
fearful that their wishes had misled them from a due regard of the real
object of their pursuit, viz: the public interest and convenience. He
was sensible, that he himself was liable to some improper impressions;
but he trusted he did not feel them in that degree which he thought he
saw in others.

He was willing to be led by the great principles which other gentlemen
had laid down as the rule of their decision; but he thought they would
lead to a different conclusion from what had been drawn from them; he
admitted that a central situation is to be taken, and in considering
this centre, the centre of a sea-coast line ought to be regarded,
because it is more conveniently accessible, has more wealth, and more
people than an equal area of inland country. Being more liable to
invasion, government should be near to protect it. It is the interest of
the back country to have the Government near the sea, to inspect and
encourage trade, by which their abundant produce will find an export.
And lastly, he said, the contingency of the separation of the Western
country was a reason for preferring the sea-coast.

He proceeded next to say, there will not be any contest where this
centre of the sea-coast line is to be found: it falls between the rivers
Potomac and Susquehanna. It will be found that there are good reasons
why we should rather move east than south.

If the sea-coast line is to be preferred, it will follow that the back
lands, west of the Ohio, which the gentleman from Virginia has so often
taken into his calculations, will be excluded; they are not peopled;
they do not affect the sea-coast line; and that line has already been
voted to be the proper one by the committee. As it is true that the
sea-coast has more wealth and more people than the inland country in
proportion to the extent, it is equally true that the eastern half of
the sea-coast has more of both than the southern. If we reckon Maryland,
which will be as well accommodated by the Susquehanna as by the Potomac,
we shall find the population of the eastern part nearly two millions,
and that of the southern only one million, and the population of free
inhabitants still less in favor of the latter.

But, sir, instead of seeking a centre geographically, we should consider
the centre of common convenience. The place is the proper one where the
greatest number of persons will be best accommodated. I will endeavor to
show that that will be on the Susquehanna. Is the zeal of gentlemen, who
oppose this design, influenced by their despair of removing the seat of
Government afterwards? I believe the people of America will not complain
of it. If fixed there, I think it will be found convenient and will
remain there.

The Susquehanna is the centre of the common convenience. At this moment
there are more wealth and more inhabitants east than south of it. But
the future population of America is calculated, and it is pretended that
the balance of population is receding from the East. Surely the present
inhabitants may be allowed principally to consult their own convenience.
West of the Ohio is an almost immeasurable wilderness; when it will be
settled, or how it will be possible to govern it, is past calculation.
Gentlemen will pardon me if I think it perfectly romantic to make this
decision depend upon that circumstance. Probably it will be near a
century before those people will be considerable; if we fix the national
seat in the proper place now, it would give me no inquietude to know
that a hundred years hence it may be liable to be removed; but, in fact,
the principle which is assumed by the committee, and which I have
attempted to justify, of taking the centre of the sea-coast line, will,
even in the event of that vast tract being settled, furnish abundant
reasons for its remaining on the Susquehanna. I will not recapitulate
those reasons. We must take some principle to guide us; and though some
inequalities will appear, yet let gentlemen remember, that in so vast a
country great inconveniences will attend the communications of the
people with Government, be the seat of it where it may; and by taking
the centre of the sea-coast line there will be less than any other
principle. It will be found best to accommodate the greatest number; or,
in other words, to be the centre of common convenience: indeed, this is
not denied to be true at this moment; but the case is said to be
changing. On the one hand, I think it is Utopian to calculate upon the
population of the United States a century hence; and, on the other hand,
I admit that it is impolitic at least, perhaps unjust, to confine our
attention to the present population; a quarter of a century may be a
medium. Will gentlemen deny that trade and manufactures will accumulate
people in the Eastern States, in proportion of five to three, compared
with the Southern? The disproportion will, doubtless, continue to be
much greater than I have calculated. It is actually greater at present;
for the climate and negro slavery are acknowledged to be unfavorable to
population: so that husbandry, as well as commerce and manufactures,
will give more people in the Eastern than in the Southern States. The
very circumstance that gentlemen found their reasonings upon is pretty
strongly against their calculations. They tell us of the vast quantities
of good land still unsettled in their States; that will produce a thin
population; for the old lands will not be crowded, so long as new ones
are to be had.

Mr. CARROLL begged leave to give the Committee some information
respecting the distance from tide-water to Fort Cumberland; from the
tide-water to the Little Falls was three miles, to the Great Falls six
more, from thence to the Seneca Falls was also six more, and from thence
to Old Town one hundred and seventeen; which last place was fifteen
miles from Fort Cumberland, making in all one hundred and forty-five
miles, instead of two hundred, as stated by the gentleman.

Mr. AMES imagined his statement to be nearly right, and he found Mr.
JEFFERSON stated in his Notes, that the Falls of the Potomac were
fifteen miles in extent, and a navigation extremely difficult to be
made.

Mr. CARROLL said, it was not near that distance; in the fifteen miles
there were three falls: the Seneca, the Great and Little Falls, but they
occupy but a small part of the fifteen miles; he could certainly form
some judgment of a place which he might say was almost at his door, and
did not expect that Mr. JEFFERSON'S Notes would have been adduced as an
authority to contradict information he had given in his place. As to the
difficulty of the navigation, he had to observe that many of the
obstacles were already so far removed as to render the transportation
down to the Great Falls practicable; that there the canal was nearly
finished, and ready to sink the lock-seats and insert the frames, so
that in a little time there was a probability that no impediment
whatever would obstruct the descent of produce to the tide-water.

The question, on Mr. Lee's motion for striking out Susquehanna, and
inserting Potomac, was put and lost; for it 21, against it 29.

Mr. MADISON then moved, to add, after "Susquehanna" the words "or
Potomac;" this would furnish an opportunity to examine and compare the
two situations. It was so favorable to a discovery of the truth, that he
did not doubt but gentlemen who were desirous of grounding their
decision upon a full understanding of the subject would agree to the
motion.

Mr. BOUDINOT seconded this motion, and supported it, by observing the
necessity there appeared to be, of obtaining a more accurate knowledge
of the two rivers, as gentlemen seemed to differ materially with
respect to the matter of fact.

Mr. SHERMAN contended, upon the principles adopted yesterday by the
committee, that they could not think of going to the Potomac; he said,
that taking the population, even allowing the slaves in the Southern
States, there was the greatest weight of population north-east of the
Susquehanna; but upon the ratio of representation, at a member for forty
thousand inhabitants, there were but one million two hundred thousand
south of Pennsylvania, one million four hundred thousand north,
including Pennsylvania; but if the calculation was made from the
Potomac, the South would contain nine hundred and sixty thousand
inhabitants, and the North one million six hundred and eighty thousand.
Now, he would ask, if gentlemen could expect that the northern people
would incline to go so far south? He apprehended they would not.

The question being taken on inserting "or Potomac," it passed in the
negative.

On motion of Mr. PAGE, the committee rose and reported progress, and
then the House adjourned.


SATURDAY, September 5.

_Permanent Seat of Government._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on
establishing the permanent residence of Congress; when

Mr. FITZSIMONS presented the following resolution:

      _Resolved_, As the opinion of this committee, that the
      President of the United States be authorized to appoint
      ---- commissioners, to examine, and report to him, the most
      eligible situation on the east bank of the Susquehanna, for
      the permanent seat of Government of the United States. That
      the said commissioners be authorized, by and with the
      advice of the President, to purchase such quantity of lands
      as may be thought necessary, and to erect thereon, within
      ---- years, suitable buildings for the accommodation of the
      Congress, and of the officers of the United States. That
      the Secretary of the Treasury, together with the
      commissioners so to be appointed, be authorized to borrow a
      sum not exceeding ---- dollars, to be paid in ---- years,
      with interest, at the rate of ---- per cent. per annum,
      payable out of the duties on impost and tonnage, to be
      applied to the purchase of the land, and the erection of
      the buildings aforesaid. And that a bill ought to pass, in
      the present session, in conformity with the aforegoing
      resolutions.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) doubted the propriety of the resolution,
because he conceived the declaration in the constitution required a
cession of territory as well as jurisdiction. If he was joined in this
sentiment by the committee, he would move that the President be
empowered to appoint commissioners to examine and report a proper place
on the banks of the Susquehanna for a federal town, and that, whenever
the State of Pennsylvania shall cede to the United States a certain
district or territory, not exceeding ten miles square, Congress would
accept thereof for the above purpose.

Mr. LAWRENCE would inquire for what purpose the cession, mentioned in
the constitution, was required? It was, in the words of that instrument,
to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever; now, did this
consequence involve in it a territorial possession? It certainly did
not. It involved nothing more than the power of making laws independent
of the State jurisdiction. The gentleman might have carried his idea
further, for as the cession is to be made by particular States, it seems
to infer that two States, at least, should be concerned in the cession;
but would objections, from such forced constructions, have any weight in
the judgment of the committee? He trusted they would not. He supposed it
more rational to attend to the plain literal meaning of the constitution
than to engage in the discussion of the refined speculations of
ingenious men.

Mr. VINING observed, that Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia, had offered
to cede territory, as well as jurisdiction, and there would be a great
impropriety in expending the federal treasure, in purchasing the soil,
when they might have it without expense.

Mr. AMES endeavored to show that such a cession, as was contemplated in
the constitution, might be made by one State to another, without giving
a property to a foot of land, by comparing it with the cession of
Silesia to Prussia, where not a single acre of soil was conveyed, but of
jurisdiction to the whole province; so, when territory changes its
government, by being the sacrifice of a treaty of peace. He supposed
that Congress were to purchase the soil necessary to erect buildings for
the accommodation of the Government, and was satisfied the cession might
be made subsequent to their election of a particular spot.

Mr. SENEY.--The gentleman from Delaware has said, that Maryland proposed
a cession of soil; but I believe, sir, there is not such a word as soil
mentioned in the law.

Mr. CARROLL agreed with his colleague, and supposed that a cession of
soil could not have been contemplated, because the State of Maryland had
offered any part of the State, not excepting the town of Baltimore. He
believed if Congress were disposed to fix in that town, it would be
agreeable to the State; but he did not imagine they would agree to give
the General Government a property to the whole town, and the surrounding
country. The other parts of the State had never contemplated making the
inhabitants of Baltimore a compensation for such an immense property.

Mr. GOODHUE believed, if the House had agreed to go to the Potomac,
there would have been none of these constitutional difficulties stated.
It was well known, he said, that the gentlemen from the eastward had no
desire to take up the subject; but those from the southward were
sanguine in their expectations that they should get the Government to
the Potomac; and were, therefore, for pressing the business, and not
allowing it to be postponed as was contended for on the other hand.

Mr. MADISON said, the business was not brought on by their original
motion, though they gave it their support. It was true, that a
proposition for postponement was made, but what was the extent of that
postponement? Till December or January next. Was there any reason to
suppose that those gentlemen, who were, at this day, opposed to the
Potomac, would give in to such a change of opinion by that time, as to
induce us to agree to their proposition. We saw no reason to expect such
a change. And, as in fact, we find a predetermined majority ready to
dispose of us, the sooner we know our destiny the better; for it can be
of little consequence, if we are to be disposed of, whether we are
disposed of in September or December.

Mr. WADSWORTH.--The reiteration of being disposed of by bargaining,
induces me to rise and make one remark. It is a notorious fact to the
members within these walls, that the New England members, to a man, were
opposed to a decision at present; and that they were disposed to
accommodate the Southern States. They refused all bargaining, till they
were assured there was a bargaining set on foot to carry them to the
Potomac; why, then, are we reproached with this? Whatever bargaining
there has been, we were the last to come into it; we never thought of
it, till we were told that we were a property, and should be disposed
of, unless we took care of ourselves. I hope, as we have gone so far, we
shall settle the subject in dispute, by granting the money and erecting
the necessary buildings.

Mr. JACKSON denied being concerned in any bargaining whatever, and
defied any gentleman to say he knew any thing of one, till he heard it
mentioned on this floor; he was determined to keep himself disengaged,
and to vote according as his judgment should lead him, after hearing the
subject coolly and thoroughly discussed.

Mr. MADISON hoped, if he travelled a little out of order, he should be
justified, after what had taken place; but he could not withhold this
public declaration of his wish, that every thing that had passed on the
subject alluded to by the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. WADSWORTH,)
were to be fully understood, and were reduced to writing. Every thing he
knew of it he was willing, on his part, to put into that form; and he
was well persuaded that it would be found, on examination, that the
opposition of the Southern gentlemen was of a defensive nature, and that
they had not listened to a proposition, until they had reason to think
it necessary to prevent a sudden and improper decision of this very
important question.

Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, begged gentlemen to remember, that all the
Southern members had not been in favor of bringing forward the business
at the present session; he had opposed it as well as some others.

Mr. LEE conceived it to be his duty to present once more the preamble,
which had been rejected in committee. He flattered himself, after the
discussion which had taken place, that gentlemen were prepared to decide
on liberal and national principles, and therefore they would adopt those
he presented.

Mr. SENEY approved of the Susquehanna in preference to the Potomac, on
every principle which had been brought into view, as proper to guide the
House in deciding the present question. He treated the alarm which
gentlemen apprehended would be given by fixing on the Susquehanna as
merely ideal, and existing nowhere but in the imagination of gentlemen;
so far from exciting jealousy, or disturbing the public mind, he
contemplated it as tending to allay uneasiness, and to give general
satisfaction.

On motion, the House now adjourned.


MONDAY, September 7.

_Permanent seat of Government._

The House resumed the consideration of the resolutions reported by the
Committee of the Whole for establishing the permanent residence of
Congress.

Whereupon, the first resolution was agreed to, and the second, to wit:

      _Resolved_, That the permanent seat of the Government of
      the United States ought to be at some convenient place on
      the east bank of the river Susquehanna, in the State of
      Pennsylvania; and that, until the necessary buildings be
      erected for the purpose, the seat of Government ought to
      continue at the city of New York,

Being under consideration,

Mr. LEE withdrew his proposition offered yesterday, and moved to amend
the said resolution, by striking out the words "East Bank of the river
Susquehanna, in the State of Pennsylvania," and inserting, in lieu
thereof; the "North Bank of the river Potomac, in the State of
Maryland."

And, on the question that the House do agree to the said amendment, the
yeas and nays were demanded, and are

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Brown, Burke, Carroll,
      Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Jackson, Lee, Madison,
      Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Smith, (of South Carolina,)
      Stone, Sumter, Tucker and Vining--21.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Benson, Boudinot, Cadwalader, Clymer,
      Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout,
      Hartley, Hathorn, Lawrence, Livermore, P. Muhlenberg,
      Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman,
      Sylvester, Sinnickson, Smith, (of Maryland,) Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--29.

So it was determined in the negative.

Mr. VINING said, it now became his duty, after having sacrificed a
prejudice, if he had one, by giving his vote for the Potomac, to bring
before the House the humble claim of Delaware. He apprehended that her
claim to centrality, as it respected wealth and population, was
superior to that of the Susquehanna; and that, if a sea-coast line was
to be a criterion, she was near the centre of territory. He supposed
that this was the line upon which the Committee was to decide for the
present. It was not supposed necessary, at this time, to take into
consideration the vacant and extensive Western Territory, or why refuse
the Potomac, which offered itself under the greatest advantages of an
easy intercourse with that quarter? Add to the reasons he had mentioned,
that the United States would consult their interest by fixing on the
Delaware, as they would not incur the heavy expense of purchasing
territory, and erecting magnificent palaces and hotels for the
Government, and he thought gentlemen would not hesitate to agree with
him.

The place he meant to offer was possessed of eminent superiority, as to
salubrity of air and fertility of soil; it also united the advantages of
the Atlantic and inland navigation; inasmuch as, by cutting a canal from
the waters of the Chesapeake to the Delaware, a communication would be
opened from Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland, to New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and the midland counties of New York. The spot that he
proposed for their acceptance was Wilmington in the State of Delaware;
round which they might have a district for exclusive legislation, if it
was thought proper to accept it. Under these impressions, he would frame
his motions in such a way, as to enable Congress, when they did adjourn,
to adjourn to meet at that borough. It was made in this form: To strike
out the word "permanent," and all the remainder of the clause, after the
words "ought to be at," and to insert in lieu of the last "the borough
of Wilmington, in the State of Delaware."

On the question that the House do agree to the said amendment, the yeas
and nays were demanded, and are

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Burke, Cadwalader,
      Coles, Contee, Griffin, Jackson, Lee, Madison, Matthews,
      Moore, Page, Parker, Sinnickson, Smith, (of South
      Carolina,) Sumter, and Vining--19.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Brown, Carroll, Clymer,
      Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gale, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue,
      Grout, Hartley, Hathorn, Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, P.
      Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Scott, Seney,
      Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of Maryland,) Stone, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Tucker, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--32.

Mr. BOUDINOT remarked that the peculiar situation in which he had been
placed, by having the chair of the Committee, prevented him from giving
his sentiments on the subject then; he therefore hoped to be indulged
with stating the claim of the Delaware to the honor of the Federal City.
When a question of such great magnitude, and which involved the
interests of the Union, was to be decided, he thought he could be
neither doing justice to the United States at large, nor his immediate
constituents, were he to neglect to call their attention to what the
former Congress had done in favor of the Delaware. He was surprised that
gentlemen, who contended for the accommodation of their constituents,
should be led so far astray from pursuing that object, as to pass far
beyond the centre of wealth and population, as well as territory; or, if
they did not pass the centre of territory, they went to a place, maugre
all that had been said, devoid of those advantages which ought to attend
the Federal residence. The want of communication with the Atlantic, the
difficulty of navigating its waters, from the innumerable rocks, falls
and shoals with which it abounds, which, from actual observation, he was
induced to believe were insuperable obstructions to a connection with
the Western waters, or, if they could be surmounted, it would be at such
cost of money and labor, as the United States were not in a condition to
expend, at a time when the widows and orphans were starving for want of
the pittance due to them by the Government. The sterility of the soil,
and the unhealthiness of a situation on the banks of a river which was
subject to rise twenty feet and more, and overflow its banks, leaving
behind vast quantities of stagnant water, whence proceeded noxious
exhalations, the cause of a long catalogue of diseases, were altogether,
in his mind, such objections to the place, that he could never imagine a
majority of the House could consent to it. He further observed, that the
Government would be secluded from the world, and the channels of
information; there were few inhabitants, unless it was in the
neighborhood of York or Lancaster.

But, beside all these considerations, there was this further, that there
was an existing resolution of Congress for erecting the necessary
buildings for their accommodation on the banks of the Delaware and
Potomac, and an absolute grant of money for the purpose of defraying the
expense. Now, as these had each of them strong pretensions, he was
willing to have them considered and examined by commissioners sent on
the ground. For the sake of accommodation, he would, therefore, move to
amend the resolution, by striking out the words "east bank of the river
Susquehanna, in the State of Pennsylvania," and inserting in lieu
thereof the words "Potomac, Susquehanna, or Delaware."

On the question that the House do agree to the said amendment, it passed
in the negative; the yeas and nays being required, are as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Coles, Contee, Griffin, Jackson, Lee,
      Madison, Matthews, Moore, Parker, Page, Sinnickson, Smith,
      (of South Carolina,) Stone, Sumter, Tucker and Vining--23.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gale, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley,
      Hathorn, Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, P. Muhlenberg,
      Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman,
      Sylvester, Smith, (of Maryland,) Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Wadsworth and Wynkoop--28.

Mr. BOUDINOT then moved to amend the resolution by striking out the
words "east bank of the river Susquehanna, in the State of
Pennsylvania," and inserting in lieu thereof, the words, "banks of
either side of the river Delaware, not more than eight miles above or
below the lower falls of Delaware."

On this question, the yeas and nays were demanded, and are:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Boudinot, Cadwalader, Gerry and
      Sinnickson--4.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Baldwin, Benson, Bland, Brown, Burke,
      Carroll, Clymer, Coles, Contee, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster,
      Gale, Gilman, Griffin, Grout, Goodhue, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Jackson, Lawrence, Lee, Livermore, Madison,
      Matthews, Moore, Muhlenberg, Page, Parker, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Sumter,
      Thatcher, Trumbull, Tucker, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--46.

Mr. STONE then moved to amend the resolution, by striking out the words
"east bank," and inserting in lieu thereof the word "banks;" and on the
question, that the House do agree to the said amendment, the yeas and
nays being demanded, were as follow:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Jackson,
      Lee, Madison, Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Seney,
      Sinnickson, Smith, (of Maryland,) Smith, (of South
      Carolina,) Stone, Sumter, Tucker, and Vining--26.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Sherman, Sylvester, Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Wadsworth and Wynkoop--25.

So it passed in the affirmative.

A motion was then made and seconded, further to amend the said
resolution, by inserting, after the word "Pennsylvania," the words "or
Maryland," and, on the question the House do agree to the said
amendment, it passed in the negative; and the yeas and nays being
demanded, were as follow:

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Jackson,
      Lee, Madison, Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Sinnickson,
      Smith, (of M.) Smith, (of S. C.) Stone, Sumter, Tucker and
      Vining--25.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, P. Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--26.

Mr. LEE expected the question would be divided on the resolution, as it
contained two distinct objects, the permanent and temporary residence.

Mr. PAGE suggested the propriety of striking out the latter part of the
clause, relating to New York, and to confine the resolution merely to
the avowed object, namely, the permanent residence.

The question was taken on striking out, and it passed in the negative,
24 for, 27 against it.

Mr. VINING then moved to strike out the words "City of New York," and
insert, in lieu thereof, "Borough of Wilmington, in the State of
Delaware;" and on the question to agree to the said amendment, the yeas
and nays being demanded, were as follow:

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Jackson,
      Lee, Madison, Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Sinnickson,
      Sumter and Vining--21.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Tucker, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--30.

So it passed in the negative.

Mr. PARKER moved to strike out "New York" and insert "Philadelphia."

Mr. LEE said the city of New York possessed every convenience and
accommodation; he was strongly impressed in favor of the inhabitants,
their urbanity and industry did honor to America, and nothing could
induce him to vote for striking out the words, but a sense of duty. He
flattered himself that a regard would now be paid to the great
principles of centrality, which Philadelphia possessed in a great
degree; the conveniences and accommodations to be found in that city
were equal, if not superior, to what New York presented; her public
buildings and institutions were, he believed, at their command; the
inhabitants were industrious, temperate, and frugal; in short, every
principle which operated in favor of the Susquehanna, as a permanent
residence, applied with equal or more force in favor of Philadelphia as
the temporary seat of Government.

Mr. SHERMAN hoped the House were disposed to make as few removes as
possible, and that as the buildings for their accommodation might be in
readiness in two or three years at the permanent residence, they would
be disposed to continue in New York till that time.

On the question, that the House do agree to the said amendment, the yeas
and nays being demanded, are as follows:

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Boudinot, Brown, Burke, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Heister, Jackson,
      Lee, Madison, Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Sinnickson,
      Stone, Sumter and Vining--22.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Bland, Clymer, Fitzsimons,
      Floyd, Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley,
      Hathorn, Lawrence, Livermore, P. Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Tucker, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--29.

The main question being put, the second resolution, as amended, was
agreed to by the House, in the words following, to wit:

      "_Resolved_, That the permanent seat of the Government of
      the United States ought to be at some convenient place on
      the banks of the river Susquehanna, in the State of
      Pennsylvania; and that, until the necessary buildings be
      erected for the purpose, the seat of Government ought to
      continue in the city of New York."

The third resolution, in the words following, to wit:

      "_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
      authorized to appoint three commissioners, to examine and
      report to him the most eligible situation on the banks of
      the Susquehanna, in the State of Pennsylvania, for the
      permanent seat of the Government of the United States; that
      the said Commissioners be authorized under the direction of
      the President, to purchase such quantity of land as may be
      thought necessary, and to erect thereon, within four years,
      suitable buildings for the accommodation of the Congress,
      and of the other officers of the United States; that the
      Secretary of the Treasury, together with the Commissioners
      so to be appointed, be authorized to borrow a sum, not
      exceeding one hundred thousand dollars, to be repaid within
      twenty years, with interest, not exceeding the rate of five
      per cent. per annum, out of the duties on impost and
      tonnage, to be applied to the purchase of the land, and the
      erection of buildings aforesaid; and that a bill ought to
      pass, in the present session, in conformity with the
      foregoing resolutions."

A motion was made by Mr. GALE, to amend the same, by inserting after the
word "aforesaid" the following proviso, viz:

"Provided, nevertheless, that, previous to any such purchase, or
erection of buildings as aforesaid, the Legislatures of the States of
Pennsylvania and Maryland make such provision for removing all
obstructions to the navigation of the said river, between the seat of
the Federal Government and the mouth thereof, as may be satisfactory to
the President of the United States."

The ayes and nays being demanded, it passed in the negative.

      AYES.--Messrs. Baldwin, Boudinot, Brown, Burke, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Jackson, Lee, Madison,
      Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Seney, Sinnickson, Smith,
      (of Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Sumter,
      Tucker and Vining--24.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gale, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Sherman, Sylvester, Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Wadsworth and Wynkoop--25.

And then the main question being put, Do the House agree to the said
third resolution, as reported by the Committee of the whole House?

The ayes and nays being demanded, it passed in the affirmative.

      AYES.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gale, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Lawrence, Livermore, Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van
      Rensselaer, Scott, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Stone, Thatcher, Trumbull, Wadsworth and
      Wynkoop--28.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Boudinot, Brown, Burke, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gerry, Jackson, Lee, Madison,
      Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Sinnickson, Smith, (of South
      Carolina,) Sumter, Tucker and Vining--21.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in, pursuant to the foregoing
resolutions, and that Messrs. AMES, LAWRENCE, and CLYMER, do prepare and
bring in the same.


MONDAY, September 21.

_Seat of Government._

The House proceeded to consider the bill to establish the seat of
Government of the United States, which lay on the table, with the
amendments, as reported by the Committee of the whole House.

Mr. SMITH proposed to confine the choice of a situation on the banks of
the Susquehanna, between Checkiselungo creek and the mouth of the river.
He was seconded by Mr. SENEY.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped the committee would limit it as near the spot
contemplated as possible.

Mr. HEISTER said, he moved, the other day, for a particular spot on the
river, which he conceived entitled to a preference; if the proposed
motion obtained, that place would be excluded, and he should hesitate
respecting his vote upon the bill.

Mr. SENEY by no means wished to embarrass the committee; if the motion
proposed would, any how, have that effect, he should withdraw his
second.

Mr. MADISON felt himself compelled to move for striking out that part of
the bill which provided that the temporary residence of Congress should
continue at New York; as he conceived it irreconcilable with the spirit
of the constitution. If it was not from viewing it in this light, he
should have given the bill no further opposition; and now he did not
mean to enter on the merits of the main question.

From the constitution, it appeared that the concurrence of the two
Houses of Congress was sufficient to enable them to adjourn from one
place to another; nay, the legal consent of the President was, in some
degree, prescribed in the 7th section of article 1st, where it is
declared, that every order, resolution, or vote, to which the
concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary,
(except on a question of adjournment,) shall be presented to the
President of the United States, and approved by him, before the same
shall take effect. Any attempt, therefore, to adjourn by law, is a
violation of that part of the constitution which gives the power,
exclusively, to the two branches of the Legislature. If gentlemen saw it
in the same light, he flattered himself they would reject that part of
the bill; and, however little they valued the reflection that this city
was not central, which had been so often urged, they would be guided by
arguments springing from a superior source.

He would proceed to state the reasons which induced him to be of this
opinion; it is declared in the constitution, that neither House, during
the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of the other,
adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in
which the two Houses shall be sitting; from hence he inferred, that the
two Houses, by a concurrence, could adjourn for more than three days,
and to any other place which they thought proper; by the other clause he
had mentioned, the Executive power is restrained from any interference
with the Legislative on this subject; hence, he concluded, it would be
dangerous to attempt to give to the President a power which the
constitution expressly denied him.


TUESDAY, September 22.

_Seat of Government._

The engrossed bill to establish the seat of Government of the United
States was read a third time; and the question was, Shall this bill
pass?

Mr. CARROLL said, he felt himself under peculiar circumstances on the
decision of this important question. The House had determined that the
permanent seat of the Government of the United States should be on the
Susquehanna, in Pennsylvania, and not in Maryland on the Potomac. It was
his opinion that the last would have been most conducive to the interest
of the Union; the voice of the majority of this House is against it. The
Susquehanna, said he, being the next object most likely to attain what I
have laid down as the rule of my conduct on this occasion, and, at the
same time, must be agreeable to the wishes of a great part of my
constituents, I felt myself under an obligation to vote for the
Susquehanna, upon obtaining the clause which made it obligatory upon the
States of Maryland and Pennsylvania to concur in opening the navigation
of that river; and nothing would restrain me from giving my assent to
the bill, but that clause which requires the concurrence of the
President respecting the seat of Government, until Congress meet at
their permanent seat. To this clause I have strong constitutional
objections; they were yesterday fully stated to this House by other
gentlemen.

I have endeavored to remove this conviction from my mind, in order to
give my assent to the bill; but as I am under the sacred obligation of
an oath to support the constitution, as I cannot efface the conviction
from my mind that it is contrary to the constitution, and as we could
not succeed in striking out the clause, I feel myself under the
disagreeable necessity of giving my dissent to the bill.

The yeas and nays, on passing the bill, being required by one-fifth of
the members present, were as follow:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Baldwin, Benson, Clymer, Contee,
      Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gale, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout,
      Hartley, Hathorn, Jackson, Lawrence, Leonard, Livermore,
      Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Scott, Seney,
      Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of Maryland,) Stone, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Wadsworth and Wynkoop--31.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bland, Boudinot, Burke, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Coles, Lee, Madison, Matthews, Moore, Parker,
      Schureman, Smith, (of South Carolina,) Sumter, Tucker,
      Vining, and White--17.

The bill having passed, was sent to the Senate for their concurrence.


SATURDAY, September 26.

_Seat of Government._

A message from the Senate was received, informing the House that they
had passed the bill for establishing the seat of Government of the
United States, with an amendment, which the House immediately took into
consideration. The amendment went to strike out all that related to the
river Susquehanna, both as to fixing the seat of Government there, and
removing the obstructions to the navigation; and to insert, in lieu
thereof, "a district of ten miles square, bounded on the south by a line
running parallel at one mile's distance from the city of Philadelphia,
on the east side of the river of Delaware, and extending northerly and
westerly, so as to include Germantown."

Mr. BLAND thought the bill was so materially changed as to warrant the
House to postpone its consideration. The principles upon which the
Senate had proceeded, he believed, had not yet been discussed in the
House, and the short time which now remained of the session forbade the
attempt.

Mr. PAGE seconded this motion.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) hoped that gentlemen would agree to let
the bill lie on the table, and not to be driven into a measure which
they considered injurious to the public interest. He trusted they would
not be influenced to adopt this bill, by the Senate's keeping the
appropriation bill as a hostage for it, which he understood to be the
case.

Mr. FITZSIMONS was sorry to hear a thing of that kind insinuated against
so respectable a body. He trusted the gentleman had been misinformed;
but should be glad to know his authority.

Mr. PARTRIDGE declared that a knowledge of this fact would have
considerable influence on his conduct; therefore, he was desirous of
knowing to what an extent it was a certainty.

Mr. BLAND would not charge the Senate with retaining the appropriation
bill as a hostage; but he thought it of more importance than the bill
they had now sent down, and wished it had been first acted upon.

Mr. SPEAKER informed the House that the appropriation bill was sent only
yesterday to the Senate.

Mr. STONE did not suspect the Senate of the conduct which had been
intimated; but, nevertheless, he was in favor of the postponement.

Mr. LEE remarked that the great principles which this House had adopted,
on full debate, were now thrown out of view; they had nothing to do with
the amendment which the Senate had made. He could not, after this
circumstance, bring himself to believe that the House would agree to
the alteration, without discussing the other principles upon which it
must be founded. And here the approaching termination of the session,
and the quantity of unfinished business, presented to the mind a strong
objection; either it could not be done at all, or done to great
disadvantage. Beside, if it is laid over to the next session, the voice
of the people may be better understood on this important question; when
that was fully and fairly expressed, he flattered himself with a
harmonious determination, to which all parties would submit without a
single murmur.

Mr. SHERMAN thought the amendment of the Senate founded in wisdom, and
upon true principles; the House had now nothing else before them.
Indeed, they had just been spending an hour or two upon a very
uninteresting subject respecting printers; he therefore trusted they
would proceed to consider the amendment fully, and come in a proper time
to a decision upon it.

Mr. WHITE considered the amendment of the Senate as totally changing the
tenor of the bill, and therefore it was like introducing a new subject.
Indeed, in all the long arguments which the question had drawn out, he
believed this place had never been mentioned. The gentleman last up,
said there was no business before the House at present: but he would
ask, if a business had never yet been before them, whether a member
would be permitted to bring it forward at this late hour. He might be
told, that the act of the Senate carried greater weight in it than the
motion of a member. But he would place against that weight, the weight
of the vote of this House, which on a former day agreed to fix the seat
of Government on the banks of the Susquehanna; so that the question may
be supposed to stand on independent ground.

But there was a collateral observation he would make. If Germantown was
the proper place for the permanent residence of Congress, it was so near
Philadelphia as to prove that that city would be the proper place for
the temporary residence, and of course they ought to move there
immediately, and order the next session to be held there; but both these
questions were of too much moment to be fixed by a hasty vote of the
House.

Mr. JACKSON had given his assent to the bill as it passed the House,
after a fair opposition: he was satisfied his fellow-citizens would
submit to what appeared to be the voice of their country; though they
would have preferred the Potomac on account of its centrality and
contiguity to the Western Territory, yet he acceded to the Susquehanna;
but this was no reason he should vote for Germantown. Who are those that
say to us, Germantown is the most proper spot that can be selected? They
are the representatives of the State sovereignties; where the large and
small States are equally represented, the voice of the majority of the
people is lost in the inequality of the political branch of the
Legislature. He could not but think an alteration in the sentiment of
the House, on this ground, would excite serious alarm in the minds of
the people; to avoid which consequence, he should agree to the
postponement.

Mr. GERRY urged, as a reason for postponement, that North Carolina and
Rhode Island were out of the Union at present; and that, as there was a
flattering expectation that at least one of those States would adopt the
constitution by the next session, it would be extremely desirable to
have their voice in determining this great question.

Mr. MADISON.--However different our sentiments, with respect to the
place most proper for the seat of the Federal Government, I presume we
shall all agree that a right decision is of great importance; and that a
satisfactory decision is of equal moment to the happiness and
tranquillity of the Union: that even the manner and circumstances under
which such decision may take place, are worthy of serious consideration.

Now, sir, the amendment proposed by the Senate, not only deserves the
name of a new bill, but it proceeds on principles different from those
which served for the basis of the bill sent up to them from this House:
hence I presume, sir, it is not only necessary to examine the merits of
the proposition, but to enter into a full and minute investigation of
those principles upon which it is founded: the proposition is new and in
some degree opposed to what has heretofore prevailed: the public mind
has not yet been called to the consideration of it; nay, I believe it
never yet has been contemplated by the inhabitants of any one State: the
eye of America should be indulged with an opportunity of viewing it
before it be made their fixed abode. All the other places which have
been mentioned as candidates for the seat of Government, on this
occasion, have at different times, and in different forms, been held up
to the public attention; two of them had not only employed the
deliberation, but had obtained the favorable decision of the old
Congress; now after all this, to take up and adopt in a moment, a rival
place, never before contemplated, is risking an improper and a
dissatisfactory decision.

Mr. STONE reminded the House of the majority there was in selecting the
Susquehanna, which he conceived to be the second best spot in the United
States; and how much greater that majority would have been than 31 to
17, if no other question had been involved in the bill: he could hardly
suppose such a change of sentiment would take place without argument, as
was necessary in order to get the Senate's amendment adopted, which, he
understood, was carried by a small majority indeed.

Mr. WHITE would just add one observation, which was respecting the
enormous price of land in the vicinity of Philadelphia; and how
imprudent it would be for Congress to subject themselves to an
exorbitant demand of this nature, by fixing upon the precise spot where
this Federal town should be.

The question was now taken on postponing the consideration of the
amendment proposed by the Senate, until the next session; and the yeas
and nays being called, are:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Brown, Burke, Carroll,
      Coles, Contee, Gale, Gerry, Griffin, Jackson, Lee, Madison,
      Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Schureman, Seney, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Sumter,
      Tucker and White--25.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Cadwalader, Clymer,
      Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley,
      Hathorn, Heister, Lawrence, Leonard, Livermore, Muhlenberg,
      Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Scott, Sherman, Sylvester,
      Sinnickson, Thatcher, Trumbull, Vining, Wadsworth, and
      Wynkoop--29.

So it was determined in the negative.


MONDAY, September 28.

_Seat of Government._

Mr. SHERMAN--In our deliberations on this occasion, we should have an
eye to the general accommodation of the Union, and the best way of
defraying the expense. The place fixed upon by the Senate, he presumed,
was known to the members generally; hence they were able to judge of its
eligibility at the first view; it certainly possessed some advantages
over the other situation; and he believed it was as central, if not more
so than the Susquehanna, as it respected the present inhabitants; the
air, the soil, in that neighborhood, were quite as agreeable as the
other. But there was an access by water, from every part of the United
States, which furnished a very great convenience; but beside this, those
who came from the Southern States, had generally an inland navigation,
with a short distance to come by land from the head of the Elk; so the
citizens of the Eastern States, in like manner, would be accommodated by
coming through the Sound and crossing to Amboy, on which route they
would have but about 70 miles land carriage; a distance nearly equal
with the other. He admitted that Germantown was not quite so near to the
Western Territory as the Susquehanna was; but he contemplated a very
distant day before it would be settled, and much longer before the
inhabitants would have frequent occasion of travelling to the seat of
Government. Added to the advantages he had mentioned, there were good
buildings, and convenience for arsenals and ship-yards, with abundance
of artificers on the spot; these considerations, taken together, induced
him to think it best to concur with the Senate.

Mr. SMITH thought the honorable gentleman rather inconsistent in his
argument to-day. If he recollected right, the gentleman had formerly
urged in favor of the Susquehanna, that it was not accessible by vessels
from sea; and now he recommends this quality as an advantage in favor of
the Delaware. The gentleman admits that this position is not quite so
near the Western Territory as the one chosen by the House; but then he
thinks no inconvenience will arise, inasmuch as it will be some years
before it is peopled: but how does this comport with the principle laid
down by an almost unanimous vote of the House? At the beginning of this
business, we declare that a due regard should be had to the Western
Territory; he now tells us, as an argument in favor of the Senate's
amendment, that we should have no regard to it at all. He thinks the
change made in the manner of obtaining the money favorable; but what
advantage will accrue to the United States from Pennsylvania's granting
100,000 dollars, when Congress will have to purchase the land on which
they are to sit down? Land in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, he had
been told, was worth 40 or 50 pounds an acre. The 100,000 dollars, given
by Pennsylvania, would not go far in a purchase at this rate. He thought
the Government would have a better bargain in buying cheap lands on the
Susquehanna; or perhaps they might have been got there for nothing. He
thought this alteration unfavorable to the Public Treasury, which could
illy supply such a demand upon it.

Mr. MADISON contended that the amendment proposed by the Senate was a
departure from every principle adopted by the House; but he would not
trouble them with a recapitulation of arguments, which he feared would
be unavailing; he wished, however, that the House would provide against
one inconvenience, which was, to prevent the district in Pennsylvania,
chosen by Congress, from being deprived for a time of the benefit of the
laws. This, he apprehended, would be the case, unless Congress made
provision for the operation of the laws of Pennsylvania, in the act by
which they accepted of the cession of that State; for the State
relinquished the right of legislation from the moment that Congress
accepted of the district. The propriety of this proposition was so
apparent, that he had not a doubt but the House would consent to it. He
then moved the following proviso: "And provided, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to affect the operation of the laws of
Pennsylvania, within the district ceded and accepted, until Congress
shall otherwise provide by law."

Mr. LIVERMORE objected to this motion; because he supposed there was no
necessity for it.

The question was then taken, do the House agree to the amendment? and
decided in the affirmative. The yeas and nays being demanded, are as
follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Cadwalader, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd,
      Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn,
      Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Leonard, Livermore,
      Muhlenberg, Partridge, Van Rensselaer, Schureman, Scott,
      Sherman, Sylvester, Sinnickson, Thatcher, Trumbull, Vining,
      Wadsworth and Wynkoop--31.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Boudinot, Brown, Burke,
      Carroll, Coles, Contee, Gale, Griffin, Jackson, Lee,
      Madison, Matthews, Moore, Page, Parker, Seney, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Sumter,
      Tucker, and White--24.

And here the bill was dropped for the session.


TUESDAY, September 29.

The two following messages were received from the President:


                                  UNITED STATES, Sept. 29, 1789.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      His Most Christian Majesty, by a letter dated the 7th of
      June last, addressed to the President and members of the
      General Congress, of the United States of North America,
      announces the much lamented death of his son the Dauphin.
      The generous conduct of the French monarch and nation
      towards this country renders every event that may affect
      his or their prosperity interesting to us; and I shall take
      care to assure him of the sensibility with which the United
      States participate in the affliction which a loss so much
      to be regretted must have occasioned both to him and them.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.


                                  UNITED STATES, Sept. 29, 1789.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      Having yesterday been informed, by a joint committee of
      both Houses of Congress, that they had agreed to a recess,
      to commence this day, and to continue until the first
      Monday in January next, I take the earliest opportunity of
      acquainting you that, considering how long and laborious
      this session has been, and the reasons which, I presume,
      have produced this resolution, it does not appear to me
      expedient to recommend any measures to their consideration
      at present.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

On motion of Mr. GERRY, it was ordered, that it shall be the duty of the
Secretary of the Senate and Clerk of the House, at the end of each
session, to send a printed copy of the Journals thereof, respectively,
to the Supreme Executive, and each branch of the Legislature, of every
State.

And then it was ordered that a message be sent to the Senate, to inform
them that this House having completed the business before them, are now
about to proceed to close the present session, by an adjournment on
their part, agreeably to the order of the 26th instant; and that the
Clerk of this House do go with the said message.

The Clerk accordingly went with the said message, and being returned,

The Speaker adjourned the House until the first Monday in January next.




FIRST CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF NEW YORK, JANUARY 4, 1790.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, January 4, 1790.

The following members of the Senate assembled:

From New Hampshire, JOHN LANGDON and PAINE WINGATE.

From Massachusetts, CALEB STRONG and TRISTRAM DALTON.

From Connecticut, WILLIAM S. JOHNSON.

From New York, RUFUS KING and PHILIP SCHUYLER.

From South Carolina, RALPH IZARD and PIERCE BUTLER.

From Georgia, WILLIAM FEW.

A quorum of members not being present, they adjourned till to-morrow.


TUESDAY, January 5.

JOHN HENRY, from Maryland, in addition to the members assembled
yesterday, attended; but not being a quorum, they adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, January 6.

WILLIAM MACLAY, from Pennsylvania, attended; a quorum of the members of
the Senate were present, and the Secretary was directed to inform the
House of Representatives that a quorum of the Senate have assembled, and
are ready to proceed to business.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. STRONG and IZARD be a committee on the part of
the Senate, with such committee as the House of Representatives may
appoint on their part, to inform the President of the United States that
a quorum of the two Houses is assembled, and will be ready in the Senate
Chamber, at such time as the President may appoint, to receive any
communications he may be pleased to make.


THURSDAY, January 7.

OLIVER ELLSWORTH, of Connecticut, and WILLIAM PATERSON, from New Jersey,
attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they have resolved that two Chaplains, of different denominations, be
appointed to Congress for the present session, one by each House, who
shall interchange weekly.

Mr. STRONG, on behalf of the joint committee, reported to the Senate,
that they had waited on the President of the United States, agreeably to
the order of both Houses, and that he informed the committee that he
would meet the two Houses in the Senate Chamber to-morrow at 11 o'clock.


FRIDAY, January 8.

_Ordered_, That the House of Representatives be informed that the Senate
are ready to meet them in the Senate Chamber, to receive any
communication the President of the United States may be pleased to make
to the two Houses of Congress; and that the usual seats will be assigned
them.

The House of Representatives having accordingly taken their seats, the
President of the United States came into the Senate Chamber, and
addressed both Houses of Congress as followeth:

      _Fellow-Citizens of the Senate, and House of
      Representatives:_

      I embrace with great satisfaction the opportunity which now
      presents itself of congratulating you on the present
      favorable prospects of our public affairs. The recent
      accession of the important State of North Carolina to the
      constitution of the United States, (of which official
      information has been received;) the rising credit and
      respectability of our country; the general and increasing
      good-will towards the Government of the Union; and the
      concord, peace, and plenty with which we are blessed, are
      circumstances auspicious in an eminent degree to our
      national prosperity.

      In resuming your consultations for the general good, you
      cannot but derive encouragement from the reflection that
      the measures of the last session have been as satisfactory
      to your constituents, as the novelty and difficulty of the
      work allowed you to hope. Still further to realize their
      expectations, and to secure the blessings which a gracious
      Providence has placed within our reach, will, in the course
      of the present important session, call for the cool and
      deliberate exertion of your patriotism, firmness, and
      wisdom.

      Among the many interesting objects which will engage your
      attention, that of providing for the common defence will
      merit particular regard. To be prepared for war, is one of
      the most effectual means of preserving peace.

      A free people ought not only to be armed, but disciplined;
      to which end, a uniform and well-digested plan is
      requisite: and their safety and interest require that they
      should promote such manufactures as tend to render them
      independent of others for essential, particularly military
      supplies.

      The proper establishment of the troops which may be deemed
      indispensable will be entitled to mature consideration. In
      the arrangements which may be made respecting it, it will
      be of importance to conciliate the comfortable support of
      the officers and soldiers with a due regard to economy.

      There was reason to hope that the pacific measures adopted
      with regard to certain hostile tribes of Indians, would
      have relieved the inhabitants of our Southern and Western
      frontiers from their depredations; but you will perceive,
      from the information contained in the papers which I shall
      direct to be laid before you, (comprehending a
      communication from the commonwealth of Virginia,) that we
      ought to be prepared to afford protection to those parts of
      the Union, and, if necessary, to punish aggressors.

      The interests of the United States require that our
      intercourse with other nations should be facilitated by
      such provisions as will enable me to fulfil my duty, in
      that respect, in the manner which circumstances may render
      most conducive to the public good; and to this end, that
      the compensations to be made to the persons who may be
      employed, should, according to the nature of their
      appointments, be defined by the law; and a competent fund
      designated for defraying the expenses incident to the
      conduct of our foreign affairs.

      Various considerations also render it expedient that the
      terms on which foreigners may be admitted to the rights of
      citizens, should be speedily ascertained by a uniform rule
      of naturalization.

      Uniformity in the currency, weights and measures, of the
      United States, is an object of great importance, and will,
      I am persuaded, be duly attended to.

      The advancement of agriculture, commerce, and manufactures,
      by all proper means, will not, I trust, need
      recommendation; but I cannot forbear intimating to you the
      expediency of giving effectual encouragement, as well to
      the introduction of new and useful inventions from abroad,
      as to the exertions of skill and genius in producing them
      at home; and of facilitating the intercourse between the
      distant parts of our country by a due attention to the
      Post-Office and post-roads.

      Nor am I less persuaded that you will agree with me in
      opinion, that there is nothing which can better deserve
      your patronage than the promotion of science and
      literature. Knowledge is in every country the surest basis
      of public happiness. In one in which the measures of
      Government receive their impression so immediately from the
      sense of the community as in ours, it is proportionably
      essential. To the security of a free constitution it
      contributes in various ways. By convincing those who are
      intrusted with the public administration, that every
      valuable end of Government is best answered by the
      enlightened confidence of the people, and by teaching the
      people themselves to know and to value their own rights to
      discern and provide against invasions of them; to
      distinguish between oppression and the necessary exercise
      of lawful authority; between burthens proceeding from a
      disregard to their convenience, and those resulting from
      the inevitable exigencies of society; to discriminate the
      spirit of liberty from that of licentiousness, cherishing
      the first, avoiding the last, and uniting a speedy but
      temperate vigilance against encroachments, with an
      inviolable respect to the laws.

      Whether this desirable object will be best promoted by
      affording aids to seminaries of learning already
      established, by the institution of a national university,
      or by any other expedients, will be well worthy of a place
      in the deliberations of the Legislature.


      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      I saw with peculiar pleasure, at the close of the last
      session, the resolution entered into by you, expressive of
      your opinion that an adequate provision for the support of
      the public credit is a matter of high importance to the
      national honor and prosperity. In this sentiment I entirely
      concur. And, to a perfect confidence in your best endeavors
      to devise such a provision as will be truly consistent with
      the end, I add an equal reliance on the cheerful
      co-operation of the other branch of the Legislature. It
      would be superfluous to specify inducements to a measure in
      which the character and permanent interests of the United
      States are so obviously and so deeply concerned, and which
      has received so explicit a sanction from your declaration.


      _Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives:_

      I have directed the proper officers to lay before you,
      respectively, such papers and estimates as regard the
      affairs particularly recommended to your consideration, and
      necessary to convey to you that information of the state of
      the Union, which it is my duty to afford.

      The welfare of our country is the great object to which our
      cares and efforts ought to be directed. And I shall derive
      great satisfaction from a co-operation with you, in the
      pleasing though arduous task of insuring to our
      fellow-citizens the blessings which they have a right to
      expect from a free, efficient and equal Government.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, January 8, 1790.


The President of the United States having retired, and the two Houses
being separated:

_Ordered_, That Messrs. KING, IZARD, and PATERSON, be a committee to
prepare and report the draft of an address to the President of the
United States, in answer to his speech delivered this day to both Houses
of Congress, in the Senate Chamber.

_Ordered_, That the speech of the President of the United States,
delivered this day, be printed for the use of the Senate.

The Senate adjourned to Monday next.


MONDAY, January 11.

Mr. KING, on behalf of the committee, reported an address to the
President of the United States, in answer to his speech to both Houses
of Congress, which being amended, was adopted as followeth:

      _To the President of the United States._

      SIR:--We, the Senate of the United States, return you our
      thanks for your speech delivered to both Houses of
      Congress. The accession of the State of North Carolina to
      the Constitution of the United States gives us much
      pleasure: and we offer you our congratulations on that
      event, which at the same time adds strength to our Union,
      and affords a proof that the more the constitution has been
      considered, the more the goodness of it has appeared. The
      information which we have received, that the measures of
      the last session have been as satisfactory to our
      constituents as we had reason to expect, from the
      difficulty of the work in which we were engaged, will
      afford us much consolation and encouragement in resuming
      our deliberations, in the present session, for the public
      good; and every exertion on our part shall be made to
      realize and secure to our country those blessings which a
      gracious Providence has placed within our reach. We are
      persuaded that one of the most effectual means of
      preserving peace is to be prepared for war; and our
      attention shall be directed to the objects of common
      defence, and to the adoption of such plans as shall appear
      the most likely to prevent our dependence on other
      countries for essential supplies. In the arrangements to be
      made respecting the establishment of such troops as may be
      deemed indispensable, we shall, with pleasure, provide for
      the comfortable support of the officers and soldiers, with
      a due regard to economy. We regret that the pacific
      measures adopted by Government, with regard to certain
      hostile tribes of Indians, have not been attended with the
      beneficial effects towards the inhabitants of our Southern
      and Western frontiers which we had reason to hope, and we
      shall cheerfully co-operate in providing the most effectual
      means for their protection, and, if necessary, for the
      punishment of aggressors. The uniformity of the currency,
      and of weights and measures; the introduction of new and
      useful inventions from abroad, and the exertions of skill
      and genius in producing them at home; the facilitating the
      communication between the distant parts of our country, by
      means of the Post-Office and post-roads; a provision for
      the support of the Department of Foreign Affairs, and a
      uniform rule of naturalization, by which foreigners may be
      admitted to the rights of citizens, are objects which shall
      receive such early attention as their respective importance
      requires. Literature and Science are essential to the
      preservation of a free constitution: the measures of
      Government should, therefore, be calculated to strengthen
      the confidence that is due to that important truth.
      Agriculture, Commerce, and Manufactures, forming the basis
      of the wealth and strength of our confederated Republic,
      must be the frequent subject of our deliberation, and shall
      be advanced by all proper means in our power. Public Credit
      being an object of great importance, we shall cheerfully
      co-operate in all proper measures for its support. Proper
      attention shall be given to such papers and estimates as
      you may be pleased to lay before us. Our cares and efforts
      shall be directed to the welfare of our country; and we
      have the most perfect dependence upon your co-operating
      with us, on all occasions, in such measures as will insure
      to our fellow-citizens the blessings which they have a
      right to expect from a free, efficient, and equal
      Government.


TUESDAY, January 12.

_Ordered_, That the Address to the President of the United States, in
answer to his speech, be presented by the Vice President, attended by
the Senate, and that the committee which reported the address wait on
the President, and desire to be informed at what time and place he will
receive the same.

Mr. KING, in behalf of the committee, reported that it would be
agreeable to the President to receive the address of the Senate, in
answer to his speech, on Thursday next, at 11 o'clock, at his own house.


WEDNESDAY, January 13.

JONATHAN ELMER, from New Jersey, attended.

BENJAMIN HAWKINS, from North Carolina, appeared, produced his
credentials, and took his seat.

The Vice President administered the oath to Mr. HAWKINS.


THURSDAY, January 14.

Agreeably to the order of the 12th instant, the Senate waited on the
President of the United States, at his own house, where the Vice
President, in their name, delivered to the President of the United
States the address agreed to on the 11th instant:

To which the President of the United States was pleased to make the
following reply:

      _Gentlemen:_ I thank you for your address, and for the
      assurances which it contains of attention to the several
      matters suggested by me to your consideration.

      Relying on the continuance of your exertions for the public
      good, I anticipate for our country the salutary effects of
      upright and prudent counsels.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

The Senate having returned to the Senate Chamber, adjourned.


FRIDAY, January 15.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. ELLSWORTH, HAWKINS, and PATERSON, be a committee
to bring in a bill, in addition to "An act to establish the Judicial
Courts of the United States."


WEDNESDAY, January 20.

On motion,

      _Resolved_, That Messrs. ELLSWORTH, MACLAY, and HENRY, be a
      committee to confer with such committee as may be appointed
      on the part of the House of Representatives, to consider
      and report whether or not the business began previous to
      the late adjournment of Congress, shall now be proceeded in
      as if no adjournment had taken place.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the House of Representatives,
acquainting them herewith, and requesting the appointment of a similar
committee on their part.


THURSDAY, January 21.

ROBERT MORRIS from Pennsylvania, attended.

      A message from the House of Representatives informed the
      Senate that they had agreed to the appointment of a
      committee on their part, consisting of Messrs. SHERMAN,
      THATCHER, HARTLEY, WHITE, and JACKSON, to confer with the
      committee appointed on the part of the Senate, to consider
      and report whether or not the business begun previous to
      the late adjournment of Congress, shall now be proceeded in
      as if no adjournment had taken place.


FRIDAY, January 22.

Mr. ELLSWORTH, on behalf of the "joint committee of the two Houses,
appointed to consider and report whether or not the business begun
previous to the late adjournment of Congress, shall now be proceeded in
as if no adjournment had taken place," reported.

_Ordered_, That the consideration of the report be deferred until Monday
next.


MONDAY, January 25.

The Senate proceeded to consider the report of the joint committee of
the Senate and House of Representatives, appointed the 20th instant, to
wit: "that the business unfinished between the two Houses at the late
adjournment ought to be regarded as if it had not been passed upon by
either;"

And, on motion that the report of the committee be postponed, it passed
in the negative.

And, upon the question to agree to the report of the committee, the yeas
and nays being required by one-fifth of the Senators present:

      _Yeas._--Messrs. Butler, Dalton, Ellsworth, Few, Hawkins,
      Henry, Johnson, King, Schuyler, and Strong--10.

      _Nays._--Messrs. Bassett, Elmer, Izard, Langdon, Maclay,
      Morris, Paterson, and Wingate--8.

And so it passed in the affirmative.

And it was

      _Resolved_, That the business unfinished between the two
      Houses at the late adjournment ought to be regarded as if
      it had not been passed upon by either.


TUESDAY, January 26.

A message from the House of Representatives announced their agreement
with the Senate in their resolution, that the business unfinished
between the two Houses, at the late adjournment, ought to be regarded as
if it had not been passed upon by either.


THURSDAY, January 28.

On motion it was

_Ordered_, That the letter from the Governor of Rhode Island of the 18th
of January instant, to the President of the United States, requesting a
further suspension of the acts of Congress subjecting the citizens of
the State of Rhode Island to the payment of foreign tonnage and foreign
duties, during the pleasure of Congress, and communicated with the
President's message this day, be referred to the same committee.

FRIDAY, January 29.

SAMUEL JOHNSTON, from North Carolina, appeared, produced his
credentials, and took his seat in the Senate.

The Vice President administered the oath to Mr. JOHNSTON.


TUESDAY, May 11.

The Senate proceeded to consider the report of the committee appointed
the 28th of April, to consider what provisions will be proper for
Congress to make, in the present session, respecting the State of Rhode
Island; whereupon,

_Resolved_, That all commercial intercourse between the United States
and the State of Rhode Island, from and after the first day of July
next, be prohibited, under suitable penalties; and that the President of
the United States be authorized to demand of the State of Rhode Island
---- dollars, to be paid into the Treasury of the United States by the
---- day of ---- next; which shall be credited to the said State, in
account with the United States; and that a bill or bills be brought in
for those purposes.

_Ordered_, That the committee who brought in the above report prepare
and report a bill accordingly.


THURSDAY, May 13.

Mr. ELLSWORTH, reported, from the committee appointed May 3d, to
consider and report their opinion on the question, when according to the
constitution, the terms for which the President, Vice President,
Senators, and Representatives, have been respectively chosen, shall be
deemed to have commenced; and, also, to consider of, and report their
opinion on such other matters as they shall conceive have relation to
this question.

_Ordered_, That this report lie for consideration.


FRIDAY, May 14.

The Senate proceeded to consider the report of the joint committee,
appointed the 28th of April, which is as follows:

      The committee of the Senate, to join with a committee
      appointed by the House of Representatives, to consider and
      report their opinion on the question, when, according to
      the Constitution, the terms for which the President, Vice
      President, Senators, and Representatives, have been
      respectively chosen, shall be deemed to have commenced;
      and, also, to consider of, and report their opinion on,
      such other matters as they should conceive to have relation
      to this question, report, as the opinion of the said joint
      committee:

      That the terms for which the President, Vice President,
      Senators, and Representatives, of the United States, were
      respectively chosen, did, according to the constitution,
      commence on the 4th day of March, 1789; and so the Senators
      of the first class, and the Representatives, will not,
      according to the constitution, be entitled, by virtue of
      the same election by which they hold seats in the present
      Congress, to seats in the next Congress, which will be
      assembled after the 3d day of March, 1791; and further,
      that, whenever a vacancy shall happen in the Senate or
      House of Representatives, and an election to fill such
      vacancy, the person elected will not, according to the
      constitution, be entitled, by virtue of such election, to
      hold a seat beyond the time for which the Senator or
      Representative in whose stead such person shall have been
      so elected, would, if the vacancy had not happened, have
      been entitled to hold a seat.

      That it will be advisable for the Congress to pass a law or
      laws for determining, agreeable to the provision in the
      first section of the second article of the constitution,
      the time when the electors shall, in the year which will
      terminate on the 3d day of March, 1793, and so in every
      fourth year thereafter, be chosen, and the day on which
      they shall give their votes; for declaring what officer
      shall, in case of vacancy, both in the office of President
      and Vice President, act as President; for assigning a
      public office where the lists, mentioned in the second
      paragraph of the first section in the second article of the
      constitution, shall in case of vacancy in the office of
      President of the Senate, or his absence from the seat of
      Government, be, in the mean time, deposited; and for
      directing the mode in which such lists shall be
      transmitted: whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That the Senate do agree to this report.


MONDAY, May 17.

The Senate proceeded to the third reading of the bill to prevent
bringing goods, wares, and merchandises from the State of Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations into the United States, and to authorize a
demand of money from the said State, and,

On motion,

_Ordered_, That this bill be recommitted.


TUESDAY, May 18.

Mr. CARROLL, from the committee appointed April the 28th, to consider
what provisions will be proper for Congress to make, in the present
session, respecting the State of Rhode Island, and to whom it was
referred, to bring in a bill on that subject, reported several
additional clauses to the bill to prevent bringing goods, wares, and
merchandises, from the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations
into the United States, and to authorize a demand of money from the said
State; which report was agreed to as amendments to the bill.

The Senate proceeded to the third reading of the bill to prevent
bringing goods, wares, and merchandises, from the State of Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations into the United States, and to authorize a
demand of money from the said State;

And, on the question, "Shall this bill pass?" the yeas and nays being
required by one-fifth of the Senators present, were:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bassett, Carroll, Dalton, Ellsworth,
      Johnson, Johnston, Izard, King, Langdon, Morris, Reed,
      Schuyler, and Strong--13.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Butler, Elmer, Hawkins, Henry, Lee, Maclay,
      Walker, and Wingate--8.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill do pass, and that it be carried to
the House of Representatives for concurrence therein.


TUESDAY, June 1.

The following message was received from the President of the United
States, and was read:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and House of Representatives:_

      Having received official information of the accession of
      the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations to the
      constitution of the United States, I take the earliest
      opportunity of communicating the same to you, with my
      congratulations on this happy event, which unites, under
      the General Government, all the States which were
      originally confederated; and have directed my Secretary to
      lay before you a copy of the letter from the President of
      the Convention of the State of Rhode Island to the
      President of the United States.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.
      UNITED STATES, June 1, 1790.

The Senate then entered on Executive business.

The following message from the President of the United States, by his
Secretary, was read:


                                  UNITED STATES, May 31, 1790.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      Mr. De Poiery served in the American army for several of
      the last years of the late war, as Secretary to Major
      General the Marquis de Lafayette, and might probably at the
      same time have obtained the commission of Captain from
      Congress, upon application to that body. At present, he is
      an officer in the French National Guards, and solicits a
      Brevet Commission from the United States of America. I am
      authorized to add, that while the compliance will involve
      no expense on our part, it will be particularly grateful to
      that friend of America, the Marquis de Lafayette.

      I therefore nominate M. De Poiery to be a Captain by
      Brevet.

                                  GEORGE WASHINGTON.

_Ordered_, That the message lie for consideration.


WEDNESDAY, June 2.

      _Resolved_, That the Senate will attend the funeral of
      Colonel Bland, late a member of the House of
      Representatives of the United States, at five o'clock this
      afternoon.[30]

The Senate then entered on Executive business, and consented to the
nomination of M. De Poiery to be a Captain by Brevet, in the service of
the United States.


WEDNESDAY, August 4.

The Senate then entered on Executive business, and the following message
from the President of the United States was read:[31]

                                  UNITED STATES, August 4th, 1790.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      In consequence of the general principles agreed to by the
      Senate in August, 1789, the adjustment of the terms of a
      treaty is far advanced between the United States and the
      Chiefs of the Creek Indians now in this city, in behalf of
      themselves and the whole Creek Nation.

      In preparing the articles of this treaty, the present
      arrangements of the trade with the Creeks have caused much
      embarrassment. It seems to be well ascertained, that the
      trade is almost exclusively in the hands of a company of
      British merchants, who by agreement, make their
      importations of goods from England into the Spanish ports.

      As the trade of the Indians is a main means of their
      political management, it is therefore obvious, that the
      United States cannot possess any security for the
      performance of treaties with the Creeks, while their trade
      is liable to be interrupted, or withheld, at the caprice of
      two foreign powers.

      Hence it becomes an object of real importance to form new
      channels for the commerce of the Creeks through the United
      States. But this operation will require time, as the
      present arrangements cannot be suddenly broken without the
      greatest violation of faith and morals.

      It therefore appears to be important to form a secret
      article of a treaty, similar to the one which accompanies
      this message.

      If the Senate should require any further explanation, the
      Secretary of War will attend them for that purpose.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

The President of the United States puts the following question for the
consideration and advice of the Senate: If it should be found essential
to a treaty for the firm establishment of peace with the Creek nation of
Indians, that an article to the following effect should be inserted
therein, will such an article be proper? viz:

      SECRET ARTICLE.

      The commerce necessary for the Creek nation shall be
      carried on through the ports, and by the citizens of the
      United States, if substantial and effectual arrangements
      shall be made for that purpose by the United States, on or
      before the 1st day of August, one thousand seven hundred
      and ninety-two. In the mean time, the said commerce may be
      carried on through its present channels, and according to
      its present regulations.

      And whereas, the trade of the said Creek nation is now
      carried wholly, or principally, through the territories of
      Spain, and obstructions thereto, may happen by war or
      prohibitions of the Spanish Government: it is therefore
      agreed between the said parties, that in the event of such
      obstructions happening, it shall be lawful for such persons
      as ---- ---- shall designate, to introduce into, and
      transport through the territories of the United States to
      the country of the said Creek nation, any quantity of
      goods, wares, and merchandise, not exceeding in value, in
      any one year, sixty thousand dollars, and that free from
      any duties or impositions whatsoever, but subject to such
      regulations for guarding against abuse, as the United
      States shall judge necessary; which privilege shall
      continue as long as such obstruction shall continue.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, August 4th, 1790.

The Senate proceeded to consider the message from the President of the
United States of this day; whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That the Senate do advise and consent to the
      execution of the secret article referred to in the message,
      and that the blank in said article be filled with the words
      "President of the United States."


WEDNESDAY, August 11.

The Senate then entered on Executive business; and the following message
was received and read, from the President of the United States:

                                  UNITED STATES, August 11, 1790.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      Although the treaty with the Creeks may be regarded as the
      main foundation of the future peace and prosperity of the
      south-western frontier of the United States, yet, in order
      fully to effect so desirable an object, the treaties which
      have been entered into with the other tribes in that
      quarter must be faithfully performed on our part.

      During the last year, I laid before the Senate a particular
      statement of the case of the Cherokees. By a reference to
      that paper it will appear, that the United States formed a
      treaty with the Cherokees in November, 1785; that the said
      Cherokees thereby placed themselves under the protection of
      the United States, and had a boundary assigned them; that
      the white people settled on the frontiers had openly
      violated the said boundary, by intruding on the Indian
      lands; that the United States, in Congress assembled, did
      on the first day of September, 1788, issue their
      proclamation, forbidding all such unwarrantable intrusions,
      and enjoined all those who had settled upon the hunting
      grounds of the Cherokees to depart with their families and
      effects, without loss of time, as they would answer their
      disobedience to the injunctions and prohibitions expressed,
      at their peril.

      But information has been received that, notwithstanding the
      said treaty and proclamation, upwards of five hundred
      families have settled on the Cherokee lands, exclusively of
      those settled between the fork of French Broad and Holstein
      Rivers, mentioned in the said treaty.

      As the obstructions to a proper conduct on this matter have
      been removed since it was mentioned to the Senate, on the
      22d of August, 1789, by the accession of North Carolina to
      the present Union, and the cessions of the land in
      question, I shall conceive myself bound to exert the powers
      intrusted to me by the constitution, in order to carry into
      faithful execution the treaty of Hopewell, unless it shall
      be thought proper to attempt to arrange a new boundary with
      the Cherokees, embracing the settlements, and compensating
      the Cherokees for the cessions they shall make on the
      occasion. On this point, therefore, I state the following
      questions, and request the advice of the Senate thereon:

      1st. Is it the judgment of the Senate that overtures shall
      be made to the Cherokees to arrange a new boundary, so as
      to embrace the settlements made by the white people since
      the treaty of Hopewell, in November, 1785?

      2d. If so, shall compensation, to the amount of ----
      dollars annually, or of ---- dollars in gross, be made to
      the Cherokees for the land they shall relinquish, holding
      the occupiers of the land accountable to the United States
      for its value?

      3d. Shall the United States stipulate solemnly to guarantee
      the new boundary which may be arranged?

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

Agreed, by unanimous consent, to proceed to the consideration of this
message. Whereupon,

      _Resolved_, That the Senate do advise and consent that the
      President of the United States do, at his discretion, cause
      the treaty concluded at Hopewell with the Cherokee Indians,
      to be carried into execution, according to the terms
      thereof, or to enter into arrangements for such further
      cessions of territory, from the said Cherokee Indians, as
      the tranquillity and interest of the United States may
      require; provided the sum which may be stipulated to be
      paid to the Cherokee Indians do not exceed one thousand
      dollars annually; and provided, further, that no person who
      shall have taken possession of any lands within territory
      assigned to the said Cherokee Indians, by the said treaty
      of Hopewell, shall be confirmed in any such possessions,
      but by a compliance with such terms as Congress may
      hereafter prescribe.

      _Resolved_, In case a new, or other boundary than that
      stipulated by the treaty of Hopewell, shall be concluded
      with the Cherokee Indians, that the Senate do advise and
      consent solemnly to guarantee the same.


THURSDAY, August 12.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House of Representatives having finished the business before them
are about to adjourn, agreeably to the vote of the two Houses of
Congress on Tuesday night.

On motion,

      _Resolved, unanimously_, That the thanks of the Senate be
      given to the corporation of the city of New York for the
      elegant and convenient accommodations provided for
      Congress, and that a copy of this resolve be enclosed in
      the following letter from the Vice President:

                                  NEW YORK, August 12, 1790.

      SIR: It is with great pleasure, that, in obedience to an
      order of the Senate of the United States, I have the honor
      to enclose their resolution of this date, which was
      unanimously agreed to; and, in behalf of the Senate, I
      request that you will be pleased to communicate the same to
      the corporation of the city, and, at the same time, signify
      to them, that it is the wish of the Senate that the
      corporation will permit such articles of furniture, &c. now
      in the City Hall, as have been provided by Congress, to
      remain for the use of that building.

                   I am, sir, your most obedient humble servant,

                                  JOHN ADAMS,
                         _Vice President of the United States,
                          and President of the Senate._

      To the Mayor of the city of New York.

The Senate then entered on Executive business, and proceeded to consider
the message from the President of the United States, of the 7th of
August, 1790, communicating a treaty entered into with the Chiefs of the
Creek nation of Indians.

And, on the question to advise and consent to the ratification of the
said treaty, made with the Creek nation, and referred to in the message
of the President of the United States, of the 7th of August, 1790; the
yeas and nays were required by one-fifth of the Senators present, and
were:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Carroll, Dalton, Ellsworth, Foster, Hawkins,
      Henry, Johnson, Johnston, Izard, King, Lee, Paterson, Read,
      Schuyler, and Stanton--15.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Butler, Few, Gunn, and Walker--4.

The Senate resuming their Legislative character,

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
the Senate having finished the Legislative business before them, are
about to adjourn, agreeably to the vote of both Houses of Congress of
the 10th instant.

And the Vice President adjourned the Senate accordingly, to meet on the
first Monday in December next.




FIRST CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, January 4.

The following is a list of the Members composing the House of
Representatives:

New Hampshire--NICHOLAS GILMAN, SAMUEL LIVERMORE, and ABIEL FOSTER.

Massachusetts--FISHER AMES, ELBRIDGE GERRY, BENJAMIN GOODHUE, JONATHAN
GROUT, GEORGE LEONARD, GEORGE PARTRIDGE, GEORGE THATCHER, and THEODORE
SEDGWICK.

Connecticut--BENJAMIN HUNTINGTON, ROGER SHERMAN, JONATHAN STURGES,
JONATHAN TRUMBULL, and JEREMIAH WADSWORTH.

New York--EGBERT BENSON, WILLIAM FLOYD, JOHN HATHORN, JEREMIAH VAN
RENSSELAER, JOHN LAWRENCE, and PETER SYLVESTER.

New Jersey--ELIAS BOUDINOT, LAMBERT CADWALADER, JAMES SCHUREMAN, and
THOMAS SINNICKSON.

Pennsylvania--GEORGE CLYMER, THOMAS FITZSIMONS, THOMAS HARTLEY, DANIEL
HEISTER, F. A. MUHLENBERG, _Speaker_, PETER MUHLENBERG, THOMAS SCOTT,
and HENRY WYNKOOP.

Delaware--JOHN VINING.

Maryland--DANIEL CARROLL, BENJAMIN CONTEE, GEORGE GALE, JOSHUA SENEY,
WILLIAM SMITH, and MICHAEL JENIFER STONE.

Virginia--THEODORICK BLAND, JOHN BROWN, ISAAC COLES, SAMUEL GRIFFIN,
RICHARD BLAND LEE, JAMES MADISON, JUN., ANDREW MOORE, JOHN PAGE,
ALEXANDER WHITE, and JOSIAH PARKER.

South Carolina--EDANUS BURKE, DANIEL HUGER, WILLIAM SMITH, THOMAS
SUMTER, and THOMAS TUDOR TUCKER.

Georgia--ABRAHAM BALDWIN, JAMES JACKSON, and GEORGE MATHEWS.

The SPEAKER and twenty-five other members, viz: Messrs. FOSTER, GILMAN,
LIVERMORE, AMES, GERRY, GOODHUE, GROUT, PARTRIDGE, THATCHER, SHERMAN,
BENSON, FLOYD, LAWRENCE, P. MUHLENBERG, SCOTT, SENEY, BROWN, COLES,
GRIFFIN, WHITE, BURKE, HUGER, SMITH, (of S. C.,) TUCKER, and BALDWIN,
appeared and took their seats; but not being a quorum, they adjourned.


TUESDAY, January 5.

Mr. BOUDINOT took his seat.--No quorum.


WEDNESDAY, January 6.

Mr. SCHUREMAN, Mr. PAGE, and Mr. LEE took their seats.--No quorum.


THURSDAY, January 7.

JONATHAN STURGIS and JEREMIAH WADSWORTH, from Connecticut; JEREMIAH VAN
RENSSELAER, from New York; DANIEL CARROLL, from Maryland; and GEORGE
MATHEWS, from Georgia, appearing and taking their seats, a quorum of the
whole House was present; of which the Senate were informed.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the President of the
United States, of the 4th instant, requesting that when there shall be a
sufficient number of the two Houses of Congress assembled to proceed to
business, he may be informed of it; and, also, at what time and place it
will be convenient for Congress that he should meet them, in order to
make some oral communications at the commencement of their session;
which was read, and ordered to lie on the table.

A message from the Senate informed the House, that they had appointed a
committee on their part, jointly with such committee as shall be
appointed on the part of the House, to wait on the President of the
United States, and notify him that a quorum of the two Houses had
assembled, and will be ready, in the Senate Chamber, at such time as he
shall appoint, to receive any communications which he shall think proper
to make.

Messrs. GILMAN, AMES, and SENEY, were then appointed a committee on the
part of the House for the purpose expressed in the message from the
Senate.

It was then ordered, That a committee be appointed to examine the
Journal of the last session, and to report therefrom all such matters of
business as were then depending and undetermined, and a committee was
appointed, consisting of Messrs. BOUDINOT, SHERMAN, and WHITE.

      _Resolved_, That two Chaplains of different denominations
      be appointed to Congress for the present session, one by
      each House, who shall interchange weekly.

_Ordered_, That the Clerk of the House do carry the said resolution to
the Senate, and desire their concurrence.

Mr. GILMAN, from the committee appointed to wait on the President of the
United States, pursuant to the order of this day, reported that they
had, according to order, performed that service, and that the President
was pleased to say he would attend to make his communications to both
Houses of Congress to-morrow morning at 11 o'clock.


FRIDAY, January 8.

HENRY WYNKOOP, from Pennsylvania, appeared, and took his seat.

The Speaker and members present attended in the Senate Chamber, to
receive the President of the United States, who addressed both Houses.
His address will be found in the Proceedings of the Senate.

The Speaker and the members of the House having returned from the
Senate, a copy of the President's speech was read, and committed to a
Committee of the whole House on to-morrow.

The Journal was then read by the Clerk.

Mr. BOUDINOT moved to correct the title by striking out all the words,
after declaring it merely the Journal of the House of Representatives.

After some further desultory conversation, the title of the Journal was
established by a vote of the House, as follows:

_Journal of the House of Representatives of the United States._

      At a session of the Congress of United States, begun and
      held at the city of New York, on Monday the 4th day of
      January, 1790, being the second session of the First
      Congress, held under the present Constitution of
      Government, for the United States, being the day appointed
      by law for the meeting of the present session.

On the further reading of the Minutes, Mr. THATCHER observed, that a
call of the House which had taken place at the meeting was not entered
on the Journal.

Mr. PAGE was sorry to find any gentleman insist upon the entry of a
measure which was not completed. He was concerned, likewise, that he had
not been here to answer to his name, but he was delayed seven days by
head winds, and two days by extreme badness of the roads. Under such
circumstances, he thought the gentlemen who were so fortunate as to get
here in time, deserved little more credit than those who were plunging
at the risk of their lives through almost insuperable difficulties. He
hoped it was not intended to stigmatize gentlemen who did not deserve
it.

Mr. WHITE.--If the absentees were from the remote States, there would be
some indelicacy in ordering a call of the House at so early a period of
the session, because there might be natural unavoidable impediments to
prevent their punctual attendance, but he had observed, that the
absentees were mostly from the neighboring States, Connecticut, New
York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania; and some of the members had
declared, they would not come until they were informed that there was a
House. Now, in order to make the Journal a true transcript of what had
really passed in the House, it was necessary to have this call inserted;
for the motion was regularly made, seconded, and carried; the absentees
were noted, and, after some time, they were called again, and those who
were known to be sick, or on their way, were apologized for, and
excused; here, indeed, the business terminated, and they were not
ordered into the custody of the Sergeant-at-arms. After these remarks,
he concluded by saying, that he did not move to have it inserted on the
Journal, and was unconcerned about it.

Mr. LAWRENCE hoped the call would not be entered on the Journal, if it
was intended to reproach the conduct of the absent members, for he was
very well satisfied in his own mind, that few, if any, of them were
guilty of neglecting their duty.

Mr. WADSWORTH likewise hoped the entry would not be made. He had left
home a week ago, but had been detained by head winds. He dared to say
that this would be found to be the case with respect to a number of
other gentlemen; and as far as his knowledge went with relation to such
as were absent, it was on necessary occasions.

Mr. PARTRIDGE did not wish to stigmatize any gentleman by an entry of
this kind on the Journals. He meant simply that the fact should appear
as it really happened in the House; however, as the business had not
been completed, he would withdraw his second to the motion for having
the entry made.

Mr. PAGE said, no new stigma could be received by him or his colleague,
(Mr. LEE.) By the entry on the Journals, it appeared they were not here
on Monday or Tuesday, but on Wednesday it is said that John Page and R.
B. Lee appeared, and took their seats; consequently, what he had said
could not be construed to favor himself or his colleague, but it was
generally for those who had not been able to get here so soon.

The motion for entering on the Journals the call of the House, was
withdrawn.


SATURDAY, January 9.

GEORGE CLYMER, from Pennsylvania, appeared, and took his seat.

_Secretary of the Treasury's Report._

A letter from Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury, was read,
informing the House that, agreeably to their resolution of the 21st of
September, he had prepared a Plan for the support of the Public Credit,
and that he was ready to report the same to this House, when they should
be pleased to receive it.

It was proposed that Thursday next be assigned for this purpose.

Mr. GERRY wished to add to the motion, that it should be made in
writing.

Mr. BOUDINOT hoped that the Secretary of the Treasury might be permitted
to make his report in person, in order to answer such inquiries as the
members might be disposed to make, for it was a justifiable surmise that
gentlemen would not be able clearly to comprehend so intricate a subject
without oral illustration.

Mr. CLYMER expressed some doubts with respect to the propriety of
receiving oral communications from the head of such an important
department. He was rather inclined to think that such communications
ought to be in writing.

Mr. AMES conceived it to be the duty of the House to obtain the best
information on any subject; but on this very important one they ought to
be particularly careful to get it from the highest source. The Secretary
of the Treasury is a most important and responsible officer; the
delicacy of his situation required every indulgence to be extended to
him, that had a tendency to enable him to complete the arduous
undertaking in which he was engaged. It would be a real misfortune that
a salutary measure should be defeated for want of being understood; yet
the most advantageous plans may miscarry in their passage through this
House, by reason of their not being clearly comprehended. He hoped,
therefore, that the financier would be authorized to make such
communications and illustrations as he judged necessary; but he wished
these communications to be in writing; in this shape they would obtain a
degree of permanency favorable to the responsibility of the officer,
while, at the same time, they would be less liable to be misunderstood.

Mr. BENSON observed, that the Secretary of the Treasury was directed, by
a resolution of the last session, to prepare a plan for the support of
public credit, and to report the same at this meeting. The point to be
settled is whether it shall be done by an oral communication, or
transmitted in writing? In the former order of the House, this point was
untouched, and the Secretary was left at his discretion to prepare
himself for reporting in either way; consequently when we have fixed the
time for receiving his report, he may make it in the manner for which he
is prepared; but no doubt, this officer, actuated by motives of
deference and respect, will conform to any rule the House may think
proper to enjoin.

Mr. GERRY conceived it would be necessary the Secretary should be
authorized, by a vote of the House, to give explanations to his plans.
This, he was not expressly authorized to do by the vote of the last
session, which confined him merely to prepare a plan for support of the
public credit. Would any gentleman on this floor suppose himself
capable of comprehending and combining the parts of a general system,
calculated to produce such a grand effect? In a plan for supporting
public credit may be comprehended every species of finance. The
Secretary, under such an order, may propose an extension of your impost
to entire new articles, an increase of some, and a diminution upon
others. He may propose an introduction of a system of excise; with all
these he may combine duties, stamps, and direct taxes. Can the human
mind retain, with any great degree of decision, objects so extensive and
multifarious upon a mere oral communication? This consideration alone
ought to be sufficient to induce gentlemen to agree to his proposition
of making the report in writing; but his proposition extended still
further, it went to give him a right to lay before them his
explanations, if he thinks explanations necessary.

On the question, the resolution for receiving the report of the
Secretary of the Treasury in writing, was carried in the affirmative.


_President's Speech._

On motion, the House now resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole
on the President's Speech. Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. SMITH (of S. C.) proposed a resolution that an address be presented
to the President, in answer to his Speech to both Houses, assuring him
that this House will, without delay, proceed to take into their serious
consideration the various and important matters recommended to their
attention.

Mr. WHITE thought this motion hardly sufficient; it was too general to
warrant a select committee to draft that particular reply which he hoped
the House was disposed to make to every part of the President's speech;
he therefore begged the gentleman to withdraw it, and permit him to
substitute one in its stead, which he read in his place.

Mr. BOUDINOT thought the proposition just read by the honorable
gentleman from Virginia much superior to that proposed by his worthy
friend from South Carolina. It must have struck every gentleman that
there were other matters contained in the Speech deserving of notice,
besides those recommended to their serious consideration. There was
information of the recent accession of the important State of North
Carolina to the Constitution of the United States. This event ought to
be recognized in a particular manner, according to its importance; and
he presumed to think that its importance was of the very first
magnitude.

A desultory conversation now took place on amending the original
proposition in such a manner as to embrace generally the subjects of the
speech; when, at length, it was amended to read as follows:

      _Resolved_, As the sense of this committee, that an address
      be presented by the House to the President of the United
      States, in answer to his speech to both Houses, with
      assurances that this House will, without delay, proceed to
      take into consideration the various and important matters
      recommended to their attention.

Whereupon Messrs. SMITH, (of S. C.,) CLYMER, and LAWRENCE, were
appointed a committee to prepare the said address.


MONDAY, January 11.

JONATHAN TRUMBULL, from Connecticut; JOHN HATHORN, from New York; and
ANDREW MOORE, from Virginia, appeared, and took their seats.

_Answer to the President's Speech._

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina,) from the committee appointed for the
purpose of preparing an address in answer to the President's speech,
presented a report; which being read,

Mr. PAGE moved to go into a Committee of the Whole on the same
to-morrow, which was agreed to.


TUESDAY, January 12.

Agreeably to the order of the day the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the address in answer to the President's
speech to both Houses.

Mr. BALDWIN being placed in the chair, the address was read as follows:

_The Address of the House of Representatives to the President of the
United States._

      The Representatives of the people of the United States have
      taken into consideration your speech to both Houses of
      Congress at the opening of the present session.

      We reciprocate your congratulations on the accession of
      North Carolina; an event which, while it is a testimony of
      the increasing good-will towards the Government of the
      Union, cannot fail to give additional dignity and strength
      to the American Republic, already rising in the estimation
      of the world in national character and respectability.

      The information that our measures of the last session have
      not proved dissatisfactory to our constituents, affords us
      much encouragement at this juncture, when we are resuming
      the arduous task of legislating for so extensive an empire.

      Nothing can be more gratifying to the representatives of a
      free people than the reflection, that their labors are
      rewarded by the approbation of their fellow-citizens. Under
      this impression, we shall make every exertion to realize
      their expectations, and to secure to them those blessings
      which Providence has placed within their reach. Still
      prompted by the same desire to promote their interests
      which then actuated us, we shall, in the present session,
      diligently and anxiously pursue those measures which shall
      appear to us conducive to that end.

      We concur with you in the sentiment that agriculture,
      commerce, and manufactures, are entitled to legislative
      protection, and that the promotion of science and
      literature will contribute to the security of a free
      Government; in the progress of our deliberations, we shall
      not lose sight of objects so worthy of our regard.

      The various and weighty matters which you have judged
      necessary to recommend to our attention, appear to us
      essential to the tranquillity and welfare of the Union, and
      claim our early and most serious consideration. We shall
      proceed, without delay, to bestow on them that calm
      discussion which their importance requires.

      We regret that the pacific arrangements pursued with regard
      to certain hostile tribes of Indians, have not been
      attended with that success which we had reason to expect
      from them; we shall not hesitate to concur in such further
      measures as may best obviate any ill effects which might be
      apprehended from the failure of those negotiations.

      Your approbation of the vote of this House at the last
      session, respecting the provision for the public creditors,
      is very acceptable to us: the proper mode of carrying that
      resolution into effect, being a subject in which the future
      character and happiness of these States are deeply
      involved, will be among the first to claim our attention.

      The prosperity of the United States is the primary object
      of all our deliberations, and we cherish the reflection,
      that every measure which we may adopt for its advancement,
      will not only receive your cheerful concurrence, but will
      at the same time derive from your co-operation additional
      efficacy in insuring to our fellow-citizens the blessings
      of a free, efficient, and equal Government.

                                  FRED'K A. MUHLENBERG,

                       _Speaker of the House of Representatives_.

Mr. BOUDINOT moved to strike out at the beginning of the third paragraph
"the information," because the House were possessed of this knowledge by
other means: they had, during the recess of Congress, an opportunity of
consulting their constituents, and could therefore say of their own
motion, that the measures of the last session have not proved
dissatisfactory.

Mr. CLYMER, as one of the committee appointed to prepare a report, had
agreed to the address, but he did not think himself precluded from
agreeing to what he supposed would be an amendment. The words appeared
to him necessary, as they were strongly implied, inasmuch as the address
was in answer to the speech of the President, which really contained
such information.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) contended, that the House had no
information with respect to the satisfaction their constituents
experienced in the measures of the last session, except what was
contained in the President's speech. He did not presume to deny, but
every individual member of Congress might have received information of
this nature in private conversation with the people, but no official
communication could possibly be got at; it was therefore necessary to
recognize, in the address, the quarter from whence they drew that
information; in this view he considered the words necessary, and hoped
they would be retained.

Mr. BOUDINOT meant to avoid the idea that it was from the Executive
alone they drew this information, when it was a notorious fact,
perceptible to common observation.

Mr. LAWRENCE said, the Executive was the proper source to draw such
information from, and he was very happy to learn it from so respectable
a quarter; he therefore hoped it would be permitted to remain in the
report.

The question was now taken for striking out the words, and it passed in
the negative.

It was then moved to strike out, in the first line of the fourth
paragraph, the word "gratifying" and insert "grateful."

Mr. WADSWORTH did not mean to call in question the right of gentlemen to
amend the address in what manner they thought proper, but he would just
remark, that the composition of two or three gentlemen, done with
deliberation and coolness, generally had more elegance and pertinency,
than the patchwork of a large assembly. He should therefore vote against
every alteration that went to nothing more than to change the style; if
gentlemen were disposed to contend for principle, he should listen to
them with attention, and decide according to the best of his judgment,
but he really conceived it to be a waste of time to discuss the
propriety of two such terms as grateful and gratifying.

Mr. PAGE hoped that gentlemen would proceed to amend the address in such
a way as to give it the highest degree of perfection. He would rather
have his feelings hurt, provided they could be said to be hurt by
changing the language of his most favorite production, than that an
address should go from this body with any incorrectness whatever. He
hoped the House would always criticise upon, strike out and amend,
whatever matter was before them with boldness and freedom. And he would
observe to gentlemen, that the most refined and accurate writers were
never ashamed to have it said of them, that they blotted out.

Mr. WHITE said, that every gentleman had an undoubted right to take the
sense of the House upon an amendment, and that it ought not to be
considered as a reflection upon those who drew up the address.

Mr. WADSWORTH did not pretend to be a critic, but thought he understood
the meaning of the words gratifying and grateful, and he conceived the
difference to be too trifling to engage the attention of the House. He
hoped that he had been as modest as a man could be in his observations,
and was sorry to have drawn his worthy friend from Virginia into any
severities.

Mr. THATCHER apprehend the meaning of these two words to be the same,
and the reception of either was only important as it related to the
measure or harmony of the period. Now those gentlemen who are qualified
to decide this point, might vote for the substitute; but for his part he
was very well satisfied with it as it stood.

Mr. STURGES wished the sentence struck out altogether, because he did
not conceive the assertion to be true; for he did believe that there was
something which could and ought to be more gratifying to the
representatives of a free people than the reflection that their labors
are rewarded by the approbation of their fellow-citizens; to be sure it
was a grateful reflection, but there was one much more so, which was,
that their labors had tended to advance the real interests of the
people. If it is, as it ought to be, our highest ambition to promote the
general interest, it must be most gratifying to us to learn that we have
attained that desirable end.

Mr. PAGE had only heard some expressions from the gentleman from
Connecticut (Mr. WADSWORTH) which he imagined had a tendency to
discourage the House from making necessary alterations; but he was
convinced, from the known candor and impartiality of that gentleman,
that he must not have fully comprehended his intentions, and therefore
begged to apologize to him for any thing he might have said partaking of
severity.

The question was now put for striking out "gratifying" and inserting
"grateful," and passed in the negative.

The committee then agreed to the report, rose, and the Chairman reported
it without amendment.

Mr. Speaker being seated in the chair, the address was read again and
unanimously agreed to by the House.

It was then moved that a committee be appointed to wait on the President
of the United States, to learn from him at what time, and in what place
he would receive this address. Messrs. SMITH, (of South Carolina,)
CLYMER, and LAWRENCE, were appointed the committee on this occasion.


WEDNESDAY, January 13.

BENJAMIN HUNTINGTON, from Connecticut; LAMBERT CADWALADER, from New
Jersey; DANIEL HEISTER, from Pennsylvania, and WILLIAM SMITH, from
Maryland, appeared and took their seats.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) reported that the President would be ready
to receive their address to-morrow at 12 o'clock.


THURSDAY, January 14.

THEODORE SEDGWICK, from Massachusetts, and THOMAS HARTLEY, from
Pennsylvania, appeared and took their seats.

The House then went and presented the address to the President, to which
the President was pleased to make the following reply:

      _Gentlemen:_

      I receive, with pleasure, the assurances you give me, that
      you will diligently and anxiously pursue such measures as
      shall appear to you conducive to the interests of your
      constituents; and that an early and serious consideration
      will be given to the various and weighty matters
      recommended by me to your attention.

      I have fall confidence that your deliberations will
      continue to be directed by an enlightened and virtuous zeal
      for the happiness of our country.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.


FRIDAY, January 15.

JAMES JACKSON, from Georgia, appeared and took his seat.

Mr. HARTLEY moved an adjournment, when

Mr. PAGE rose and said, he wished to call the attention of the House,
before they adjourned, to a subject which he thought of importance, and
which ought no longer to be in the undecided state it had been in since
the last session; it was this, whether the persons who had taken down
and published the debates of the House, by the tacit consent of the
members during the last session, and who had withdrawn from the seats
they then held in the House, to the gallery, during this session, might
not return to the same seats. He supposed that they had modestly
withdrawn, on the supposition that the debate which took place just
before the adjournment, showed that the sense of the members was against
their sitting in the House; but the contrary was the case; that he knew
their publications had given great satisfaction to many of the
constituents of that House; that the House was applauded for its conduct
on that occasion, both at home and abroad, and had been highly commended
for it in some British publications; that he was anxious that the
short-hand writers should resume their seats in the House, lest it might
be insinuated by the jealous enemies of our Government, that the House
of Representatives were more republican and indulgent the last session
than this; that removing those writers to the gallery, was but a step
towards removing them from the House, and that this suspicion would be
increased by circumstances which, however innocent, nay proper in
themselves, might be misunderstood and excite uneasiness. The doors of
the gallery had been two days shut, the House had made a parade through
the streets, and had displayed their eagle in their hall; that these
circumstances, if followed by the exclusion of the short-hand writers,
might spread an alarm which ought to be avoided; he therefore hoped that
those gentlemen who had retired to the gallery might be informed that
they might return to the seats they occupied in the last session--that
he avoided making a regular motion to this effect, because he knew that
some worthy members who wished to admit those writers, or any others,
did not think their admission ought to be sanctioned by vote, and appear
on the journals, lest that might sanction and authenticate erroneous
publications; but that if he should not discover that the sense of the
members present was in favor of the ideas he had expressed, that
to-morrow he would bring forward a motion made by a member from South
Carolina, (Mr. TUCKER,) last session, for that purpose, for he had no
fears that a vote of the House to authorize the admission of such
writers, would make the House answerable for their publications.

Mr. HARTLEY withdrew his motion for adjournment, in order that the
subject alluded to by the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. PAGE) might be
understood.

Mr. WHITE said, he felt averse to enter into a positive resolution for
the admission of any person to take down the debates, but wished them
permitted to a convenient seat within the bar for the purpose of hearing
with greater accuracy. But he feared that a vote of the House would give
a sanction to the details, which the publications ought not to have. Not
that he thought them worse than similar publications in other countries;
on the contrary, he thought them better, if he judged from what had
fallen under his particular observation, and what he recollected to have
from others. He did not wish a positive motion for the admission of
short-hand writers, because gentlemen might object to a vote of the
kind, and he should be very loth to discourage publications of the
advantages of which he was well convinced; he knew they had given great
satisfaction to the people of America, and it was a satisfaction of
which he would not deprive them. Although these publications had not
given an exact and accurate detail of all that passed in Congress, yet
their information had been pretty full, and he believed the errors not
very many; those that were made, he supposed to arise rather from haste
or inadvertence, than from design. He was convinced of this, from the
disposition the publishers had manifested to correct any errors that
were pointed out, and the pains they sometimes took to ask gentlemen
what were their particular expressions, when they either did not hear
distinctly, or did not comprehend the speaker's meaning. He wished,
therefore, the business might go on; but silently, as it had heretofore
done, without the express approbation of the House. He was fully
convinced, that neither the editor of the Register, nor any other man,
but the members of the House, had a right to a seat within those walls,
without the consent of every member; but he thought this consent would
be tacitly given if no gentleman opposed their introduction, and in this
way he most heartily concurred with his colleague in agreeing to the
admission of such persons as thought themselves qualified, and were
inclined to take down and publish their debates and proceedings; he
should be glad to see them in the seats they had last session, but he
should object to the vote being entered on the journals of the House.

Mr. BOUDINOT thought the mode proper to be pursued on this occasion,
would be to give a discretionary power to the Speaker to admit such
persons as he thought proper. Under such a regulation, short-hand
writers might be admitted, without giving to their publications any
degree of legislative authority.

Mr. THATCHER hoped that it was not the intention of gentlemen to confine
the business to one person only, because others might appear of equal
capacity, and equally deserving of encouragement.

Mr. PAGE said, he did not wish to confine the vote to any two or three
writers, he cared not how many were admitted. It ought to be remembered,
that he said, when this subject was before the House at the last
session, that he saw no reason why Mr. FENNO should not be within the
House as well as Mr. LLOYD, instead of being in the gallery. He had no
objection to admitting any number of short-hand writers, provided they
did not incommode the members.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--I do not wish, Mr. Speaker, to exclude
others from a convenient seat; but at the same time, I think those who
were here before, have a pre-emption right to the best. I assure you,
sir, I am sorry for the loss of them off the floor, because I think
their publications had a salutary tendency. It has been said, that it
was the design of the short-hand writers to give a partial
representation of our proceedings. I believe, if they are not correctly
given, it is owing to the hurry in which business of this kind is
conducted, and I am confirmed in this opinion, by some errors which I
have discovered in the publication of our proceedings. It was said that
a committee was appointed to bring in a bill for the preservation and
safe-keeping of the _accounts_ of the United States. I thought within
myself that we were not so tenacious on this head, therefore suspected
some mistake, and on consulting the journals I found that a committee
had been appointed to bring in a bill for the safe-keeping and
preservation of the _acts_ of the United States. The similarity of the
letters in those two words, and the great abridgment short-hand writers
are obliged to make for the sake of expedition, may have caused him to
substitute the one for the other. In another place I found a greater
blunder still; it was said, that the House had appointed a committee for
the regulation of the _barbers_ of the United States; this struck me as
a very gross misrepresentation, for I could hardly believe that the
Legislature of the Union would, at so early a day, attempt to usurp an
authority not vested in them by the constitution, and that, too, over a
body of men who could at any time put an end to the tyranny with the
edge of the razor; but on searching the minutes in this case, I found
that a bill was brought in for the regulation of the _harbors_ of the
United States. Upon the whole, I believe, inaccurate as this work is, it
has given to our constituents great satisfaction, and I should be glad
to see our _Argus_ restored to his former situation behind the Speaker's
chair, from whence he could both see and hear distinctly every thing
that passed in the House.


TUESDAY, January 19.

The bill for enumerating the inhabitants of the United States was read a
second time, and ordered to be committed to a Committee of the Whole.


WEDNESDAY, January 20.

JAMES MADISON and JOSIAH PARKER, from Virginia, appeared and took their
seats.


THURSDAY, January 21.

GEORGE LEONARD, from Massachusetts, PETER SYLVESTER, from New York, and
THOMAS FITZSIMONS, from Pennsylvania, appeared and took their seats.


MONDAY, January 25.

_Census of the Union._

The House resolved into Committee of the Whole on the bill providing for
the actual enumeration of the inhabitants of the United States, Mr.
BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON observed, that they had now an opportunity of obtaining the
most useful information for those who should hereafter be called upon to
legislate for their country, if this bill was extended so as to embrace
some other objects besides the bare enumeration of the inhabitants; it
would enable them to adapt the public measures to the particular
circumstances of the community. In order to know the various interests
of the United States, it was necessary that the description of the
several classes into which the community is divided should be accurately
known. On this knowledge the Legislature might proceed to make a proper
provision for the agricultural, commercial, and manufacturing interests,
but without it they could never make their provisions in due proportion.

This kind of information, he observed, all Legislatures had wished for;
but this kind of information had never been obtained in any country. He
wished, therefore, to avail himself of the present opportunity of
accomplishing so valuable a purpose. If the plan was pursued in taking
every future census, it would give them an opportunity of marking the
progress of the society, and distinguishing the growth of every
interest. This would furnish ground for many useful calculations, and at
the same time answer the purpose of a check on the officers who were
employed to make the enumeration; forasmuch as the aggregate number is
divided into parts, any imposition might be discovered with
proportionable ease. If these ideas meet the approbation of the House,
he hoped they would pass over the schedule in the second clause of the
bill, and he would endeavor to prepare something to accomplish this
object.

The committee hereupon agreed to pass over the part of the bill alluded
to.

Mr. LIVERMORE moved to amend the last clause of the bill, by striking
out all that related to the mode of compensating the Marshal and his
assistants, which were specified sums, proportioned to the service, and
to substitute a provision, authorizing the Marshal, or his assistants,
to receive from every male white inhabitant above the age of twenty-one,
five cents; and of the owner of every male slave, of like age, three
cents; reserving, for his own use, four cents out of every five, and
paying the other one cent to the Marshal. He thought this was an
equitable tax, agreeable to the spirit of the constitution; that it
might be collected with safety and satisfaction; while, on the other
hand, the mode proposed in the bill would be extremely inconvenient; it
would draw a considerable sum out of the Treasury, which their present
situation did not enable them to spare.

On the question this motion was lost.

The committee then, after making some small amendments, rose and
reported progress.


THURSDAY, January 28.

_Report of the Secretary of the Treasury._

Mr. AMES observed, that the subject of the Secretary's report, on the
means of promoting public credit, is the order for this day; but when I
consider the circumstances under which this order was entered into, I am
inclined to wish for an extension of the time. It will be recollected
that this report was ordered to be printed, in order that the members
might have it in their hands for consideration; when this was done, it
was expected that the printing would be more expeditiously executed than
the event has demonstrated it could be, of consequence our time for
deliberation has been curtailed; and those gentlemen who were against so
early a day before, will think the present rather premature. In order to
accommodate them, I shall move you a longer day than otherwise I might
be disposed to do; and if I am seconded, I move that the order of the
day be postponed till next Monday week.

Mr. JACKSON.--The report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Speaker,
embraces subjects of the utmost magnitude, which ought not to be lightly
taken up, or hastily concluded upon. It appears to me to contain two
important objects, worthy of our most serious and indefatigable
disquisition. The first is, that all idea of discrimination among the
public creditors, as original holders and transferees, ought to be done
away; and on this head, I must own to you, sir, that I formerly
coincided in something like the same opinion, but circumstances have
occurred, to make me almost a convert to the other. Since this report
has been read in this House, a spirit of havoc, speculation, and ruin,
has arisen, and been cherished by people who had an access to the
information the report contained, that would have made a _Hastings_
blush to have been connected with, though long inured to preying on the
vitals of his fellow-men. Three vessels, sir, have sailed within a
fortnight from this port, freighted for speculation; they are intended
to purchase up the State and other securities in the hands of the
uninformed, though honest citizens of North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Georgia. My soul rises indignant at the avaricious and moral
turpitude which so vile a conduct displays.

Then, sir, as to the other object of the report, the assumption of the
State debts by the General Government, it is a question of delicacy as
well as importance. The States ought to be consulted on this point, some
of them may be against the measure, but surely it will be prudent in us
to delay deciding upon a subject that may give umbrage to the community.
For my part, before I decide, I should be glad to know the sentiments of
the Legislature of the State from which I come, and whether it would, in
their opinion, be more conducive to the general and particular interests
of these United States, than retaining them on their present footing. I
trust I am not singular on this point; for gentlemen desirous of
deciding on full information, will not only wish for the sense of the
Legislatures of the several States, but of every individual also.
Perhaps gentlemen of the neighboring States may think it proper to take
up this business at an early day, because they can learn the desires of
their constituents in a short time; but let those gentlemen consider for
a moment, that the distant States ought to have an equal opportunity,
and we cannot hear the voice of Georgia in a week, nor a month. I should
therefore be as much in the dark on Monday week, as I am at present; I
would wish, if the postponement is intended to answer any valuable
purpose, that it should be extended to a longer period. I think the
first Monday in May would be sufficiently soon to enter upon it, and
shall therefore move it. In this time, the State Legislatures may have
convened, and be able to give us their sentiments on a subject in which
they are so deeply concerned.

Mr. BOUDINOT agreed with the honorable gentleman who was last up, that
this subject is a matter of the highest importance, and worthy of due
deliberation; that speculation had risen to an alarming height; but this
consideration bade him to be in favor of the only measure which could
put a stop to the evil, that is, appreciating the public debt, till the
evidences in the hands of the creditors came to their proper value. I
also agree, said he, with the gentleman, that it would be a desirable
thing to have the sense of the State Legislatures, and every part of the
community, because it would tend to elucidate the subject; but we should
not be led by visionary pursuits to defer a business of this magnitude
too long. I think we may go into a Committee of the Whole on Monday
week, without coming to a final determination; but if it is put off for
a long period, it will cause a still greater fluctuation in the market,
and increase those circumstances which the honorable gentleman laments
as injurious to the peace and happiness of the community. We had better,
therefore, look the business in the face, take it into consideration,
and go through it deliberately; but, at the same time, as expeditiously
as the novelty of our circumstances will admit. In this way also we may
acquire information, because we obtain more from listening to each
other's sentiments, than we can procure from any other source. But if,
after all, gentlemen should find themselves unprepared on Monday week,
the business may be postponed to a further day. But I would by no means
consent to lose sight of it for so long a period as from now till May.

Mr. JACKSON.--If the members of this body had known the plan in
contemplation, and they had had an opportunity of consulting their
constituents on the subject, then, I venture to say, this demon of
speculation would not have extended its baleful influence over the
remote parts of the Union. It arose and seized on us by surprise,
advantages are taken without any warning, and such as cannot but
exasperate. But, sir, waiving all these reflections, let us recollect
that the State of North Carolina forms a part of this Union; this
measure is to affect her, as well as the States who are represented on
this floor. Shall we then proceed without them? Her citizens are
indubitably as much concerned in the event as others, and will you bind
her in a case of this importance, when she has not a single
Representative within these walls? If no other consideration can induce
gentlemen to defer this business, deference to a sister State who has so
lately acceded to the Union ought. But, in addition to this, I contend
that the State Legislatures ought to be consulted; and I declare myself,
that I shall not know how to vote until I learn the sense of my
constituents. If we consent to this proper and reasonable delay, our
constituents will be prepared for our decisions, and a stop will be put
to the speculation; or if any man burns his fingers, which I hope to
God, with all the warmth of a feeling heart, they may, they will only
have their own cupidity to blame. The people will then generally remain
satisfied, under the general assurance, that Congress will pursue proper
measures for the support of public credit, and little or no evil can be
apprehended; but much substantial good may arise from a delay of a few
months.

Mr. SHERMAN hoped the business would be conducted in such a way as to be
concluded before the end of the present session. As to obtaining the
sense of the State Legislatures, he did not think that necessary. The
people appointed the members of this House, and their situation enabled
them to consult and judge better what was for the public good, than a
number of distinct parts, void of relative information, and under the
influence of local views. He supposed that Congress contained all the
information necessary to determine this or any other national question.
As to the first observation of the gentleman from Georgia, that
speculations had been carried on to a great extent, he had only to
observe, that this had been the case from the time when the public
securities were first issued, and he supposed they would continue until
the holders were satisfied with what was done to secure the payment.

As to the State debts, it was a subject which he apprehended would not
be ultimately decided, till the sense of the people is generally known;
and on this occasion, it might be well to be acquainted with the sense
of the State Legislatures; he hoped, therefore, that it would be the
case. But with regard to the foreign and domestic continental debts, he
did not hesitate to say, it was proper for Congress to take them into
consideration as speedily as possible; for the sooner they are
discussed, the sooner will the House make up there judgment thereon. He
believed they were possessed of all the facts they could be possessed
of, and therefore any great delay was improper. He was in favor of
making the business the order of the day for Monday week.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--I believe the House at present have not come to a
conclusion in their own opinion, on the various circumstances which are
necessary to be attended to in the report of the Secretary of the
Treasury; therefore, I think some delay is necessary, but it should be
as early a day as we could act upon it understandingly. The ardent
expectations of the people on this subject want no other demonstration
than the numerous body of citizens assembled within these walls.[32] And
while the public expectation is kept thus alive and in suspense,
gentlemen cannot but suppose designs will be framed and prosecuted that
may be injurious to the community. For, although I do not believe that
speculation, to a certain degree, is baneful in its effects upon
society, yet, when it is extended too far, it becomes a real evil, and
requires the administration to divert or suppress it. If the capital
employed in merchandise is taken from that branch of the public
interest, and employed in speculations no way useful in increasing the
labor of the community, such speculation would be pernicious. The
employment of the time of merchants in this way, in addition to the
employment of their capital, is a serious and alarming circumstance. A
spirit of gambling is of such evil tendency, that every legislative
endeavor should be made to suppress it. From these considerations, I
take it, Mr. Speaker, that there are two things very evident; first,
that the postponement should be so long as to enable us to enter upon
the task with understanding; and that this pernicious temper, or spirit
of speculation, should be counteracted at as early a period as can
possibly take place.

Mr. GERRY.--I am a friend to the postponement, Mr. Speaker, though not
for so long a time as the gentleman from Georgia proposes. It will be
agreed, on all hands, that public credit is the main pillar on which
this Government is to stand; but so embarrassed are our finances, that
they require both time and consideration for their due arrangement.

With respect to the suppression of speculation, I do not conceive that
possible, by either a longer or a shorter postponement. Does any
gentleman expect, while we have a public debt, to prevent speculation in
our funds? If they do, they expect to accomplish what never was
effected by any nation, nor, in my opinion, ever will be. But if they
could accomplish it, they would do an injury to the community; for
speculation gives a currency to property that would lie dormant; all
public debts would hereafter be contracted on terms ruinous to the
debtors. As to the policy of speculation, I doubt whether the
speculation of foreigners in our funds is not rather advantageous than
disadvantageous to the community. If we look abroad, and judge by
comparative reasoning, we shall be led to believe that nations derive
great advantages from being possessed of the money of foreigners; they
not only endeavor to acquire it by direct, but also by indirect loans.
During the late war, the Dutch held 40 or 50,000,000 sterling, in the
funds of Great Britain, and she was sensible of the benefit. The
speculations of individuals have perhaps been of the greatest advantage
to those who held public securities, by giving a circulation to the
certificates. Hence it has been thought that a public debt is a source
of great emolument to a nation, by extending its capital, and enlarging
the operations of productive industry.

Mr. JACKSON.--I know, sir, that there is, and will be, speculation in
the funds of every nation possessed of public debt; but they are not
such as the present report has given rise to, by the advantage those at
the seat of Government obtained of learning the plan contemplated by the
principal of the Treasury Department, before others had heard a word
thereof. If we had either received this report privately, or not sat in
a large city, then, sir, none of these speculations would have arisen,
because Congress could have devised means of diffusing the information
so generally as to prevent any of its ill effects. Under these
impressions, I am led to express my ardent wish to God, that we had been
on the banks of the Susquehanna or Potomac, or at any place in the
woods, and out of the neighborhood of a populous city; all my
unsuspecting fellow-citizens might then have been warned of their
danger, and guarded themselves against the machinations of the
speculators. To some gentlemen, characters of this kind may appear to be
of utility; but I, sir, view them in a different light; they are as
rapacious wolves, seeking whom they may devour, and preying upon the
misfortunes of their fellow-men, taking an undue advantage of their
necessities. This, sir, is the sentiment of my heart, and I will always
use its language. I say, sir, whatever might be the happy effects of
speculation in other countries, it has had the most unhappy and
pernicious effects in this. Look at the gallant veteran, who nobly led
your martial bands in the hour of extreme danger, whose patriotic soul
acknowledged no other principle than that his life was the property of
his country, and who evinced it by his repeated exposures to a vengeful
enemy. See him deprived of those limbs, which he sacrificed in your
service! and behold his virtuous and tender wife sustaining him and his
children in a wilderness, lonely, exposed to the arms of savages, where
he and his family have been driven by these useful class of citizens,
these speculators, who have drained from him the pittance which a
grateful country had afforded him, in reward for his bravery and toils,
and a long catalogue of merits. Nor is their insatiable avarice yet
satisfied, while there remains a single class of citizens who retain the
evidence of their demands upon the public; the State debts are to become
an object for them to prey upon, until other citizens are driven into
scenes of equal distress. Is it not the duty of the House to check this
spirit of devastation? It most assuredly is. If by the ill-timed
promulgation of this report, we have laid the foundation for the
calamity, ought we not to counteract it? This may be done by postponing
the subject, until the sense of the State Legislatures is obtained, with
respect to their particular debts. Then these men may send off other
vessels to countermand their former orders; and, perhaps, we may yet
save the distant inhabitants from being plundered by these harpies.


MONDAY, February 1.

GEORGE GALE, from Maryland, appeared and took his seat.


TUESDAY, February 2.

THEODORE BLAND, from Virginia, appeared and took his seat.


WEDNESDAY, February 3.

The engrossed bill for enumerating the inhabitants of the United States
was read the third time, and then ordered to lie on the table.

_Rule of Naturalization._

The House then went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
establishing a uniform rule of Naturalization, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.
The first clause enacted, that all free white persons, who have, or
shall migrate into the United States, and shall give satisfactory proof,
before a magistrate, by oath, that they intend to reside therein, and
shall take an oath of allegiance, _and shall have resided in the United
States for one whole year_, shall be entitled to all the rights of
citizenship, except being capable of holding an office under the State
or General Government, which capacity they are to acquire after a
residence of two years more.

Mr. TUCKER moved to strike out the words "and shall have resided within
the United States for one whole year;" because he conceived it the
policy of America to enable foreigners to hold lands, in their own
right, in less than one year; he had no objection to extending the term,
entitling them to hold an office under Government, to three years. In
short, the object of his motion was, to let aliens come in, take the
oath, and hold lands without any residence at all.

Mr. HARTLEY said, he had no doubt of the policy of admitting aliens to
the rights of citizenship; but he thought some security for their
fidelity and allegiance was requisite besides the bare oath; that is, he
thought an actual residence of such a length of time as would give a man
an opportunity of esteeming the Government from knowing its intrinsic
value, was essentially necessary to assure us of a man's becoming a
citizen. The practice of almost every State in the Union countenanced a
regulation of this nature; and perhaps it was owing to a wish of this
kind, that the States had consented to give this power to the General
Government. The terms of citizenship are made too cheap in some parts of
the Union; to say, that a man shall be admitted to all the privileges of
a citizen, without any residence at all, is what can hardly be expected.

The policy of the old nations of Europe has drawn a line between
citizens and aliens: that policy has existed to our knowledge ever since
the foundation of the Roman Empire; experience has proved its propriety,
or we should have found some nation deviating from a regulation inimical
to its welfare. From this it may be inferred, that we ought not to grant
this privilege on terms so easy as is moved by the gentleman from South
Carolina. If he had gone no further in his motion than to give aliens a
right to purchase and hold lands, the objection would not have been so
great; but if the words are stricken out that he has moved for, an alien
will be entitled to join in the election of your officers at the first
moment he puts his foot on shore in America, when it is impossible, from
the nature of things, that he can be qualified to exercise such a
talent; but if it was presumable that he was qualified by a knowledge of
the candidates, yet we have no hold upon his attachment to the
Government.

Mr. SHERMAN thought that the interest of the State where the emigrant
intended to reside ought to be consulted, as well as the interests of
the General Government. He presumed it was intended by the convention
who framed the constitution, that Congress should have the power of
naturalization, in order to prevent particular States receiving
citizens, and forcing them upon others who would not have received them
in any other manner. It was therefore meant to guard against an improper
mode of naturalization, rather than foreigners should be received upon
easier terms than those adopted by the several States. Now, the
regulation provided for in this bill, entitles all free white persons,
which includes emigrants, and even those who are likely to become
chargeable. It certainly never would be undertaken by Congress to compel
the States to receive and support this class of persons; it would
therefore be necessary that some clause should be added to the bill to
counteract such a general proposition.

Mr. PAGE was of opinion, that the policy of European nations and States
respecting naturalization, did not apply to the situation of the United
States. Bigotry and superstition, or a deep-rooted prejudice against the
Government, laws, religion, or manners of neighboring nations had a
weight in that policy, which cannot exist here, where a more liberal
system ought to prevail. I think, said he, we shall be inconsistent with
ourselves, if, after boasting of having opened an asylum for the
oppressed of all nations, and established a Government which is the
admiration of the world, we make the terms of admission to the full
enjoyment of that asylum so hard as is now proposed. It is nothing to
us, whether Jews or Roman Catholics settle amongst us; whether subjects
of kings, or citizens of free States wish to reside in the United
States, they will find it their interest to be good citizens, and
neither their religious nor political opinions can injure us, if we have
good laws, well executed.

Mr. BOUDINOT was against striking out the words, because he would rather
choose to alter it from one year to two years, than strike out all that
respected the capacity of an alien to be elected into any office. He
conceived, that after a person was admitted to the rights of
citizenship, he ought to have them full and complete, and not be
divested of any part.

Mr. WHITE noticed the inconvenience which would result from permitting
an alien to all the rights of citizenship, merely upon his coming and
taking an oath that he meant to reside in the United States. Foreign
merchants and captains of vessels might by this means evade the
additional duties laid on foreign vessels; he thought, therefore, if the
words were struck out, that another clause ought to be added, depriving
persons of the privilege of citizenship, who left the country and staid
abroad for a given length of time.

Mr. LAWRENCE was of opinion, that Congress had nothing more to do than
point out the mode by which foreigners might become citizens. The
constitution had expressly said how long they should reside among us
before they were admitted to seats in the Legislature; the propriety of
annexing any additional qualifications is therefore much to be
questioned. But this bill is not confined to the qualifications of the
General Government only, it descends to those of the State Governments;
it may be doubly questioned how far Congress has the power to declare
what residence shall entitle an alien to the right of a seat in the
State Legislatures.

The reason of admitting foreigners to the rights of citizenship amongst
us is the encouragement of emigration, as we have a large tract of
country to people. Now, he submitted to the sense of the committee,
whether a term, so long as that prescribed in the bill, would not tend
to restrain rather than encourage emigration? It has been said, that we
ought not to admit them to vote at our elections. Will they not have to
pay taxes from the time they settle amongst us? And is it not a
principle that taxation and representation ought to go hand and hand?
Shall we then restrain a man from having an agency in the disposal of
his own money? It has been also observed, that persons might come and
reside amongst us for some time, and then leave the country; he did not
doubt that such might be the case, but it was not presumable, that after
they had once taken an oath that they meant to reside here, and had
become citizens, that they would return as soon as the occasion which
required their absence had terminated.

Mr. MADISON.--When we are considering the advantages that may result
from an easy mode of naturalization, we ought also to consider the
cautions necessary to guard against abuses. It is no doubt very
desirable that we should hold out as many inducements as possible for
the worthy part of mankind to come and settle amongst us, and throw
their fortunes into a common lot with ours. But why is this desirable?
Not merely to swell the catalogue of people. No, sir, it is to increase
the wealth and strength of the community; and those who acquire the
rights of citizenship, without adding to the strength or wealth of the
community, are not the people we are in want of. And what is proposed by
the amendment is, that they shall take nothing more than an oath of
fidelity, and declare their intention to reside in the United States.
Under such terms, it was well observed by my colleague, aliens might
acquire the right of citizenship, and return to the country from which
they came, and evade the laws intended to encourage the commerce and
industry of the real citizens and inhabitants of America, enjoying at
the same time all the advantages of citizens and aliens.

I should be exceedingly sorry, sir, that our rule of naturalization
excluded a single person of good fame that really meant to incorporate
himself into our society; on the other hand, I do not wish that any man
should acquire the privilege, but such as would be a real addition to
the wealth or strength of the United States.

It may be a question of some nicety, how far we can make our law to
admit an alien to the right of citizenship, step by step; but there is
no doubt we may, and ought to require residence as an essential.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) thought some restraints proper, and that
they would tend to raise the Government in the opinion of good men, who
are desirous of emigrating; as for the privilege of electing, or being
elected, he conceived a man ought to be some time in the country before
he could pretend to exercise it. What could he know of the Government
the moment he landed? Little or nothing: how then could he ascertain who
was a proper person to legislate or judge of the laws? Certainly
gentlemen would not pretend to bestow a privilege upon a man which he is
incapable of using?

Mr. HARTLEY said that the subject had employed his thoughts for some
time, and that he had made up his mind in favor of requiring a term of
residence. The experience of all nations, and the constitutions of most
of the States induced the same opinion. An alien has no right to hold
lands in any country, and if they are admitted to do it in this, we are
authorized to annex to it such conditions as we think proper. If they
are unreasonable, they may defeat the object we have in view, but they
have no right to complain; yet, considering the circumstances of this
country, he was favorable to easy terms of admission, because, he
thought, it might be some inducement to foreigners to come and settle
among us. It has been remarked, that we must admit those whom we call
citizens to all the rights of citizenship at once. This opinion, he
presumed, was not well founded; the practice of this country in no
instance warrants it. The constitutions of the several States admit
aliens to the privilege of citizenship, step by step; they generally
require a residence for a certain time, before they are admitted to vote
at elections; some of them annex to it the condition of payment of taxes
and other qualifications; but he believed none of the States render a
foreigner capable of being elected to serve in a legislative capacity,
without a probation of some years. This kind of exception is also
contemplated in the Constitution of the United States. It is there
required, that a person shall be so many years an inhabitant before he
can be admitted to the trust of legislating for the society. He thought,
therefore, that this part of the objection is not well supported.

Mr. WHITE doubted whether the constitution authorized Congress to say on
what terms aliens or citizens should hold lands, in the respective
States; the power vested by the constitution in Congress, respecting the
subject now before the House, extends to nothing more than making a
uniform rule of naturalization. After a person has once become a
citizen, the power of Congress ceases to operate upon him; the rights
and privileges of citizens in the several States belong to those States;
but a citizen of one State is entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of the citizens in the several States. Now, if any State in
the Union should choose to prohibit its citizens from the privilege of
holding real estates, without a residence of a greater number of years
than should be thought proper by this House, they could do it, and no
authority of the Government, he apprehended, could enforce an obedience
to a regulation not warranted by the constitution. So, in the case of
elections, if the constitution of a particular State requires four,
five, or six years residence, before a man is admitted to acquire a
legislative capacity, with respect to the State Government, he must
remain there that length of time notwithstanding you may declare he
shall be eligible after a residence of two years; all, therefore, that
the House have to do on this subject, is to confine themselves to a
uniform rule of naturalization, and not to a general definition of what
constitutes the rights of citizenship in the several States.

Mr. JACKSON conceived the present subject to be of high importance to
the respectability and character of the American name; the veneration he
had for, and the attachment he had to, this country, made him extremely
anxious to preserve its good fame from injury. He hoped to see the title
of a citizen of America as highly venerated and respected as was that of
a citizen of old Rome. I am clearly of opinion, that rather than have
the common class of vagrants, paupers, and other outcasts of Europe,
that we had better be as we are, and trust to the natural increase of
our population for inhabitants. If the motion made by the gentleman from
South Carolina, should obtain, such people will find an easy admission
indeed to the rights of citizenship; much too easy for the interests of
the people of America. Nay, sir, the terms required by the bill on the
table are, in my mind, too easy. I think, before a man is admitted to
enjoy the high and inestimable privileges of a citizen of America, that
something more than a mere residence amongst us is necessary. I think he
ought to pass some time in a state of probation, and at the end of the
term, be able to bring testimonials of a proper and decent behavior; no
man, who would be a credit to the community, could think such terms
difficult or indelicate: if bad men should be dissatisfied on this
account, and should decline to emigrate, the regulation will have a
beneficial effect; for we had better keep such out of the country than
admit them into it. I conceive, sir, that an amendment of this kind
would be reasonable and proper; all the difficulty will be to determine
how a proper certificate of good behavior should be obtained; I think it
might be done by vesting the power in the grand jury or district courts
to determine on the character of the man, as they should find it.

Mr. PAGE.--I observed before, Mr. Chairman, that the European policy did
not apply to the United States. I gave my reasons for it; they are such
as have not been controverted, and I presume cannot be.

With respect to the idea of excluding bad men from the rights of
citizenship, I look upon it as impracticable; hard terms of admission
may exclude good men, but will not keep out one of the wretches alluded
to; they will come in various forms, and care little about citizenship.
If we make use of the grand jury for this purpose, as proposed by the
member from Georgia, (Mr. JACKSON,) we must, to complete the plan,
authorize the grand jury to indict such emigrants as are unworthy to
become citizens, and expel them. We must add an inquisition, and as it
will not be sufficient for our views of having immaculate citizens, we
should add censors, and banish the immoral from amongst us. Indeed, sir,
I fear, if we go on as is proposed now, in the infancy of our republic,
we shall, in time, require a test of faith and politics of every person
who shall come into these States. As to any precautions against
admitting strangers to vote at elections, though I think them of less
importance than some gentlemen, I object not to them; but contend, that
every man, upon coming into the States, and taking the oath of
allegiance to the Government, and declaring his desire and intention of
residing therein, ought to be enabled to purchase and hold lands, or we
shall discourage many of the present inhabitants of Europe from becoming
inhabitants of the United States.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--We are authorized to establish a uniform rule of
naturalization; but what are the effects resulting from the admission of
persons to citizenship, is another concern, and depends upon the
constitutions and laws of the States now in operation. I have therefore
an objection to that part of the bill which respects the qualification
of the members of the State Legislatures. But with respect to residence,
before a man is admitted, I am of opinion with the gentleman from
Virginia, (Mr. PAGE,) at least it may be questioned, whether any good
can result from it, to compensate for the evil it may effect by
restraining emigration. The gentleman has said he would admit none but
such as would add to the wealth or strength of the nation. Every person
who comes among us must do one or the other; if he brings money, or
other property with him, he evidently increases the general mass of
wealth, and if he brings an able body, his labor will be productive of
national wealth, and an addition to our domestic strength. Consequently,
every person, rich or poor, must add to our wealth and strength, in a
greater or less degree.

Mr. TUCKER had no object in making his motion, but to enable people to
hold lands, who came from abroad to settle in the United States. He was
otherwise satisfied with the clause, so far as it made residence a term
of admission to the privilege of election; but there was a seeming
contradiction in making them freeholders, and, at the same time,
excluding them from the performance of duties annexed to that class of
citizens. He thought the citizens had a right to require the performance
of such duties, by every person who was eligible under their State laws
and constitutions. Now, if the motion could be modified in any way to
accomplish his object with consistency, he would cheerfully acquiesce
therein.

He had no doubt the Government had a right to make the admission to
citizenship progressive; the constitution pointed out something of this
kind, by the different ages and terms of residence they annexed to the
right of holding a seat in this House and in the Senate, and of being
chosen President. No inhabitant can become President of the United
States, unless he has been an inhabitant fourteen years; which plainly
infers that he might have been a citizen for other purposes, with a
shorter residence. But it goes still further, it enables Congress to
dictate the terms of citizenship to foreigners, and to prevent them from
being admitted to the full exercise of the rights of citizenship by the
General Government; because it declares that no other than a
natural-born citizen, or a citizen at the time of the adoption of this
constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President.

Mr. SMITH (of S. C.) hoped the question would not be put to-day, as he
wished to reflect further on the subject. A variety of observations had
been made, which merited the serious attention of the committee; he
would suggest another. An alien, in Great Britain, is not permitted to
inherit, or hold real estate for his own use; consequently, a citizen of
the United States, and a subject of Great Britain, would not be on an
equal footing with respect to estates descended to them by inheritance.
He thought this, and other weighty observations, would induce the House
to postpone the subject till to-morrow.

Mr. SEDGWICK was against the indiscriminate admission of foreigners to
the highest rights of human nature, upon terms so incompetent to secure
the society from being overrun with the outcasts of Europe; besides, the
policy of settling the vacant territory by emigration is of a doubtful
nature. He believed, in the United States, the human species might be
multiplied by a more eligible and convenient mode, than what seemed to
be contemplated by the motion now before the committee. He was well
satisfied for himself, that there existed no absolute necessity of
peopling it in this way; and, if there was no absolute necessity, he
thought Congress might use their discretion, and admit none but
reputable and worthy characters; such only were fit for the society into
which they were blended. The citizens of America preferred this country,
because it is to be preferred; the like principle he wished might be
held by every man who came from Europe to reside here; but there was at
least some grounds to fear the contrary; their sensations, impregnated
with prejudices of education, acquired under monarchical and
aristocratical governments, may deprive them of that zest for pure
republicanism, which is necessary in order to taste its beneficence with
that gratitude which we feel on the occasion. Some kind of probation, as
it has been termed, is absolutely requisite, to enable them to feel and
be sensible of the blessing. Without that probation, he should be sorry
to see them exercise a right which we have gloriously struggled to
attain.

Mr. BURKE thought it of importance to fill the country with useful men,
such as farmers, mechanics, and manufacturers, and, therefore, would
hold out every encouragement to them to emigrate to America. This class
he would receive on liberal terms; and he was satisfied there would be
room enough for them, and for their posterity, for five hundred years to
come. There was another class of men, whom he did not think useful, and
he did not care what impediments were thrown in their way; such as your
European merchants, and factors of merchants, who come with a view of
remaining so long as will enable them to acquire a fortune, and then
they will leave the country, and carry off all their property with
them. These people injure us more than they do us good, and, except in
this last sentiment, I can compare them to nothing but leeches. They
stick to us until they get their fill of our best blood, and then they
fall off and leave us. I look upon the privilege of an American citizen
to be an honorable one, and it ought not to be thrown away upon such
people. There is another class also that I would interdict, that is, the
convicts and criminals which they pour out of British jails. I wish
sincerely some mode could be adopted to prevent the importation of such;
but that, perhaps, is not in our power; the introduction of them ought
to be considered as a high misdemeanor.

Mr. STONE had no doubt but an alien might be admitted to the rights of
citizenship, step by step; but he questioned the power of the House to
say that a man shall be citizen for certain purposes, as it respects the
individual State Governments; he concluded that the laws and
constitutions of the States, and the constitution and laws of the United
States would trace out the steps by which they should acquire certain
degrees of citizenship. Congress may point out a uniform rule of
naturalization; but cannot say what shall be the effect of that
naturalization, as it respects the particular States. Congress cannot
say that foreigners, naturalized under a general law, shall be entitled
to privileges which the States withhold from native citizens.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--An exchange of sentiment on this floor I find always
tends to throw more light on a subject than is generally to be obtained
in any other way. But, as the subject is not yet fully elucidated, I
shall be in favor of letting it remain undecided till to-morrow, for
which reason, I move the committee to rise.

This motion being put, the committee rose, and reported progress, after
which the House adjourned.


=Tuesday=, February 4.

_Rule of Naturalization._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
naturalization bill, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. TUCKER'S motion was still before the committee.

The committee being about to take a question on the motion,

Mr. PAGE wished it delayed until he saw the gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. BURKE) in his place.

Mr. SMITH (of S. C.) said, he believed the object of his colleague was
nothing more than to let foreigners, on easy terms, be admitted to hold
lands; that this object could be better effected by introducing a clause
to that purpose, and he had no doubt but it would be equally
satisfactory to his colleague.

Mr. GOODHUE was against the motion, because it made our citizenship too
cheap; after it was decided against, he would move to make the term two
years, instead of one, before an alien should be entitled to the
privilege of a citizen.

Mr. JACKSON.--It was observed yesterday, Mr. Chairman, that we could not
modify or confine our terms of naturalization; that we could not admit
an alien to the rights of citizenship progressively. I shall take the
liberty of supporting the contrary doctrine, which I contend for, by a
reference to the very accurate commentator on the laws of England,
_Justice Blackstone_, I., 10.--"Naturalization," says he, "cannot be
performed but by an act of Parliament; for by this an alien is put in
exactly the same state as if he had been born in the King's legiance,
_except_ only, that he is incapable, as well as a denizen, of being a
member of the Privy Council, or Parliament, holding offices, grants, &c.
No bill for naturalization can be received in either House of Parliament
without such disabling clause in it." So that here we find, in that
nation from which we derive most of our ideas on this subject, not only
that citizens are made progressively, but that such a mode is absolutely
necessary to be pursued in every act of Parliament for the
naturalization of foreigners.

The same learned Judge then goes on to show the attempts that were made
to introduce a general system of naturalization, and how they failed;
and that, to this day, even of their meritorious naval and military
characters they make an exception, as to sitting in Parliament, &c., and
holding grants of land from the Crown, within the Kingdoms of Great
Britain and Ireland. After this, I presume, it will not be contended
that we cannot found our law on the principle of a progressive and
probational naturalization.

Mr. HUNTINGTON.--The terms of the bill are too indefinite; they require
the emigrant to take an oath that he intends to reside in the United
States; but how long, and for what purpose, is not ascertained. He may
determine to stay here until he accomplishes a particular object; and he
may go into the most obscure part of the Union to take this oath. The
community certainly will not be benefited by such emigrants, and
therefore they ought not to be admitted to the privileges of
citizenship. The mode of naturalization, pointed out in this bill, is
much too easy. In the State to which I belong, said he, no person could
be naturalized, but by an act of the Legislature; the same is the case
in several of the other States, and in Britain. He never knew a good
inhabitant, who wished to be admitted to the rights of citizenship, but
what found this mode sufficiently easy. The term that an emigrant should
reside ought to be sufficiently long to give him an opportunity of
acquiring a knowledge of the principles of the Government, and of those
who are most proper to administer it; otherwise he cannot exercise his
privilege with any advantage to himself, or to the community. He
therefore wished that the clause might be amended, in such a manner as
to leave the naturalization of foreigners to the State Legislatures.

Mr. BURKE.--Unless some residence is required, it may be attended with
confusion. In large cities, like Boston, New-York, or Philadelphia, an
election may be carried by the votes of the body of sailors who happened
to be in port. If the French fleet was here at such a time, and a spirit
of party strongly excited, perhaps one of the candidates might get the
crews of every ship in the fleet, and after qualifying them, by taking
an oath of no definite meaning, carry them up to the hustings, and place
himself or his friend on this floor, contrary to the voice of
nine-tenths of the city. Even a residence of one year is too short, it
ought to be two, three, or four; but seven is too long. Indeed, the
whole of this bill seems somehow objectionable; there are some cases
also omitted, which may show the necessity of recommitting it.

The case of the children of American parents born abroad ought to be
provided for, as was done in the case of English parents, in the 12th
year of William III. There are several other cases that ought to be
likewise attended to.

Mr. JACKSON had an objection to any persons holding land in the United
States without residence, and an intention of becoming a citizen; under
such a regulation the whole Western Territory might be purchased up by
the inhabitants of England, France, or other foreign nations; the
landholders might combine and send out a large tenantry, and have
thereby such an interference in the Government as to overset the
principles upon which it is established. It will be totally subversive
of the old established doctrine that allegiance and land go together; a
person owing no allegiance to a sovereign, ought not to hold lands under
its protection, because he cannot be called upon and obliged to give
that support which invasion or insurrection may render necessary. But
with respect to residence and probation, before an alien is entitled to
the privilege of voting at elections, I am very clear it is necessary;
unless gentlemen mean to render the rank of an American citizen the
maygame of the world. Shall stories be told of our citizenship, such as
I have read in the Pennsylvania Magazine, of the citizenship there: if
my memory serves me right, the story runs, that at a contested election
in Philadelphia, when parties ran very high, and no stone was left
unturned, on either side, to carry the election, most of the ships in
the harbor were cleared of their crews, who, ranged under the masters
and owners, came before a magistrate, took the oath of allegiance, and
paid half-a-crown tax to the collector, as the constitution required,
then went and voted, and decided the contest of the day. On the return
of one of the vessels, whose crew had been employed in the affair of the
election, they fell in with a shoal of porpoises off Cape Henlopen:
"Ha!" said one of them, "what merry company have we got here! I wonder
where they are going so cheerfully?" "Going," replied one of his
comrades, "why, going to Philadelphia, to be sure, to pay taxes and vote
for Assembly men!" I hope, Mr. Chairman, we have more respect for our
situation as citizens, than to expose ourselves to the taunts and jeers
of a deriding world, by making that situation too cheap.

Mr. BURKE said, no person ought to be permitted to inherit by descent in
America, unless the same privilege was reciprocated by other nations;
perhaps this point would be properly settled by treaty, and it would be
well to introduce a provisionary clause to this effect. He was also in
favor of admitting foreigners to hold lands on easy terms, if they would
come to reside among us: and here he would take an opportunity of doing
justice to some of them, as it might be supposed, from what had fallen
from various parts of the House, that foreigners, educated under a
monarchy, were inimical to the pure principles of republicanism. He was
convinced that this doctrine was untrue, because he had often remarked,
that foreigners made as good citizens of republics as the natives
themselves. Frenchmen, brought up under an absolute monarch, evinced
their love of liberty in the late arduous struggle; many of them are now
worthy citizens, who esteem and venerate the principles of our
Revolution. Emigrants from England, Ireland, and Scotland, have not been
behind any in the love of this country; so there is but little occasion
for the jealousy which appears to be entertained for the preservation of
the Government.

Mr. TUCKER thought the bill must be recommitted; but he did not wish it
done till the sense of the House was known on some of the various points
that had presented themselves during the debate. With respect to the
latter part of the first clause, he agreed with the gentleman from
Maryland, (Mr. SENEY,) that we ought to provide a rule of
naturalization, without attempting to define the particular privileges
acquired thereby under the State Governments. By the Constitution of the
United States, the electors of the House of Representatives are to have
the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of
the State Legislatures. He presumed it was to be left to the discretion
of the State constitutions, who were to be the electors of the State
Legislatures, and therefore the General Government had no right to
interfere therein.

Mr. HARTLEY observed, that the subject was entirely new, and that the
committee had no positive mode to enable them to decide; the practice of
England, and the regulations of the several States, threw some light on
the subject, but not sufficient to enable them to discover what plan of
naturalization would be acceptable under a government like this. Some
gentlemen had objected to the bill, without attending to all its parts,
for a remedy was therein provided for some of the inconveniences that
have been suggested. It was said the bill ought to extend to the
exclusion of those who had trespassed against the laws of foreign
nations, or been convicted of a capital offence in any foreign kingdom;
the last clause contains a proviso to that effect, and he had another
clause ready to present, providing for the children of American citizens
born out of the United States.

Mr. LIVERMORE thought the bill very imperfect, and that the committee
ought to rise, and recommend it to be referred to a select committee;
observing, that it was extremely difficult for fifty or sixty persons to
arrange and make a system of a variety of motions and observations that
had been brought forward.

On the question being put, the committee rose and reported, and the bill
was recommitted to a committee of ten.[33]


MONDAY, February 8.

_Public Credit._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union. The report of the Secretary of the Treasury relative
to a provision for the support of public credit was before them. Mr.
BALDWIN in the chair.

After a silence of some minutes,

Mr. LIVERMORE asked, what part of the report it was expected that
gentlemen should speak to? He wished some gentleman would select such
parts as he conceived to be of importance, and submit them to the
committee.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) was of opinion, that the committee had
better consider the object of the report, in separate points of view, by
which means they would be able to go through the investigation with a
greater degree of accuracy than if they were left to range at large in
the extensive field before them. The report contains objects so various,
that it is possible gentlemen may agree, with respect to one or two, and
yet differ on a third: from this consideration, he was induced to
suggest the idea of single and independent resolutions, and had prepared
the following: if the manner met the approbation of the committee, he
would lay them on the table for consideration. They were to the
following effect:

_Resolved_, That Congress ought not adjourn, until they have adopted
such measures as will make an adequate provision for the public debt.

_Resolved_, That in making such provision, no discrimination shall be
made between the original holders of the evidences and the assignees
thereof.

_Resolved_, That such of the debts of the individual States as have been
incurred by them, during the late war, ought to be assumed by the
General Government, and like funds provided for them.[34]

_Resolved_, That the arrearages of interest, on the Continental and
State debts, ought to be funded, and consolidated with the principal.

_Resolved_, That the interest to be paid thereon does not exceed ----
per cent. per annum, for the present.

These motions were severally expressive of objects contemplated in the
Secretary's report. The last was upon a principle of modification, such
as was held out in the plan for reloaning the debt.


TUESDAY, February 9.

      _Public credit: Providing for the public debt: Assuming the
      State debts: Funding their certificates: Report of General
      Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury._

      [To the first object, that of providing for the public
      debt, there was no objection; to the assumption and the
      funding there was a strenuous opposition, and their
      adoption became one of the landmarks of party.]

Mr. JACKSON.--Believe me, Mr. Chairman, I have as high a sense of the
obligation we are under to the public creditors, and feel as much
gratitude towards them as any man on this floor. I shall ever cheerfully
acknowledge the duty we owe to our benefactors, and in a peculiar manner
to those brave soldiers who, at the risk of their lives and fortunes,
secured the independency of America. I have also the most sincere wishes
for the re-establishment of public credit, and that upon firm and solid
ground, and on principles which cannot be called in question; but there
appears to me a previous question, which has not yet been brought
forward; it is this, whether there exists an immediate necessity for
funding the national debt in the permanent manner proposed?

The high regard I have for the nature and circumstances of the foreign
debt, induced me to let the first proposition pass without any
animadversion. The vote which has been taken on that point will serve to
show foreigners that we are concerned to preserve our credit with them
by a rigid performance of our stipulations; trusting, at the same time,
that our fellow-citizens cannot object to a distinction so just and
proper in itself; for, notwithstanding what the domestic creditors may
say, it is the money of foreigners that has, in a great measure,
established our independence.

It is doubtful with me whether a permanent funded debt is beneficial or
not to any country; some of the first writers in the world, and who are
most admired on account of the clearness of their perceptions, have
thought otherwise, and declared that wherever funding systems have been
adopted in a Government, they tend more to injure posterity than they
would injure the inhabitants to pay the whole debt at the time it was
contracted. The principle, I apprehend, is demonstrated by experience;
the first system of the kind that we have any account of originated in
the State of Florence in the year 1634; that Government then owed about
£60,000 sterling, and being unable to pay it, formed the principal into
a funded debt, transferable with interest at five per cent. What is the
situation of Florence in consequence of this event? Her ancient
importance is annihilated. Look at Genoa and Venice; they adopted a
similar policy, and are the only two of the Italian Republics who can
pretend to an independent existence, but their splendor is obscured;
they have never been able since the period at which a funding system was
introduced to raise themselves to that formidable state to which they
were before. Spain seems to have learned the practice from the Italian
Republics, and she, by the anticipation of her immense revenue, has sunk
her consequence beneath that level which her natural situation might
have maintained. France is considerably enfeebled, and languishes under
a heavy load of debt. England is a melancholy instance of the ruin
attending such engagements. In the reign of King William, 1706, the
policy of the English Parliament laid the foundation of what is called
their national debt; but the sum was inconsiderable; it little exceeded
£5,000,000 sterling; the example then set has been closely followed. In
1711, it amounted to £9,177,769 sterling, during the wars in the reign
of Queen Anne; since that, the capital of the debt of Great Britain
amounted, in 1777, to about £136,000,000 sterling; and to such a pitch
has the spirit of funding and borrowing been carried in that country,
that in 1786, their national debt had increased to £230,000,000
sterling; a burthen which the most sanguine mind can never contemplate
they will ever be relieved from. If future difficulties should involve
that nation still further, what must be the consequence? The same effect
must be produced that has taken place in other nations; it must either
bring on a national bankruptcy, or annihilate her existence as an
independent empire. Hence I contend that a funding system in this
country will be highly dangerous to the welfare of the Republic; it may,
for a moment, raise our credit, and increase our circulation by
multiplying a new species of currency; but it must hereafter settle upon
our posterity a burthen which they can neither bear nor relieve
themselves from. It will establish a precedent in America that may, and
in all probability will be pursued by the sovereign authority, until it
brings upon us that ruin which it has never failed to bring, or is
inevitably bringing, upon all the nations of the earth who have had the
temerity to make the experiment. Let us take warning by the errors of
Europe, and guard against the introduction of a system followed by
calamities so universal. Though our present debt be but a few millions,
in the course of a single century it may be multiplied to an extent we
dare not think of; for my part, I would rather have direct taxes imposed
at once, which, in the course of a few years, would annihilate the
principal of our debt. A few years' exertion in this way will save our
posterity from a load of annual interest, amounting to the fifth, or
perhaps the half of the sum we are now under engagements to pay.

But why, Mr. Chairman, should we hasten on this business of funding? Are
our debts ascertained? The report of the Secretary of the Treasury
proposes that we should not only fund the debts that are ascertained,
but the unliquidated and unsettled debts due from the Continent; nor
does the plan stop here, it proposes that we should assume the payment
of the State debts--debts to us totally unknown. Many of the States,
sir, have not yet ascertained what they owe; and if we do not know the
amount of what we owe, or are to be indebted, shall we establish funds?
Shall we put our hands into the pockets of our constituents, and
appropriate moneys for uses we are undetermined of? But more especially
shall we do this, when, in doing it, it is indisputably certain, that
the encumbrance will more than exceed all the benefits and conveniences?
Gentlemen may come forward, perhaps, and tell me, that funding the
public debt will increase the circulating medium of the country, by
means of its transferable quality; but this is denied by the best
informed men. The funding of the debt will occasion enormous taxes for
the payment of the interest. These taxes will bear heavily both on
agriculture and commerce. It will be charging the active and industrious
citizen, who pays his share of the taxes, to pay the indolent and idle
creditor who receives them, to be spent and wasted in the course of the
year, without any hope of a future reproduction; for the new capital
which they acquire must have existed in the country before, and must
have been employed, as all capitals are, in maintaining productive
labor. Thus the honest, hard-working part of the community will promote
the ease and luxury of men of wealth; such a system may benefit large
cities, like Philadelphia and New York, but the remote parts of the
continent will not feel the invigorating warmth of the American
treasury; in the proportion that it benefits one, it will depress
another.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--The report of the Secretary of the
Treasury contains a proposition for the establishment of a sinking fund.
I wish the gentleman who brought forward the resolutions under
consideration, had included that part of the system in his
propositions, as it might have had a tendency to ease the mind of the
honorable gentleman from Georgia, and to have shown him that the public
debt is not intended to acquire the permanency which he dreads. If our
present debt cannot be paid off at once, all that can be done is to
provide such funds for its gradual extinction as will morally ensure the
object.

The gentleman has contended, that public funding is a public injury. I
agree with him that funding a debt to a very great amount may be very
injurious; yet funding a small debt is beneficial. But whether this is,
or is not a fact, is not the object of our present inquiry; we are not
in a situation to determine whether we will or will not have a public
debt. We have it already, and it appears to me to be a matter of
necessity that we should appropriate some funds for the payment of the
interest upon it. When we consider the nature of the contract, for what
it is we owe the money, and our ability to comply, it follows, of
consequence, that we must pay; it follows as close as the shadow follows
its substance; or as close as the night follows the day. The only
question that can come before us is, the mode of doing it.

With respect to that part of our debt which is yet unascertained, I
would just beg leave to observe, that it is not our fault that it
remains in an unsettled state; neither is it the fault of those who have
brought in their accounts and had them liquidated. Hence, it appears to
me extremely hard that we should refuse to provide for the payment of
those to whom we acknowledge ourselves to be indebted, because there are
others whose claims against us are not yet adjusted. The argument,
therefore, which relates to this point, as well as that which relates to
the Western Territory, will apply ten years hence as well as now, and
form an eternal pretext for deferring the business.

Mr. FITZSIMONS said, that the circumstances of the foreign debt were
such as left no choice in our power, according to the plan proposed by
the Secretary of the Treasury; but we have it in our power, and are
recommended to make a different arrangement with respect to the domestic
debt. I stated, when I introduced the resolutions, that they were
intended to bring the Secretary's plan fairly before the committee. This
resolution is differently worded on that account; but it may be
observed, that the foreign creditors are not here to make a contract
with the people of the United States, but the domestic creditors are;
and we may hold out a modification to them for their acceptance. With
respect to the means by which we shall be enabled to pay the interest
and principal of our debt, this resolution has nothing to do, it leaves
it to the consideration of the committee; and every gentleman will be
perfectly at liberty to propose and support such as he supposes to be
most suitable to our abilities.

Mr. LIVERMORE.--I do not clearly understand the import of the resolution
before the committee. It seems worded rather in a doubtful manner. If
it means, that funds ought to be appropriated for the payment of the
interest and principal of the domestic debt, as the amount appears on
the face of the certificates, I shall be totally against it; whether it
pointedly carries that meaning or not, I cannot say.

For my part, I consider the foreign and domestic debt to carry with them
very material distinctions. The one is not like a debt, while the other
has all the true qualities of one. However gentlemen may think on this
subject, there is a great difference between the merits of that debt
which was lent the United States in real coin, by disinterested persons,
not concerned or benefited by the revolution, and at a low rate of
interest, and those debts which have been accumulating upon the United
States, at the rate of six per cent. interest, and which were not
incurred for efficient money lent, but for depreciated paper, or
services done at exorbitant rates, or for goods or provisions supplied
at more than their real worth, by those who received all the benefits
arising from our change of condition. It is within the knowledge of
every gentleman, that a very considerable part of our domestic
loan-office debt arose in this manner. It is well known that loan-office
certificates were issued as a kind of circulating medium, when the
United States were in such straits for cash, that they could not raise
the necessary supplies in any other way. And it is very well known, that
those who sold goods or provisions for this circulating medium, raised
their prices from six to ten shillings at least.

There is another observation I would beg leave to make. The prices at
which our supplies were procured were such, even in hard money, that it
might be said specie had depreciated, or, what amounted to the same
thing, the commodities were sold for more than their current price; in
many cases, half the price would now purchase the same thing. If so,
there is as much reason that we should now consider these public
securities in a depreciated state, as every holder of them has
considered them from that time to this. There was a period at which they
were considered of no greater value than three or four shillings in the
pound; at this day they are not at more than eight or ten. If this,
then, is the case, why should Congress put it upon the same footing as
the foreign debt, for which they received a hard dollar for every dollar
they engaged to pay? Could any possible wrong be done to those who hold
the domestic debt, by estimating it at its current value? I do not speak
of those only who have speculated in certificates. With respect to them,
I do not see how a difference can be made. By the resolutions of
Congress, and from the face of the papers, it appears that they were
transferable.

It may be said, that there was some part of the domestic debt incurred
by loans of hard money. There might be a small part lent in this way,
but it was very small indeed, compared with the whole of the domestic
debt. It is in the memory of every gentleman, that, before the beginning
of the revolution, every State issued paper-money; it answered the
exigencies of Government in a considerable degree. The United States
issued a currency of the same nature, which answered their purposes,
except in some particular cases, and these were effected by loans of
certain sums of hard money. If any distinctions are to be made among the
domestic creditors, they ought to be made in favor of such only, and
that in consequence of the origin of the debt; while the great mass
given for the depreciated paper, or provisions sold at double prices,
ought to be liquidated at its real value. I cannot think it injustice to
reduce the interests on those debts. I should therefore be against
passing this resolution, if it carries in it the idea of paying the
principal and interest, according to the face of the paper. It is well
known, that a large proportion of this domestic debt was incurred for
paper-money lent. To be sure Congress acknowledged its value equal to
its name; but this was done on a principle of policy, in order to
prevent the rapid depreciation which was taking place. But money lent in
this depreciated and depreciating state, can hardly be said to be lent
from a spirit of patriotism; it was a mere speculation in public
securities. They hoped, by putting their money in the loan-office,
though in a depreciated state, to receive hard money for it by and by. I
flatter myself this prediction will never be effected.

The Secretary of the Treasury has offered some alternatives to the
creditors, out of which they may make their election; but it seems to me
that they, all of them, propose a reduction in the principal and
interest, that they may have an annuity of two-thirds, at six per
centum, or for the whole sum at four per centum, or they may accept of
the other terms. Though this may make a reduction favorable to the
public, yet this is not such a reduction as justice, in my opinion,
requires; and as the resolution before the committee is intended to make
way for the adoption of those principles, I shall vote against it,
though I would rather it was passed over for the present, in order to
see what is the sense of the House on making a specific provision for
the payment of the debt.

Mr. PAGE was glad that the question had been asked the mover of the
propositions on the table what was the object of the resolution now
under consideration, because it was liable to be misunderstood. But now,
he presumed, the answer had satisfied every gentleman's mind.

The gentleman from New Hampshire was pleased to observe, that foreigners
were not interested in the late revolution; that what they did was from
such motives as demanded our gratitude; but our citizens were deeply
interested, and, I believe, if they were never to get a farthing for
what is owing to them for their services, they would be well paid; they
have gained what they aimed at; they have secured their liberties and
their lives; they will be satisfied that this House has pledged itself
to pay to foreigners the generous loans they advanced us in the day of
distress. If we were to make distinctions adverse to their interests, we
could never expect from them a further favor in the future exigencies of
this country. But we may also look with confidence at home for loans and
services; on such occasions they will be supplied us on the principles
of patriotism; the adoption of the first resolution was therefore
politic and just, but the motion of my worthy colleague is not
necessary. I feel for my fellow-citizens who have gloriously exerted
themselves in the salvation of their country by their services in the
field, or the supplies which they yielded, as much as any man can do. I
acknowledge the debt of gratitude the community owes to those select
citizens, and am willing to pay it as far as we possibly can; but they
cannot, they will not complain of the deference we have shown to others,
whose particular situation merited such regard at our hands.

Mr. SCOTT.--I find myself obliged to consider the Government of the
United States in a very different situation, with respect to our foreign
and domestic creditors. With respect to the foreign debt, we, the
representatives of the United States, are vested with full power, and we
are bound in duty to provide for the punctual payment according to the
nature of the contract; but when I turn my eyes to the domestic debt, I
find myself in a very different situation. I conceive myself a mere
arbiter among the individuals of which the Union is composed. A part of
the people have a claim upon somebody. I think that claim is against the
people at large, and we are not only to provide for the payment of that
claim, if just, but to determine whether that claim is just or not. One
part of the community applies to us to recover of the other what is due
to it; the other says, the debt is too large, it is more than is justly
due; you must try and determine between us, and say what part is just,
and what is not. This brings clearly into my view the whole subject, as
a thing within the power of Congress to new model or modify, if we find
that justice demands it; but we have no such authority with respect to
the foreign debt. It is very clear to me, that we have the power to
administer justice and impartiality among the members of the Union; and
this will lead me freely to assert, that we have not only authority, but
it is our duty, if, on examination, we find that not more than half the
sum that is claimed is justly claimed, to strike off the other half.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I am glad to see gentlemen bring into view principles on
which to determine the great question before us; because, when they are
once established, they will enable us to proceed with certainty to a
decision. If the principles brought forward by the honorable gentleman
from Pennsylvania are just, his arguments are of great weight; but if,
on consideration, we shall find that the principles are unjust, then I
presume, however cogent the system of reasoning he has founded thereon,
it will not prevail. He supposes we sit here as judges to determine the
different claims of the creditors of the United States. If we are in
that predicament, I agree we ought not to proceed but on full evidence
and hearing of those claims. But I have never hitherto been led to
consider Congress in this light, nor can I now consider them in any such
point of view. I consider the Congress, who entered into these
engagements, as complete representatives of the United States, and, in
their political capacity, authorized, by the articles of Confederation,
to contract the debts for which our public faith is pledged; instead of
being judges, or arbitrators, on this occasion, we are parties to the
contract; nor is our case varied, by the dissolution of the old
Confederacy, because the existing constitution has expressly recognized
the engagements made under the former. All debts contracted before the
adoption of this constitution, shall be as valid against the United
States, under this Government, as under the Confederation. Now is the
moment to establish the principle; if the constitution admits the
borrowing of money, or paying for supplies, to be a contract, we are one
of the parties to this contract, and all idea of being arbiters must
vanish. We cannot judge in our own cause. The case will now stand clear;
we owe a debt, contracted for a valuable consideration. The evidences of
our debt are in the hands of our creditors, and we are called upon to
discharge them; if we have it in our power, we ought to consider
ourselves bound to do it, on every principle of honor, of justice, and
of policy; but as we have not the ability to pay the whole off, nor,
perhaps, the whole interest, we must endeavor to make such a
modification as will enable us to satisfy every one. Not that this
modification shall take place without the consent of the creditors; this
would be improper and unjust. Each party is as much to be consulted on
this occasion, as it was at the time of the first contract. If, then,
Congress is bound by the first contract, no gentleman can say we are
judges. If we are parties, what would be the decision before a court of
justice? The creditor produces my bond, by which I have bound myself to
pay a hundred dollars; I cannot gainsay the fact; no man is allowed to
plead that he has made a bad bargain, and that at other times, he could
have purchased what he got of the creditor at half the sum he was forced
to allow him. The inquiry with the judges is not, whether the debtor
made a good bargain or not, but whether he did it fairly and
voluntarily. We are in the same predicament if we fairly and honestly
received the _quid pro quo_; we are bound, as parties to the honest
performance of the contract, to discharge the debt; otherwise, what
avails the clause in the constitution, declaring all debts contracted,
and engagements entered into, before the adoption to be as valid against
the present Government as they were under the old Confederation? The
debt was _bona fide_ contracted; it was acknowledged by the United
States; and the creditor received a certificate as to the evidence of
his debt. It is immaterial to us what he did with it. I confess, if the
original holder was to come forward, and say that he had been robbed of
such evidence, we ought not to pay it until the point was ascertained in
a court of justice.

Some observations were made to point out a difference between the
foreign and domestic debt. I admit there is a distinction, and that in
another instance, which has not been mentioned. His Most Christian
Majesty, when he first became our important ally, presented Congress
with a large sum of money; but this being insufficient to procure us the
necessary supply of military stores, a loan was made us from the royal
coffers of France. But this also being inadequate, we endeavored to
obtain further aid from foreigners. The credit of the United States was
so much impaired, as to hold out but little encouragement to individuals
to trust us with their money. The French King added another mark of his
distinguished attention: he guarantied the loan, and the money was
obtained--obtained of the widow and fatherless; of persons whose all
depended upon a punctual payment of the interest. On this point I could
refer you to letters from our commissioners in Europe, who beg that we
may not put them on this business, unless we are certain that the United
States will carefully provide for the payment of the interest; because,
in case of failure, hundreds must perish for want. This is another
motive why we should attend to the performance of our contracts; and I
will repeat again, it is what we are called upon to do upon every
principle of honor, justice, and policy.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The observations of the honorable gentleman from
Pennsylvania, (Mr. SCOTT,) if I rightly understand them, apply to the
principal, and not the interest of the domestic debt. He imagines it to
be too large; that is, that the individual who performed services, or
rendered supplies during the late war, received evidences of rather too
great nominal value; and that, at this period of time, it is necessary
to investigate every particular claim, and judge whether the balances
are respectively due or not. The gentleman has distinguished between the
foreign and domestic creditor on this point; he supposes the foreign
debt ought not to be re-examined, because the holders of it are
unconnected with our Government. They lent us money, and we are bound
according to the precise terms of the contract. Here I agree with him;
but that there should be a solid distinction in justice between the
foreign and domestic creditor is to me a singular thing. It was
observed, that the citizens of America would be well paid for their
loans, supplies, and services, by the benefits and profits arising to
them by the revolution; but are we to sacrifice the claims of
individuals of the community for the advantage of the whole? Who are
benefited by the revolution? Every citizen. Then every citizen is bound
to contribute his equal part of the expenses attending the procurement.
Should those of our citizens who furnished the supplies, or loaned their
money, be the only class who are injured? Every citizen is bound to pay
according to his ability, because every one has participated in the
benefits: then the only question to ask is, whether this discrimination
should be made to ascertain or new proportion the debt? This will lead
me to inquire whether it is proper for us, after the resolution we
passed at the last session, after the resolution we have just now
passed, to scale the public debt anew? Shall we say that the evidence
carries on its face fraud and deception? I contend we shall not. Why
shall we liquidate a debt which is established upon a complete and final
settlement? From the face of the evidences arises the demand, and that
is the demand we are to make provision for. Shall we go to our officers
and soldiers who served during the late war, individually, and say that
the balance struck to be due to them is an imposition on the public,
when the Government itself has determined that they were entitled to
such particular reward? If, at the time those securities were given to
them, Government had paid them in money, would any gentleman now contend
that their accounts ought to be reliquidated, and every individual
called upon to refund a part of what he acquired in conformity to the
laws of this country? Certainly no gentleman would contend for such a
measure. How is the nature of the case altered from the circumstances of
our having been so unfortunate as to pay those worthy men with a
certificate in lieu of the money which was due? The nature of the case,
I conceive, is perfectly the same; and we are in duty bound to make a
full compensation. The face of the paper expresses what that is, and it
is to be our guide; the demand surely is not to be lessened.

Mr. JACKSON said there were, most surely, principles on which to ground
a discrimination betwixt a foreign and domestic creditor; if there was
no other, there was this, that the domestic creditors are those that are
bound to pay the foreign creditors their demand; they ought,
consequently, to do justice to others, by a punctual payment, before
they require a discharge of their own claims.

Mr. AMES did not conceive it material to inquire whether there be an
equal obligation on the people of the United States to pay their foreign
and domestic creditors, when they meant to pay both; but if it is
intended to reduce the principal of either, it will lead us into a
discussion of the principles on which such a measure ought to be
founded. The honorable gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SCOTT) probably
intends by the amendment to have a reduction of the debt; I have, said
he, so much respect for the good sense and upright intentions of that
honorable gentleman, that I will not impute to him unworthy motives; nor
do I believe that he governs his conduct in private life by maxims
which I suspect to be contained in the amendment now before us. I would
not be understood, by any means, to convey an improper reflection upon
the opinions of any one. The science of finance is new in America; a
gentleman may therefore propose the worst of measures with the best
intentions. What, let me inquire, will be the pernicious consequences
resulting from the establishment of this doctrine? Will it not be
subversive of every principle on which public contracts are founded? The
evidences of the debt, possessed by the creditors of the United States,
cannot, in reason, justice, or policy, be considered in any other light
than as public bonds, for the redemption and payment of which the
property and labor of the whole people are pledged. The only just idea
is, that when the public contract a debt with an individual, that it
becomes personified, and that with respect to this contract, the powers
of Government shall never legislate. If this was not the case, it would
destroy the effect it was intended to produce; no individual would be
found willing to trust the Government, if he supposed the Government had
the inclination and power, by virtue of a mere major vote, to set aside
the terms of the engagement. If the public in such a case is, as I have
said, personified, what conceivable difference is there, except in favor
of the creditor, between the public and an individual in the case? If,
then, the public contract is a solemn obligation upon us, we are bound
to its true and faithful performance. What is the object for which men
enter into society, but to secure their lives and property? What is the
usual means of acquiring property between man and man? The best right to
property is acquired by the consent of the last owner. If, then, an
individual is possessed of property, in consequence of this right, how
can Government, founded on this social compact, pretend to exercise the
right of divesting a man of that object which induced him to combine
himself with the society? every gentleman may determine this question by
his own feelings. Shall it be said that this Government, evidently
established for the purpose of securing property, that, in its first
act, it divested its citizens of seventy millions of money, which is
justly due to the individuals who have contracted with Government! I
believe those gentlemen, who are apprehensive for the liberties and
safety of their fellow-citizens, under the efficiency of the present
constitution, will find real cause of alarm from the establishment of
the present doctrine. I have heard, that in the East Indies the stock of
the labor and property of the empire is the property of the prince; that
it is held at his will and pleasure; but this is a slavish doctrine,
which I hope we are not prepared to adopt here. But I will not go
further into a consideration of the idea of discrimination. I will ask,
though, is this country ever to be in a settled and quiet state? Must
every transaction that took place, during the course of the last war,
be ripped up? Shall we never have done with the settlement and
liquidation of our accounts?

Mr. LIVERMORE.--The arguments advanced by the gentlemen from
Massachusetts and New York prove too much, and therefore prove nothing.
That the late Congress had, at all times, from their first institution,
the power to contract debts, for the benefit of the United States,
cannot be denied; and that we are authorized to pay such debts, is
equally certain. But this by no means contravenes the opinion of those
gentlemen who think, that the whole may be properly considered and
discharged at the rate which justice requires; for the same argument
which is urged for the payment of the public securities at their nominal
value, might be urged in favor of paying off the Continental debts of
credit, according to the sums expressed on the face of them. They were
issued with as much confidence, and were received with as much reliance
on the public faith, as any species of securities whatever; yet, it
seems to be given up on all hands, that the owners of the old
Continental paper bills ought not to be paid according to their nominal
value. Perhaps it may be said, on comparing them with the loan-office
certificates, that the United States had not the benefit of that money;
but had they not the value of it? It will be answered, that when the
money was first issued, Congress had nearly the value for it; but
afterwards the money greatly depreciated, and they had not the full
value for it, yet the obligation to pay it is as explicit as words can
make it. No advocate will be found for making all that money good. It
has been thought proper, and it is just, that it should be reduced from
its nominal value; if it is reduced on a scale of one hundred for one,
the holders of it, I dare say, would cheerfully receive that sum. If the
United States then had value for it, and if they had not value for the
certificates, who can doubt of the justice of reliquidating, and duly
ascertaining the public debt? All I contend for is this, that the
present Government pay the debts of the United States; but as the
domestic part of the debt has been contracted in depreciated notes, that
less interest should be paid upon it than six per cent. Six per cent.
was the usual interest upon the certificates when they were issued by
Congress; but if the possessor has received no part of this six per
cent. until this time, that now the principal and interest be
consolidated into one sum, hereafter to bear an interest of three or
four per cent.; then those citizens, who now stand as creditors of the
Union, will find that part of their property has been the most
productive of any, much more productive than the property of the
citizens of the United States has generally been. Those who lent their
money to individuals before and during the late war, generally lost or
suffered by the depreciation some three-quarters of the capital; nay,
some thirty-nine fortieths. But is this the case of the domestic
creditor of the United States? No! he will preserve his property,
through the chaos of the revolution, and be put now in a more eligible
situation than he was at the time when he loaned the money. The capital
sum which he lent is now increased, and very rapidly increased, for six
per cent. is a very large interest. He will now receive 160 dollars for
his 100, and putting that into the funds, at three or four per cent. he
will find it more productive than any other method in which he could
employ his money; for, I contend, that neither improved, nor unimproved
lands, will give an interest near half of what the public creditor will
receive. People who have held real property have sunk, with the taxes,
and other losses, the greatest part of it; but the public creditor has
let his run through the confusion of the revolution, and nevertheless
gets it returned to him safe; and, so far from being impaired, that he
has prodigiously accumulated, not only in a manner superior to the
property of his fellow-citizens, but superior to the foreigner who lent
his money at four per cent. Justice and equity require, on the behalf of
the community, that these people be content with reasonable profit. They
ought not, therefore, to receive, on a funded debt, so much as six per
cent.; whether three or four, or something between three and four, would
be a proper sum, I shall not pretend to determine. But I consider it a
proper question for this committee to consider, in justice to those who
are to pay, as well as to those who are to receive; nor do I believe the
domestic creditors would be dissatisfied with it, provided they were
sure of receiving this annual interest; for their debts, on such a
footing, would be better to them than if they were established on an
extravagant plan that could never be effected, but which would be likely
to throw the nation into confusion. Every body has suffered more or less
by the depreciation, but the public creditors very little, in regard to
that part of their property which they had deposited in the hands of
Government: it is true, that it has slept; but it is now waked up to
some purpose.

Mr. SCOTT.--A great deal has been said on a great principle that must be
attended to in some stage of this business; but gentlemen have been led
into a more extensive discussion on the doctrine of discrimination than
I had any idea of when I proposed the amendment. It has been urged by
some of the gentlemen, that however just my principle is, that the
Legislature is in the quality of an arbitrator, yet we cannot adopt the
amendment; others again have said, that the debt is a contract between
the Government and the individual, and that we being parties we cannot
be judges; for it is contrary to the principles of the law, that we
should be judges in our own cause. If, in national transactions like
this, interesting to our citizens only, the Government is to be supposed
one party, and the individual the other party, I would ask the gentleman
who is the judge? Can two parties exist in a well organized Government
to dispute about property, and have no judge? The very idea must induce
the gentleman to abandon his ground. It has been said, as the foundation
of an opinion, that there is a great similitude between a certificate
and a bond that is brought into court to demand payment upon; that no
opposition can be made; that no plea can be entered; but I would wish to
ask the gentleman who made the remark, as a professional man, whether
the want of consideration would not be a good plea? In Courts of Equity,
relief can be given against _prima facie_ evidence.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I am a friend to the discussion of every principle on
which the great business before us may be supposed to turn, because I
have a great desire that they should be settled on full information,
that the public, as well as ourselves, may be satisfied with their
propriety. This leads me again to notice the arguments which have been
urged in favor of considering this body as judges or arbitrators between
the public and the individuals who have claims upon the public.

It must appear to the satisfaction of every unprejudiced mind, from the
resolutions of the late Congress, that they acknowledge themselves a
party on behalf of the public, to every engagement they entered into for
services, supplies, or moneys loaned. If then it is admitted that the
late Congress were parties to the contract, we must agree that our
situation is precisely the same, because we stand in their shoes; and in
my former argument I urged, if we are parties we cannot be judges.

Mr. JACKSON.--If there is no part of the debt of the United States
unliquidated, besides the two millions which the gentleman alludes to,
yet there is a very considerable part of what is in contemplation to
fund, as Continental debt, not at present ascertained. I mean the State
debts. The Secretary himself had no evidence before him, from which he
could make a probable guess of the amount; if these are to be assumed by
the General Government, I presume the General Government ought to be at
liberty duly to ascertain them; and, therefore, the amendment proposed
by the honorable gentleman from Pennsylvania ought to be admitted.

The honorable gentlemen who are in opposition, contend that no sort of
discrimination ought to take place; yet from what they have let fall, on
this occasion, I am led to believe that they favor that part of the
report of the Secretary which makes a discrimination, in fact, equal to
a loss of one-third of the principal. What will hold good in one case
ought to hold good in another, and a discrimination might take place
upon the same principles, between those to whom the Government was
originally indebted, and who have never received satisfaction therefor,
and those who had nothing to do with the Government in the first
transaction; but have merely speculated, and purchased up the evidence
of an original debt. Some gentlemen think, that the claims of this
latter class merit a greater degree of attention, because by their
actions, they seem to have evinced a greater degree of confidence in the
Government than those who sold them. But, sir, these men have had more
information, they have been at the seat of Government, and knew what was
in contemplation before citizens of other parts of the Union could be
acquainted with it. There has been no kind of proportion of knowledge
between the two classes--to use the expression of a British Minister,
the reciprocity has been all on one side. The people in this city are
informed of all the motions of Government; they have sent out their
money, in swift sailing vessels, to purchase up the property of
uninformed citizens in the remote parts of the Union. Were those
citizens acquainted with our present deliberations, and assured of the
intention of Congress to provide for their just demands, they would be
on an equal footing; they would not incline to throw away their property
for considerations totally inadequate. Such attempts at fraud would
justify the Government in interfering in the transactions between
individuals, without a breach of the public faith; but this, sir, is not
the object of the present motion, it only goes so far as to ascertain
the amount of the debt, before we make provision for the payment; and
this appears to me to be proper upon every principle of justice and
discretion.

Mr. BURKE wished the question postponed till to-morrow, as it was a
subject of such high importance. He moved the committee to rise;
whereupon the committee rose, and reported progress.


WEDNESDAY, February 10.

_Public Credit._

The House again went into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. BALDWIN in the
chair, on the report of the Secretary of the Treasury.

Mr. SCOTT'S amendment being still under consideration.

Mr. SCOTT.--Some time was spent yesterday in the consideration of this
subject; in my opinion, that time was not ill spent, nor would two or
three days more be ill spent in discussing the question, for it involves
in it the whole doctrine of discrimination and liquidation. If these two
great points are once settled, the way will be clear and open before us
to proceed to the discussion of the report: for if the principles of the
report are good, I believe the plan itself is good. I believe, upon the
principles which it holds forth, that it is wisely and judiciously drawn
out, and does great honor to the officer who framed it. But it is
incumbent on us to examine its principles before we adopt it; if they do
not consist with equity and justice among the several inhabitants of the
Union, they must be rejected. Now I doubt whether they consist with that
equity and justice; I think there are others on this floor who have
their doubts also. I wish, therefore, that we should coolly examine
those principles, consult our judgment and understanding, and when we
have collected all the information we can get from each other, we may
determine; and when we have determined this, and the two grand points I
have mentioned, our business will be easy.

In support of the principles held out in the report, it is said that a
solemn contract is entered into that cannot be violated; that the debt
is ascertained and cannot be extinguished, but by the absolute payment
of what it acknowledged to be due. Now, I doubt whether the necessary
concomitants of a contract to the amount mentioned on the face of the
paper, really accompanies the public securities. Let us revert back to
the time that this contract was entered into. At the close of the war,
at the commencement of issuing final settlements, there was a demand
against the United States for real and essential services rendered; the
claimants came forward, and asked something for their demand. Congress
having no money to give them, offered something; what? A certificate to
a certain nominal amount; nay more, of a certain known value; the
nominal amount was twenty shillings, the certain known value was two and
sixpence. Did the soldier accept of this offer? Yes. On what principle
did he accept it? He knew it was putting the capstone on the building
which he had erected by his labor and cemented with his blood. I have
done you services, said he, to the amount of twenty shillings, but you
are poor and unable to pay me; I will accept now of your two and
sixpence, and give you a discharge. Thus, the soldier who had, through
blood and slaughter, established the liberties of his country, crowned
the whole by the sacrifice of pecuniary emoluments. His consent was
given to the contract, and he received two and sixpence in the pound.
Now, if there is any other contract existing like this, I cannot see it.
The soldier never received it, nor the officer who handed it out, never
believed it to be worth more than two and sixpence in the pound. It was
like compounding a debt by the consent of the creditor, and there an
equal liquidation ought to take place. If this reasoning is right, we
know the value at once of our paper currency; if it is not right, I
would wish to know upon what principle of rationality, a rate can be
established for the value of our certificates.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--I am convinced that the principles laid down by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, if true, ought to effect the final
determination of this question; and if I was satisfied with them, I
should clearly vote with him. If I was convinced that the certificates,
at the time they were given out, were worth no more than 2_s._ 6_d._ in
the pound, and that the creditors received them at that price, in full
discharge of their demands, I should be very loath to raise them to so
great a value; I would treat them precisely the same as Continental
money. I should think that the public did complete justice by complying
with the terms of their contract; while this is a matter of dispute we
can never agree in our determination. But if I can show that this is not
the case, that he has not looked into the origin of this debt, so as to
be well ascertained of the fact, I hope he will give up his opinion, and
join with me in the conclusion.

The debt of the United States is of four kinds; first, paper money;
second, money lent; third, the pay to the army, including commutation,
and the allowance for depreciation; and fourth, certificates, or
evidences of the debts due from the United States to individuals, for
supplies furnished, or services rendered at different periods of the
last war. As to the bills of credit, I mentioned yesterday that they
stand upon a different footing from the rest; because it was one of the
parties who ascertained their depreciation, contrary to the opinion of
the other, who had a desire of keeping them up to their nominal value.
The money loaned to the United States, is a debt which we are bound to
pay, on every principle of honor and justice; nor can it be said that
the certificate given to the person who loaned the money, was given as a
payment in discharge of the debt. With respect to the army, including
commutation, I shall beg leave to read two or three resolutions of
Congress, to show that Congress had a different idea of the certificates
they gave to the officers and soldiers, in evidence of the balance of
their account, which is still due. When they were first issued to the
soldiers, Congress guarded them from being transferable; but as the
soldiers could get nothing for them in that form, upon representation,
Congress passed another resolution, by which they were made
transferable, in order that the soldier might avail himself of the
acknowledgment of Congress in his favor; (the resolutions referred to
were in May, 1783, April, 1784, and June, 1784.) This recurrence to the
resolutions of Congress, under which the evidences of the debt were
issued, sufficiently explodes a supposition, that they were understood
to be worth no more than 2_s._ 6_d._ in the pound, at the time they were
issued and received. From the personal knowledge I have of the
transactions of that time, I can venture to say, that no idea of payment
was ever entertained. They were, in fact, and were so considered,
evidences of the liquidated and specific sums due to the creditors of
the United States. The step which Congress took for the benefit of the
army, in making their certificates transferable, so far from
accommodating them, would have proved a real injury. If the assignee had
supposed himself to stand in a less eligible situation than the
assignor, he never would have been induced to have given him the price
which he did. If the soldier had received a certificate of twenty
shillings, as only 2_s._ 6_d._ nobody would have inclined to have given
him 2_s._ 6_d._ for it, because he could never expect to obtain a
repayment of a greater sum, even in such money as Congress should find
convenient; upon every principle of assignation of debts or contracts,
such an idea ought to be reprobated.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--I will express my idea on the point which the gentleman
has made an inquiry respecting, in a few words. I said, that I conceived
a delay of this business would endanger the peace of the Union by
diminishing the energy of the Government, without which this
constitution would be of no value. These are considerations which must
appear weighty and important, if justly considered by the committee. A
great and respectable body of our citizens are creditors of the United
States. There are a variety of opinions prevailing respecting their
claims, with respect to funding, discrimination, and interest. This
diversity of opinion may probably irritate and produce heats and
animosities, which may terminate in forming factions among the people.
The State debts may produce a difference between the General and
particular Governments. If the matter is taken up as the business of a
party, one may be pitted against the other, until, in the end, they
disturb the public tranquillity, or sacrifice the general welfare to
opposition and party spirit. Besides this, the reputation, the credit of
the Government is at stake; the public expectation is alive to all the
measures of Government at the present moment. They expect that justice
and equity will be administered as far as the abilities of our country
extend; it lies with the Legislature to realize this expectation. If
Congress pursue the present inquiry, and come to a determination without
delay, the public sentiment will be brought to a point, and a general
acquiescence may be expected; but if it is postponed to a future
session, such may be the effect of faction and disappointment during the
recess, that the probability is, that no one party will comprise a
sufficient number to comprehend the majority of the whole.

Mr. JACKSON.--Do not gentlemen think there is some danger on the other
side? Will there not be ground of uneasiness when the soldier and the
meritorious citizen are called upon to pay the speculator more than ten
times the amount they ever received from him for their securities? I
believe, Mr. Chairman, there is more just reason of alarm on this than
on the other side of the question.

A gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. HARTLEY) has noticed my arguments of
yesterday, respecting a funding system. I beg leave to make a few
observations in answer to him. He has said, that a funded debt is of
great advantage to a nation, and has adduced the situation of England as
a proof, founded on experience. But England is a solitary example, and
the force of that example dwindles into nothing, if we examine into the
real cause of her seeming affluence. She does not owe much of
respectability to her national debt; she owes the most of it, at
present, to the troubles of other countries, and when those have
subsided, the bubble of her credit may blow up, as did the South Sea
project, for Government stock can never be considered as cash. The stock
employed in agriculture, commerce, and manufactures may, by great
prospects of advantage, be diverted into the hands of brokers, for the
purpose of speculating further in the funds; but no real addition will
be made to the means of productive industry, nor was any thing of this
kind contemplated at the time funding was first introduced into England.
We learn from _Blackstone_, that the reason for establishing a national
debt, was in order to support a system of foreign politics, and to
establish the new succession at the revolution; because it was deemed
expedient to create a new interest, called the moneyed interest, in
favor of the Prince of Orange, in opposition to the landed interest,
which was supposed to be generally in favor of the king, who had
abdicated the throne. I hope there is no such reason existing here; our
Government, I trust, is firmly established without the assistance of
stock-jobbers. We ought to reign universally in the hearts of our
fellow-citizens, on account of the salutary tendency of our measures to
promote the general welfare, and not depend upon the support of a party,
who have no other cause to esteem us but because we realize their golden
dreams of unlooked-for success.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--If we were about to contract debts for
the purpose of funding them, the observations of the gentleman from
Georgia would apply; but we have already contracted them, and the only
question is, shall we fund or pay? We must do one or the other. With
respect to the remark of Blackstone, he is writing of an enormous public
debt when he mentions it as injurious, because he expressly says, that
"a certain proportion of debt seems to be highly useful to a trading
people; but what proportion that is it is not for me to determine." To
be sure he adds afterwards, "that the present magnitude of our national
encumbrances very far exceeds all calculations of commercial benefit,
and is productive of the greatest inconveniences." And here I agree with
him: but our public debt is not of such enormous magnitude as to
counterbalance the good effects of throwing out such a quantity of a
stable paper as will answer all the purposes of a circulating medium.

Mr. TUCKER.--I very much applaud the gentleman who made the motion now
before the committee, because he has boldly come forward to combat an
opinion so generally received in this place, that many thought it could
not be controverted by any man possessed of common honesty; and because
I am persuaded, that he has done it with an honorable intention of
substituting real and substantial justice, in the place of that which he
deems to be only the name and the shadow.

Although it is probable I differ with the gentleman who moved the
amendment, I am inclined to think a discrimination of some kind is
equitable and necessary. I believe it may be fairly said, that there are
three classes of domestic creditors. The first, those who hold the
Continental bills of credit, which have been long out of circulation.
Second, those who hold certificates that were given for services or
supplies, in their own names. And, third, those who hold certificates by
purchase. I would wish to consider the obligation to each of these three
classes, and whether, in equity, some kind of discrimination may not be
made. On a strict and impartial examination, I am inclined to believe
they will not appear to be the same. I will now turn to the examination
of the first; namely, the holders of the Continental bills of credit.
The Secretary of the Treasury has reported in favor of some degree of
provision being made for them. But, sir, what is the situation of the
people who hold these bills? If I recollect rightly, the face of the
bills declares, that the bearer shall be entitled to receive so many
Spanish milled dollars as is therein expressed. When these bills were
issued, their real value was equal to their nominal value; no person
refused, or wished to refuse, them as such; but, in a short time, too
large a quantity were issued, and they began to depreciate. Congress
then recommended to the several States to pass tender-laws for the
support of their credit. This was done by all the States; and they
continued, in some of them, to pass as specie, under those laws, when
they were depreciated twenty, thirty, and forty for one. Those people,
who received them in this state, suffered a very great loss by an act of
the Government, and many were ruined by the measure. When these bills
had thus depreciated, Congress passed a resolution, calling them in at
forty for one. This ordinance of Congress immediately reduced the claims
of the first class of creditors by an arbitrary act of power. I do not
pretend to say that the measure was unnecessary, but it was rigorous to
deprive them of 39-40ths of their claims. Perhaps we cannot return to
all the transactions of that time, because it would involve the
Government in a thousand difficulties, and produce, perhaps, greater
evils than it would remedy. But there remains a claim upon our justice
to pay the holders one dollar, at least, for forty. By the act of
Congress, which I alluded to before, these bills were thrown out of
circulation, and have ever since lain in the hands of individuals. Now,
it appears to me, that, in equity, we ought to make all the reparation
in our power. Surely, then, we ought to allow interest on the principal
from the time the bills were scaled, and forced out of circulation.
These creditors, I take it, have a strong claim upon us; because the
Government has materially injured them, and the least satisfaction we
can give them, is to put this part of the debt on the best footing we
can; if we cannot do complete justice, let us approximate towards it as
far as it is in our power. The second class of our creditors have
obligations that are strong. It has been said, and generally passed
current as an incontrovertible opinion, that those who transferred their
certificates have conferred to the purchaser every claim they had upon
the public. I mean, sir, to deny this assertion. There is a claim which
they could not transfer, that is, a claim in equity;, they were entitled
to the principal sum when they presented their accounts to the United
States, and we ought, in justice, to have paid it at that time; but,
perhaps, from our inability to do this, we were obliged to force on them
a certificate of the balance, with a promise to pay them an annual
interest thereon; but a promise to pay the interest does not exonerate
us from paying the principal, as soon as we have it in our power. Now,
this is a claim which the original creditor, who parted with the
evidence of his debt, did not transfer to the person to whom he sold it.
The United States are under no contract with the purchaser who bought a
loaned debt, to pay him any thing more than what the paper specifies,
that is, to pay him the interest from year to year, but not the
principal, until we find it convenient.

Then, with respect to the third class, if the residue of the revenue is
insufficient to pay them the interest on their whole principal, I would
give them certificates for such part as we are able to provide for the
payment of the interest upon, at six per cent., to be paid in the same
manner with the others. And I would give them other certificates for the
remainder, on a like interest of six per cent., the payment whereof
should commence at a fixed period, say three, four, or five years, as it
might be found that the increasing resources of our country would,
enable us to do; but I would undertake nothing now beyond our present
ability.


THURSDAY, February 11.

[Mr. FITZSIMONS presented the address of the yearly (Quaker) meeting of
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, and the Western parts of Maryland
and Virginia, held at Philadelphia, against the continuance of the
African slave trade, and praying Congress to remove that reproach from
the land, and Mr. LAWRENCE presented an Address to the same effect from
the Society of Friends in New York.]

Mr. HARTLEY moved to refer the Address of the annual assembly of
Friends, held at Philadelphia, to a committee; he thought it a mark of
respect due to so numerous and respectable a part of the community.

Mr. WHITE seconded the motion.

Mr. SMITH (of S. C.)--However respectable the petitioners may be, I hope
gentlemen will consider that others equally respectable are opposed to
the object which is aimed at, and are entitled to an opportunity of
being heard before the question is determined. I flatter myself
gentlemen will not press the point of commitment to-day, it being
contrary to our usual mode of procedure.

Mr. FITZSIMONS.--If we were now to determine the final question, the
observation of the gentleman from South Carolina would apply; but, sir,
the present question does not touch upon the merits of the case; it is
merely to refer the memorial to a committee, to consider what is proper
to be done; gentlemen, therefore, who do not mean to oppose the
commitment to-morrow, may as well agree to it to-day, because it will
tend to save the time of the House.

Mr. JACKSON wished to know why the second reading was to be contended
for to-day, when it was diverting the attention of the members from the
great object that was before the Committee of the Whole? Is it because
the feelings of the Friends will be hurt to have their affair conducted
in the usual course of business? Gentlemen, who advocate the second
reading to-day, should respect the feelings of the members who represent
that part of the Union which is principally affected by the measure. I
believe, sir, that the latter class consists of as useful and as good
citizens as the petitioners, men equally friends to the revolution, and
equally susceptible of the refined sensations of humanity and
benevolence. Why, then, should such particular attention be paid to
them, for bringing forward a business of questionable policy? If
Congress are disposed to interfere in the importation of slaves, they
can take the subject up without advisers, because the constitution
expressly mentions all the power they can exercise on the subject.

Mr. SHERMAN suggested the idea of referring it to a committee, to
consist of a member from each State, because several States had already
made some regulations on this subject. The sooner the subject was taken
up he thought it would be the better.

Mr. PARKER.--I hope, Mr. Speaker, the petition of these respectable
people will be attended to with all the readiness the importance of its
object demands; and I cannot help expressing the pleasure I feel in
finding so considerable a part of the community attending to matters of
such momentous concern to the future prosperity and happiness of the
people of America. I think it my duty, as a citizen of the Union, to
espouse their cause; and it is incumbent upon every member of this House
to sift the subject well, and ascertain what can be done to restrain a
practice so nefarious. The constitution has authorized us to levy a tax
upon the importation of such persons as the States shall authorize to be
admitted. I would willingly go to that extent; and if any thing further
can be devised to discountenance the trade, consistent with the terms of
the constitution, I shall cheerfully give it my assent and support.

Mr. MADISON.--The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. FITZSIMONS) has put
this question on its proper ground; if gentlemen do not mean to oppose
the commitment to-morrow, they may as well acquiesce in it to-day; and,
I apprehend, gentlemen need not be alarmed at any measure it is likely
Congress will take; because they will recollect, that the constitution
secures to the individual States the right of admitting, if they think
proper, the importation of slaves into their own territory, for
eighteen years yet unexpired; subject, however, to a tax, if Congress
are disposed to impose it, of not more than ten dollars on each person.
The petition, if I mistake not, speaks of artifices used by
self-interested persons to carry on this trade; and the petition from
New York states a case that may require the consideration of Congress.
If any thing is within the Federal authority to restrain such violation
of the rights of nations and of mankind, as is supposed to be practised
in some parts of the United States, it will certainly tend to the
interest and honor of the community to attempt a remedy, and is a proper
subject for our discussion. It may be, that foreigners take the
advantage of the liberty afforded them by the American trade, to employ
our shipping in the slave trade between Africa and the West Indies, when
they are restrained from employing their own by restrictive laws of
their nation. If this is the case, is there any person of humanity that
would not wish to prevent them? Another consideration why we should
commit the petition is, that we may give no ground of alarm by a serious
opposition, as if we were about to take measures that were
unconstitutional.

Mr. _Stone_ feared that if Congress took any measures indicative of an
intention to interfere with the kind of property alluded to, it would
sink it in value very considerably, and might be injurious to a great
number of the citizens, particularly in the Southern States. He thought
the subject was of general concern, and that the petitioners had no more
right to interfere with it than any other members of the community. It
was an unfortunate circumstance, that it was the disposition of
religious sects to imagine they understood the rights of human nature
better than all the world besides; and that they would, in consequence,
be meddling with concerns in which they had nothing to do. As the
petition relates to a subject of a general nature, it ought to lie on
the table as information. He would never consent to refer petitions,
unless the petitioners were exclusively interested. Suppose there was a
petition to come before us from a society, praying us to be honest in
our transactions, or that we should administer the constitution
according to its intent, what would you do with a petition of this kind?
Certainly it would remain on your table. He would, however, not have it
supposed that the people had not a right to advise and give their
opinion upon public measures; but he would not be influenced by that
advice or opinion to take up a subject sooner than the convenience of
other business would admit. Unless he changed his sentiments, he would
oppose the commitment.

Mr. BURKE thought gentlemen were paying attention to what did not
deserve it. The men in the gallery had come here to meddle in a business
with which they have nothing to do; they were volunteering in the cause
of others, who neither expected nor desired it. He had a respect for the
body of Quakers, but, nevertheless, he did not believe they had more
virtue or religion than other people, nor perhaps so much, if they were
examined to the bottom, notwithstanding their outward pretences. If
their petition is to be noticed, Congress ought to wait till counter
applications were made, and then they might have the subject more fairly
before them. The rights of the Southern States ought not to be
threatened, and their property endangered, to please people who would be
unaffected by the consequences.

Mr. HARTLEY thought the memorialists did not deserve to be aspersed for
their conduct, if influenced by motives of benignity. They solicited the
Legislature of the Union, to prevent, as far as is in their power, the
increase of a licentious traffic; nor do they merit censure, because
their behavior has the appearance of more morality than other people.
Congress ought not to refuse to hear the applications of their
fellow-citizens, while those applications contain nothing
unconstitutional or offensive. What is the object of the address before
us? It is intended to bring before this House a subject of great
importance to the cause of humanity; there are certain facts to be
inquired into, and the memorialists are ready to give all the
information in their power; they are waiting, at a great distance from
their homes, and wish to return; if, then, it will be proper to commit
the petition to-morrow, it will be equally proper to-day, for it is
conformable to our practice; besides, it will tend to their conveniency.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The gentleman from South Carolina says, the petitioners
are of a society not known in the laws or constitution. Sir, in all our
acts, as well as in the constitution, we have noticed this society; or,
why is it that we admit them to affirm in cases where others are called
upon to swear? If we pay this attention to them, in one instance, what
good reason is there for contemning them in another? I think the
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. STONE) carries his apprehensions too far,
when he fears that negro property will fall in value, by the suppression
of the slave trade; not that I suppose it immediately in the power of
Congress to abolish a traffic which is a disgrace to human nature; but
it appears to me, that, if the importation was crushed, the value of a
slave would be increased instead of diminished; however, considerations
of this kind have nothing to do with the present question. Gentlemen may
acquiesce in the commitment of the memorial, without pledging themselves
to support its object.

Mr. JACKSON.--I differ much in opinion with the gentleman last up. I
apprehend, if through the interference of the General Government the
slave trade was abolished, it would evince to the people a disposition
towards a total emancipation, and they would hold their property in
jeopardy. Any extraordinary attention of Congress to this petition may
have, in some degree, a similar effect. I would beg to ask those, then,
who are desirous of freeing the negroes, if they have funds sufficient
to pay for them? If they have, they may come forward on that business
with some propriety; but, if they have not, they should keep themselves
quiet, and not interfere with a business in which they are not
interested. They may as well come forward and solicit Congress to
interdict the West India trade, because it is injurious to the morals of
mankind; from thence we import rum, which has a debasing influence upon
the consumer. But, sir, is the whole morality of the United States
confined to the Quakers? Are they the only people whose feelings are to
be consulted on this occasion? Is it to them we owe our present
happiness? Was it they who formed the constitution? Did they, by their
arms or contributions, establish our independence? I believe they were
generally opposed to that measure: why, then, on their application,
should we injure men who, at the risk of their lives and fortunes,
secured to the community their liberty and property? If Congress pay any
uncommon degree of attention to their petition, it will furnish just
ground of alarm to the Southern States. But why do these men set
themselves up in such a particular manner against slavery? Do they
understand the rights of mankind, and the disposition of Providence,
better than others? If they were to consult that book, which claims our
regard, they will find that slavery is not only allowed but commended.
Their Saviour, who possessed more benevolence and commiseration than
they pretend to, has allowed of it: and if they fully examine the
subject, they will find that slavery has been no novel doctrine since
the days of Cain; but be these things as they may, I hope the House will
order the petition to lie on the table, in order to prevent an alarm to
our Southern brethren.

Mr. SEDGWICK.--If it was a serious question whether the memorial should
be committed or not, I would not urge it at this time; but that cannot
be a question for a moment, if we consider our relative situation with
the people. A number of men, who are certainly very respectable, and of
whom, as a society, it may be said with truth, that they conform their
moral conduct to their religious tenets, as much as any people in the
whole community, come forward and tell you, that you may effect two
objects by the exercise of a constitutional authority, which will give
great satisfaction. On the one hand, you may acquire revenue, and on the
other, restrain a practice productive of great evil. Now, setting aside
the religious motives which influence their application, have they not a
right as citizens to give their opinion of public measures? For my part,
I do not apprehend that any State, or any considerable number of
individuals in any State, will be seriously alarmed at the commitment of
the petition, from a fear that Congress intend to exercise an
unconstitutional authority, in order to violate their rights. I believe
there is not a wish of the kind entertained by any member of this body;
how can gentlemen hesitate, then, to pay that respect to a memorial
which it is entitled to, according to the ordinary mode of procedure in
business? Why shall we defer doing that till to-morrow, which we can do
to-day; for the result, I apprehend, will be the same in either case.

Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina.)--The question, I apprehend, is whether
we will take the petition up for a second reading, and not whether it
shall be committed? Now, I oppose this, because it is contrary to our
usual practice, and does not allow gentlemen time to consider of the
merits of the prayer. Perhaps some gentlemen may think it improper to
commit it to so large a committee as has been mentioned; a variety of
causes may be supposed to show that such a hasty decision is improper;
perhaps the prayer of it is improper. If I understood it right on its
first reading, though to be sure I did not comprehend perfectly all that
the petition contained, it prays that we should take measures for the
abolition of the slave trade. This is desiring an unconstitutional act,
because the constitution secures that trade to the States, independent
of Congressional restrictions, for a term of twenty-one years. If,
therefore, it prays for a violation of constitutional rights, it ought
to be rejected as an attempt upon the virtue and patriotism of the
House.

Mr. BOUDINOT.--It has been said, that the Quakers have no right to
interfere in this business. I am surprised to hear this doctrine
advanced, after it has been so lately contended and settled, that the
people have a right to assemble and petition for redress of grievances.
It is not because the petition comes from the society of Quakers that I
am in favor of the commitment, but because it comes from citizens of the
United States who are equally concerned in the welfare and happiness of
their country with others. There certainly is no foundation for the
apprehensions which seem to prevail in gentlemen's minds. If the
petitioners were so uninformed as to suppose that Congress could be
guilty of a violation of the constitution, yet I trust we know our duty
better than to be led astray by an application from any man or set of
men whatever. I do not consider the merits of the main question to be
before us; it will be time enough to give our opinions upon that when
the committee have reported. If it is in our power, by recommendation,
or any other way, to put a stop to the slave trade in America, I do not
doubt of its policy; but how far the constitution will authorize us to
attempt to depress it, will be a question well worthy of our
consideration.

Mr. SHERMAN observed, that the petitioners from New York stated, that
they had applied to the Legislature of that State to prohibit certain
practices which they conceived to be improper, and which tended to
injure the well-being of the community; that the Legislature had
considered the application, but had applied no remedy, because they
supposed that power was exclusively vested in the General Government
under the Constitution of the United States; it would, therefore, be
proper to commit that petition, in order to ascertain what are the
powers of the General Government in the case.

Mr. GERRY thought gentlemen were out of order in entering upon the
merits of the main question at this time, when they were considering the
expediency of committing the petition. He should, therefore, not follow
them further in that track than barely to observe, that it was the right
of the citizens to apply for redress, in every case in which they
conceived themselves aggrieved; and it was the duty of Congress to
afford redress as far as in their power. That their Southern brethren
had been betrayed into the slave trade by the first settlers, was to be
lamented; they were not to be reflected on for not viewing this subject
in a different light, the prejudice of education is eradicated with
difficulty; but he thought nothing would excuse the General Government
for not exerting itself to prevent, as far as they constitutionally
could, the evils resulting from such enormities as were alluded to by
the petitioners; and the same considerations induced him highly to
commend the part the Society of Friends had taken; it was the cause of
humanity they had interested themselves in, and he wished, with them, to
see measures pursued by every nation, to wipe off the indelible stain
which the slave trade had brought upon all who were concerned in it.

Mr. MADISON thought the question before the committee was no otherwise
important than as gentlemen made it so by their serious opposition. Had
they permitted the commitment of the memorial, as a matter of course, no
notice would have been taken of it out of doors; it could never have
been blown up into a decision of the question respecting the
discouragement of the African slave-trade, nor alarm the owners with an
apprehension that the General Government were about to abolish slavery
in all the States; such things are not contemplated by any gentleman;
but they excite alarm by their extended objections to committing the
memorials. Gentlemen may vote for the commitment of the petition without
any intention of supporting the prayer of it.

Mr. WHITE would not have seconded the motion, if he had thought it would
have brought on a lengthy debate. He conceived that a business of this
kind ought to be decided without much discussion; it had constantly been
the practice of the House, and he did not suppose there was any reason
for a deviation.

Mr. PAGE said, if the memorial had been presented by any individual,
instead of the respectable body from whom it emanated, he should have
voted in favor of a commitment, because it was the duty of the
Legislature to attend to subjects brought before them by their
constituents; if, upon inquiry, it was discovered to be improper to
comply with the prayer of the petitioners, he would say so, and they
would be satisfied.

Mr. STONE thought the business ought to be left to take its usual
course; by the rules of the House, it was expressly declared that
petitions, memorials, and other papers, addressed to the House should
not be debated or decided on the day they were first read.

Mr. BALDWIN felt at a loss to account why precipitation was used on this
occasion, contrary to the customary usage of the House. He had not heard
a single reason advanced in favor of it. To be sure it was said the
petitioners are a respectable body of men; he did not deny it; but
certainly gentlemen did not suppose they were paying respect to them or
to the House, when they urged such a hasty procedure. It was contrary to
his idea of respect, and the idea the House had always expressed, when
they had important subjects under consideration; and, therefore, he
should be against the motion. He was afraid that there was really a
little volunteering in this business, as it had been termed by the
gentleman from Georgia.

Mr. HUNTINGTON considered the petitioners as much disinterested as any
persons in the United States; he was persuaded they had an aversion to
slavery, yet they were not singular in this; others had the same; and he
hoped, when Congress took up the subject, they would go as far as
possible to prohibit the evil complained of. But he thought that would
be better done by considering it in the light of revenue; when the
Committee of the Whole on questions of finance might properly take the
subject into consideration, without giving any ground for alarm.

Mr. TUCKER.--I have no doubt on my mind respecting what ought to be done
on this occasion; so far from committing the memorial, we ought to
dismiss it without further notice. What is the purport of the memorial?
It is plainly this, to reprobate a particular kind of commerce, in a
moral point of view, and to request the interposition of Congress to
effect its abrogation. But Congress has no authority, under the
constitution, to do more than lay a duty of ten dollars upon each person
imported; and this is a political consideration, not arising from either
religion or morality, and is the only principle upon which we can
proceed to take it up. But what effect do these men suppose will arise
from their exertions? Will a duty of ten dollars diminish the
importation? Will the treatment be better than usual? I apprehend not;
nay, it may be worse, because an interference with the subject may
excite a great degree of restlessness in the minds of those it is
intended to serve, and that may be a cause for the masters to use more
rigor towards them than they would otherwise exert: so that these men
seem to overshoot their object. But if they will endeavor to procure the
abolition of the slave trade, let them prefer their petitions to the
State Legislatures, who alone have the power of forbidding the
importation. I believe their applications there would be improper; but
if they are any where proper, it is there. I look upon the address then
to be ill-judged, however good the intention of the framers.

Mr. SMITH claimed it as a right that the petition should lie over till
to-morrow.


THURSDAY, February 11.

_Assumption of State Debts._

      [Mr. MADISON's motion to discriminate between original
      creditors and present holders, so as to pay claims in full
      to the former, and the highest market price to the
      assignee, and the remainder to the original creditor.]

The House then again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole upon
the report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. BURKE's amendment being under consideration,

Mr. BURKE said, he had brought his motion forward, in consequence of a
hasty promise he had given a member of this House; but as he did not
mean to support it, or vote for it, he would withdraw it.

Mr. MADISON.--No gentleman, Mr. Chairman, has expressed more strongly
than I feel, the importance and difficulty of the subject before us.
Although I have endeavored to view it under all its aspects, and analyze
it in all its principles, yet have I kept my mind open, and been anxious
to aid my own reflections by the reflected light to be expected from
gentlemen on this floor who enter into the discussion. For this purpose,
I have chosen hitherto rather to be a hearer than a speaker on the
subject, and should even at this moment have continued in my seat, but
that the turn which the business has taken, renders it requisite for me
now, if at all, to trouble the committee with my reflections, and the
opinion in which they have terminated.

It has been said, by some gentlemen, that the debt itself does not exist
in the extent and form which is generally supposed. I confess, sir, I
differ altogether from the gentleman who takes that ground. Let us
consider, first, by whom the debt was contracted, and then let us
consider to whom it is due. The debt was contracted by the United
States, who, with respect to that particular transaction, were in a
national capacity. The Government was nothing more than the agent or
organ, by which the whole body of the people acted. The change in the
Government which has taken place has enlarged its national capacity, but
it has not varied the national obligation, with respect to the
engagements entered into by that transaction. For, in like manner, the
present Government is nothing more than the organ, or agent, of the
public. The obligation which they are under, is precisely the same with
that under which the debt was contracted; although the Government has
been changed, the nation remains the same. There is no change in our
political duty, nor in the moral or political obligation. The language I
now use, sir, is the language of the constitution itself; it declares
that all debts shall have the same validity against the United States,
under the new, as under the old form of Government. The obligation
remains the same, though I hope experience will prove that the ability
has been favorably varied.

The next question is, to what amount the public are at present indebted?
I conceive the question may be answered in a few words. The United
States owe the value they received, which they acknowledge, and which
they have promised to pay: what is that value? It is a certain sum in
principal, bearing an interest of six per cent. No logic, no magic, in
my opinion, can diminish the force of the obligation.

The only point on which we can deliberate is, to whom the payment is
really due; for this purpose, it will be proper to take notice of the
several descriptions of people who are creditors of the Union, and lay
down some principles respecting them, which may lead us to a just and
equitable decision. As there is a small part of the debt yet
unliquidated, it may be well to pass it by and come to the great mass of
the liquidated debt. It may here be proper to notice four classes into
which it may be divided:

      _First_, Original creditors, who have never alienated their
      securities.

      _Second_, Original creditors who have alienated.

      _Third_, Present holders of alienated securities.

      _Fourth_, Intermediate holders, through whose hands
      securities have circulated.

The only principles that can govern the decision on their respective
pretensions, I take to be, 1. Public Justice; 2. Public Faith; 3. Public
Credit; 4. Public Opinion.

With respect to the first class, there can be no difficulty. Justice is
in their favor, for they have advanced the value which they claim;
public faith is in their favor, for the written promise is in their
hands; respect for public credit is in their favor, for if claims so
sacred are violated, all confidence must be at an end; public opinion is
in their favor, for every honest citizen cannot but be their advocate.

With respect to the last class, the intermediate holders, their
pretensions, if they have any, will lead us into a labyrinth, for which
it is impossible to find a clew. This will be the less complained of,
because this class were perfectly free, both in becoming and ceasing to
be creditors; and because, in general, they must have gained by their
speculations.

The only rival pretensions, then, are those of the original creditors,
who have assigned, and of the present holders of the assignments.

The former may appeal to justice, because the value of the money, the
service, or the property advanced by them, has never been really paid
to them.

They may appeal to good faith, because the value stipulated and
expected, is not satisfied by the steps taken by the Government. The
certificates put into the hands of the creditors, on closing their
settlements with the public, were of less real value than was
acknowledged to be due; they may be considered as having been forced, in
fact, on the receivers. They cannot, therefore, be fairly adjudged an
extinguishment of the debt. They may appeal to the motives for
establishing public credit, for which justice and faith form the natural
foundation. They may appeal to the precedent furnished by the
compensation allowed to the army during the late war, for the
depreciation of bills, which nominally discharged the debts. They may
appeal to humanity, for the sufferings of the military part of the
creditors can never be forgotten, while sympathy is an American virtue.
To say nothing of the singular hardship, in so many months, of requiring
those who have lost four-fifths, or seven-eighths of their due, to
contribute the remainder in favor of those who have gained in the
contrary proportion.

On the other hand, the holders by assignment have claims, which I by no
means wish to depreciate. They will say, that whatever pretensions
others may have against the public, these cannot affect the validity of
theirs. That if they gain by the risk taken upon themselves, it is but
the just reward of that risk. That as they hold the public promise, they
have an undeniable demand on the public faith. That the best foundation
of public credit is that adherence to literal engagements on which it
has been erected by the most flourishing nations. That if the new
Government should swerve from so essential a principle, it will be
regarded by all the world as inheriting the infirmities of the old. Such
being the interfering claims on the public, one of three things must be
done; either pay both, reject wholly one or the other, or make a
_composition_ between them on some principle of equity. To pay both is
perhaps beyond the public ability; and as it would far exceed the value
received by the public, it will not be expected by the world, nor even
by the creditors themselves. To reject wholly the claims of either is
equally inadmissible; such a sacrifice of those who possess the written
engagements would be fatal to the proposed establishment of public
credit; it would moreover punish those who had put their trust in the
public promises and resources. To make the other class the sole victims
is an idea at which human nature recoils.

A composition, then, is the only expedient that remains; let it be a
liberal one in favor of the present holders, let them have the highest
price which has prevailed in the market; and let the residue belong to
the original sufferers. This will not do perfect justice; but it will do
more real justice, and perform more of the public faith, than any other
expedient proposed. The present holders, where they have purchased at
the lowest price of the securities, will have a profit that cannot
reasonably be complained of; where they have purchased at a higher
price, the profit will be considerable; and even the few who have
purchased at the highest price cannot well be losers, with a well funded
interest of six per cent. The original sufferers will not be fully
indemnified; but they will receive, from their country, a tribute due to
their merits, which, if it does not entirely heal their wounds, will
assuage the pain of them. I am aware, that many plausible objections
will lie against what I have suggested, some of which I foresee and will
take some notice of. It will be said, that the plan is impracticable;
should this be demonstrated, I am ready to renounce it; but it does not
appear to me in that light. I acknowledge that such a scale as has often
been a subject of conversation, is impracticable.

The discrimination proposed by me, requires nothing more than a
knowledge of the present holders, which will be shown by the
certificates; and of the original holders, which the office documents
will show. It may be objected, that if the Government is to go beyond
the literal, into the equitable claims against the United States, it
ought to go back to every case where injustice has been done. To this
the answer is obvious: the case in question is not only different from
others in point of magnitude and of practicability, but forces itself on
the attention of the committee, as necessarily involved in the business
before them. It may be objected, that public credit will suffer,
especially abroad; I think this danger will be effectually obviated by
the honesty and disinterestedness of the Government displayed in the
measure, by a continuance of the punctual discharge of foreign interest,
by the full provision to be made for the whole foreign debt, and the
equal punctuality I hope to see in the future payments on the domestic
debts. I trust also, that all future loans will be founded on a previous
establishment of adequate funds; and that a situation, like the present,
will be thereby rendered impossible.

I cannot but regard the present case as so extraordinary, in many
respects, that the ordinary maxims are not strictly applicable to it.
The fluctuations of stock in Europe, so often referred to, have no
comparison with those in the United States. The former never exceeded
50, 60, or 70 per cent.: can it be said, that because a Government
thought this evil insufficient to justify an interference, it would view
in the same light a fluctuation amounting to seven or eight hundred per
cent.

I am of opinion, that were Great Britain, Holland, or any other country,
to fund its debts precisely in the same situation as the American debt,
some equitable interference of the Government would take place. The
South Sea scheme, in which a change, amounting to one thousand per cent.
happened in the value of stock, is well known to have produced an
interference, and without any injury whatever to the subsequent credit
of the nation. It is true, that in many respects, the case differed from
that of the United States; but, in other respects, there is a degree of
similitude, which warrants the conjecture. It may be objected, that such
a provision as I propose will exceed the public ability; I do not think
the public unable to discharge honorably all its engagements, or that it
will be unwilling, if the appropriations shall be satisfactory. I
regret, as much as any member, the unavoidable weight and duration of
the burthens to be imposed; having never been a proselyte to the
doctrine, that public debts are public benefits. I consider them, on the
contrary, as evils which ought to be removed as fast as honor and
justice will permit, and shall heartily join in the means necessary for
that purpose. I conclude with declaring, as my opinion, that if any case
were to happen among individuals, bearing an analogy to that of the
public, a Court of Equity would interpose for its redress; or that if a
tribunal existed on earth, by which nations could be compelled to do
right, the United States would be compelled to do something not
dissimilar in its principles to what I have contended for.

Mr. LIVERMORE wished the amendment he had formerly mentioned might be
made to the original proposition; it was, to insert, before the word
"interest," the words, "at a certain rate o."

Mr. SHERMAN apprehended it would strongly imply that Congress meant to
reduce the rate of interest, and he did not wish that question involved
with the present.

Mr. LIVERMORE's motion being seconded, the question was put thereon, and
it being lost,

Mr. MADISON moved to amend the original proposition, so as to read as
follows:

      _Resolved_, That adequate funds ought to be provided for
      paying the interest and principal of the domestic debt, as
      the same shall be liquidated; and that in such liquidation,
      the present holders of public securities, which have been
      alienated, shall be settled with according to the highest
      market rate of such securities; and that the balance of the
      sums due from the public, be paid in such proportion to the
      original holder of such securities.

Mr. BOUDINOT said, he had long been in the habit of paying great respect
to the sentiments of the gentleman from Virginia; but he feared, on this
occasion, he had not viewed the subject with his usual accuracy. He was
not surprised that the gentleman was led away by the dictates of his
heart, for he believed he really felt for the misfortunes of his
fellow-citizens, who had been the prey of avaricious men. Indeed, it is
matter of less surprise, on another account, for heretofore I
contemplated the subject in nearly the same point of view. Influenced by
a desire to do justice to every person connected with the public, I
wished for the means of compensating the original holders, who had sold
their certificates at a great loss; but I found the thing, upon long and
careful examination, to be both unjust and impracticable.

The honorable gentleman tells us, that the debt was contracted for
meritorious services, and inquires whether the creditor received an
adequate compensation in full discharge? I say, sir, this debt is still
due, and that the person to whom it is due, has received nothing but a
certificate as evidence of his claim; but then, if any of our first
creditors have put another person in their shoes, the question will
arise, are we to disown the act of the party himself? Are we to say, we
will not be bound by your transfer, we will not treat with your
representative, but insist upon a resettlement with you alone? But the
same reasoning will oblige us to go further, and investigate all the
claims of those who have received of the Government Continental money,
which they afterwards parted with for ten, forty, or one hundred for
one.


FRIDAY, February 12.

_Abolition of Slavery._

The following memorial of the Pennsylvania Society for promoting the
Abolition of Slavery, the relief of free negroes unlawfully held in
bondage, and the improvement of the condition of the African race, was
presented and read:

The memorial respectfully showeth,

      That from a regard for the happiness of mankind, an
      association was formed several years since in this State,
      by a number of her citizens, of various religious
      denominations, for promoting the abolition of slavery, and
      for the relief of those unlawfully held in bondage. A just
      and acute conception of the true principles of liberty, as
      it spread through the land, produced accessions to their
      numbers, many friends to their cause, and a Legislative
      co-operation with their views, which, by the blessing of
      Divine Providence, have been successfully directed to the
      relieving from bondage a large number of their
      fellow-creatures of the African race. They have also the
      satisfaction to observe, that in consequence of that spirit
      of philanthropy and genuine liberty which is generally
      diffusing its beneficial influence, similar institutions
      are forming at home and abroad.

      That mankind are all formed by the same Almighty Being,
      alike objects of his care, and equally designed for the
      enjoyment of happiness, the Christian religion teaches us
      to believe, and the political creed of Americans fully
      coincides with the position. Your memorialists,
      particularly engaged in attending to the distresses arising
      from slavery, believe it their indispensable duty to
      present this subject to your notice. They have observed,
      with real satisfaction, that many important and salutary
      powers are vested in you for "promoting the welfare and
      securing the blessings of liberty to the people of the
      United States;" and as they conceive that these blessings
      ought rightfully to be administered, without distinction of
      color, to all descriptions of people, so they indulge
      themselves in the pleasing expectation, that nothing which
      can be done for the relief of the unhappy objects of their
      care will be either omitted or delayed.

      From a persuasion that equal liberty was originally the
      portion, and is still the birthright of all men; and
      influenced by the strong ties of humanity, and the
      principles of their institution, your memorialists conceive
      themselves bound to use all justifiable endeavors to loosen
      the bands of slavery, and promote a general enjoyment of
      the blessings of freedom. Under these impressions, they
      earnestly entreat your serious attention to the subject of
      slavery; that you will be pleased to countenance the
      restoration of liberty to those unhappy men, who alone, in
      this land of freedom, are degraded into perpetual bondage,
      and who, amidst the general joy of surrounding freemen, are
      groaning in servile subjection; that you will devise means
      for removing this inconsistency from the character of the
      American people; that you will promote mercy and justice
      towards this distressed race, and that you will step to the
      very verge of the power vested in you for discouraging
      every species of traffic in the persons of our fellow-men.

                                  BENJ. FRANKLIN, _President_.

      PHILADELPHIA, _February_ 3, 1790.

Mr. HARTLEY then called up the memorial presented yesterday, from the
annual meeting of Friends at Philadelphia, for a second reading;
whereupon the same was read a second time, and moved to be committed.

Mr. TUCKER was sorry the petition had a second reading, as he conceived
it contained an unconstitutional request, and from that consideration he
wished it thrown aside. He feared the commitment of it would be a very
alarming circumstance to the Southern States; for if the object was to
engage Congress in an unconstitutional measure, it would be considered
as an interference with their rights, the people would become very
uneasy under the Government, and lament that they ever put additional
powers into their hands. He was surprised to see another memorial on the
same subject; and that signed by a man who ought to have known the
constitution better. He thought it a mischievous attempt, as it
respected the persons in whose favor it was intended. It would buoy them
up with hopes, without a foundation, and as they could not reason on the
subject, as more enlightened men would, they might be led to do what
they would be punished for, and the owners of them, in their own
defence, would be compelled to exercise over them a severity they were
not accustomed to. Do these men expect a general emancipation of slaves
by law? This would never be submitted to by the Southern States without
a civil war. Do they mean to purchase their freedom? He believed their
money would fall short of the price. But how is it they are more
concerned in this business than others? Are they the only persons who
possess religion and morality? If the people are not so exemplary,
certainly they will admit the clergy are; why, then, do we not find them
uniting in a body, praying us to adopt measures for the promotion of
religion and piety, or any moral object? They know it would be an
improper interference; and to say the best of this memorial, it is an
act of imprudence, which he hoped would receive no countenance from the
House.

Mr. SENEY denied that there was any thing unconstitutional in the
memorial; at least, if there was it had escaped his attention, and he
should be obliged to the gentleman to point it out. Its only object was,
that Congress should exercise their constitutional authority to abate
the horrors of slavery, as far as they could; indeed, he considered that
all altercation on the subject of commitment was at an end, as the House
had impliedly determined yesterday that it should be committed.

Mr. BURKE saw the disposition of the House, and he feared it would be
referred to a committee, maugre all their opposition; but he must
insist, that it prayed for an unconstitutional measure; did it not
desire Congress to interfere and abolish the slave trade, while the
constitution expressly stipulates that Congress shall exercise no such
power? He was certain the commitment would sound an alarm, and blow the
trumpet of sedition in the Southern States. He was sorry to see the
petitioners paid more attention to than the constitution; however, he
would do his duty and oppose the business totally; and if it was
referred to a committee, as mentioned yesterday, consisting of a member
from each State, and he was appointed, he would decline serving.

Mr. SCOTT.--I cannot entertain a doubt but the memorial is strictly
agreeable to the constitution; it respects a part of the duty
particularly assigned to us by that instrument, and I hope we may be
inclined to take it into consideration. We can at present lay our hands
upon a small duty of ten dollars; I would take this, and if it is all
that we can do, we must be content: but I am sorry that the framers of
the constitution did not go further, and enable us to interdict the
traffic entirely; for I look upon the slave trade to be one of the most
abominable things on earth; and if there was neither God nor devil, I
should oppose it upon the principles of humanity, and the law of nature.
I cannot, for my part, conceive how any person can be said to acquire a
property in another; is it by virtue of conquest? What are the rights of
conquest? Some have dared to advance this monstrous principle, that the
conqueror is absolute master of his conquest; that he may dispose of it
as his property, and treat it as he pleases; but, enough of those who
reduce men to the state of transferable goods, or use them like beasts
of burthen, who deliver them up as property or patrimony to others. Let
us argue on principles countenanced by reason and becoming humanity; the
petitioners view the subject in a religious light, but I do not stand in
need of religious motives to induce me to reprobate the traffic in human
flesh; other considerations weigh with me to support the commitment of
the memorial, and to support every constitutional measure likely to
bring about its total abolition. Perhaps, in our Legislative capacity,
we can go no further than to impose a duty of ten dollars; but I do not
know how far I might go, if I was one of the Judges of the United
States, and those people were to come before me and claim their
emancipation; but I am sure I would go as far as I could.

Mr. JACKSON differed with the gentleman last up, and supposed the master
had a qualified property in his slave. He said the contrary doctrine
would go to the destruction of every species of personal service. The
gentleman said, he did not stand in need of religion to induce him to
reprobate slavery, but if he is guided by that evidence upon which the
Christian system is founded, he will find that religion is not against
it. He will see, from Genesis to Revelations, the current setting strong
that way. There never was a Government on the face of the earth, but
what permitted slavery. The purest sons of freedom in the Grecian
Republics, the citizens of Athens and Lacedæmon, all held slaves. On
this principle the nations of Europe are associated; it is the basis of
the feudal system. But suppose all this to have been wrong, let me ask
the gentleman if it is good policy to bring forward a business at this
moment, likely to light up the flame of civil discord; for the people of
the Southern States will resist one tyranny as soon as another? The
other parts of the continent may bear them down by force of arms, but
they will never suffer themselves to be divested of their property
without a struggle. The gentleman says, if he was a Federal Judge, he
does not know to what length he would go in emancipating these people;
but I believe his judgment would be of short duration in Georgia,
perhaps even the existence of such a judge might be in danger.

Mr. SHERMAN could see no difficulty in committing the memorial; because
it was probable the committee would understand their business, and
perhaps they might bring in such a report as would be satisfactory to
gentlemen on both sides of the House.

Mr. BALDWIN was sorry the subject had ever been brought before Congress,
because it was of a delicate nature as it respected some of the States.
Gentlemen who had been present at the formation of this constitution
could not avoid the recollection of the pain and difficulty which the
subject caused in that body. The members from the Southern States were
so tender upon this point, that they had well-nigh broken up without
coming to any determination; however, from the extreme desire of
preserving the Union, and obtaining an efficient Government, they were
induced mutually to concede, and the constitution jealously guarded what
they agreed to. If gentlemen look over the footsteps of that body, they
will find the greatest degree of caution used to imprint them, so as not
to be easily eradicated; but the moment we go to jostle on that ground,
I fear we shall feel it tremble under our feet. Congress have no power
to interfere with the importation of slaves beyond what is given in the
ninth section of the first article of the constitution; every thing
else is interdicted to them in the strongest terms. If we examine the
constitution, we shall find the expressions relative to this subject
cautiously expressed, and more punctiliously guarded than any other
part, "The migration or importation of such persons shall not be
prohibited by Congress." But lest this should not have secured the
object sufficiently, it is declared, in the same section, "That no
capitation or direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to the
census;" this was intended to prevent Congress from laying any special
tax upon negro slaves, as they might, in this way, so burthen the
possessors of them as to induce a general emancipation. If we go on to
the fifth article, we shall find the first and fifth clauses of the
ninth section of the first article restrained from being altered before
the year 1808.

Gentlemen have said that this petition does not pray for an abolition of
the slave trade. I think, sir, it prays for nothing else; and therefore
we have no more to do with it than if it prayed us to establish an order
of nobility, or a national religion.

Mr. SYLVESTER said, that he had always been in the habit of respecting
the Society called Quakers; he respected them for their exertions in the
cause of humanity; but he thought the present was not a time to enter
into a consideration of the subject, especially as he conceived it to be
a business within the province of the State Legislatures.

Mr. LAWRENCE observed, that the subject would undoubtedly come under the
consideration of the House; and he thought, as it was now before them,
that the present time was as proper as any; he was therefore for
committing the memorial, and when the prayer of it had been properly
examined, they could see how far Congress may, constitutionally,
interfere: as they knew the limits of their power on this, as well as
every other occasion, there was no just apprehension to be entertained
that they would go beyond it.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) insisted that it was not in the power of
the House to grant the prayer of the petition, which went to the total
abolishment of the slave trade, and it was therefore unnecessary to
commit it. He observed, that in the Southern States difficulties had
arisen on adopting the constitution, inasmuch as it was apprehended that
Congress might take measures under it for abolishing the slave trade.

Perhaps the petitioners, when they applied to this House, did not think
their object unconstitutional, but now they are told that it is, they
will be satisfied with the answer, and press it no further. If their
object had been for Congress to lay a duty of ten dollars per head on
the importation of slaves, they would have said so, but that does not
appear to have been the case. The commitment of the petition, on that
ground, cannot be contended. If they will not be content with that,
shall it be committed to investigate facts? The petition speaks of
none. For what purpose, then, shall it be committed? If gentlemen can
assign no good reason for the measure, they will not support it when
they are told that it will create jealousies and alarm in the Southern
States; for I can assure them that there is no point on which they are
more jealous and suspicious, than on a business with which they think
the Government has nothing to do.

When we entered into this confederacy, we did it from political, not
from moral motives, and I do not think my constituents want to learn
morals from the petitioners; I do not believe they want improvements in
their moral system; if they do, they can get it at home.

The gentleman from Georgia has justly stated the jealousy of the
Southern States. On entering into this Government, they apprehend that
the other States, not knowing the necessity the citizens of the Southern
States were under to hold this species of property, would, from motives
of humanity and benevolence, be led to vote for a general emancipation;
and had they not seen that the constitution provided against the effect
of such a disposition, I may be bold to say they never would have
adopted it. And, notwithstanding all the calmness with which some
gentlemen have viewed the subject, they will find that this discussion
alone will create great alarm. We have been told, that if this would be
the case, we ought to have avoided it, by saying nothing; but it was not
for that purpose that we were sent here. We look upon this measure as an
attack upon the palladium of the property of our country; it is
therefore our duty to oppose it by every means in our power. Gentlemen
should consider, that when we entered into a political connection with
the other States, that this property was there; it was acquired under a
former Government, conformably to the laws and constitution, therefore
any thing that will tend to deprive them of that property, must be an
_ex post facto_ law, and, as such, is forbidden by our political
compact.

I said the States would never have entered into the Confederation,
unless their property had been guarantied to them, for such is the state
of agriculture in that country, that without slaves it must be
abandoned. Why will these people, then, make use of arguments to induce
the slave to turn his hand against his master? We labor under
difficulties enough from the ravages of the late war. A gentleman can
hardly come from that country with a servant or two, either to this
place or Philadelphia, but there are persons trying to seduce his
servants to leave him; and, when they have done this, the poor wretches
are obliged to rob their master, in order to obtain a subsistence; all
those, therefore, who are concerned in this seduction, are accessories
to the robbery.

The reproaches which they cast upon the owners of negro property, is
charging them with the want of humanity. I believe the proprietors have
as much humanity as persons in any part of the continent, and are as
conspicuous for their good morals as their neighbors. It was said
yesterday that the Quakers are a society known to the laws and the
constitution, but they are no more so than other religious societies;
they stand exactly in the same situation; their memorial, therefore,
relates to a matter in which they are no more interested than any other
sect, and can only be considered as a piece of advice, which it is not
customary to refer to a committee; but if it is supposed to pray for
what they think a moral purpose, is that sufficient to induce us to
commit it? What may appear a moral virtue in their eyes, may not be so
in reality. I have heard of a sect of Shaking Quakers, who, I presume,
suppose their tenets of a moral tendency. I am informed one of them
forbids to intermarry, yet you may see them with a numerous offspring
about them. Now, if these people were to petition Congress to pass a law
prohibiting matrimony, would gentlemen agree to refer such a petition? I
think if they would reject one of that nature, as improper, they ought
also to reject this.

Mr. PAGE was in favor of the commitment. He hoped that the designs of
the respectable memoralists would not be stopped at the threshold, in
order to preclude a fair discussion of the prayer of the memorial. He
observed, that gentlemen had founded their arguments upon a
misrepresentation; for the object of the memorial is not declared to be
the total abolition of the slave trade, but that Congress will consider
whether it be not in reality within their power to exercise justice and
mercy, which, if adhered to, they cannot doubt must produce the
abolition of the slave trade. If, then, the prayer contained nothing
unconstitutional, he trusted the meritorious effort of the petitioners
would not be frustrated.

With respect to the alarm that was apprehended, he conjectured there was
none; but there might be just cause if the memorial was not taken into
consideration. He placed himself in the case of a slave, and said, that,
on hearing that Congress had refused to listen to the decent suggestions
of a respectable part of the community, he should infer that the General
Government (from which was expected great good would result to every
class of citizens) had shut their ears against the voice of humanity,
and he should despair of any alleviation of the miseries he and his
posterity had in prospect; if any thing could induce him to rebel, it
must be a stroke like this, impressing on his mind all the horrors of
despair. But if he was told that application was made in his behalf, and
that Congress was willing to hear what could be urged in favor of
discouraging the practice of importing his fellow-wretches, he would
trust in their justice and humanity, and wait the decision patiently. He
presumed that these unfortunate people would reason in the same way, and
he, therefore, conceived the most likely way to prevent danger was to
commit the petition. He lived in a State which had the misfortune of
having in her bosom a great number of slaves; he held many of them
himself, and was as much interested in the business, as any gentleman in
South Carolina or Georgia, yet if he was determined to hold them in
eternal bondage, he should feel no uneasiness or alarm on account of the
present measure, because he should rely upon the virtue of Congress that
they would not exercise any unconstitutional authority.

Mr. MADISON.--The debate has taken a serious turn, and it will be owing
to this alone if an alarm is created; for, had the memorial been treated
in the usual way, it would have been considered as a matter of course,
and a report might have been made so as to have given general
satisfaction. If there was the slightest tendency by the commitment to
break in upon the constitution, he would object to it; but he did not
see upon what ground such an event was to be apprehended. The petition
prayed, in general terms, for the interference of Congress, so far as
they were constitutionally authorized: but even if its prayer was, in
some degree, unconstitutional, it might be committed, as was the case on
Mr. Churchman's petition, one part of which was supposed to apply for an
unconstitutional interference by the General Government. He admitted,
that Congress is restricted by the constitution from taking measures to
abolish the slave trade; yet there are a variety of ways by which it
could countenance the abolition, and regulations might be made in
relation to the introduction of them into the new States to be formed
out of the Western Territory. He thought the object well worthy of
consideration.

Mr. GERRY thought the interference of Congress fully compatible with the
constitution, and could not help lamenting the miseries to which the
natives of Africa were exposed by this inhuman commerce. He never
contemplated the subject, without reflecting what his own feelings would
be, in case himself, his children, or friends were placed in the same
deplorable circumstances. He then adverted to the flagrant acts of
cruelty which are committed in carrying on that traffic; and asked,
whether it can be supposed that Congress has no power to prevent such
abuses? He then referred to the constitution, and pointed out the
restrictions laid on the General Government respecting the importation
of slaves. It was not, he presumed, in the contemplation of any
gentleman in this House to violate that part of the constitution; but
that we have a right to regulate this business, is as clear as that we
have any rights whatever; nor has the contrary been shown by any person
who has spoken on the occasion. Congress can, agreeably to the
constitution, lay a duty of ten dollars on imported slaves; they may do
this immediately. He made a calculation of the value of the slaves in
the Southern States, and supposed they may be worth ten millions of
dollars. Congress have a right, if they see proper, to make a proposal
to the Southern States to purchase the whole of them, and their
resources in the Western Territory might furnish them with the means. He
did not intend to suggest a measure of this kind; he only instanced
these particulars to show that Congress certainly has a right to
intermeddle in the business. He thought that no objection had been
offered of any force to prevent the commitment of the memorial.

Mr. BOUDINOT had carefully examined the petition and found nothing like
what was complained of by gentlemen contained in it; he, therefore,
hoped they would withdraw their opposition and suffer it to be
committed.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) said, that as the petitioners had
particularly prayed Congress to take measures for the annihilation of
the slave trade; and as that was admitted, on all hands, to be beyond
their power, and as the petitioners would not be gratified by a tax of
ten dollars per head, which was all that was within their power, there
was, of consequence, no occasion for committing it.

The question on the commitment being about to be put, the yeas and nays
were called for, and were as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Brown, Cadwalader,
      Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gale, Gerry, Gilman,
      Goodhue, Griffin, Grout, Hartley, Hathorn, Heister,
      Huntington, Lawrence, Lee, Leonard, Livermore, Madison,
      Moore, Muhlenberg, Page, Parker, Partridge, Rensselaer,
      Schureman, Scott, Sedgwick, Seney, Sherman, Sinnickson,
      Smith, (of Maryland,) Sturges, Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Wadsworth, White, and Wynkoop--43.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bland, Burke, Coles, Huger,
      Jackson, Matthews, Sylvester, Smith, (of South Carolina,)
      Stone, and Tucker--14.

The memorials were referred accordingly.


MONDAY, February 15.

_Public Credit._

The House went again into a Committee of the Whole on the report of the
Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's motion for a discrimination being under consideration,

Mr. SEDGWICK.--The proposition, Mr. Chairman, contains a question of the
utmost importance. And the committee must be obliged to the gentleman
who brought it forward for his very ingenious discussion of the subject
of the domestic debt. With respect to the question now before the
committee, so much has been said, that I think it will not be necessary
to consume much of their time in the investigation. On the subject of
contracts I have to observe, that whenever a voluntary engagement is
made for a valuable consideration for property advanced or services
rendered, and the terms of the contract are understood, if no fraud or
imposition is practised, the party engaging is bound to the performance,
according to the literal meaning of the words in which it is expressed.
Such contract, whether of a Government or an individual, may be either
transferable or not transferable. The latter species of contract
receives an additional value from its capacity of being transferred, if
the circumstances of the possessor should render a sale of it necessary
or convenient to him. To render the transferable quality of such
evidences of contract in any degree advantageous to the possessor, it is
necessary to consider, in case of sale, the alienee possessed of all the
property of the original holder; and indeed it is highly absurd, and
even contradictory, to say, that such evidences of debt are
transferable, and at the same time to say that there is in them a kind
of property that the holder could not convey by _bona fide_ contract.

This is the construction which has invariably been given to these
contracts, whether formed by Government or by individuals. To deprive
the citizen of the power of binding himself by his own voluntary
contract, or to prevent a disposition of property in its nature
alienable, would be a violent and unjustifiable invasion of one of those
rights of which man, as a citizen, is the most tenacious, and would
indeed break one of the strongest bonds by which society is holden
together.

In the transfers which have been made, the contracts were fairly made;
the whole rights have been transferred. It is not pretended any fraud or
imposition has been practised. The risk was calculated by the parties,
and it was observed, that the risk contemplated a revolution in the
Government.

From the foregoing deduction of particulars, it is presumed to be proved
that a property is vested in the transferees. That if this property is
divested by the Government, the law for that purpose would have a
retrospective operation, and that no _ex post facto_ law could be more
alarming than that by which the right of private property is violently
invaded.

Having considered the nature of the contract, and of the obligations
which result from it, I beg leave to call the attention of the committee
to those circumstances by which that obligation may be destroyed,
impaired, or suspended. They are stated to be, 1. Performance. 2.
Voluntary discharge. 3. Composition. 4. Inability.

And gentlemen are called upon to give information of any other causes
which can produce either of those effects.

With regard, more particularly, to the proposition before the committee,
I have, to observe, that with regard to these contracts, there has
existed a depreciation in consequence of the failure of Government
regularly to pay the interest. That in this depreciated state, the
securities have been alienated; that of course the original holders have
sustained a loss; that if the loss resulted from the fault, and not the
misfortune of Government, the creditors have, undeniably, a demand
against the Government for compensation; that this demand, however well
founded, can never authorize the Government to invade the honestly
acquired property of the present possessors, a property warranted by the
terms of the contract itself, and sanctioned by the act of Congress, of
April, 1783, and the validity of it recognized by the constitution we
have sworn to support.

With regard to the claims of the original holders, it is, however,
observable, that the domestic creditor, at the time the contract was
formed, well knew the nature of the constitution of the Government
administered by Congress, the other contracting party; that its power of
performance depended on the ability and good-will of the States; that
Congress had always performed its duty, had made the necessary
requisitions; that this was its utmost power; and that the failure had
arisen wholly from the neglect of the States. I therefore submit it to
the committee, whether, if the original holder has a just or equitable
demand, he should not resort to the State of which he is a member?

I admit, that the case of an original holder is indeed a hard one; that
I have a respect for his misfortunes and for his pretensions; that if
satisfaction is discovered to be just and practicable, I would not
hesitate to go to the utmost ability of the Government for that purpose.
But let me ask, what merit will the Government possess, if it strip one
class of citizens, who have acquired property by the known and
established rules of law, under the specious pretence of doing justice
to another class of citizens?

It was implicitly agreed, that eighty per cent. depreciation would not
authorize the interference proposed by the motion. I ask, then, for some
point of depreciation to be pointed out, which will authorize such
interference.

The question for which I contend has received the universal approbation
of mankind; there are no instances of the interference contended for,
and this general sense of mankind affords me some evidence of truth.

This contract was founded on a valuable consideration. It was the price
of our liberty and independence. The possessor claimed, according to the
very terms of the contract, though it is not pretended that the
engagements of Government have been performed. No composition with the
creditors is proposed; nor is the proposition founded on any pretended
inability of the Government; for to comply with the intention of it,
1,600,000 dollars, annually, more than is proposed by the report of the
Secretary, would be required.

By reason of the circumstances which have taken place, the honorable
gentleman (Mr. MADISON) supposes, that, if the whole amount of a
security shall be paid to the present possessor, he will have a sum of
money to which the original holder is equitably entitled. If this is
true, then, no interposition is necessary, it being a well-known rule of
law, that an action will always lie to recover money out of the hands of
another, to which the plaintiff, from the principles of equity and good
conscience, is entitled.

With regard to the effects, which will probably result from this
measure, I have to observe, that they will be destructive to our
national character. That the world is now willing, charitably, to impute
our former miscarriages to events we could not control; but should our
first measures, in regard to public faith, be a violent infraction of
our contracts, it will sanction all our bitterest enemies have said, to
our disadvantage. With regard to its effects on credit, little
dependence will be placed on the plighted faith of a Government which,
under the pretence of doing equity, has exercised a power of dispensing
with its contracts, and has thereby formed for itself a precedent of
future violations, both with respect to its funds and contracts. With
regard to discovering who was the original holder, except so far as
respects the army debt, I am certain there are no documents by which the
necessary facts can be discovered.

I presume it is a fact, with regard to much the greater part of the
debt, that any fictitious name was inserted. And with regard to the army
debt, the soldiers, generally, who were in the service at the conclusion
of the war, had received ample satisfaction for their services, at the
time of their enlistment, having been paid more, on an average, than two
hundred and fifty dollars per man.

I have only to add, that the proposed system will lay a foundation for
infinite frauds and perjuries, and that it will, beyond all powers of
calculation, multiply the evils of speculation.

Mr. LAWRENCE observed, that the proposition of the gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. MADISON) derived force from the talents and knowledge of
that gentleman in public transactions; but that, on examination, it
would be found to contain doctrines very repugnant to the interest and
prosperity of the Union.

He then stated, that the debts contracted by the United States were for
loans of money, supplies of articles necessary for the public wants, and
for actual services rendered in different employments. That these debts
were ultimately adjusted and reduced to their present transferable form.
That every part of the contract was essential to it. The negotiability
was a material part. That the nature of the contract was frequently
recognized by the late Government. That, in 1783, Congress recommended
certain funds to be established to pay the interest, and put the
principal in a course of discharge. That this recommendation was
unequivocal, as to the nature of it, and made no discrimination between
the possessor and original holder. That the subsequent conduct of that
body was conformable to this recommendation. That they had annually
called on the States to furnish money to pay the interest, without
discriminating between the original holder and present possessor. That
they had paid interest on the securities, without making any
discrimination. That provision had been made for holders of loan-office
certificates that were subject to liquidation, to have them cancelled,
and others issued for the specie value. That the holders of certificates
were enabled to have them registered, to guard against accidents; and
that no distinction was made between the original holder and the
alienee. That the transferable nature of the claim was for the benefit
of the creditor, because it gave it an active value. That he consented
to take it, and consulted his own advantage. That the conduct of the
late Congress, since the war, had been uniform in the support of this
contract, and they had done no act to impair its obligation, according
to the terms of it. That this contract was valid against the Government;
for, notwithstanding the truth of the gentleman's observations, that the
nation is the same, though the bodies that administered the Government
were different, there was yet far greater security; and to remove all
doubt, a clause that made all debts and engagements valid against the
United States, under the late General Government, valid against the
present, was inserted in the constitution.

He further observed, that this contract having descended upon the
Government, there was no right in the Legislature to impair the force of
it. That the particular Governments are restrained from passing laws
impairing the obligations of contracts. That this interference would be
a violation of the contract, between the individuals, when the
certificate was transferred; and it would not be presumed, the States
being prohibited, that the General Government had the power to do it.

He then adverted to the principles of the gentleman, to wrest the
obligation of the public to the original holder; and observed, that the
same principles were in favor of the present possessor. That public
justice required a performance of contracts, when there was no fraud on
the part of the holder. That the possessor had been guilty of no fraud,
no deception. That the contract between him and the original holder was
fair, and that a hazard and risk attended the purchase adequate to the
advantage. That nothing short of a revolution in Government could have
produced payment. That if there was an imposition, the public occasioned
it; and between the original holder and the public, there might be a
claim for retribution. That public faith was as sacredly pledged to the
bearer, or present possessor, as to the original creditor. That public
credit results from fair and upright conduct; that the Government, to
support it, must perform its contract. That this was a contract
recognized by them, and as such should be discharged. That the condition
we have been in made it proper for us to be cautious on this subject;
and even at present, people doubted our disposition to establish our
credit. That this would give a fatal blow to it, and when we should
recover, if ever, was doubtful. That the public opinion was difficult
to be ascertained; gentlemen had different modes to determine it. He
supposed it was better ascertained by the acts of public bodies than by
squibs in the newspapers, or by pamphlets written by individuals. That
the uniform conduct of men, deputed by the particular States to
represent them, in the late General Government, was the best standard;
and their opinion, from the year 1783, was in favor of the present
possessor. That the conduct of the particular States was another
circumstance; that he did not know of any discrimination made by them,
though it had been attempted. That the general opinion of men of
property was in favor of it; and that these sources of public opinion
were more certain than those he had before mentioned.

He further observed, that although he believed gentlemen supposed no
advantage would be derived to the United States from this
discrimination, yet much would arise. That part of the army was composed
of foreigners, many had left the country, others were dead; all their
part would be unclaimed. That certificates were issued to public
officers to a great amount, and were paid by them to persons from whom
they purchased. The difficulty of making proof of the original creditor
would be great; and, from this circumstance, great sums would be gained
to the public. That there were persons enough who would have sagacity to
discern this; and they would doubt the purity of the public motive,
should the gentleman's plan be adopted.

He then adverted to the circumstance of the new creditor receiving
paper. That this paper might be subject to another liquidation on the
same principle as the present. That it would introduce doubt and
distrust of public engagements; and there would be no greater security,
although a fund was pledged, than there is at present, for whenever the
public pleased, they might destroy the obligation. Arguments were
improperly addressed to their feelings; but that however hard it may be
for the original creditor, who had parted with his certificates, to
contribute to pay the debt, yet it would be equally hard on him who had
been injured by Continental money, who had been plundered by the enemy,
who had had his property burned by them in the course of the war; and
that instances of these kinds were numerous.

He then adverted to the doctrine of the Court of Equity; and urged that
this court must be governed by principle. That were the committee this
high court, and the United States the original creditor, and the present
possessor before them; and if there appeared no fraud on the part of the
possessor, the original creditor would have no just claim on him. That
between the United States and original creditors, the United States were
in fault, and the claim, if good, would be against them.

Mr. SMITH (of S. C.) remarked, that it was necessary and proper the
House should give the subject the most ample discussion. The question
had long agitated the public mind, and the people should know that it
had occupied the serious attention of their Representatives, and be made
acquainted with the principles of their decision. For his part, having
bestowed on it the most attentive consideration, he could assert, that
the more he contemplated it, the more he was impressed with a
conviction, that the proposition was unjust, impolitic, and
impracticable. It consisted of two parts: The one was to take away the
property of one person; the other was to give that property to another;
and this by a voluntary interposition of the House, by a mere act of
power, without the assent of the former, or without even the application
of the latter. For it was remarkable, that the original holders, who had
alienated their certificates, had not come forward with this demand; and
it is presumable, that, had they applied for redress, they would reject
any indemnification which was the result of such manifest injustice. To
prove that this was taking away the property of a citizen by force, he
observed, that the purchaser had, by a fair purchase, acquired a right
to the full amount of the sum expressed in the certificate, which it was
not within the power of the House to divest him of. No tribunal on earth
could lawfully deprive a man of his property fairly obtained. The
purchaser bought under the act of Congress, making the securities
transferable; and having given the market price, without fraud or
imposition, he was, by virtue of such purchase, vested with the complete
and absolute ownership of the certificate, as fully as the original
holder; and had as much right to demand full payment as the original
holder would have had, had the security been still in his hands. Even
should the House refuse, by an act of power, to pay him more than half
his demand, the other half would still remain against the public; it
could not be extinguished. The debt would continue to haunt them; the
creditors would loudly clamor for justice, and sooner or later the
balance would be paid. Then would they incur all the odium of a
violation of private rights, without deriving to the public any
advantage whatever. He considered the measure as doing a certain evil,
that a possible good might result from it. This was not, in his opinion,
the proper mode of doing good. Justice cannot be founded on injustice;
and to take money out of the pocket of one man, to put it into that of
another, is a precedent which may justify future interferences. This
step would lead the House to others: for, if the principle be a just
one, then the Government should look into all the transactions and
speculations of individuals, in order to correct them, and make
retribution to every individual according to his losses. He was
persuaded, that the true policy of a Legislative body was, to pursue the
broad road of justice, clearly marked out before them; for it was an
undeniable truth, that whenever they deviated into by-roads and
trackless paths, without any other guide than their own imagination,
they would get bewildered in a labyrinth of difficulties, and rejoice to
trace back their steps, and regain the plain road. Now, the plain line
of conduct is, to do strict justice, such as is enforced in judicial
tribunals, between man and man, in a similar case. The debtor is bound
to pay the debt to the holder of the security; the contract, between the
giver of the bond and the person to whom it was given, is done away the
moment the latter assigns it to another person. If A gives a bond to B,
who parts with it to C, there is no longer any obligation on the part of
A to pay B, but he must pay it to C. A has nothing to do with the
private negotiations between B and C, nor to inquire what consideration
was given for the security. All that he has to inquire is, whether he
really signed it and had value received for it, and the amount of it. He
cannot say to the holder, you gave but fifty dollars for this security
of one hundred dollars, and I will pay you only fifty; for the law will
compel him to pay the hundred. This is a point of justice between man
and man. Is there another point of law and justice for the Government?
By what rule is the Government to square its conduct, if not by those
sacred rules which form the basis of civil society, and are the
safeguard of private property?

The gentleman from Virginia has said, that giving the present holders,
by alienation, the highest market price, would be doing them ample
justice; but did the public mean to refund them the money they had
actually advanced? No; they were to receive this ample justice by a bit
of paper, nominally for ten shillings; but which this very measure would
instantly depreciate to eight, or six shillings. They would have this
consolation, that, according to the gentleman's reasoning, they would
still have a claim against the Government for the balance. For, if the
original holder, by selling his certificate for four shillings, has now
a just claim against the Government for the balance of sixteen
shillings, which it is asserted he has, of course the alienee, to whom
the public should now acknowledge a debt of ten shillings, which he
would sell for only six, would hereafter have a just demand against the
public for four shillings. The reasoning might be carried further, for
it would follow, that whenever the public shall pay in paper which shall
depreciate, the seller will have a demand against the Government for the
difference.

The constitution itself, he said, was opposed to the measure, for it was
an _ex post facto_ law, which was prohibited in express terms. The
transfer of public securities was lawful at the time these alienations
were made; an attempt, therefore, to punish the transferees is an
attempt to make an _ex post facto_ law, by making that now unlawful
which was lawful at the time it was done. It alters the nature of the
transaction, and annexes the idea of guilt to that which at the moment
of commission, was not only perfectly innocent, but was explicitly
authorized and encouraged by a public act of Congress. By that act those
who had money were invited to purchase of those who held securities, and
now we are called upon to punish the purchasers who bought under that
invitation. The constitution restrains the States from passing any laws
impairing the force of contracts; _a fortiori_ is the Legislature of the
Union restrained. What an example to hold up to the Judiciary of the
United States! How could they annul a State law, when the State would be
able to plead a precedent on the part of Congress? The right of property
is a sacred right; no tribunal on earth can deprive a citizen of his
property, unless for a fair equivalent, for the public welfare. The
purchaser is vested, by the sale, with an absolute right, to the full
amount of the security, and it is beyond their authority to divest him
of it. They might, indeed, by an act of power, declare that he should be
paid only half; but his right to the other moiety would not be
extinguished. It had been said, that the original holder still had a
claim against the public, because he had received only two shillings and
sixpence for services worth twenty shillings. On the same principle, and
with more justice, the present holder would still have a claim for ten
shillings, because he has the public bond for twenty shillings. No
ingenuity can overcome these stubborn principles of law and justice;
they are immutable, and must ultimately prevail. The House had been told
that if the Government had defrauded the original holders out of their
dues, it was fit the public should rectify the fraud. The former
Government was not deficient in inclination to do them ample justice;
but, from the imbecility of the Confederation, had not the means. In
those days of democratic enthusiasm, the people were afraid of an
energetic Government: having so recently experienced the severity of the
former one, the citizens of these States were cautious in trusting any
Government with power; and it is not improbable that some of the
original holders, who suffered their embarrassments, from the want of a
Government competent to the payment of its debts, would themselves have
opposed vesting Congress with powers adequate to this object. Even the
present constitution, which is a mild one, met with considerable
opposition: had it been rejected, the public securities would have never
been paid.

Mr. AMES agreed with the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) in regard
to the validity of the debt. There was propriety in saying the nation is
the same, though the Government be changed. The debt is the price of our
liberties, and cannot be diminished a farthing, the gentleman from
Virginia says; and why? Because the Government, as one of the
contracting parties, cannot annul, or vary the bargain without the
consent of the other. If the measure proposed by that gentleman
corresponds with that sound principle, he should have the pleasure of
agreeing with him on the ultimate decision; but if the measure should
be found, on a fair discussion, to be subversive of that principle, it
would not merit the countenance of the committee.

A claim upon our justice is made, on behalf of the original holders of
securities, who have transferred them. Does the plighted faith of the
country stand charged to pay the difference between the price their
securities sold for in the market and their nominal sum? In order to
make the affirmative appear, the worthy gentleman has said, that the
paper is the only evidence of a prior contract; and while the paper was
sold, the residuary right to the debt still remained in the seller.
Supposing this novel doctrine to be true, which cannot be conceded, it
will not warrant any conclusion in prejudice of any purchaser of the
Loan-office debt; for the paper was given when the loan was made; as no
prior debt existed, the paper is the very debt. The gentleman ought,
therefore, to confine his motion to the army debt, as his principle
seems inapplicable to any other. And even on liquidating the army debt,
the certificate extinguished the prior debt; otherwise the public would
be twice charged. As, when one man owes another an account, and gives
his bond for the balance, the account is no longer of force. By the
terms of the certificate, the person transferring has lost his claim
against the public. He has freely transferred; for if violence or fraud
were practised, the law will afford him redress. In society, as well as
in a state of nature, property is changed by the consent of the last
occupant. He may dispose of it by gift or at half price, and give a
complete title. Nor will the pretence that this transfer was free only
in appearance, avail; for the motives which disposed the owner to sell
cannot affect the right of the purchaser. Every such creditor risked
something; either that the Government would not pay him at all, or not
in due season. The risk, computed in free and open market, will be
nearly right. It is a kind of insurance against these risks, and the
insurers and insured will calculate the rate of insurance better than
Government can do it. If there is a new risk of Government interposing,
it seems that the purchaser, who may be called the insurer, did not rate
his risk high enough. It seems pretty clear, therefore, that there is no
claim on the stipulated justice of the country.

The committee rose, reported progress, and obtained leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, February 16.

_Public Credit._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
report of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's proposition still under consideration.

Mr. JACKSON observed, that although as young a politician as any on the
floor, and convinced that the weight of experience was against him, on
so important a national subject, he could not be silent; particularly as
he had the honor of seconding the gentleman's motion (Mr. MADISON) now
before the House, that it would be therefore expected that he should
bring forward his reasons, and the principle which actuated him to it.
He confessed, that had he not before leaned to the side of a
discrimination, the arguments of that able gentleman would have induced
him to support the plan he had brought forward. He was induced on
another motive to rise, to show that the numerous arguments of the
gentlemen in opposition, yesterday, had not convinced him of the
impracticability or injustice of the composition.

The House were told much of the moral obligations we were under of
paying our debts, and the impolicy and injustice of interfering with
private contracts. The obligation, he believed, was nowhere denied; the
debt was of the highest nature; it was the price of our independence:
the only difficulty is, how that debt shall be discharged. He would here
observe, that the justice of the plan before the House, had not been so
fully objected to, as the impracticability, although it had been
asserted to be unjust, by some of the gentlemen who had spoken.

He would consider the justice of the proposition. The House had been
told the nature of those contracts, and the valuable considerations of
them. The contract, as it struck him, fell under the legal terms of _do,
ut des_; I give that thou mayest give--or, I give that I may receive. In
all contracts there are three requisites: 1st. The agreement. 2d. The
consideration. 3d. The thing to be done or omitted. This consideration
is to be an equivalent, or full recompense for the thing to be
performed. Let us examine what is the thing to be done, and what the
consideration is. The creditor, who was to perform the third article of
the contract, held twenty shillings, which was to be given for a
valuable consideration. What was this consideration? Two shillings and
sixpence. He argued, that if this twenty shillings was worth no more
than two shillings and sixpence, the contract was fair and substantial;
but, if gentlemen carried the idea further, and declared this twenty
shillings was money of equal value with the two shillings and sixpence
given, he contended that the contract was destroyed. Equity would
relieve, would declare it an unrighteous bargain, that there was not an
adequate compensation, and would set aside the contract.

This public opinion is in favor of the original creditor; it is
impossible to be otherwise. The people of America are a grateful people,
and they cannot, with indifference, view the earnings of those who
established their independence, converted into the coffers of the
wealthy and ambitious. The speculator, he contended, was already more
than satisfied, if it was only on the principle of interest which had
accrued for six, seven, and eight years past, and which they had
speculated on since.

Mr. BENSON.--The gentlemen in favor of this motion come forward as the
advocates of the late army. I wish, therefore, to be ascertained of one
fact, do the army wish a measure of this kind to take place? I apprehend
they do not; and I am led to this opinion from a knowledge of the habits
of military men; they prefer their honor to every pecuniary
consideration, and they generally are actuated by that principle alone.
I will state a case. Suppose I purchased an officer's certificate for
one hundred dollars, and I was to fund it; the Treasurer would say, you
are to receive but fifty dollars, the other fifty are reserved for the
original holder. Now, if I was to go and tell the officer, that,
notwithstanding my purchase of all his right, title, and claim to the
one hundred dollars, the Government would give me but fifty, retaining
the other fifty for him, he would answer, I will never receive a
farthing of it, because it is your money, fairly and honorably purchased
of me. Now, in this case, what would you do? Should these fifty dollars
fall to the Government, or to me? I reason in this manner, because I
suppose this would be a general case. The Society of Cincinnati, of the
State of New York, have, by a resolution, which they have published in
the papers, disavowed the principle; and, in Rhode Island, a member of
the Society was expelled for taking advantage of the tender-law of that
State, and paying off a _bona fide_ debt with depreciated paper. I
apprehend the principle of action still remains the same throughout the
whole of the army. When the soldier conveyed his certificate, there was
a contract between the parties, that whatever sum the Government could
pay, the whole of it should go to the assignee. Now, by an act of
violence, you take the half of it away, and enable the assignor to
discharge the contract by paying fifty dollars, when he had engaged that
the purchaser should receive one hundred. This is, in effect, the same
as the payment of depreciated paper under a tender-law, and would be
equally rejected by those whom it is intended to favor.

I would state the case, as if it had happened between the gentleman and
myself, could he hesitate to say the whole sum was fairly mine, and
surrender it up, notwithstanding the legal interference of the
Government? This is a question I would not suffer myself to reason upon;
I would not trust my mind with it, lest it should preponderate in favor
of self-interest, though against the common principles of truth and
justice. I cannot think the army would accept the interposition; we
ought, therefore, to be cautious how we trifle with the honor of other
people.

I do not pretend to say, that the persons intended to be relieved by the
proposed scheme have not a claim against the United States; but I deny
that it is a claim upon our equity or justice; it may be a claim upon
our humanity; and, whether we will satisfy this claim, depends on
circumstances which have no connection with the present question.

Mr. JACKSON.--God forbid, Mr. Chairman, that I should trifle with the
honor of men I value, and esteem so highly; it would be the last thing I
could think of. But, sir, as a Legislator, I cannot consent that the
pittance which was the reward of distinguished services, shall be torn
from them by the arts of insidious speculators; but there are others,
who have a claim in equity upon our justice, who ought not to be
sacrificed to the soldier's honor.

Mr. WHITE said he agreed with the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr.
SEDGWICK) in the principle, that if a contract is made for a valuable
consideration, and with the understanding of both parties, the
Legislature ought not to interfere in it; and should it appear that the
transaction between the original holders of certificates and the
purchasers was a fair one, the dispute, in his mind, was at an end. But
no gentleman had attempted to show that this was the case, though all
the arguments against a discrimination were founded on that supposition.
Perhaps it might be said, that every argument ought to be considered as
fair; unless the contrary be proved. But where one man has obtained the
property of another to the amount of £100 for £10, or £12 10s. the
transaction must be explained to him, before he would believe it to be
honest. What is the present case? The original holders, who have parted
with the evidences of their debts, were principally common soldiers,
militiamen, and farmers in indigent circumstances. Who were the
purchasers? The Secretary of the Treasury tells us, that the most
enlightened among our citizens are the creditors of the United States;
common soldiers cannot be comprehended in this description. What must
have passed, he asked, between the soldier, the militiaman, or farmer,
and the purchaser? What reason could the purchaser assign for offering
£10 for a paper which specified an obligation to pay £100? It must be
something like this--the States will never pay you; if they do, it will
be at a very remote period, so long as to be useless to you; but to
relieve your present necessities, I will take the risk on myself, and
give you £10. Now, could any enlightened man, he asked, in 1783, or at
any subsequent period, in which time the transfers took place, believe
that the independence of America was in danger, or that the debts could
not be provided for?

He knew so many instances of transactions like that which he had stated,
that he doubted not the greater part of the certificates had been
obtained by similar means. Indeed he could not conceive any other by
which they could be obtained.

He said we were, perhaps, without a precedent in any other nation which
would be strictly applicable; but he desired gentlemen to determine for
themselves, whether, under such circumstances, the man who had rendered
services to his country should be deprived of his reward, or whether the
purchaser ought to receive it. He said it was very different in the
common transactions of life. If a man purchased a tract of land for
£1,000, paid the money, and took a bond for the conveyance, a third
person, by informing the purchaser that the seller could not make a
title, or by other false suggestions should obtain a transfer of the
bond in consideration of £100, and get a conveyance and possession of
the land, yet, on repaying the £100, the conveyance would be set aside,
and he would be restored to his land.

He gave some other instances of a similar nature, and said, he believed,
if a bond, whether due, or to become due, was assigned under such
circumstances, that the obligee would be justifiable in contesting it in
a court of law, and that the injured person would, on application,
obtain redress. He said, that in cases of extreme hardship, Courts of
Equity would give relief without express proof of fraud; that this was
the law of Great Britain, and was agreeable to the principles of the
civil law; that the Roman jurists, he believed, had fixed the point of
extreme hardship to one half of the value of the property transferred;
in England the court was to judge.

He said he did not think the present holders were strictly entitled to
any thing more than the original purchasers; that here the maxim, quoted
on the other side of the question, that the assignee stands in the shoes
of the assignor, properly applied. You cannot place another on more
advantageous ground than that on which you stand yourself. The plea of
an innocent purchaser could not take place; the nature of the
transaction must appear evident to every man concerned in the transfer.

He said the reverse of this did not hold. An assignee was not always in
as advantageous a situation as the assignor; and instanced the case of
an executor who should obtain the assignment of his testator's bond at
an undervalue; and who, he said, could not retain in his hands the
amount of the sum specified in the bond, which the creditor might have
recovered, but only the sum which he actually paid for the bond.

He said, that, though in his opinion the present holders of certificates
were strictly entitled to no more than what had been paid to the
original holders, yet, as an investigation of that circumstance would be
involved in inextricable difficulties, and since we were (as had been
very properly observed and well expressed by a gentleman from South
Carolina) settling the business of a family, he was willing to acquiesce
in the motion of his colleague. He said, that arbitrators often gave the
injured party less than his due, for peace sake; and he was willing to
act on the same principle. He doubted not but courts of justice would
give relief in particular cases; but in a matter of that magnitude, he
thought the interference of the Legislature very proper. The South Sea
business, he thought, in that respect, a good precedent. Two gentlemen
had mentioned the business; he would not say they had misstated the
transaction, but he thought their accounts imperfect. They said they had
the documents under their hands; he wished they had been read; he had
them not, but would state from memory what he thought applicable to the
case in question. The directors of the South Sea Company, by various
arts, induced the people to give as high as £1,000 for £100 stock; in
many instances the money was paid, in others it was contracted to be
paid. A gentleman has said, that Parliament interfered, not to violate,
but to perfect the contract: but what did Parliament do? They
confiscated the estates of the directors, and applied the amount to the
relief of those who had actually paid their money, and suspended suits
against those who had not paid; and authorized the debtors to discharge
their debts by the payment of ten per cent. on the real value of the
stock subscribed for. But if he was wrong in supposing the present
holders ought to stand in the place of the first purchasers, they could
be considered only as having purchased, in market, a paper of indefinite
value; if, then, they get the highest market price, they are not
injured.

He would now endeavor to obviate some of the objections to the measure,
on account of its impracticability; and in general terms observed, that
much greater pains had been taken to show the impracticability than the
injustice of it. He said, if it was just, we ought to adopt it; and he
did not doubt but the wisdom of the Legislature would be able to carry
it into effect. Purchasers, he said, had been represented as the
supporters of public credit; but he could not consider them in that
light. The offering a tenth or an eighth part of the value of the bond
of an individual would tend rather to blast his credit than to support
it; it would have the same effect with respect to the public.

He said he had lived long enough to be convinced that wise and great
men, having the same object in view, often differ in opinion with
respect to the means of accomplishing it; therefore, every proposition
ought to be treated with candor and respect. He made that observation in
consequence of what passed yesterday. A gentleman from Massachusetts had
introduced his speech in a manner somewhat new--with an apology for an
impropriety which he _intended to commit_. He pursued the arguments of
those who went before him, in opposition to the amendment; but his
speech consisted principally in an effusion of opprobrious epithets,
some of which he repeated, and said, to detail the whole would perhaps
fill half a column of a newspaper. He said he felt, on the occasion, not
for himself, for he had not expressed his sentiments on the subject
under debate, but for the honor of the House, in which, he thought, no
such language ought to be used.

It had been said we came forward as volunteers; that the original
holders did not put in their claim. That might be easily accounted for;
they were generally obscure and indigent; had too much modesty, or
perhaps not the capacity, to come forward. That he believed the crowd in
the gallery did not consist of original holders.

Mr. HARTLEY.--I do not wish to trespass upon the time of the committee,
but I cannot consent to give a silent vote on this occasion. I mean,
however, to confine myself to a few observations, as many of my ideas
have been communicated by other gentlemen. The honorable gentleman from
South Carolina (Mr. SMITH) has anticipated much of what I had to urge; I
shall therefore reduce my view of the subject to two points; first, as
to the justice or legality of the measure, in obliging a creditor, or
assignee, to take less than a certificate expresses, and pay the
difference to another: second, as to the practicability or policy of the
motion and its consequences.

As to making further satisfaction to the officers and soldiers of the
late army, who have sold their certificates for an inconsiderable sum,
and who have in consequence reaped a less reward than the Government
contracted for, and intended them, I conceive it has nothing to do with
the present question. However, if there is a disposition in Congress to
make a further compensation to those brave and meritorious men, I would
be among the first to support the measure; but I think this a subject
too momentous to be involved collaterally in the question now under
consideration.

With respect to the first point that offers itself, I have to remark,
that a man who enters into a contract should know the consideration, and
understand the principles upon which it is made, and these should be
expressed on the face of the evidence of the contract. Now, if this
contract be of a negotiable nature, the person to whom the same is
offered, looks on its face, from which it discovers the _agrementum_,
and is naturally led to consider the circumstances of the debtor, his
ability and integrity. Suppose even the evidence of the contract to be
obtained by fraud, unless it be against the express provision of a
statute, and is transferred to a third person for a valuable
consideration, without notice of fraud, it, must be paid. A fraud in any
link of the chain is corrected by a _bona fide_ transfer for a valuable
consideration, without a knowledge of that circumstance by the
purchaser.

Now, let us apply these principles to the present case. Here is an
instrument of writing, specifying a debt to be due from the United
States to the original holder, or bearer; this being brought into
market, is offered to a third person, he, before his purchase, sees that
the contract was executed in consequence of a consideration, and not
against any positive statute; he then inquires the ability of the
Union, and its disposition to comply with the contract; and, from a
consideration of these circumstances, he concludes, with respect to his
own interest and safety in the purchase, and pays what is conceived to
be the value. What is there to discharge the Government from the
payment? Is it pretended that the services and supplies were an
inadequate compensation? If it even was so supposed, it would not
authorize us to refuse a compliance with our engagements; any
interference would set afloat the great principle upon which the public
tranquillity and happiness depend. This leads me to consider the subject
in my second point of view, with respect to its policy and
practicability, and the consequences that would result from the attempt.

There are but few original holders who have transferred, that can be
found; of consequence, you would throw the major part of the debt into
an intricate labyrinth. The present possessor would be shifting back the
certificate to the original holder, as far as a latitude is given. Many
persons who were bare trustees, would be reaping advantages, and drawing
money from the Public Treasury, to which they are not entitled; oaths
would be multiplied on oaths; perjuries on perjuries; fraud upon fraud;
and every species of speculation would ensue; deception would be a
strong trait in the character of the times, and the whole of the United
States would be in motion, each endeavoring to prey upon the other. The
consequences of a second inundation of this nature are to be dreaded,
and ought to be carefully avoided.

Mr. MOORE observed, that it was agreed on all hands, and proposed in the
report of the Secretary, that some discrimination ought to take place.
It was, therefore, incumbent on the House to inquire how this might be
effected with the greatest degree of equity. He supposed the result
would be, that we are at liberty to pay the most meritorious first. Who
constituted this class of citizens? He trusted the late army had an
incontrovertible title to it. He could never believe that the men who
stripped the soldiers of their hard earnings, by allowing them a tenth
of their claim, would have the temerity to pretend that they had
acquired the title of merit with their money, and that the soldier
relinquished, with his certificate, the honor of his corps.

Had the present question been agitated in the hour of distress, when an
army was essential to our defence, the arguments of justice and equity
would have had their weight. Perhaps it is the soldier's misfortune,
that the question arises at a time when the object for which he was
employed is secured. But notwithstanding all that has been said, I am
fully convinced that his claim is insuperable in equity. The soldier did
not engage to fight your battles to be compensated with a certificate,
acknowledging you were indebted to him; it was specie you promised, and
specie he had a right to expect, or something equal to it in reality.
The public faith was actually pledged to him for a compensation for his
services; but will any one say the public faith was inviolably kept with
him, when a certificate, worth but two shillings in the pound was forced
upon him as specie? The poor soldier, thus situated, was followed by
gangs of speculators, who endeavored to impose on his judgment by the
relation of artful and insidious opinions of the public capacity and
integrity in the discharge of these acknowledgments. The soldier,
incapable of detecting the specious falsehood, swallows the bait, and
becomes the easy prey of designing men. The people felt and resented the
injuries thus perpetrated on those they esteemed; and I am much mistaken
if the citizens of America do not still retain favorable impressions of
the soldiers' services.

A great deal has been said, with respect to public opinion on this
question. It is impossible, perhaps, to ascertain the public mind with
precision; but there is but one way in our power, that is, to suffer the
subject to be suspended for the present session, and on our return, or
the election of our successors, the public sentiment in this respect
will be evinced; but if we are to determine the public mind from our own
observation, I should not hesitate to say that nine out of ten would be
in favor of a discrimination. The people would, on this principle, I
conceive, submit cheerfully to the payment of those taxes which are
requisite to discharge the public engagements; but if they are to flow
into the large cities, or into the hands of foreigners, who have
speculated upon the misfortunes of the most meritorious class of our
citizens, they will bear the burthen with murmurs and complaints.

Can any principle of justice demand the payment of the present possessor
of a certificate, that does not apply more forcibly as it respects
original holders? Will gentlemen, then, comply with the one, and neglect
the other? Or rather, as my colleague has proposed, if they are
incapable to pay both, will they not prefer a composition?

Mr. WADSWORTH.--It appears to me that we have mistaken this business
from the beginning, for we are proceeding as if it was taken for granted
that all those who had alienated their certificates, have been compelled
to it by necessity; there is nothing further from the truth. So far as
it respects the army debt it may be just; and at this moment, were a
soldiery to be paid in certificates, they would part with them at as
great a discount as ever. There is a disposition in soldiers generally
to despise pecuniary considerations; if they want money, they will
dispose of their property at an inconsiderate value to obtain it. But
this remark does not extend to the industrious part of the public
creditors, because they have carefully retained the evidences of their
debt, and now will receive its value. But even of the army, it is not
true that they will suffer the loss of the discount at which their
certificates have been sold. Having an opportunity of being well
acquainted with the circumstances of the army, I know that many of the
officers lived upon their friends, who supported them from time to time,
with such sums as they had occasion for, and when they retired from the
army, they repaid their friends with the certificates which they had
received. The best way for gentlemen to ascertain the amount of the
public debt which has been transferred from necessity, is to mix in the
world, and try, from the circle of their acquaintance, to learn what the
actual transfers have been. I have done this, and am conscious within
myself, that seven-eighths of all the alienated debt has not been
disposed of by the original holder from necessity.

When the requisitions of Congress were rejected by the State Assemblies,
some of the most wealthy persons of the community, and those most
violently opposed to Continental measures, seemed to concur in the
opinion, that the States would never raise a revenue for the purpose of
paying the domestic debt. The people finding this a prevailing opinion,
were impressed with a dread of its consequences, and sold this species
of negotiable property at a rate dictated by their apprehensions. I
should conceive it as a great evil, if the Government were now to
restore to such persons what they lost for want of confidence. I think
this circumstance will operate considerably against the gentleman's
principle of equity; now, as to the practicability of the measure, those
gentlemen who are acquainted with the history of the manner in which the
public debt was contracted, will readily agree with me, that it is an
insuperable objection. In the years 1776 and 1777, very few advances
were made to those who procured supplies to the public; they purchased
what they got generally upon credit, and they were obliged, before their
accounts could be settled, and they could get their money from the
Public Treasury, to get receipts for all the articles they had
furnished, and then they received orders upon the loan-officers, who,
not having money, paid them in certificates, which these people, in
return, paid over to those who furnished them with supplies. So that the
agent appears a creditor to a very considerable amount, when his
personal claim is very trifling, and those who risked their property,
without pay of any kind, and who are undoubtedly deserving of some
credit, appeared to be no other than speculators in public securities. I
cannot see, in this case, any possible mode of discrimination. There are
a variety of other official transactions which would demonstrate the
impracticability, if it was necessary to oppose the proposition on that
ground.


WEDNESDAY, February 17.

_Public Credit._

The House again went into a committee on the report of the Secretary of
the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's proposition still under consideration.

Mr. PAGE.--I do not wish to trouble the committee with a formal argument
in favor of the motion offered by my colleague; but I wish to inquire of
the gentlemen in opposition, whether they conceive the principles upon
which it is grounded to be unjust? I observed, that their replies have
generally gone against the practicability of the measure; but that does
not prove to me that it is inequitable. If there is justice in the case,
we must not consider the difficulty of the attempt. I trust, if it shall
be found to stand on the foundation of immutable justice, that its
practicability will be demonstrated. However, I shall not enter on that
ground, but leave it to my colleague, who has so ably supported it on
the other.

I would, however, beg gentlemen to answer these questions, and show to
my mind the injustice of the United States complying with their
engagements made to the first holders of certificates, as far as the
case, and their abilities, will permit. Or where is the justice of doing
more for the assignee than he, or his assignor, expected could or would
be done? Where is the breach of faith in Government, if it pays its
whole debt, with a justice, blended with mercy, resembling that of
Heaven itself, making impartial retribution among the children of men,
on the great day of accounts? Where is the propriety of branding a
measure of this nature with epithets of infamy? or using such harsh
expressions as have issued like a torrent from a gentleman on the other
side of the House? So far am I from viewing the propositions through
such a discolored medium, that I am induced to believe, if Congress
adopt it, they may submit its rectitude, and stand the decision, of not
only a superior order of beings, but of the Great Judge of the Universe,
who is immutable truth itself.

What will the assignee lose by the measure? He will lose nothing, but
the sanguine expectation lately raised in his mind.

Where is the interference in contracts, when the proposition is to
comply sacredly, as far as the case will admit, with the contract
between the State and its creditors? Is not the assignment of the
certificates confirmed by the nation? Does it not give to the assignee
the very thing stipulated between the assignor and assignee, that is,
whatever sum the Government shall be pleased to pay for the certificate?
And is not the sum now proposed, more than either the first or last
assignee ever contemplated, till within a few days past, would ever be
paid him?

The time is now arrived when justice ought to be done; it is looked for,
with anxious expectation, by all classes of our fellow citizens; it will
not avail us to say, it is impracticable, until experience has
demonstrated it to be so. But the measure we contend for is termed an
_ex post facto_ law, and as such, is declared to be unconstitutional.
Gentlemen torture every thing, in order to produce evidence against an
act of justice. How can it be such an _ex post facto_ law as is
prescribed by the constitution, when that expression is conjunctive with
a bill of attainder? It relates to that only, and can have no reference
to the subject of the proposition before us. The same idea, which
prevents us from an interference on the present occasion, will prevent
us, as was observed by the gentleman from Georgia, from making a statute
of limitation, or from correcting any frauds, which have been
perpetrated on the unsuspicious soldiery. We must not contemplate the
restoration of the starving soldier, with his humble wife and numerous
and naked offspring, to a more eligible situation; we must not restore
confidence to the man of honor who is buried in abject poverty, because
it is addressing a language to the heart, which the haughtiness of the
head disdains to hear; but, in doubtful cases of justice, the heart is
the best director on this subject; happy will it be for us, if, as I
think, they both concur to give their approbation to the present
measure.


THURSDAY, February 18.

_Public Credit._

The House again went into a committee on the Secretary of the Treasury's
report, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's proposition still under consideration.

Mr. STONE.--I shall not attempt to show the importance of the subject
before us, as it relates to public credit; or as it will affect our
character as a nation, at home and abroad. These have been explained;
but it is proper for us to consider how far the amendment may operate to
establish a precedent of Continental and State Legislation, the
influence it may have on society, and the rules of civil conduct between
man and man. Every community must experience that the conduct of the
Government will influence the opinions of the individuals; and the
spirit of the individual will transfuse itself into the Government. This
action and reaction operates more powerfully in a Republican Government,
founded on representation, than on any other.

Our situation is made more important, on the present occasion, by a
disagreement on principles which ought to be fixed and plain; to me it
seems that we differ on the principle of public justice. This may be
unfortunate--let us endeavor to be reconciled. If the true distinction
between natural and civil justice be accurately drawn, we may annihilate
the point in contest. Agreeably to the principle of natural justice, no
contract is perfect unless there be an equivalent; and that which we
call a valuable consideration, on which to ground a contract, is founded
on the idea of an equivalent, and presupposes it. And, I believe the
idea of such a consideration being an equivalent, is the foundation of
the validity of a contract, even in the English law; and is always
carried into effect, wherever the execution is safe and certain; because
I think, whenever it appears in any court of justice, that the
consideration was not an equivalent, that then the contract is not
carried into execution. The execution of the principle of natural
justice then is safe; for instance, £99 19_s._ 11_d._ is not a
consideration for £100, but a small sum may be a consideration for a
valuable property; this does not arise from an infraction of the
principle; but because the property may not have a determinate value in
the society; and it would make judges arbitrary, legal proceedings
extremely expensive, and contracts uncertain, if an extensive discretion
as to the value was admitted. But whenever the consideration is so small
and inadequate, as to appear so plainly and satisfactorily that the
judge cannot be mistaken in determining it not to be an equivalent,
there the contract is not valid.

Now, if we have received services from the soldier, and have given him
paper, the question will be, whether that was an equivalent, and the
paper a proper payment; or whether it is only an evidence of the debt? I
take it to be a granted point that it was not a payment, but an
obligation to pay whenever the United States should be able. It appears
to me, then, that it was the duty of the person who received the paper,
to wait a reasonable time; and the duty of the nation to make actual
payment as speedily as possible. If the person who had received this
paper had wantonly parted with it for nothing, I agree we should have
been under no more obligation to pay him the expressed sum, than if we
had paid him money, and he had flung it away or wasted it; but if, on
the contrary, there was a delay in the execution of the contract, on the
part of the Government, which compelled him to part with it, a
compensation is equitable.

The same rule will apply between the original holder, or person who
rendered the service, and present possessor or assignee; for shortness
we will distinguish them by the names of soldier and speculator. The
speculator, when he dealt with the soldier, must, from the nature of the
thing, have induced him to believe that he gave him an equivalent for
his purchase; and it might have been an inducement to the soldier to
sell, to think he had something more than an equivalent; the speculator
thought he had more than an equivalent, throwing necessity on the one
side, and fraud on the other, out of the question. Then the confidence
was equal, perhaps not a penny between them: I can hardly conceive the
exchange took place on any other terms. You never can allow the
confidence of the speculator to be estimated very highly, perhaps at not
more than one for ten. For if it is admitted, that the speculator had
entire confidence, he was guilty of a palpable fraud, and a violation of
the first principle of justice; it amounted to this, that he gave £10 in
money for £100 bond, which he was certain would be paid. I believe, if
the case stood exactly in this form, no man would hesitate in deciding
its illegality. If a man takes £100 for £10, it is illegal; but suppose
there was a risk, and this risk was considered by the speculator as
little less than ten for one, has he not discovered his own mistake when
he sees he gets an interest of sixty per cent. on his capital; and that
capital tenfold? This contract then ought to be void on the principle of
a mistake; and here you place the speculator between Scylla and
Charybdis. If he really thought the certificates only worth one for ten,
you can give him no credit for his confidence; and you will admit that
he ought to be satisfied with a reasonable advance on his purchase. But
if you give him entire credit for his confidence in Government, you must
give him no credit for his honesty. If both parties had known of this
event, the contract would never have taken place. If you pay the whole
sum, the speculator ought to take no more than what he gave a fair
equivalent for. Gentlemen who seem afraid of giving to the soldier a
part of his original claim, lest they affront his nobleness of soul,
make no scruple to offer the speculator ten times the sum he is entitled
to, on the principle of natural justice, without any apprehension that
his honor will receive a wound. If the claim of the soldier was
extinguished by receiving two shillings in the pound of the speculator,
upon what principle is it contended that the latter should receive more
than distributive justice? Arguments, proving that the justice due to
the first has been satisfied by what has been done, apply with greater
force to the latter.

It has been doubted, and a question has been agitated, whether we shall
exercise the power of reconsidering these contracts, and whether a
modification is constitutionally in our power? I will not go into this
subject, or any other which ought to be taken for granted. I shall take
it, that we are authorized, and do mean to interfere; you must act. Do
you mean to pay the principal and interest now due? I believe not. Will
you shelter yourself under the plea of necessity? That is impossible. I
dare say, if the United States were sold, they would at least be worth
six hundred millions of dollars; and we have but eighty millions to
provide for. Having, then, the means and power, I trust you mean to
exercise them; and as you exercise them, you ought to exercise them as
justly as possible; then, to do this, you will, it is said, personify
the three parties concerned--the United States, the original holder, and
the speculator. I do not clearly comprehend the idea of a personified
State; perhaps it arises from my dulness of apprehension. Man, in his
natural capacity, is sometimes obliged to do what is considered unjust;
but a State, when it has power, is not obliged to do what is unjust. The
State, then, in this respect, is doing what an honest man would do, if
he had the power of conducting this business as he thought proper.

The speculator comes to you with his bond, and tells you it is due. The
soldier tells you that he has done services to a considerable amount,
for which he never has been paid; and that those evidences of the demand
which you gave to him, were obtained from him, for one-tenth part of
what they were declared to be worth. The State says to the speculator,
you have made a great deal, and out of a man who has risked his life,
and borne every burthen which human nature could bear, with the greatest
fortitude which the most virtuous heart is capable of exerting, let him
have a part back. The speculator answers no; here is your bond. Consider
again, replies the State, that the veteran's services, at the expense of
his health and property, at the risk of his life, has saved you and
yours; and not only that, but he is obliged to pay of your demand, more
than he has ever received. What is now his answer? Here is the bond, pay
me my bond. Under these circumstances, supposing the State an
individual, he might, without much infamy to his character, exercise the
power which he has over his own bond, in order to do justice between the
parties. He might say to the speculator, you had the soldier in your
power; you did him injustice; we have you now in our power, we will do
you complete justice, but no more. A private man could never be injured
in his reputation by such conduct: indeed, according to the result of
these circumstances, the hardships of war, and the breach of contract,
have unfortunately inflicted upon the man, the most meritorious in this
community, or perhaps in any other community, sufferings and miseries--a
punishment sufficient to atone for the guilt of the greatest crimes.
This, in the event, appears to be the situation of the saviors of
America.

Mr. _Madison_ said that the opponents of his proposition had imposed on
its friends not only a heavy task, by the number of their objections,
but a delicate one by the nature of some of them. It had been arranged
as an embarrassing measure which ought to be facilitated, and producing
discussions which might end in disagreeable consequences. However
painful it might be to contradict the wishes of gentlemen whom he
respected, he could promise nothing more, in the present case, than his
endeavors to disappoint their apprehensions. When his judgment could not
yield to the propositions of others, the right to make and support his
own, was a right which he could never suffer to be contested. In
exercising it, he should study to maintain that moderation and
liberality which were due to the greatness of the subject before the
committee. He felt pleasure in acknowledging, that the like spirit had,
in general, directed the arguments on the other side. Free discussions
thus conducted are not only favorable to a right decision, but to a
cheerful acquiescence of the mistaken opponents of it. They might have
the further advantage of recommending the result to the public, by fully
explaining the grounds of it. If the pretensions of a numerous and
meritorious class of citizens be not well founded, or cannot be complied
with, let them see that this is the case, and be soothed, under their
disappointment, with the proof that they have not been overlooked by
their country.

He would proceed now to review the grounds on which the proposition had
been combated; which he should do without either following those who had
wandered from the field of fair argument, or avoiding those who had kept
within its limits.

It could not have escaped the committee, that the gentlemen to whom he
was opposed, had reasoned on this momentous question as on an ordinary
case in a court of law; that they had equally strained all the maxims
that could favor the purchasing, or be adverse to the original holder;
and that they dwelt with equal pleasure on every circumstance which
could brighten the pretensions of the former, or discredit those of the
latter. He had not himself attempted, nor did he mean to undervalue the
pretensions of the actual holders. In stating them, he had even used as
strong terms as they themselves could have dictated; but beyond a
certain point he could not go. He must renounce every sentiment which he
had hitherto cherished, before his complaisance could admit that America
ought to erect the monuments of her gratitude, not to those who saved
her liberties, but to those who had enriched themselves in her funds.

All that he wished was, that the claims of the original holders, not
less than those of the actual holders, should be fairly examined and
justly decided. They had been invalidated by nothing yet urged. A debt
was fairly contracted; according to justice and good faith, it ought to
have been paid in gold or silver; a piece of paper only was substituted.
Was this paper equal in value to gold or silver? No. It was worth, in
the market, which the argument for the purchasing holders makes the
criterion, no more than one-eighth or one-seventh of that value. Was
this depreciated paper freely accepted? No. The Government offered that
or nothing. The relation of the individual to the Government, and the
circumstances of the offer, rendered the acceptance a forced, not a free
one. The same degree of constraint would vitiate a transaction between
man and man, before any Court of Equity on the face of the earth. There
are even cases where consent cannot be pretended; where the property of
the planter or farmer had been taken at the point of the bayonet, and a
certificate presented in the same manner. But why did the creditors part
with their acknowledgment of the debt? In some instances, from
necessity; in others, from a well-founded distrust of the public.
Whether from the one, or the other, they had been injured; they had
suffered loss, through the default of the debtor; and the debtor cannot,
in justice or honor, take advantage of the default.

Here, then, was a debt acknowledged to have been once due, and which
was never discharged; because the payment was forced and defective. The
balance, consequently, is still due, and is of as sacred a nature as the
claims of the purchasing holder can be; and if both are not to be paid
in the whole, is equally entitled to payment in part.

He begged gentlemen would not yield too readily to the artificial
niceties of forensic reasoning; that they would consider not the form,
but the substance--not the letter, but the equity--not the bark, but the
pith of the business. It was a great and an extraordinary case; it ought
to be decided on the great and fundamental principles of justice. He had
been animadverted upon, for appealing to the heart as well as the head;
he would be bold, nevertheless, to repeat, that, in great and unusual
questions of morality, the heart is the best judge.

It had been said, by a member from Massachusetts, that the proposition
was founded on a new principle in Congress. If the present Congress be
meant, that is not strange, for Congress itself is new; if the former
Congress be meant, it is not true, for the principle is found in an act
which had been already cited. After the pay of the army had, during the
war, been nominally and legally discharged in depreciated paper, the
loss was made up to the sufferers.

It had been said, by a member from New York, that this case was not
parallel, there being no third party like the present holders of
certificates. This objection could not be valid. The Government paid ten
dollars' worth in fact, but only one to the soldier. The soldier was
then the original holder. The soldier assigned it to the citizen; the
citizen then became the actual holder. What was the event? The loss of
the original holder was repaired, after the actual holder had been
settled with, according to the highest market value of his paper.

He did not mean, however, to decide on the whole merits of this last
transaction; or to contend for a similitude, in all respects, between
the two kinds of paper. One material difference was, that the bills of
credit, by more frequent transfers, and by dividing the change of value
among a greater number of hands, rendered the effect of less consequence
to individuals, and less sensible to the public mind. But this
difference, whatever force it might give to the claims of the purchasing
holder of certificates, could diminish nothing from the claims of the
original holders who assigned them.

It had been said, by another member from Massachusetts, that the old
Government did every thing in its power. It made requisitions, used
exhortations, and in every respect discharged its duty; but it was to be
remembered, that the debt was not due from the Government, but the
United States. An attorney, with full powers to form, without the means
to fulfil engagements, could never, by his ineffectual, though honest
efforts, exonerate his principal.

He had been repeatedly reminded of the address of Congress in 1783,
which rejected a discrimination between original and purchasing holders.
At that period, the certificates to the army, and citizens at large, had
not been issued. The transfers were confined to loan-office
certificates, were not numerous, and had been, in great part, made with
little loss to the original creditor. At present, the transfers extend
to a vast proportion of the whole debt, and the loss to the original
holders has been immense. The injustice which has taken place has been
enormous and flagrant, and makes redress a great national object. This
change of circumstances destroys the argument from the act of Congress
referred to; but if implicit regard is to be paid to the doctrines of
that act, any modification of the interest of the debt will be as
inadmissible as a modification of the principal.

It had been said, that if the losses of the original creditors are
entitled to reparation, Congress ought to repair those suffered from
paper money--from the ravages of the war, and from the act of barring
claims not produced within a limited time. As to the paper money, either
the case is applicable, or it is not: if not applicable, the argument
fails; if applicable, either the depreciated certificates ought to be
liquidated by a like scale, as was applied to the depreciated money; or
the money, even if the whole mass of it was still in circulation, ought
to be literally redeemed, like the certificates. Leaving the gentleman
to make his own choice of these dilemmas, he would only add, himself,
that if there were no other difference between the cases, the manifest
impossibility of redressing the one, and the practicability of
redressing the other, was a sufficient answer to the objection. With
respect to the towns burnt, and other devastations of war, it was
taught, by the writers on the law of nations, that they were to be
numbered among the inevitable calamities of mankind. Still, however, a
Government owed them every alleviation which it could conveniently
afford; but no authority could be found that puts on the same footing
with those calamities, such as proceed from a failure to fulfil the
direct and express obligations of the public. The just claims barred by
the act of limitation, were, in his opinion, clearly entitled to
redress. That act was highly objectionable. The public, which was
interested in shortening the term, undertook to decide, that no claim,
however just, should be admitted, if not presented within nine months.
The act made none of the exceptions usual in such acts, not even in
favor of the most distant parts of the Union. In many instances, it had
been absolutely impossible for the persons injured to know of the
regulation. Some of these instances were within his own knowledge. To
limit the duration of a law to a period, within which it could not
possibly be promulged, and then take advantage of the impossibility,
would be imitating the Roman tyrant, who posted up his edicts so high
that they could not be read, and then punished the people for not
obeying them.

It has been said, that if the purchased certificates were funded at the
rate proposed, they would fall in the market, and the holders be
injured. It was pretty certain, that the greater part, at least, would
be gainers. He believed that the highest market price, especially with
the arrears of interest incorporated, well funded at six per cent, would
prevent every loss that could justify complaint.

But foreigners had become purchasers, and ought to be particularly
respected. Foreigners, he remarked, had themselves made a difference
between the value of the foreign and domestic debt; they would,
therefore, the less complain of a difference made by Government here. It
was his opinion that the term stated in the proposition would yield a
greater profit to the foreign purchasers than they could have got for
their money if advanced by them in any of the funds of Europe.

The proposition had been charged with robbing one set of men to pay
another. If there were robbery in the case, it had been committed on the
original creditors. But, to speak more accurately, as well as more
moderately, the proposition would do no more than withhold a part from
each of two creditors, where both were not to be paid the whole.

A member from New York has asked whether an original creditor, who had
assigned his certificate, could, in conscience, accept a reimbursement
in the manner proposed? He would not deny that assignments might have
been made with such explanations, or under such circumstances, as would
have that effect; but, in general, the assignments have been made with
reference merely to the market value, and the uncertainty of the steps
that might be taken by the Government. The bulk of the creditors had
assigned under circumstances from which no scruples could arise. In all
cases where a scruple existed, the benefit of the provision might be
renounced. He would, in turn, ask the gentleman, whether there was not
more room to apprehend that the present holder, who had got his
certificate of a distressed and meritorious fellow-citizen for
one-eighth or one-tenth its ultimate value, might not feel some remorse
in retaining so unconscionable an advantage?

Similar propositions, it was said, had been made and rejected in the
State Legislatures. This was not a fact. The propositions made in the
State Legislatures were not intended to do justice to the injured, but
to seize a profit to the public.

But no petitions for redress had come from the sufferers. Was merit,
then, to be the less regarded, because it was modest? Perhaps, however,
another explanation ought to be given. Many of the sufferers were poor
and uninformed. Those of another description were so dispersed, that
their interests and efforts could not be brought forward. The case of
the purchasing holders was very different.

The constitutionality of the proposition had been drawn into question.
He asked whether words could be devised that would place the new
Government more precisely in the same relation to the real creditors
with the old? The power was the same; the obligation was the same. The
means only were varied.

An objection had been drawn from the article prohibiting _ex post facto_
laws. But as _ex post facto_ laws relate to criminal, not civil cases,
the constitution itself requires this definition, by adding to a like
restriction on the States an express one against retrospective laws of a
civil nature.

It had been said, that foreigners had been led to purchase, by their
faith in the article of the constitution relating to the public debts.
He would answer this objection by a single fact: Foreigners had shown,
by the market price in Europe, that they trusted the nature of foreign
debt more under the old Government, than the nature of the domestic debt
under the new Government.

Objections to the measure had been drawn from its supposed tendency to
impede public credit. He thought it, on the contrary, perfectly
consistent with the establishment of public credit. It was in vain to
say, that Government ought never to revise measures once decided. Great
caution on this head ought, no doubt, to be observed; but there were
situations in which, without some legislative interposition, the first
principles of justice, and the very ends of civil society, would be
frustrated. The gentlemen themselves had been compelled to make
exceptions to the general doctrine; they would probably make more before
the business was at an end.

It had been urged, that if Government should interpose in the present
case, as interposition would be authorized in any case whatever where
the stock might fluctuate, the principle would apply as well to a fall
of sixty or seventy per cent. as to a fall of six hundred or seven
hundred per cent. He could not admit this inference. A distinction was
essential between an extreme case, and a case short of it. The line was
difficult to be drawn; but it was no more incumbent on him than on his
opponents to draw it. They themselves could not deny that a certain
extremity of the evil would have justified the interposition. Suppose
that the distress of the alienating creditors had been ten times as
great as it was; that instead of two, three, and four shillings in the
pound, they had received a farthing only in the pound; and that the
certificates lay now in the hands of the purchasers in that state, or
even at a less value, was there a member who would rise up and say, that
the purchasers ought to be paid the entire nominal sum, and the original
sufferer be entitled to no indemnification whatever?

Gentlemen had triumphed in the want of a precedent to the measure. No
government, it was said, had interposed to redress fluctuations in its
public paper. But where was the government that had funded its debts
under the circumstances of the American debt? If no government had done
so, there could be no precedent either for or against the measure,
because the occasion itself was unprecedented. And if no similar
occasion had before existed in any country, the precedent to be set
would at least be harmless, because no similar occasion would be likely
to happen in this.

If gentlemen persisted, however, in demanding precedents, he was happy
in being able to gratify them with two, which, though not exactly
parallel, were, on that account, of the greater force, since the
interposition of Government had taken place where the emergency could
less require them.

The first was the case of the Canada bills. During the war which ended
in 1763, and which was attended with a revolution of the Government in
Canada, the supplies obtained for the French army in that province were
paid for in bills of exchange and certificates. This paper depreciated,
and was bought up chiefly by British merchants. The sum and the
depreciation were so considerable as to become a subject of negotiation
between France and Great Britain at the peace. The negotiations produced
a particular article, by which it was agreed by France that the paper
ought to be redeemed, and admitted by Great Britain that it should be
redeemed at a liquidated value. In the year 1766 this article was
accordingly carried into effect by ministers from the two courts, which
reduced the paper in the hands of the British holders, in some
instances, as much as seventy-five per cent. below its nominal value. It
was stated, indeed, by the reporter of the case, that the holders of the
paper had themselves concurred in the liquidation; but it was not
probable that the concurrence was voluntary. If it was voluntary, it
shows that they themselves were sensible of the equity of the sacrifice.

The other case was of still greater weight, as it had no relation to war
or treaty, and took place in the nation which has been held up as a
model with respect to public credit. In the year 1713, the civil list of
Great Britain had fallen into arrears to the amount of £500,000. The
creditors who had furnished supplies to the Government had, instead of
money, received debentures only from the respective officers. These had
depreciated. In that state, they were assigned in some instances; in
others, covenanted to be assigned. When the Parliament appropriated
funds for satisfying these arrears, they inserted an express provision
in the act, that the creditors who had been obliged, by the default of
Government, to dispose of their paper at a loss, might redeem it from
the assignees by repaying the actual price, with an interest of six per
cent., and that all agreements and covenants to assign should be
absolutely void. Here then was an interposition on the very principle,
that a Government ought to redress the wrongs sustained by its default,
and on an occasion trivial when compared to that under consideration;
yet it does not appear that the public credit of the nation was injured
by it.

The best source of confidence in Government was the apparent honesty of
its views. The proposition could not possibly be ascribed to any other
motive than this, because the public was not to gain a farthing by it.
The next source was an experienced punctuality in the payments due from
the Government. For this support to public credit, he relied on what had
been experienced by a part of the foreign creditors; on the provision to
be made for the residue; and on the punctuality which, he flattered
himself, would be observed in all future payments of the domestic
creditors. He was more apprehensive of injury to public credit from such
modifications of the interest of the public debt as some gentlemen
seemed to have in view. In these the public would be the gainer, and the
plea of inability the more alarming, because it was so easy to set up,
so difficult to be disproved, and for which, consequently, the
temptations would be so alluring.

Mr. SENEY rose and observed, that it was with reluctance he attempted to
express to the committee his ideas upon a question which had been so
fully and ably discussed. However, as it had been expected that
gentlemen would not, in a case of such magnitude, be content with merely
a silent vote, he rose to declare the reasons upon which his decision
was founded. In doing this, he hoped that he should not use epithets
which might be deemed harsh, or language which would be offensive; that
although the sentiments of other members should differ from his, he
wished so far to respect those sentiments as to treat them with decency.

He considered the proposition of the gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
MADISON) was designed to effect two purposes: the one, a compensation to
the original creditors, who, during the late war, in times of distress,
had loaned money, furnished supplies, and rendered military services;
and who had only received satisfaction therefor in paper of
inconsiderable value, forced on them by the public, and depreciated by
their acts. This class of citizens, he conceived, had a just and
equitable claim for the full difference in value between that paper,
when paid, and specie. The other object of the proposition alluded to,
was, he said, to compensate those creditors who now hold alienated
certificates. Each description of those creditors had, in his opinion,
claims on the public. The first was founded on an original contract
between them and the Government, part of which only had been complied
with, and the residue still remained undischarged. The other was
grounded on having possession of the paper which contained the promise
to pay.

It has been contended that the United States have not ability to pay
both. In this case a question arises: What is, upon the whole, most just
and expedient? Some gentlemen contend, that it is incumbent on us to
make full provision for those who hold the assigned certificates,
without any for the original creditors who have alienated them. Others
think, that the misfortune of Government, in this respect, should not be
felt by either class solely, but be borne by both. That it is more just
to adopt a mode of composition, by which those creditors should mutually
share in this misfortune, and be mutually benefited by a provision
within our power to make; with those his sentiments accorded. He could
not be impressed with the justice or reason of a measure calculated to
make a total sacrifice of one class of creditors, and full payment to
the other class. Such a step could not, in his opinion, be justified in
any distinction or precedence which existed in their claims. When it was
considered that the original creditors furnished money and supplies, and
rendered services essential to the preservation of their country, and at
a time when its liberties were invaded, and every thing which can be
dear to freemen was in jeopardy and at stake, he could not apprehend
that their claims would be deemed inferior to those of their rivals. In
his opinion, these circumstances entitled them to superior notice.
Believing, however, that the amendment under consideration would, upon
the whole, effect more substantial justice than any other practicable
scheme that had been proposed to the committee, or which he had heard
of, his assent would, therefore, be given to it.


TUESDAY, February 19.

_Public Credit._

The House again went into a committee on the report of the Secretary of
the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's proposition still under consideration.

Mr. LIVERMORE said he was against any discrimination between the soldier
and other public creditor, who held a public security, made payable to
bearer, and consequently transferable, with intent that they might be
sold, if convenience or necessity should require it. This had been
understood by all parties, as well in America as in foreign countries,
and they had been sold accordingly. The advocates for discrimination
have not denied this; they have only alleged that the low rate at which
the poor soldier or other public creditor had sold his securities was a
sufficient reason for Congress to interfere and set aside the sale. In
opposition to this, he observed, that persons had a right to buy and
sell at such prices as they could mutually agree upon, provided there
was no fraud.

A diamond, a horse, or a lot of ground, might be sold too cheap, or too
dear, and so might any other property; but Government could not
interfere without destroying the general system of law and justice. Esau
had sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, and heaven and earth had
confirmed the sale. The distresses of the army, both officers and
soldiers, at the time they received and sold their securities, had been
painted in too strong colors. They were not so emaciated by sickness and
famine as had been represented. They were crowned with victory, and
received with applause by their fellow-citizens; and although they had
been paid in paper, their loss had been made up by large bounties, and
in other emoluments; so that, in point of property, they were equal to
their fellow-citizens who had borne the burden of taxes under which many
are laboring to this day. Let them be called brave soldiers, patriotic
soldiers, but not poor soldiers. They ought to be governed by the same
system of justice that governs others; but their contracts ought not to
be set aside out of partiality to them. The case quoted from the statute
of Queen Anne is not applicable to this case, inasmuch as Government had
not originally made the debentures therein mentioned transferable.
Neither did the case of the Canada bills apply; for, as he understood,
those bills were paid to British merchants and to others who had
purchased them.

Mr. MADISON.--If paper, or the honor of statues or medals can discharge
the debts of justice, payable in gold or silver, we can not only
exonerate ourselves from those due to the original holders, but from
those of the assignees. So far as paper goes, the latter have received
the compensation. If honor can discharge the debt, they have received
civil honors; look around to the officers of every Government in the
Union, and you find them sharing equal honors with those bestowed on the
original creditors. But, sir, the debt due in gold and silver is not
payable either in honor, appointments, or in paper.

Gentlemen say it will work injustice; but are we not as much bound to
repair the injustice done by the United States? Yet I do not believe the
assertion has been established by any thing that has been urged in its
support. The gentleman from Maryland (Mr. STONE) acknowledges that there
is a moral obligation to compensate the original holders; how will they
get what he admits is their due? He is willing to make an effort, by
applying the resources of the country to that purpose; but if we are to
judge by the sentiments of other gentlemen who have spoken on this
occasion, we have little to expect from that quarter. Suppose the debt
had depreciated to a mere trifle, and suppose the sale of the Western
Territory had extinguished the certificates, let me ask, whether, if the
United States had thus exonerated themselves from the obligation to the
assignee, whether the claim of the original holder would not still
remain in its full force in a moral view? But believing the point of
justice to be exhausted, I will just add one remark upon the
practicability. The transferred certificates, generally, will show the
names of the original holders, and here there is no difficulty. With
respect to those granted to the heads of either of the five great
departments, the books of the Treasurer of Loans, as well as the
accounts of those departments now in the Treasury, will designate, with
a great degree of accuracy, and this may be followed up by the usual
mode of obtaining evidence; and I believe every security may be provided
against fraud in this case that was provided in the case of the
commissioners who were sent into the respective States for ascertaining
and liquidating the claims of individuals. That there will be some
difficulty I admit, but it is enough for me that it is not insuperable;
and I trust, with the assistance which the cause of equity and justice
will ever obtain from the members of the National Legislature, they will
easily be surmounted.


MONDAY, February 22.

_Public Credit._

The House then resolved itself into a committee on the Report of the
Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. BALDWIN in the chair.

Mr. MADISON's proposition still under consideration.

Mr. PAGE.--As the worthy and eloquent member who replied to me did not
answer the questions I put to the committee, I suppose, he either did
not hear them, did not understand me, or could not answer them. I hope,
before the committee decide, they will attempt at least to resolve them.
I asked, where is the injustice of the State's complying with its
engagements made to the first holders of certificates as far as the case
admits? Where is the justice of doing more for the assignee than he or
his assignor expected could or would be done? Where is the breach of
faith in Government, if it paid its whole debt with justice, blended
with mercy? Where is the interference in contracts, when the proposition
is to comply sacredly, as far as the case will admit, with the contracts
between a State and its creditors? I asked, is not the assignment of
certificates confirmed by the motion? Does it not give to the assignee
the very thing stipulated to be given, that is, whatever sum Government
shall be pleased to pay for the certificates, for that was the condition
of the assignment? And is not the sum now proposed more than either the
first or last holder, till within these few days, supposed would be paid
him? I asked also, ought not an honest assignee to be pleased that
Government intends to do that justice to his assignor which he ought to
do himself, were the whole payment made to him? I asked, of what is the
assignee deprived but of his late sanguine expectations? I asked,
whether the proposition before us does not rather establish confidence
in Government than the contrary? For, sir, to make use of the comparison
which has been often made here between the State and an obligor on a
bond, what could give more credit to any man's bonds than to find that,
though they had depreciated to half a crown in the pound, he paid the
whole twenty shillings; ten shillings to the assignee, who had given but
two shillings and sixpence, and ten to the obligee who had sold at so
great a loss?

It is true Congress may, consistently with the rules of common law
courts, pay the bearer and take no notice of the creditors; but were a
Court of Equity instituted to decide on the case of certain speculators,
how would they decide? Government, in the most solemn manner, pledged
itself to make compensation to the soldiers, have they done it? Instead
of doing this, certain persons, who took advantage of their ignorance
and their poverty, bought up the evidence of their debt at one-eighth of
the nominal value; and in some States these very men had drawn what
constituted the principal of the purchase with six per cent. interest in
three years.

In what does the case differ between the depreciated paper and the
certificates? Paper money was redeemed at forty for one, as well to the
last as the first holder; the same principle would lead to give the last
holder of the certificate the depreciated value at which he bought it.
But we propose to work no injustice, we give the first holder, if he is
the holder still, the full value stipulated. It would not be injustice
to consider the assignee, as having paid what he advanced, in
consequence of his confidence in Government, on account of that
Government; and that the Government ought to repay him what he so
advanced; having repaid that sum, the balance ought to go to the credit
of the assignee. I am willing, on this consideration, to call the
speculator the friend and supporter of the Government, who kindly lent
us when in need, two shillings and sixpence in every pound, to advance
to the poor soldier. If certificates are the evidence of the debt, it
proves, sir, that the balance is due to him in whose name it issued.
This is the day of payment, and we must pay accordingly; and here permit
me to remark, in reply to the observation of the gentleman from New
Hampshire, (Mr. LIVERMORE,) that _Jacob_ was punished for his fraud, but
for his faith enjoyed the promise; even so let us regard those who had
so much confidence in us as to advance two shillings and sixpence to the
distressed soldier.

Mr. HEISTER was in hopes this question would be postponed for the
present, in order to go into a consideration of the ways and means:
when, if it appeared that the United States were incapable of making
full provision, it might be considered, whether one deviation would not
authorize the other? If any gentleman would make a motion to that
effect, he would second him.

The question was now taken on Mr. MADISON's proposition for a
composition, and it passed in the negative; yeas 13, nays 36.[35]


WEDNESDAY, March 17.

_On Slavery._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
Report of the committee, to whom was referred the memorial of the people
called Quakers, &c., Mr. BENSON in the chair.

The question of order was put, when it was determined that Mr. TUCKER's
last amendment was not in order.

The report was then taken up by paragraphs. The first proposition being
read,

Mr. WHITE moved that it be struck out. He did this, he said, because he
was against entering into a consideration at this time of the powers of
Congress. He thought it would be time enough for this when the powers
are called in question. He then read the next, which he said was
entirely unnecessary, as it contains nothing more than what is contained
in express terms in the constitution. He passed on to the third, which
he said was equally unnecessary; and to the fourth, which was provided
for by the constitution. He said, that he should agree to the fifth and
sixth, with certain modifications. Agreeable to this idea, he offered
those two in a different form. He disagreed to the seventh proposition,
as unnecessary and improper. He concluded by observing, that his wish
was to promote the happiness of mankind--and among the rest those who
are the objects of the present consideration--but this he wished to do
in conformity to the principles of justice and with a due regard to the
peace and happiness of others; he would contribute all in his power to
their comfort and well-being while in a state of slavery; but he was
fully of opinion that Congress has no right to interfere in the
business, any further than he proposed by the two propositions as
modified. He did not, however, anticipate the difficulties from a total
prohibition which some gentlemen seem to apprehend--and if Congress had
it in their power to interdict this business at the present moment, he
did not think the essential interests of the Southern States would
suffer. Twenty years ago, he supposed the idea he now suggested would
have caused universal alarm. Virginia, however, about twelve years
since, prohibited the importation of negroes from Africa, and the
consequences apprehended never were realized; on the contrary, the
agriculture of that State was never in a more flourishing situation.

Mr. HARTLEY.--I have the honor to be one of the committee on the
memorials, and will, with the leave of this committee, mention some
particulars which took place in the course of the investigation of the
business. He premised that he was sorry that the question of right had
been brought forward yesterday--and was not a little surprised to hear
the cause of slavery advocated in that House, and language held towards
the petitioners which his experience had never shown to be
Parliamentary--he read some memorandums taken in committee, and had
particular reference to a law passed in Grenada, which he applauded for
its humanity, and truly benevolent spirit. He reprobated the illiberal
treatment which the memorialists had received, and asserted that they
were friends to the constitution, and that on the present occasion they
came forward from the most laudable motives, from a wish to promote the
happiness of mankind; that their conduct, so far from meriting censure,
deserved, and would receive, the applause of the civilized world.

Mr. BROWN, in a considerable speech, advocated the motion of Mr. WHITE.
He enlarged on the pernicious consequences that may be expected to flow
from the interference of Congress; he pointed out the effects which had
resulted from the interposition of the Quakers, by which the prospects
of the Southern States in slaves had been rendered very precarious--and
if Congress should adopt the report as it stands, the consequences would
be pernicious in the highest degree. The negro property will be
annihilated. The emancipation of slaves will be effected in time, it
ought to be a gradual business; but he hoped that Congress would not, to
gratify people who never had been friendly to the independence of
America, precipitate the business to the great injury of the Southern
States.

Mr. BURKE entered into a very extensive consideration of the subject. He
gave an account of the humane treatment which the slaves of the Southern
States received, their habitations, families, children, privileges, &c.
He then showed that their emancipation would tend to make them wretched
in the highest degree. He animadverted with great freedom on the past
and present conduct of the Quakers. He denied that they were the friends
of freedom; he said, that during the late war, they were for bringing
this country under a foreign yoke; they descended to the character of
spies; they supplied the enemy with provisions; they were guides and
conductors to their armies; and whenever the American army came into
their neighborhood, they found themselves in an enemy's country. Mr.
BURKE was proceeding in this strain, when he was interrupted by being
called to order. A warm altercation ensued, and in the midst of it, a
motion was made that the committee rise. This motion was negatived, and
Mr. BURKE added a few more observations on the injustice of the measure
of interference, as it respected the property of the Southern States.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) said he lamented much that this subject
had been brought before the House; that he had deprecated it from the
beginning, because he foresaw that it would produce a very unpleasant
discussion; that it was a subject of a nature to excite the alarms of
the Southern members, who could not view, without anxiety, any
interference in it on the part of Congress. He remarked, that as they
were resolved into a Committee of the Whole on the powers of Congress
respecting slavery and the slave trade, in consequence of certain
memorials from the people called Quakers and the Pennsylvania Society
for the abolition of slavery, the whole subject, as well as the contents
of these memorials, was under consideration. He should therefore enter
into the business at large, and offer some comments on the contents of
the memorial.

The memorial from the Quakers contained, in his opinion, a very indecent
attack on the character of those States which possess slaves. It
reprobates slavery as bringing down reproach on the Southern States, and
expatiates on the detestation due to the licentious wickedness of the
African trade, and the inhuman tyranny and bloodguiltiness inseparable
from it. He could not but consider it as calculated to fix a stigma of
the blackest nature on the State he had the honor to represent, and to
hold its citizens up to public view as men divested of every principle
of honor and humanity. Considering it in that light, he felt it
incumbent on him not only to refute those atrocious calumnies, but to
resent the improper language made use of by the memorialists. Before he
entered into the discussion, he begged to observe, that when any class
of men deviated from their own religious principles, and officiously
came forward in a business with which they had no concern, and attempted
to dictate to Congress, he could not ascribe their conduct to any other
cause but to an intolerant spirit of persecution. This application came
with the worst grace possible from the Quakers, who professed never to
intermeddle in politics, but to submit quietly to the laws of the
country.

He had met with a publication which came out in the year 1775, (at a
period when the affairs of America were in a very desponding situation,)
entitled "The ancient Testimony and Principles of the Quakers." It set
forth that their religious principles restrained them from having any
hand or connivance in setting up and putting down kings and governments;
that this was God's peculiar prerogative for causes best known to
himself; that it was not their business to be busybodies above their
stations, but only to pray for the King and safety of their nation, that
they might live a quiet and peaceable life, under the Government which
God was pleased to set over them. If these were really their
sentiments, why did they not abide by them? Why did they not leave that,
which they call God's work, to be managed by himself? Those principles
should instruct them to wait with patience and humility for the event of
all public measures, and to receive that event as the Divine will. Their
conduct on this occasion proved that they did not believe what they
professed, or that they had not virtue enough to practise what they
believed. Did they mean to rob the Almighty of what they call his
prerogative? And were they not partial ministers of their own
acknowledged principles? It was difficult to credit their pretended
scruples; because, while they were exclaiming against the Mammon of this
world, they are hunting after it with a step steady as time, and an
appetite keen as the grave.

The memorial from the Pennsylvania Society applied, in express terms,
for an emancipation of slaves, and the report of the committee appeared
to hold out the idea that Congress might exercise the power of
emancipating after the year 1808; for it is said that Congress could not
emancipate slaves prior to that period. He remarked, that either the
power of manumission still remained with the several States, or it was
exclusively vested in Congress; for no one would contend that such a
power would be concurrent in the several States and the United States.
He then showed that the State Governments clearly retained all the
rights of sovereignty which they had before the establishment of the
constitution, unless they were exclusively delegated to the United
States; and this could only exist where the Constitution granted, in
express terms, an exclusive authority to the Union, or where it granted
in one instance an authority to the Union, and in another prohibited the
States from exercising the like authority, or where it granted an
authority to the Union, to which a similar authority in the States would
be repugnant.

He applied these principles to the case in question; and asked, whether
the constitution had, in express terms, vested the Congress with the
power of manumission? Or whether it restrained the States from
exercising that power? Or whether there was any authority given to the
Union, with which the exercise of this right by any State would be
inconsistent? If these questions were answered in the negative, it
followed that Congress had not an exclusive right to the power of
manumission. Had it a concurrent right with the States? No gentleman
would assert it, because the absurdity was obvious. For a State
regulation on the subject might differ from a Federal regulation; in
which case one or the other must give way. As the laws of the United
States were paramount to those of the individual States, the Federal
regulations would abrogate those of the States, consequently the States
would thus be divested of a power which it was evident they now had, and
might exercise whenever they thought proper. But admitting that
Congress had authority to manumit the slaves in America, and were
disposed to exercise it, would the Southern States acquiesce in such a
measure without a struggle? Would the citizens of that country tamely
suffer their property to be torn from them? Would even the citizens of
the other States, which did not possess this property, desire to have
all the slaves let loose upon them? Would not such a step be injurious
even to the slaves themselves? It was well known that they were an
indolent people, improvident, averse to labor: when emancipated, they
would either starve or plunder. Nothing was a stronger proof of the
absurdity of emancipation than the fanciful schemes which the friends to
the measure had suggested; one was, to ship them out of the country, and
colonize them in some foreign region. This plan admitted that it would
be dangerous to retain them within the United States after they were
manumitted: but surely it would be inconsistent with humanity to banish
these people to a remote country, and to expel them from their native
soil, and from places to which they had a local attachment. It would be
no less repugnant to the principles of freedom, not to allow them to
remain here, if they desired it. How could they be called freemen, if
they were, against their consent, to be expelled from the country? Thus
did the advocates for emancipation acknowledge that the blacks, when
liberated, ought not to remain here to stain the blood of the whites by
a mixture of the races.

Another plan was to liberate all those who should be born after a
certain limited period. Such a scheme would produce this very
extraordinary phenomenon, that the mother would be a slave and her child
would be free. These young emancipated negroes, by associating with
their enslaved parents, would participate in all the debasements which
slavery is said to occasion. But allowing that a practicable scheme of
general emancipation could be devised, there can be no doubt that the
two races would still remain distinct. It is known, from experience,
that the whites had such an idea of their superiority over the blacks,
that they never even associated with them; even the warmest friends to
the blacks kept them at a distance, and rejected all intercourse with
them. Could any instance be quoted of their intermarrying; the Quakers
asserted that nature made all men equal, and that the difference of
color should not place negroes on a worse footing in society than the
whites; but had any of them ever married a negro, or would any of them
suffer their children to mix their blood with that of a black? They
would view with abhorrence such an alliance.

Mr. S. then read some extracts from Mr. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia,
proving that negroes were by nature an inferior race of beings; and that
the whites would always feel a repugnance at mixing their blood with
that of the blacks. Thus, he proceeded, that respectable author, who was
desirous of countenancing emancipation, was, on a consideration of the
subject, induced candidly to avow that the difficulties appeared
insurmountable. The friends to manumission had said, that by prohibiting
the further importation of slaves, and by liberating those born after a
certain period, a gradual emancipation might take place, and that in
process of time the very color would be extinct, and there would be none
but whites. He was at a loss to learn how that consequence would result.
If the blacks did not intermarry with the whites, they would remain
black to the end of time; for it was not contended that liberating them
would whitewash them; if they would intermarry with the whites, then the
white race would be extinct, and the American people would be all of the
mulatto breed. In whatever light, therefore, the subject was viewed, the
folly of emancipation was manifest. He trusted these considerations
would prevent any further application to Congress on this point, and
would so far have weight with the committee as to reject the clause
altogether, or at least to declare, in plain terms, that Congress has no
right whatever to manumit the slaves of this country.

Various objections, said he, had at different times been alleged against
the abominable practice, as it had been called, of one man exercising
dominion over another; but slavery was no new thing in the world. The
Romans, the Greeks, and other nations of antiquity, held slaves at the
time Christianity first dawned on society, and the professors of its
mild doctrines never preached against it. [Here Mr. S. read a quotation
from the Roman and Grecian History, and from some accounts of the
government and manners of the people of Africa, before they had any
knowledge of the African traders, from which it appeared that slavery
was not disapproved of by the Apostles when they went about diffusing
the principles of Christianity; and that it was not owing to the African
trade, as had been alleged, that the people of Africa made war on each
other.]

Another objection against slavery was, that the number of slaves in the
Southern States weakened that part of the Union, and in case of invasion
would require a greater force to protect it. Negroes, it was said, would
not fight; but he would ask whether it was owing to their being black or
to their being slaves? if to their being black, then unquestionably
emancipating them would not remedy the evil, for they would still remain
black; if it was owing to their being slaves, he denied the position:
for it was an undeniable truth, that in many countries slaves made
excellent soldiers. In Russia, Hungary, Poland, peasants were slaves,
and yet were brave troops. In Scotland, not many years ago, the Highland
peasants were absolute slaves to their lairds, and they were renowned
for their bravery. The Turks were as much enslaved as the negroes--their
property and lives were at the absolute disposal of the Sultan, yet they
fought with undaunted courage. Many other instances might be quoted,
but those would suffice to refute the fact. Had experience proved that
the negroes would not make good soldiers? He did not assert that they
would, but they had never been tried; discipline was every thing; white
militia made but indifferent soldiers before they were disciplined. It
was well known that according to the present art of war, a soldier was a
mere machine, and he did not see why a black machine was not as good as
a white one; in one respect the black troops would have the advantage in
appearing more horrible in the eyes of the enemy. But admitting that
they would not fight, to what would the argument lead? Undoubtedly to
show that the Quakers, Moravians, and all the non-resisting and
non-fighting sects, constitute the weakness of the country. Did they
contribute to strengthen the country against invasion by staying at home
and joining the invader as soon as he was successful? But they furnished
money, he should be told, and paid substitutes; and did not the slaves,
by increasing the agriculture of the country, add to its wealth, and
thereby increase its strength? Did they not moreover perform many
laborious services in the camp and in the field, assist in transporting
baggage, conveying artillery, throwing up fortifications, and thus
increase the numbers in the ranks by supplying their places in these
services? Nor was it necessary that every part of the empire should
furnish fighting men; one part supplied men, another money; one part was
strong in population, another in valuable exports, which added to the
opulence of the whole. Great Britain obtained no soldiers from her East
and West India settlements, were they therefore useless? She was obliged
to send troops to protect them, but their valuable trade furnished her
with means of paying those troops.

Another objection was that the public opinion was against slavery. How
did that appear? Were there any petitions on the subject excepting that
from the Pennsylvania Society and a few Quakers? And were they to judge
for the whole Continent? Were the citizens of the Northern and Eastern
States to dictate to Congress on a measure in which the Southern States
were so deeply interested? There were no petitions against slavery from
the Southern States, and they were the only proper judges of what was
for their interest. The toleration of slavery in the several States was
a matter of internal regulation and policy, in which each State had a
right to do as she pleased, and no other State had any right to
intermeddle with her policy or laws. If the citizens of the Northern
States were displeased with the toleration of slavery in the Southern
States, the latter were equally disgusted with some things tolerated in
the former.

He had mentioned on a former occasion the dangerous tenets and
pernicious practices of the sect of Shaking Quakers, who preached
against matrimony, and whose doctrine and example, if they prevailed,
would either depopulate the United States, or people it with a spurious
race. However the people of South Carolina reprobated the gross and
immoral conduct of these Shakers, they had not petitioned Congress to
expel them from the Continent, though they thought such a measure would
be serviceable to the United States.

The Legislature of South Carolina had prohibited theatrical
representations, deeming them improper; but they did not trouble
Congress with an application to abolish them in New York and
Philadelphia. The Southern citizens might also consider the toleration
of Quakers as an injury to the community, because in time of war they
would not defend their country from the enemy, and in time of peace they
were interfering in the concerns of others, and doing every thing in
their power to excite the slaves in the Southern States to insurrection;
notwithstanding which, the people of those States had not required the
assistance of Congress to exterminate the Quakers.

But he could not help observing, that this squeamishness was very
extraordinary at this time. The Northern States knew that the Southern
States had slaves before they confederated with them. If they had such
an abhorrence for slavery, why, said Mr. S., did they not cast us off
and reject our alliance? The truth was, that the best informed part of
the citizens of the Northern States knew that slavery was so ingrafted
into the policy of the Southern States, that it could not be eradicated
without tearing up by the roots their happiness, tranquillity, and
prosperity; that if it were an evil, it was one for which there was no
remedy, and therefore, like wise men, they acquiesced in it. We, on the
other hand, knew that the Quaker doctrines had taken such deep root in
some of the States, that all resistance to them must be useless; we
therefore made a compromise on both sides--we took each other, with our
mutual bad habits and respective evils, for better, for worse; the
Northern States adopted us with our slaves, and we adopted them with
their Quakers. There was then an implied compact between the Northern
and Southern people that no step should be taken to injure the property
of the latter, or to disturb their tranquillity. It was therefore with
great pain that he viewed the anxiety of some of the members to pay such
uncommon respect to the memorialists, as even to set aside the common
rules of proceeding, and attempt to commit the memorials the very day
they were presented, though the Southern members had solicited one day's
delay. Such proceedings had justly raised an alarm in the minds of
himself and his Southern colleagues; and feeling that alarm, they would
have acted a dishonorable part to their constituents had they not
expressed themselves with that warmth and solicitude which some
gentlemen had disapproved.

A proper consideration of this business must convince every candid mind
that emancipation would be attended with one or other of these
consequences: either that a mixture of the races would degenerate the
whites, without improving the blacks, or that it would create two
separate classes of people in the community, involved in inveterate
hostility, which would terminate in the massacre and extirpation of one
or the other, as the Moors were expelled from Spain, and the Danes from
England. The negroes would not be benefited by it; free negroes never
improve in talents, never grow rich, and continue to associate with the
people of their own color. This is owing either to the natural aversion
the whites entertain towards them, and an opinion of the superiority of
their race, or to the natural attachment the blacks have to those of
their own color; in either case it proves that they will, after
manumission, continue a distinct people, and have separate interests.
The author already quoted has proved that they are an inferior race even
to the Indians.

After the last war, a number of negroes which had been stolen from the
Southern States, and carried to England, either quitted the persons who
had carried them there, or were abandoned by them. Unable to provide for
themselves, and rejected from the society of the common people of
England, they were begging about the streets of London in great numbers;
they supplicated captains of vessels to carry them back to their owners
in America, preferring slavery there to freedom in England. Many of them
were shipped to Africa by the humanity of the English, and were either
butchered or made slaves of by their savage countrymen, or reshipped for
sale to the plantations.

But some persons have been of opinion, that if the further importation
of slaves could be prohibited, there would be a gradual extinction of
the species. Having shown the absurdity of liberating the _postnati_
without extending it to all the slaves old and young, and the great
absurdity and even impracticability of extending it to all, I shall say
a few words with regard to the extinction. That would be impossible,
because they increase; to occasion an extinction, Congress must prohibit
all intercourse between the sexes; this would be an act of humanity they
would not thank us for, nor would they be persuaded that it was for
their own good; or Congress must, like Herod, order all the children to
be put to death as soon as born. If, then, nothing but evil would result
from emancipation, under the existing circumstances of the country, why
should Congress stir at all in the business, or give any countenance to
such dangerous applications? We have been told that the Government ought
to manifest a disposition inimical to this practice which the people
reprobate. If some citizens, from misinformation and ignorance, have
imbibed prejudices against the Southern States, if ill-intentioned
authors have related false facts, and gross misrepresentations tending
to traduce the character of a whole State, and to mislead the citizens
of other States, is that a sufficient reason why a large territory is to
be depopulated, merely to gratify the wish of some misinformed
individuals? But what have the citizens of the other States to do with
our slaves? Have they any right to interfere with our internal policy?

This is not an object of general concern, for I have already proved that
it does not weaken the Union; but admit that it did, will the abolition
of slavery strengthen South Carolina? It can only be cultivated by
slaves; the climate, the nature of the soil, ancient habits, forbid the
whites from performing the labor. Experience convinces us of the truth
of this. Great Britain made every attempt to settle Georgia by whites
alone, and failed, and was compelled at length to introduce slaves;
after which that State increased very rapidly in opulence and
importance. If the slaves are emancipated, they will not remain in that
country; remove the cultivators of the soil, and the whole of the low
country, all the fertile rice and indigo swamps will be deserted, and
become a wilderness. What, then, becomes of its strength? Will such a
scheme increase it? Instead of increasing the population of the whites,
there will be no whites at all. If the low country is deserted, where
will be the commerce, the valuable exports of that country, the large
revenue raised from its imports and from the consumption of the rich
planters? In a short time, the Northern and Eastern States will supply
us with their manufactures; if you depopulate the rich low country of
South Carolina and Georgia, you will give us a blow which will
immediately recoil on yourselves. Suppose there are one hundred and
forty thousand slaves in those States, which require annually five yards
of cloth each, making seven hundred thousand yards at half a dollar a
yard, this makes three hundred and fifty thousand dollars, besides the
articles of linen, flannel, Osnaburgh, blankets, molasses, sugar, and
rum, for the use of the negroes; now, either the Eastern and Middle
States will supply us with all these articles, or they will receive the
benefit of the impost on them if they are imported from foreign
countries. Without the rice swamps of Carolina, Charleston would decay,
so would the commerce of that city; this would injure the back country.
If you injure the Southern States, the injury would reach our Northern
and Eastern brethren; for the States are links of one chain; if we break
one, the whole must fall to pieces. Thus it is manifest, that in
proportion to the increase of our agriculture will our wealth be
increased; the increase of which will augment that of our sister States,
which will either supply us with their commodities, or raise a large
revenue upon us, or be the carriers of our produce to foreign markets.

It has been said, that the toleration of slavery brings down reproach on
America. It only brings reproach on those who tolerate it, and we are
ready to bear our share. We know that none but prejudiced and uncandid
persons, who have hastily considered the subject, and are ignorant of
the real situation of the Southern States, throw out these insinuations.
We found slavery ingrafted in the very policy of the country when we
were born, and we are persuaded of the impolicy of removing it; if it be
a moral evil, it is like many others which exist in all civilized
countries, and which the world quietly submit to. Humanity has been a
topic of declamation on this subject: that sentiment has different
operations on different individuals, and he had it in his power to show,
that humanity first gave origin to the transportation of slaves from
Africa into America. _Bartholomew de las Casas_, Bishop of Chiapa, a
Spaniard renowned for his humanity and virtues, in order to save the
Indians in South America from slavery, prevailed on his monarch to
substitute Africans, which were accordingly purchased on the coast of
Africa, and shipped to the Spanish colonies to work in the mines: this
appears in _Robertson's History of America_, which Mr. S. quoted. At
this day, the Spaniards give considerable encouragement to the
transportation of slaves into their islands. Mr. S. read the edict for
that purpose.

Another objection is, that slavery vitiates and debases the mind of the
owner of this sort of property. Where, he asked, is the proof of this
allegation? Do the citizens of the Southern States exhibit more
ferociousness in their manners, more barbarity in their dispositions,
than those of the other States? Are crimes more frequently committed
there? A proof of the absurdity of this charge may be found in the
writings of those who wish to disseminate this mischievous idea, and
yet, in their relations of facts, they themselves contradict it. They
lay down general principles, which they take upon credit from others, or
which they publish with sinister views, and when they enter into a
detail of the history of those States, they overset their own doctrines.
Thus, one writer tells us, that the Southern citizen, who is educated in
principles of superiority to the slaves which surround him, has no idea
of government, obedience, and good order, till he mingles with the hardy
and free-spirited yeomanry of the North, and that after mixing with
them, he will return home with his mind more enlarged, his views more
liberalized, and his affections rectified, and he becomes a more
generous friend to the rights of human nature. But hear what the Eastern
traveller is to learn by visiting the enslaved regions of the South. He
will see, says the same writer, immediately after, industry crowned with
affluence, independence, hospitality, liberality of manners; and,
notwithstanding the prevalence of domestic slavery, he will find the
noblest sentiments of freedom and independence to predominate; he will
extol their enterprise, art, and ingenuity, and will reflect that nature
is wise, and that Providence in the distribution of its favors is not
capricious. Take another striking instance of this contradiction from
Morse's Geography. He says, that there are more slaves than free persons
in South Carolina, and mentions the mischievous influence of slavery on
their manners, which, he observes, by exempting them from the necessity
of labor, leads to luxury, dissipation, and extravagance, and savors too
much of a haughty, supercilious behavior; that the inhabitants want that
enterprise and perseverance which are necessary for the attainment of
the arts and sciences; that they have few motives to enterprise, and too
generally rest contented with barely knowledge enough to transact the
common affairs of life. Now, for the author's proofs: they are contained
in these words:

"Many of the inhabitants spare no pains nor expense in giving the
highest polish of education to their children; literature has begun to
flourish since the peace; several flourishing academies and colleges
have been established; the ladies have an engaging softness and delicacy
in their manners; theatrical exhibitions have been prohibited by law;
gaming of all kinds is more discountenanced than in any of the Southern
States; all denominations of religion are on an equal footing; commerce
is flourishing; economy is becoming more fashionable, and science begins
to spread her salutary influence among the citizens."

But was South Carolina, at the commencement of the war, with all her
slaves, backward in her resistance to Great Britain? View the conduct of
her citizens, their zeal and ardor in the cause of liberty; their labor
at Fort Sullivan. Are crimes more frequent in that country than in the
other States? Are there more executions? I believe there have been as
few as in any part of the Continent, and those which have taken place
have been generally of emigrant convicts, or fugitive wheel-barrow men;
he would be bold to assert that in no State on the Continent is there
more order, sobriety, and obedience to good government; more industry
and frugality; nor is there any trace of the influence of slavery on the
character of her citizens.

The French, so far from curbing and cramping the African trade with
needless regulations, give large premiums upon every negro landed on
their islands; in some instances as much as two hundred livres per head.
Is that nation more debased than others? Are they not a polished people,
sensible of the rights of mankind, and actuated by proper sentiments of
humanity? The Spaniards encourage slavery; they are people of the nicest
honor, proverbially so. The Romans and Greeks had slaves, and are not
their glorious achievements held up as excitements to great and
magnanimous actions? Sparta teemed with slaves at the time of her
greatest fame as a valiant Republic. The absolute power of the
Lacedæmonians over the Helotes is frequently spoken of by the ancient
writers; they were not only the slaves of the Commonwealth, but of every
individual; they could not be set at liberty, neither could they be
sold; hence arose a saying, that a free man at Sparta was most a free
man, and a slave most a slave.

The system of the Roman policy with regard to slavery was still more
severe. Slaves were not even under the protection of the laws; they were
considered as things, _inter res_. A master, merely from caprice, might
torture, dismember, and even murder his slave. If a slave did any damage
exceeding his value, he was delivered to the person injured, who did
with him what he pleased. Yet these slaves were of the same color as
their masters, and equal to them in mental faculties; many of them were
men of great learning, philosophers, poets, &c. Much had been said of
the cruel treatment of slaves in the West Indies and the Southern
States; with respect to the latter, he denied the fact from experience,
and accurate information, and believed in his conscience that the slaves
in South Carolina were a happier people than the lower order of whites
in many countries he had visited. With regard to the West Indies, _Lord
Rodney_ and _Admiral Barrington_ had both declared, that they had spent
some time in the West Indies, and that they had never heard of a negro
being cruelly treated; that they had often spoken of their happiness in
high terms, declaring that they should rejoice exceedingly if the
English day laborer was half as happy. Some have said that slavery is
unnecessary; so far from it, that several essential manufactures
depended on it. Indigo, cochineal, and various other dyeing materials,
which are the produce of the West Indies, could only be raised by
slaves; the great staple commodities of the South would be annihilated
without the labor of slaves. It is well known that when the African
slaves were brought to the coast for sale, it was customary to put to
death all those who were not sold; the abolition of the slave trade
would therefore cause the massacre of the people.

The cruel mode of transportation was another motive to this abolition;
but was it to be presumed that the merchants would so far attend to
their own interests as to preserve the lives and the health of the
slaves on the passage. All voyages must be attended with
inconveniencies, and those from Africa to America not more than others.
As to their confinement on board, it was no more than necessary; as to
the smallness of space allotted them, it was more than was allotted to
soldiers in a camp; for the measurement of cubical air breathed by the
Africans, compared with that of soldiers in a camp, was in favor of the
former as thirty to seventeen; it was full as much as was allotted in
ships of war to seamen, who, by the laws of England, were frequently on
their return to their families, after a long and dangerous voyage,
seized by violence, hurried away by a press-gang, and forced on another
voyage more tedious and perilous than the first, to a hot and sickly
climate, where several hundreds of them were stowed away in the hold of
a vessel. In cases of disobedience, the captain had a right, for slight
offences, to inflict on them corporal punishment without the
intervention of a court-martial, and in other cases they are punishable
by very severe laws, executed by martial courts, established for that
purpose. The same may be observed of the soldiers, who were frequently
flogged severely for trifling offences; instances have been known of
their being put under the care of a surgeon, after receiving a small
part of the intended flagellation, to refit them for the residue.

Having thus removed the force of the observations which have been
advanced against the toleration of slavery, by a misguided and
misinformed humanity, I shall only add, that I disapprove of the whole
of the report; because it either states some power sufficiently
expressed in the constitution, which is unnecessary, or it sets forth
some power which I am clear Congress do not possess. The concluding
paragraph is an extraordinary one. In what mode are the memorialists to
be informed of our humane dispositions? Are we to send a special
committee to inform them? Or is the Speaker to write them a letter, or
the Sergeant-at-Arms with the mace to wait on them? In short, Mr.
Chairman, the whole of this business has been wrong from beginning to
end, and as one false step generally leads to others, so has the hasty
commitment of these memorials involved us in all this confusion and
embarrassment. I hope, therefore, if any kind of report is agreed to, it
will be something like that proposed by my colleague.

The committee rose, and reported progress.


FRIDAY, March 19.

HUGH WILLIAMSON, a member from North Carolina, appeared and took his
seat.


MONDAY, March 22.

_Subject of Slavery._

Mr. BOUDINOT said, although he most heartily approved of many of the
arguments and doctrines of his friend from Pennsylvania, yet he could
not go all lengths with him. He thought with him, that our time had been
taken up, and great labor had been used in arguments that nowise related
to the merits of the question before the committee, but he could not
agree that the clause in the constitution relating to the want of power
in Congress "to prohibit the importation of such persons, as any of the
States _now existing_ shall think proper to admit, prior to the year
1808, and authorizing a tax or duty on such importation, not exceeding
ten dollars for each person," did not extend to negro slaves. Candor
required that he should acknowledge, that this was the express design of
the constitution, and, therefore, Congress could not interfere in
prohibiting the importation, or promoting the emancipation of them,
prior to that period. He said he was well informed that the tax or duty
of ten dollars was provided instead of the five per cent. _ad valorem_,
and was so expressly understood by all parties in the Convention. That
therefore it was the interest and duty of Congress to impose this tax,
or it would not be doing justice to the States, or equalizing the duties
throughout the Union. If this was not done, merchants might bring their
whole capitals into this branch of trade, and save paying any duties
whatever. Mr. B. had hoped that the great lengths to which the gentleman
from Pennsylvania had carried the argument, would have convinced
gentlemen in the opposition of the propriety, if not the necessity of
the resolutions on the table. Is it not prudent now, while the design of
the framers of the constitution is well known, and while the best
information can be obtained, for Congress to declare their sense of it,
on points which the gentlemen say, involve their great and essential
interests, especially when the gentleman from Pennsylvania gives so
different a construction to it from what the gentleman from the
Southward thinks right? Is it not advantageous to the Southern States to
have an explicit declaration calming their fears and preventing
unnecessary jealousies on this subject? Can there be any foundation for
alarm, when Congress expressly declare, that they have no power of
interference prior to the year 1808? But gentlemen say they have been
charged with impropriety of conduct, in discovering so much warmth and
earnestness, on a subject with which their dearest interests are so
intimately connected--that all men are led by interest, and they are
justified in pursuing the same line of conduct.

Mr. B. declared, for his own part, he never blamed them for standing
forth for what they conceived the true interests of their constituents;
but it was the manner in which this had been done, that he complained
of. On resolutions declaring that Congress had not power to prohibit the
importation of slaves into any State, or interfering in their
emancipation or internal government, long arguments had been used, and
much precious time had been spent, to prove the lawfulness of the
African trade in slaves; this, indeed, was an arduous task, in this day
of light and knowledge. An author, said to be of reputation, was brought
forward to prove the state of that unhappy country, but it turned out to
be in the fifteenth century; this could be of little avail. An hour was
taken up in reading the labors of a newspaper writer in the island of
Jamaica. This writer appeared wholly uninformed as to historic facts
relating to the miserable Africans, and as ignorant of the principal
arguments against the slave trade. It was necessary for him to deny the
authority of _Anthony Benezet_, who had published some pointed facts on
the subject. Mr. _Benezet_ was a man of the strictest integrity, and of
the best information--a man that was an honor to his country, and an
ornament to society. Mr. B. had been well acquainted with him, and spoke
from personal knowledge; he had examined into the facts from captains of
Guineamen, and a person who had lived twelve years in that country, and
he could say, with confidence, that _Mr. Benezet's_ account had been
generally confirmed. Not only the practice of ancient nations, and that
of all modern Europe, had been brought into view, but even the sacred
Scriptures had been quoted, to justify this iniquitous traffic. It is
true, that the Egyptians held the Israelites in bondage for four hundred
years, and Mr. B. doubted not, but much the same arguments as had been
used on the present occasion, had been urged with great violence by the
King of Egypt, whose heart, it is expressly said, had been extremely
hardened, to show why he should not consent to let the children of
Israel go, who had now become absolutely necessary to him; but, said he,
gentlemen cannot forget the consequences that followed; they were
delivered by a strong hand and stretched-out arm, and it ought to be
remembered that the Almighty Power that accomplished their deliverance
is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. The New Testament has
afforded a number of texts to countenance this doctrine, in the
gentleman's opinion. One would have imagined that the uniform tenor of
the Gospel, that breathes a spirit of love and universal philanthropy to
our fellow-creatures--that commands our love to our neighbor to be
measured by our love to ourselves--that teaches us that whatsoever we
would that men should do to us to do so to them, would have prevented
this misapplication. Surely the gentleman overlooked the prophecy of St.
Peter, where he foretells, that, among other damnable heresies, "through
covetousness shall they, with feigned words, make merchandise of you."

A quotation from a modern author, of great note in the philosophical
world, has been most ungenerously made use of by the newspaper writer
before referred to--I mean from the works of the famous _Mr. Paley_,
whose treatise on Moral Philosophy does him the greatest credit--a
single sentence or two is taken from this work, without regard to the
connection, to brand him with the charge of countenancing slavery. Mr.
B. then produced the book and read the passage, wherein it appeared that
_Mr. Paley_ laid down "the obligation of slavery to arise from crimes,
captivity, and debt;" that the slave trade on the coast of Africa is not
excused by these principles; that no questions are there asked relative
to the justice of the vender's title, but this is the least crime with
which this traffic is chargeable; the natives are excited to war, with
this the wickedness begins; the slaves torn away from parents, wives,
children, from their friends and companions, their fields and flocks,
their home and country, are transported to the European settlements in
America, with no other accommodation on ship-board than what is provided
for brutes. This is the second stage of cruelty from which they are
delivered, only to be placed, and that for life, in subjection to a
dominion and system of laws the most tyrannical that ever were tolerated
upon the face of the earth. But necessity is pretended, and after all it
has never been proved that it exists. _Mr. Paley_ then refers to the
present situation of the United States. "The great revolution in the
Western World," says he, "may probably conduce (and who knows but that
it was designed) to accelerate the fall of this abominable tyranny; and
now it is a season for reflecting whether a Legislature, which had so
long lent its assistance to the support of an institution replete with
human misery, was fit to be trusted with an empire the most extensive
that ever obtained in any age or quarter of the world." He then shows
that slavery was a part of the civil constitution of most countries when
Christianity appeared; and the reason that its precepts did not
expressly condemn or prohibit slavery was, because, soliciting admission
into all nations, it abstained from meddling with the civil institutions
of any. Then follows the passage quoted by the newspaper writer--"That
the discharging of slaves from all obligation to their masters, which is
the consequence of pronouncing slavery unlawful, would have no better
effect than to let loose one-half of mankind on the other. Slaves would
have been tempted to embrace a religion which asserted their right to
freedom; masters would hardly have been persuaded to consent to claims
founded on such authority; the most calamitous of all contests, a
_bellum servile_, might probably have ensued, to the reproach, if not
the extinction of the Christian name." He then asserts, that
emancipation should be gradual, and by the provisions of laws, and under
the protection of civil government. "Christianity can only operate as an
alterative. By the mild diffusion of its light and influence, the minds
of men are insensibly prepared to perceive and correct the enormities,
which folly, wickedness, or accident, have introduced into their public
establishments." Thus, proceeded Mr. B., justice is done to this worthy
philosopher and my own sentiments are more concisely and explicitly set
forth than I could have done without it.

But when gentlemen attempt to justify this unnatural traffic, or to
prove the lawfulness of slavery, they should advert to the genius of our
Government, and the principles of the Revolution. By the declaration of
Congress, in 1775, setting forth the causes and necessity of taking up
arms, they say: "If it was possible for men who exercise their reason,
to believe that the Divine author of our existence intended a part of
the human race to hold an absolute property in, and an unbounded power
over others, marked out by His infinite goodness and wisdom, as the
objects of a legal domination never rightfully resistible, however
severe and oppressive, the inhabitants of these colonies might at least
require from the Parliament of Great Britain some evidence that this
dreadful authority over them had been granted to that body." And by the
Declaration of Independence, in 1776, Congress declare: "We hold these
truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal; that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

This, then, is the language of America in the day of distress. Mr.
Chairman, I would not be understood, to contend the right of Congress at
this time to prohibit the importation of slaves, whatever might have
been the principles of the Revolution or the genius of the Government;
by the present constitution we are clearly and positively restrained
till the year 1808, and I am sure that no gentleman in this committee
would have the most distant wish to wound this instrument of our
connection.

But there is a wide difference between justifying this ungenerous
traffic, and supporting a claim to property, vested at the time of the
constitution, and guarantied thereby. Besides, it would be inhumanity
itself to turn these unhappy people loose to murder each other, or to
perish for the want of the necessaries of life. I never was an advocate
for so extravagant a conduct.

Many arguments were pointed against the danger of our emancipating these
slaves, or even holding up an idea that we had a power so to do, and
much time has been taken up to disprove this right in Congress. As no
claim of this kind is contended for, and the resolutions already passed
expressly contradict it, I shall make no further observations on them.

But the characters of the signers of these memorials are called in
question, as an argument against the adoption of the resolution on the
table. One of these memorials was signed by the Society of people called
Quakers: the other by Dr. Franklin, as President of a private Society in
Philadelphia. The indiscriminate abuse that has been thrown out against
Quakers, without distinction, has not comported with the honor or
dignity of this House. Not only their characters, but their very names
have been called upon, and private anecdotes, relating to individuals,
been mentioned on the floor. Many of the Quakers I have long lived in
the habits of friendship with, and can testify to the respectability of
their characters and the regularity of their lives. Their conduct in the
late war has been arraigned, and they have been condemned in the lump. I
have known many of them during the war, and impartial justice requires
it from me, to give the committee some official information on the
subject. I had the honor of serving the United States at the
commencement of the war, as Commissary General of prisoners. Congress
not being able to afford them supplies, those unhappy men in this town
were reduced to the very depths of distress, without food or raiment,
without blankets or firing, they suffered every thing that human nature
could bear. In this situation many of the Quakers of this city exercised
such humanity towards them as did honor to human nature. The miserable
prisoner not only felt the happy effects of their exertions in his
favor, but participated in their money, their food, and clothing. Nay,
such were the jealousies created by this conduct, in the British army
here, that an armed force entered the house of one of them, seized his
books, and though a man of great property, and large commercial
dealings, on finding that he had loaned large sums of money to our
distressed prisoners, he was turned out of their lines, and with his
family was a refugee during the whole of the war afterwards, separated
from his business and property.

To whom was the care of our prisoners in Philadelphia committed? To a
Quaker: and I have been witness to the just tribute of gratitude and
thankfulness paid by great numbers of our unhappy fellow-citizens to
that gentleman for his kindness and humanity. And is this indiscriminate
charge, without the least respect to characters, a decent or a just
return for a conduct like this? Where is the denomination amongst us,
that did not furnish opposers to our glorious Revolution? Were not
hundreds of Presbyterians, Episcopalians, and almost of every other
denomination, among our enemies? What denominations formed the thousands
of new levies, that endeavored to deluge our country in blood? On the
other hand, were not a Greene and a Mifflin furnished from the Society
of the Quakers?

In short, I rejoice to say, that our cause was not carried on by
fanaticism or religious zeal, but a general struggle for the rights of
human nature. Then why all this abuse of this particular sect, without
discrimination? Can any solid argument against the resolution on the
table arise from a conduct of this kind? I am at a loss to know what
other argument has been used to show the impropriety of the resolution
before you. It goes to declare the power of Congress to prohibit
foreigners from fitting out vessels in our ports, to supply foreigners
with slaves from Africa. For my part, I think it a prudent, a humane,
and a constitutional resolution. It will render further interference on
this subject, perhaps, unnecessary, when it is known that the power of
Congress extends to remedy the evil. They will hardly venture to risk a
voyage that may be ruined before its being finished.

The gentleman last up (Mr. SMITH) said, that it was now acknowledged,
that one of the memorials had asked something contrary to the
constitution. I have never acknowledged this. The language is, that
Congress would go to "the very verge of the constitution," to accomplish
the business; but there is no request to exceed it.

The character of the celebrated signer of the last memorial, Dr.
Franklin, has been touched upon. The firmness of his mind has been
suspected. An ingenious parable of his has been read to the committee,
but its application totally mistaken. If the Supreme Being has borne
with the unhappy subjects of our consideration, not for one hundred, but
for thousands of years, in their own native land; has provided them
with climate, soil, and social comforts, in which they rejoice; must we
be discontented, and suppose, by adding to their misery, we can add to
their happiness?


TUESDAY, March 23.

_Subject of Slavery._

It was then moved, that the House should take up the report of the
Committee of the Whole on the report of the committee to whom were
referred the memorials of the people called Quakers, and of the
Pennsylvania Society for promoting the abolition of slavery.

This motion was opposed by Mr. JACKSON, Mr. SMITH, Mr. BURKE, and Mr.
BLAND; they severally observed, that the discussion of the subject has
already excited a spirit of dissension among the members of the House,
and that every principle of policy and concern for the dignity of the
House, and the peace and tranquillity of the United States, concur to
show the propriety of dropping the subject, and letting it sleep where
it is. On the other hand, Mr. VINING, Mr. HARTLEY, and Mr. PAGE,
observed, that there was the same propriety in taking up the subject at
the present moment, and bringing it to a conclusion, as there was for
first taking it up; that it has been so fully discussed it cannot be
supposed gentlemen will go over the same ground again; it may soon be
determined; to pass it over will be unprecedented, and will leave the
public mind in the same state of uncertainty from which so much danger
is apprehended. The motion for taking up the report was warmly contested
in a lengthy debate, and finally passed in the affirmative, by a
majority of one. Whereupon, on motion, that the said report of the
committee, and also the report of the Committee of the whole House, of
amendments to said report, be inserted on the Journal, it was resolved
in the affirmative, 29 votes to 25. The yeas and nays were as follows:

Those who voted in the affirmative, were,

      Messrs. Boudinot, Brown, Cadwalader, Contee, Floyd, Foster,
      Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Griffin, Hartley, Hathorn, Heister,
      Huntington, Lawrence, Lee, Leonard, Madison, Muhlenberg,
      Parker, Partridge, Schureman, Scott, Sedgwick, Sherman,
      Sylvester, Sinnickson, Vining, and Wynkoop.

Those who voted in the negative, were,

      Messrs. Ames, Baldwin, Benson, Bland, Burke, Carroll,
      Coles, Gale, Grout, Jackson, Livermore, Mathews, Moore,
      Page, Van Rensselaer, Smith, (of Maryland,) Smith, (of
      South Carolina,) Stone, Sturges, Sumter, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Tucker, White, and Williamson.

The said reports are as follow:

_Report of the Special Committee._

      The committee to whom were referred sundry memorials from
      the people called Quakers, and also, a memorial from the
      Pennsylvania Society for promoting the Abolition of
      Slavery, submit the following report:

      That from the nature of the matters contained in these
      memorials, they were induced to examine the powers vested
      in Congress, under the present constitution, relating to
      the Abolition of Slavery, and are clearly of opinion,

      _First._ That the General Government is expressly
      restrained from prohibiting the importation of such persons
      "as any of the States now existing shall think proper to
      admit, until the year one thousand eight hundred and
      eight."

      _Secondly._ That Congress, by a fair construction of the
      constitution, are equally restrained from interfering in
      the emancipation of slaves, who already are, or who may,
      within the period mentioned, be imported into, or born
      within, any of the said States.

      _Thirdly._ That Congress have no authority to interfere in
      the internal regulations of particular States, relative to
      the instructions of slaves in the principles of morality
      and religion; to their comfortable clothing,
      accommodations, and subsistence; to the regulation of their
      marriages, and the prevention of the violation of the
      rights thereof, or to the separation of children from their
      parents; to a comfortable provision in cases of sickness,
      age, or infirmity; or to the seizure, transportation, or
      sale of free negroes; but have the fullest confidence in
      the wisdom and humanity of the Legislatures of the several
      States, that they will revise their laws from time to time,
      when necessary, and promote the objects mentioned in the
      memorials, and every other measure that may tend to the
      happiness of slaves.

      _Fourthly._ That, nevertheless, Congress have authority, if
      they shall think it necessary, to lay at any time a tax or
      duty, not exceeding ten dollars for each person of any
      description, the importation of whom shall be by any of the
      States admitted as aforesaid.

      _Fifthly._ That Congress have authority to interdict, or
      (so far as it is or may be carried on by citizens of the
      United States, for supplying foreigners) to regulate the
      African trade, and to make provision for the humane
      treatment of slaves, in all cases while on their passage to
      the United States, or to foreign ports, so far as respects
      the citizens of the United States.

      _Sixthly._ That Congress have also authority to prohibit
      foreigners from fitting out vessels in any port of the
      United States, for transporting persons from Africa to any
      foreign port.

      _Seventhly._ That the memorialists be informed, that in all
      cases to which the authority of Congress extends, they will
      exercise it for the humane objects of the memorialists, so
      far as they can be promoted on the principles of justice,
      humanity, and good policy.


_Report of the Committee of the whole House._

The Committee of the whole House, to whom was committed the report of
the committee on memorials of the people called Quakers, and of the
Pennsylvania Society for promoting the Abolition of Slavery, report the
following amendments:

Strike out the first clause, together with the recital thereto, and in
lieu thereof insert, "That the migration or importation of such persons
as any of the States now existing shall think proper to admit, cannot be
prohibited by Congress, prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and
eight."

Strike out the second and third clauses, and in lieu thereof insert,
"That Congress have no authority to interfere in the emancipation of
slaves, or in the treatment of them within any of the States; it
remaining with the several States alone to provide any regulations
therein, which humanity and true policy may require."

      Strike out the fourth and fifth clauses, and in lieu
      thereof insert, "That Congress have authority to restrain
      the citizens of the United States from carrying on the
      African trade, for the purpose of supplying foreigners with
      slaves, and of providing, by proper regulations, for the
      humane treatment, during their passage, of slaves imported
      by the said citizens into the States admitting such
      importation."

      Strike out the seventh clause.[36]


WEDNESDAY, March 24.

JOHN BAPTIST ASHE, another member from North Carolina, appeared and took
his seat.


THURSDAY, April 22.

_Benjamin Franklin._

Mr. MADISON rose and addressed the House as follows:

Mr. SPEAKER: As we have been informed, not only through the channel of
the newspapers, but by a more direct communication, of the decease of an
illustrious character, whose native genius has rendered distinguished
services to the cause of science and of mankind in general; and whose
patriotic exertions have contributed in a high degree to the
independence and prosperity of this country in particular; the occasion
seems to call upon us to pay some tribute to his memory expressive of
the tender veneration his country feels for such distinguished merit. I
therefore move the following resolution:

      "The House being informed of the decease of BENJAMIN
      FRANKLIN, a citizen whose native genius was not more an
      ornament to human nature than his various exertions of it
      have been precious to science, to freedom, and to his
      country, do resolve, as a mark of the veneration due to his
      memory, that the members wear the customary badge of
      mourning for one month."

Which was agreed to.


THURSDAY, June 24.

_Officers of the Navy._

On motion of Mr. HARTLEY, the report of the committee on the memorial of
the Officers of the Navy was taken into consideration by the committee
of the Whole: the report is as follows:

      The committee report, that they do not find any reason
      sufficient to justify the difference that has been made in
      the compensation of the officers of the army and of the
      navy of the United States, and are, therefore, of opinion,
      that a law ought to pass for granting five years' pay,
      equal to the commutation of half-pay, and also a bounty of
      land, to the officers of the navy, upon the same
      principles, and in the same manner, as has been granted to
      the officers of the army of the United States.


Mr. SHERMAN observed, that, by the memorial and the report, it appears
that the memorialists do not pretend to have any claim on the public by
virtue of any existing resolutions of Congress. The subject is very
fully before the committee; it lies with Congress, therefore, to
determine what is proper to be done under such circumstances. The
application stands entirely on the basis of its own merits, and he could
conceive of no difficulty in deciding on it.

Mr. STONE observed, that it is true there is no claim by virtue of any
antecedent contract or promise; nor was commutation, he believed,
promised to the officers of the army. In this view, the officers of the
navy stand exactly upon the same footing with those of the army. He then
entered into a consideration of the merits, services, and sufferings, of
the officers of the navy; and from these and other considerations, urged
the justice of their claims, as he could see no reason for the
difference that had been made.

Mr. HUNTINGTON said, but a little consideration was necessary to
recollect the reason of the difference between the officers of the navy
and army. The officers of the army were first in the public service; the
navy was not formed until some time after hostilities commenced. The
officers of the navy were put on the same footing, in respect to pay, as
the army; the former had some advantages in point of rank, and they were
entitled to a part of their captures. He then gave an account of the
origin of commutation--which was granted on account of the peculiar
exigencies of affairs at that time. During the time this business was in
agitation there were very few navy officers in the public service, and
no application was made by them for half-pay or commutation. They were
ashore, and many of them had retired to civil life. The reason,
therefore, why they are not included in the commutation was, there did
not appear at the time any necessity for the measure, as the United
States did not then want a navy; whereas the public exigencies with
respect to the army were such as rendered the resolution for the
commutation to them absolutely necessary. He, however, thought the claim
of the navy officers founded on justice; and justice, said he, is the
strongest plea that can be urged in support of any demand whatever.

Mr. HARTLEY supported the memorial. He gave the officers great credit
for their bravery, services, and attachment to the cause of their
country. He dilated on the hardships and sufferings they endured; he
adverted to the advantages they derived from captures, which he stated
to be very inconsiderable. Their claims, said he, appear to me to be
founded on the the strictest and most impartial justice; he hoped,
therefore, that the report would be accepted, and a committee appointed
to bring in a bill accordingly.

Mr. BALDWIN, who was one of the select committee which made the report,
stated some of the reasons which influenced the committee; also the
considerations which were supposed to have led to the distinction
between the navy and army, in respect to commutation--one of which was,
that the officers of the navy were in the line of their particular
calling, and which they were enabled to pursue with perhaps greater
advantages than they ever did before. Other circumstances were mentioned
by him, tending to invalidate their claim.

Mr. SHERMAN observed, that if this report is adopted, it will open a
very wide door indeed to applications for half pay or commutation. He
then gave a history of the origin of commutation or half pay, which, he
said, was considered at the time as a measure of necessity, and not of
justice; and has been very much complained of by several of the States.
The above necessity did not exist with respect to the officers of the
navy, as, at the time, there were but two or three ships in service.
From this state of facts, he inferred that no precedent could be drawn
in favor of extending the commutation to the officers of the navy. He
thought that their case was entitled to the consideration of the
Legislature, on the principles of equity; he should, therefore, be for
the committee's making full inquiry into the circumstances of the whole
business, and making such provision as justice should point out; but he
was against the report in its present latitude.

Mr. BURKE replied to the observations of Mr. BALDWIN, respecting the
officers of the navy being in the way of their profession; and, from the
nature of the service, he showed that there was little weight in the
observation. Their circumstances were very much altered for the worse,
and they were now left in a very destitute situation; whereas the
officers of the army are enjoying posts and places of honor and profit.
Their silence on the subject has been mentioned. He observed that their
dispersed situation had been the principal reason of their not coming
forward with their petition before. Mr. B. observed, that the officers
of the navy were not treated like other prisoners when they were taken;
they suffered peculiarly, not as prisoners of war, but were treated like
rebels, whose crimes were of the blackest nature.

Mr. SENEY said he was, and always had been an advocate for the claims of
the officers of the navy: he thought their memorial founded on the
strictest justice. He introduced the representation to Congress of the
"illustrious" Commander-in-chief of the late army, on the subject of
half pay and pensions, which he read. He then entered into a comparative
view of the relative merits of the army and navy; and said it was well
known that many of them made as great sacrifices as the other
description of officers. With respect to prize money, he doubted whether
they had ever been benefited by it. In some instances, where they had
expected the most, they had, through the failure of agents, received
only a certificate, worth about five shillings in the pound; and that
received only for a part of what was due. He replied to the several
objections which had been offered, and concluded by saying it would be
unjust and impolitic not to grant their claims.

Mr. SEDGWICK observed, that no gentleman in the committee had deeper
impressions made upon him, by the grateful recollection of the merits
and services of those brave men to whom America owed its freedom, than
himself. Yet, under the present circumstances of the country, he thought
it a duty he owed the people who had confided their interest to his
management, to examine, on principle, the demands which were made upon
the Government for pecuniary grants. The applicants in the present
instance, did not place their demand on the ground of contract. For the
contract, under which the services had been rendered, had been complied
with according to the specified terms, and performed to the extent of
the powers of the Government, in the same manner as other claims of a
similar nature had been satisfied. It was further, he said, to be
noticed, that during the time those services were performing, no
dissatisfaction had been manifested by the present memorialists. From
these observations, then, it clearly followed, that, in point of
contract, the claims of the officers of the navy were in all respects
similar to those of every other individual in the community, who had
received satisfaction by the same means. It would then become gentlemen
to reflect on the consequences which would result from the establishment
of a precedent, which would go to the invalidation of all the final
settlements which had been made.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, gentlemen had supported the claim of the applicants
from a supposed analogy of their circumstances to those of the gentlemen
of the army. He said there was the difference which arose from the
circumstance already mentioned. The commutation was founded in contract;
the present claim was destitute of that support. There were also other
material circumstances which very widely differed in the two cases. The
officers of the army were called from pursuits by which they were
enabled to support and provide for their families, and to abandon their
prospects of establishment by the business to which they had been
educated. On the other hand, the gentlemen of the navy were promised
handsome wages for continuing in that business to which they had been
educated, and for which they were best, if not only qualified; and this,
too, at a time when, by the destruction of our commerce, many of them
otherwise must have wanted employment. They had likewise additional
encouragement from a participation in the avails of prizes, while the
army derived no emolument from any such source. That the report of the
Select Committee being unsupported either on the ground of contract, or
the principles on which the grant to the officers of the army was made,
the application was merely to the generosity of the Government. He said
it was a principle, from which he professed himself determined never to
depart, not to dissipate that property in idle or visionary projects of
generosity, which is necessary to the performance of justice. That the
arduous scenes in which we had been engaged, had imposed the necessity
of practising a rigid economy. That the conduct which we might, under
present embarrassments, pursue, it would be improper hereafter to
consider as a precedent. That it would, indeed, be a noble and generous
sentiment to compensate all those losses which our friends had sustained
by the war. But he asked, if such would not be a vain attempt? Can we
compensate all the desolation of fire and wanton depredation, provoked
from the enemy by the patriotism of particular districts in this
country? Can we retribute the sufferings which have been caused by the
depreciation of our currency? Or the ruin of thousands and thousands by
our delays of payment, and the consequent depreciation of our
securities? Can we administer to the relief of the vast number of widows
and orphans, who, from those circumstances, have been reduced from
affluence to want and beggary? Remember, too, he said, the sages, who,
in the hour of danger, watched over your security; and who, in their
best days, abstracted themselves from every lucrative pursuit, and
devoted all their time and talents to the service of their country.
These patriots, now in the evening of life, are the most meritorious
objects of the generosity of the Government, yet they would nobly
disdain to ask, or to receive the aid of the Government, however
necessary to them, until efficient provision was made for the
performance of those contracts, which we are under the most solemn
obligation, if in our power, to fulfil. And he concluded by observing,
that when the improving resources of our country should enable the
Government generously to compensate the sufferings of those several
descriptions of persons, then, and not till then, might we extend to the
memorialists the relief which they now sought for.

Mr. JACKSON supported the claim of the officers. He observed, that if
the country had not derived so extensive advantages from the exertions
of the navy, it must be imputed to peculiar circumstances, and not to
any deficiency in the officers and sailors; so far as their abilities
could be exerted, no men distinguished themselves more. Had ours been a
maritime instead of an agricultural country, the importance of a navy
would have struck us more forcibly. Their claims he considered as
founded in the strictest justice, and he had no doubt that if they had
applied to the old Congress they would have granted their request; but
restrained by a consideration of the embarrassments of the United
States, they did not obtrude their petitions upon them; and now this
very circumstance is urged as a reason for not granting their petition.
In his opinion, this did them great honor; since that time, they have
been scattered through all parts of the Union. This and other
circumstances have delayed their application to this time, but have not
lessened the equity of it. He added many other observations, and
concluded by saying that he was fully in favor of the report.


FRIDAY, June 25.

_Foreign Intercourse._

The House proceeded to consider the amendments last proposed on the part
of the Senate to the bill providing the means of intercourse between the
United States and foreign nations. The first amendment was to strike out
thirty thousand, and to insert forty thousand dollars.

It was moved that the House should agree to this amendment; this motion
was opposed.

It was said that the committee had exceeded their commission in
proposing this alteration in the bill, as both Houses had agreed in the
sum of thirty thousand dollars. It was further said that more than one
Minister Plenipotentiary was unnecessary; that the Court of Great
Britain had sent only a Consul to this country; and that, from the
present appearances, no advantages could be expected to arise from
sending a Minister, equivalent to the expense; the necessity contended
for is merely conjectural; and by that rule, the Ministers
Plenipotentiary may be increased, and one sent to Spain and another to
Portugal. If only one Minister is sent to Europe, the first sum will be
sufficient; with respect to the Court of London, a Chargé des Affaires
will answer every purpose.

In support of the motion, it was urged that the President of the United
States is, by the constitution, vested with the power of appointing such
foreign officers as he may think necessary, and it must devolve upon the
Legislature to make provision for defraying the expense. The Committee
of Conference did not rely on their own judgment, they consulted the
Secretary of Foreign Affairs. His opinion was, that in the present
situation of this country with respect to foreign nations, two Ministers
and two Chargés des Affaires were necessary; a Minister at the Court of
Versailles is generally conceded to be requisite. The peculiar situation
of this country with respect to the posts, the Northern and Eastern
frontiers, and the state of our commerce in respect to Great Britain,
can scarcely leave a doubt of the necessity and importance of sending a
Minister to that country. This being the state of affairs, a less sum
than that proposed, it is demonstrably evident, will not be found
adequate.

The question on concurring in this amendment was carried in the
affirmative.

The other amendments were agreed to, with amendments.


TUESDAY, July 6.

_Seat of Government._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill sent
from the Senate for establishing the temporary and permanent seat of
the Government of the United States, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair.

Mr. SHERMAN.--As this bill respects the permanent residence of the
Government, which is an important subject, it ought to be a matter of
inquiry, whether the place proposed is the real centre of population and
territory or not? He thought it too far southward. He moved, therefore,
that the Potomac should be struck out, and a district to include the
town of Baltimore be inserted.

Mr. BURKE seconded this motion.

Mr. LEE desired the gentleman to inform the committee where he meant the
temporary residence should be, provided this motion should be carried.

Mr. SHERMAN said, he had no objection to making Philadelphia the
temporary residence, as soon as it was convenient. He then mentioned
several particulars which would render it inconvenient to go there at
present.

Mr. HUNTINGTON said, that the only reason for removing, which he had
ever heard was, that this place is not so central. If there is any force
in the reasoning, he wished not to go to a place less central. He
adverted to the mode of conveyance to this place, generally adopted by
members to get to the seat of Government. He supposed that the present
centre was somewhere between Philadelphia and Baltimore; but the place
contemplated is very much removed from the centre, more than three
hundred miles west. With respect to centrality, he said that it is not
an idea which predominates in regard to any other country of which he
knew any thing respecting the geography; other and various important
considerations operated in fixing the seat of Government.

Mr. WHITE observed, that if this House was alone to be consulted, on the
principle of accommodation, Baltimore might answer; but when it is
considered that this bill originated in the other House, who have an
equal voice with us in determining the question, and in which this place
has been repeatedly rejected, it is evident, that, if the clause is
struck out the bill will be lost. He then controverted the calculations
of the gentleman last speaking, and stated the difference of travel
between the Southern and Northern distances, which is made to be as four
and one-half to one; but he said, that so far as respected himself, he
should make no difficulty on that account; but the accommodation of the
citizens who may have business at the seat of Government is a
consideration of very great importance. With respect to the uncentral
situation of the seat of Government in other countries, this arose from
the mere whims of the sovereigns of those kingdoms; but modern policy
has obliged the people of European countries, (I refer particularly to
Great Britain,) to fix the seat of Government near the centre of trade.
It is the commercial importance of the city of London which makes it the
seat of Government; and what is the consequence? London and Westminster,
though they united send only six members to Parliament, have a greater
influence on the measures of Government than the whole empire besides.
This is a situation in which we never wish to see this country placed.
He concluded by observing, that if this amendment is agreed to, the bill
will be lost, and we shall be without either a temporary or permanent
residence.

Mr. LEE, after a few introductory observations, entered into a
consideration of the relative interests of the Southern, Middle, and
Northern States. He interspersed a variety of reflections, tending to
conciliate and blend those different interests--and to disseminate the
sentiments of union and concord. He alluded particularly to the great
object of funding the debts of the United States; the seat of Government
will concentrate the public paper. Hence he inferred the necessity of a
situation from whence all parts of the Union may be equally benefited.
From these considerations, he deduced the necessity of placing the
Government in a central situation. He observed, that while the present
position continued to be the seat of Government, the agriculture of the
States to the eastward is invigorated and encouraged, while that to the
southward is languishing and expiring. He then showed the fatal tendency
of this preponderating encouragement to those parts of the country,
already considered as the strongest parts of the Union--and from the
natural operation of these principles he inferred that the interest of
the Southern States must be eventually swallowed up. The decision of the
Senate, said he, affords a most favorable opportunity to manifest that
magnanimity of soul, which shall embrace, upon an extensive, liberal
system, the best interest of the great whole. This cannot be done while
the present unequal situation of the seat of Government of the United
States continues. Nations have their passions as well as individuals. He
drew an alarming picture of the consequences to be apprehended from
disunion, ambition and rivalship. He then gave a pleasing sketch of the
happy effects to be derived from a national, generous, and equal
attention to the Southern and Northern interests. Will gentlemen, said
he, blast this prospect by rejecting the bill? I trust they will not.

He then entered into the merits of the question. The States of Delaware,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, which contribute more than
one-half to the revenue, and which have the only rival claim to the
permanent seat of Government, are satisfied with the arrangement in the
bill. That Philadelphia is the nearest centre of the present wealth and
population of the United States, the gentlemen from New York themselves
will confess; the Potomac will become the nearest centre for a permanent
residence probably by the period proposed--to oppose this, therefore,
will be acting from merely local motives.

The gentleman moves to insert Baltimore. Mr. L. insisted that Baltimore
is as far South as the place proposed, besides being exposed by its
frontier position on the sea; we are not confined, said he, to a
particular spot on the Potomac; we may fix on a place as far North as
the gentleman from Connecticut wishes. I consider the motion, therefore,
calculated to destroy the bill, and ought to be opposed by every one who
is in favor of a Southern situation.

This State has no pretensions to the permanent residence. It is true the
citizens of this place have put themselves to a great expense to
accommodate the Government, and are entitled to much praise for their
exertions; but he wished to take up the subject on national ground, and
to have it decided on principles which apply to the best interests of
the whole. He then referred to a map of the Potomac, and the adjacent
country, which lay on the table, and which had been sent from the
Executive of the State of Virginia. He referred also to other papers and
documents.

Mr. BURKE said, he wished that the whole business of the temporary and
permanent residence might now be settled. He exculpated the members who
are in favor of Baltimore from all design to defeat the present bill. He
referred to some observations which had been made on the conduct of the
members of the States south of Virginia, and said, that they had
consulted the interest of the whole. One reason why he was in favor of
the motion was, because he preferred Baltimore to Conococheague. He
thought a populous city better than building a palace in the woods.
Another reason was, that there was no political necessity existing for
removing the Government from New York to Philadelphia. He said that the
measure would excite the most turbulent passions in the minds of the
citizens. It is unjust to the people of this city, to remove from this
place till the expense they have incurred is repaid them. It is a breach
of honesty and justice. It is injustice to the State--to the whole
nation. He entered into a consideration of their sacrifices and
services. He thought it a very extraordinary measure indeed. It is
calculated, said he, to arrest the funding system, and to throw every
thing into confusion. If the bill is passed in its present form,
Congress will never leave Philadelphia; for the Commissioners to be
appointed will incur no penalty for a neglect of doing their duty. This
is a most essential defect in the bill, and there are other defects in
it. He spoke in handsome terms of the State of Pennsylvania. He said he
had as high an opinion of that State, as any man whatever, but he was
afraid of their influence; and that State was the last in which he would
ever consent the permanent seat of Government should be. He then
adverted to the influence of the members from that State, who by their
political management, had raised a storm in the United States. [Here Mr.
BURKE was called to order.] After a short interruption, he proceeded,
and said a Quaker State was a bad neighborhood for the South
Carolinians. Here he adverted to the Quaker business last winter. He
objected to Philadelphia, also, on account of there being no gallery in
the House proposed for the accommodation of Congress--an open gallery he
considered as a very important check to the Legislature.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The gentleman from Virginia has observed, that the object
of the amendment is to defeat the bill. He has also mentioned the States
which are most particularly interested in the question. Mr. L. said, the
State of New York might have been considered. He wished the motion might
succeed, because he thought that it would conduce to the peace of the
Union. He objected to the place proposed for the permanent residence; by
the bill it is conceded that the place is not, at present, a suitable
position. By what magic can it be made to appear it will be more proper
at the end of ten years? What reason can be given why those parts of the
Union should not populate which are at a distance from the Potomac, in
proportion to those parts in the vicinity of that place? I presume none
can be assigned. Why, then, is a period of ten years to expire, previous
to going there? The reason is plain. The people would not now consent to
have the Government dragged to so remote a part of the United States. He
then adverted to the funding business, and other important matters which
remain to be decided on, and very strongly intimated that these
questions were to be determined agreeable to the fate of this bill. He
showed, from a variety of particulars, that Philadelphia would become
the permanent residence. He then adverted particularly to the several
parts of the bill. The first was respecting the place where it is
proposed to erect the public buildings. He said, they could not be
erected within the time mentioned, and showed the various difficulties
which would attend the whole business. He then stated the advantages of
Baltimore, and said that that place would have obtained in the Senate,
if the Maryland Senators would have voted for it. He concluded by
observing, that, as no necessity exists for removing the temporary
residence, he hoped that Congress would sit down contented where they
are.

Mr. BLOODWORTH observed, that as the funding bill had been alluded to,
he could wish that the objection from that quarter might be taken out of
the way. He moved that the committee should rise, in order to take up
the ways and means.

Mr. STONE.--All we seem to differ about is whether Baltimore or the
Potomac shall be the seat of the Government; and if this was all, the
Delegates of that State might fold their arms and sit down contented;
but the State of Maryland has been placed in the situation of Tantalus.
He then stated how the gentlemen had formerly voted, who now appear in
favor of Baltimore. Had the bill come down from the Senate with
Baltimore inserted, instead of Potomac, he should have had no difficulty
in determining how to act; but he conceived, that if the amendment now
proposed should take place, nothing would be done, and the business will
be left in a very inauspicious state. From this and other
considerations, he was resolved not to be drawn off from his present
determination by any motion, amendment, or modification of the bill
whatever. With respect to himself, he had no election between the town
of Baltimore and the Potomac; yet, as a Marylander, he would, if he saw
a prospect of success, vote for the town of Baltimore; but as it
respects the United States, he should vote for the Potomac; and on this
idea he was willing to make some sacrifices. He considered the subject
as one of the most painful and disagreeable that could be agitated, and
he wished to have the business finally and unalterably fixed.

Mr. SENEY also considered this as an unhappy question to come before the
House at this time. The State of Maryland is as much divided on the
subject as the United States appeared to be; a great rivalship subsists
between the Potomac and Susquehanna rivers, and he doubted not but that
when the question was ultimately decided, it would be either on the one
or the other of those rivers. He agreed with Mr. LEE, that Pennsylvania,
Maryland and Virginia, were the only States who could make any
reasonable pretensions for the seat of Government; but a majority of
voices from these States had been against the Potomac. Pennsylvania and
Maryland, he observed, had given the preference to the Susquehanna. Mr.
S. then noticed some transactions of the Legislature of Maryland, which
he said clearly evinced their determination to support the pretensions
of the Susquehanna. Maryland certainly had an equal right with
Pennsylvania and Virginia to have her interests consulted. The interests
of Maryland, it appeared, were now to be sacrificed to those two
adjoining States. And however flattering it may seem to Maryland to fix
the seat of Government on her side of the Potomac, the real advantages
were in a great measure nugatory, as it would be but a very small
portion of that State that could reap any benefit therefrom. The real
advantages would undoubtedly result to Pennsylvania and Virginia. It
appeared somewhat extraordinary to him, that gentlemen should be willing
to confine the residence to a particular spot, previous to their
removing to a permanent residence. Why is it necessary to fix upon
Philadelphia for ten years? Surely this is putting the Government in a
very ineligible situation, for it is by no means improbable that many
serious and important occurrences might render a removal highly
expedient, perhaps unavoidable. Besides, after the Government shall have
remained ten years in Philadelphia, the probability of quitting it for
the Potomac appeared to be very slight indeed. For though it was
understood by the bill that the offices were to be removed to the
Potomac, yet if a majority in either House were opposed to going there,
Congress would remain at Philadelphia, and they would be obliged to
repeal the bill from necessity.

Mr. SCOTT said, he should not notice many things which had been offered
on the subject. He would only observe, that from the town of Baltimore
there is no water conveyance to the interior country; but from the
proposed site on the Potomac, there are two hundred miles navigation
directly into the heart of the country. Nor is Baltimore more northerly
than the position contemplated. A connection with the Western country is
of the utmost consequence to the peace and union of the United States,
let the gentlemen from the sea-coast say what they will.

Mr. MADISON.--In order to decide this question rightly, we ought to
compare the advantages and disadvantages of the two places as they
relate to the good of the United States. Now, I will defy any gentleman,
however sanguine he may be with respect to Baltimore, to point out any
substantial advantage that is not common to the Potomac; and I defy them
to disprove that there are not several important advantages belonging to
the Potomac, which do not appertain to Baltimore. The committee have had
ample information with respect to the Northern and Southern positions of
the two places. In point of salubrity of air, without disparaging the
pretensions of Baltimore, the Potomac is at least equally favored in
that respect. In regard to centrality of situation, the Potomac has
undoubtedly the advantage. In respect to security from invasion, I aver
the Potomac has the advantage also. With relation to the Western
country, there is not a shadow of comparison. If we should go as far
South as Baltimore, why not an equal distance south-west to the Potomac?
Those who are acquainted with the country on the Potomac, and that in
the neighborhood of Baltimore, do not hesitate to give the preference to
the Potomac. It is true, that Baltimore has respectable resources; her
rapid growth is a clear proof of it; but look at the resources of the
Potomac; the great range of rich country that borders on it, and see if
these are not advantages that must, in a short time, produce a
commercial town. Sir, a period might be named, not exceeding ten years,
within which the town of Baltimore obtained the greater part of its
increase and consequence; a period of ten years will produce the same
effects on the Potomac, because the same causes exist; and when,
superadded to this, the residence of Government shall be there, there
can be no doubt but that there will be every accommodation that can be
desired.

It is said, that before the ten years expire, a repeal of the act may
take place, and thus Congress be kept at Philadelphia. But what more can
we do than pass a law for the purpose? It is not in our power to guard
against a repeal. Our acts are not like those of the Medes and Persians,
unalterable. A repeal is a thing against which no provision can be made.
If that is an objection, it holds good against any law that can be
passed. If those States that may have a superiority in Congress at a
future day will pay no respect to the acts of their predecessors, or to
the public good, there is no power to compel them.

But I flatter myself that some respect will be paid to the public
interest, and to the plighted faith of the Government. As to centrality,
the best evidence we have at this time in favor of the Potomac is the
different travelling of the members; and this, sir, proves incontestably
that the proposed place on the Potomac is near the centre. If any
arguments could be brought against it, it is its being too far to the
northward. For the mileage south of the Potomac is twelve thousand seven
hundred and eighty-two miles, to the north of it twelve thousand four
hundred and twenty-two miles. If to this Rhode Island be added, it will
not be more than equal. If the bill once passes, I am not under any
apprehensions of a repeal; but if danger of repeal does exist, it is of
that kind against which we cannot guard. Sir, we should calculate on
accepting the bill as it now stands; we ought not to risk it by making
any amendment. We have it now in our power to procure a Southern
position. The opportunity may not again speedily present itself. We know
the various and jealous interests that exist on this subject. We should
hazard nothing. If the Potomac is struck out, are you sure of getting
Baltimore? May no other place be proposed? Instead of Baltimore, is it
not probable we may have Susquehanna inserted, perhaps the Delaware?
Make any amendment, sir, and the bill will go back to the Senate. Are we
sure that it will come back into our possession again? By amending, we
give up a certainty for an uncertainty. In my opinion, we shall act
wisely, if we accept the bill as it now stands, and I beg leave to press
it on gentlemen not to consent to any alteration, lest it be wholly
defeated and the prospect of obtaining a Southern position vanish for
ever.

Mr. GERRY said, he rose with greater reluctance on this than he ever did
on any former occasion; and it is because it appears pretty evident the
advocates of the bill are sure of a majority, and are determined not to
change their minds let what arguments will be offered on the subject.
The business of establishing the permanent residence is contrary to the
sentiments of a majority of the members of this House, and of the
Senate, as they have both negatived a bill for this purpose the present
session. It is to be regretted that it has ever been brought forward,
for it is very evident that it has had a very pernicious influence on
the great business of funding the public debt. He then mentioned the
former removals of Congress, which had never been complained of, as the
public business was never neglected. He said, that if the present bill
is carried into execution, a very great uneasiness will ensue; for the
measures of Congress, and not their residence, are the objects of
concern to the people. Those States who think that they shall be
injured, it cannot be expected will then acquiesce. He then gave an
account of the process of this measure the last session. The travelling
has been mentioned. This, he said, could not be considered as an
argument in favor of the bill, for the expense is not paid by particular
States, it comes out of the common treasury. He asserted that the
accessibility to New York is better than to the Potomac. He contended
that the risk by land is greater than by water. He stated the advantages
that the Southern members derived from coming to the northward, while,
on the other hand, is there, asked he, any thing to balance the risk and
difficulties which the Northern members must encounter in such a
Southern situation? He said it was highly unreasonable to fix the seat
of Government in such a position as to have nine States out of thirteen
to the northward of the place. He adverted to the sacrifices which the
Northern States are ready to make in being willing to go so far south as
Baltimore. He contended that the explicit consent of the Eastern States
ought to be obtained, before they are dragged still further south. He
ridiculed the idea of fixing the Government at Conococheague. He did not
think there was any serious intention of ever going to this Indian
place. He considered the whole business as a mere manoeuvre. Baltimore
holds out the only prospect of a permanent seat of Government. He
recapitulated the account which before had been given. From this he
adverted to the general expectation of the public with respect to the
Government's tarrying here till the permanent seat was established. He
particularized the expenses that had been incurred by the citizens, and
for which they merited great honor. He said, it had been promised to New
York that this place should be the temporary residence of Congress, and
on this engagement they came into an unconditional adoption of the
constitution. Should this bill pass, what can it be denominated but a
delusion, a deception, sanctioned by Congress itself? He remarked on the
several observations offered by Messrs. MADISON, LEE, STONE, and SCOTT.

Mr. VINING.--When I find arguments made use of to inflame the minds of
gentlemen against the members of this House, I think it my duty to
notice such observations. Attempts are made to hold up, in an odious
point of light, the members of Pennsylvania. Sir, it is a fact, which
your Journals will justify, that the members from Pennsylvania voted the
last session against Philadelphia. I trust that none of those
observations will have the least influence on the mind of one single
individual. We are sent here to do the public business, and I trust that
our constituents have not sent men that are to be deterred from doing
their duty by such insidious insinuations, such ill-founded suggestions
of deceiving and deluding the citizens of this place. Mr. V. added some
more strictures on Mr. GERRY's observations, and then entered largely
into the merits of the question. He supported the bill on general
principles, and noticed the several objections that had been made by
different members. He imputed the embarrassments of the public business
to the assumption, and not to the subject of residence.

Mr. CLYMER made a few remarks on the observations of Mr. BURKE, which
were not distinctly heard.

The committee rose, and reported progress


WEDNESDAY, July 7.

_Seat of Government._

The House again resolved itself into a committee on the bill for
establishing the temporary and permanent seat of Government, Mr.
BOUDINOT in the chair.

Mr. BURKE made some remarks on the observations of Mr. VINING, in which
he exculpated himself from all design to excite mobs and tumults among
the citizens of New York, as had been insinuated by that gentleman. He
declared that he believed the citizens incapable of behaving so much out
of character. For himself, he disclaimed any such idea. He further
observed, that the delegates from Pennsylvania were fully competent to
advocate the interests of their particular State; they had given
abundant evidence of their abilities; they therefore did not need the
assistance of the gentleman from Delaware.

Mr. HARTLEY observed, that it was the fault of the New York Senators
last year that they did not vote for a four years' residence in their
own city, and the permanent one at Germantown, which they could then
have carried. He defended himself and his colleagues from any charge of
want of generosity, and also defended the character of the Quakers. The
gentleman (Mr. BURKE) is not acquainted with the people called Quakers
or their history, or he would entertain different sentiments concerning
them. Under the famous William Penn, they settled the former Province of
Pennsylvania, between the years 1680 and 1690, near the close of the
last century; and such was their justice, wisdom, moderation and good
policy, that they gained reputation abroad. Men emigrated from the
European world to this land of freedom. They preserved peace at home;
for it was not until the year 1753, in a war, fomented on the borders of
another Province, that an inhabitant of Pennsylvania was killed by the
hands of an Indian. The Quakers had always been remarkable for their
moral laws, for the plainness of their manners, and their benevolence.
Nay, should the gentleman go to Philadelphia, he will find that these
people will treat him as well as any other society. They merit not the
abuse which has been so frequently thrown upon them.

Mr. BLOODWORTH thought that if the New York Senators had acted wrong,
yet the people should not be blamed for it. The proposition of Mr.
BURKE was so reasonable and just, that he said he could not avoid
approving of it.

Mr. LAWRENCE defended the New York Senators, and explained the reasons
of their former conduct, which, when it was known, he believed, would
rather merit the approbation of the people. He then proceeded to remark
upon the conduct of New York during the war and since. Her revenue had
been thrown into the Treasury of the United States, and every succor
that could possibly be expected was received from her. Upon the whole,
he wished the dispute of residence could be left to the decision of the
three Northern and three Southern States; and he appealed to the House,
as politicians and men, for the justice of the case.

Mr. WADSWORTH rose next. He was proceeding when he was called to order.
After some altercation on the question of order,

Mr. PAGE spoke to the merits of the question, in which he introduced
several conciliatory observations, and then added, as to the place for
the permanent residence of Congress, any unprejudiced disinterested man
in the world, looking over the map of the United States, would put his
finger on the district pointed out in the bill, and say, "This is your
place, sir." As to going to Philadelphia, it is not my wish to go and
stay there as proposed in the bill; but I say, with my colleague, (Mr.
MADISON,) that I consent to go there to get into a more central
position, and to be fairly on our way to the permanent residence on the
Potomac. As to our present situation, the citizens of New York
themselves acknowledge, nay, even the member himself who has called me
to order, acknowledges that it has no pretensions to be the permanent
residence; and it must be confessed that in proportion as it is improper
for the permanent residence, it must be improper for the temporary
residence. The continuance of Congress here has been acquiesced in by
the Southern States, merely on the supposition that a removal to the
permanent residence would take place sooner if Congress sat here than at
some other place more central. The wise and virtuous citizens of New
York know this, and cannot resist the removal.

Sir, I was not apprehensive that the observations made by gentlemen
yesterday could excite an improper resentment in their minds. There is
not a city in the world in which I would sooner trust myself and
Congress than in New York; for it is superior to any place I know for
the orderly and decent behavior of its inhabitants; but, sir, when the
member behind me, (Mr. BURKE,) who alluded to me when he was last up,
said that they were injured and robbed by Congress, I told him, as a
friend, that had I been in the chair, I should have called him to order.

I confess I was shocked to hear that gentleman's declarations repeated
by a member on the other side of the House, who is remarkable for his
coolness and his peculiar attention to every sentiment offered in debate
(Mr. GERRY.) I took the liberty, when the House adjourned, to tell that
gentleman, perhaps too freely, what I thought respecting those
declarations; if I gave him, or the member behind me any offence, I ask
their pardon; but I still think I should have done my duty had I taken
notice of the impropriety of their declarations in my place in the
House, as a friend to order and freedom of debate.

Mr. LIVERMORE said, that the motion for striking out the Potomac and
inserting Baltimore is so reasonable in itself, that I cannot conceive
there should be one person opposed to it. He observed, that Baltimore is
as far south as the Potomac; the members will then have as far to go to
one as the other. There is a river, it is said, which runs two hundred
miles into the country as far as the Allegany mountains; what advantage
can this be to Congress? I can conceive none, except that it may be to
send the acts of Congress by water to the foot of the Allegany
mountains. He thought that the centre of population was the only true
centre. It is not pretended that the Potomac is at present this centre;
but it is said that it will in time become the centre of population.
What reason is there for any such supposition? The place in which this
favorite spot is has been as long settled as any other part of the
Continent, but the population has not kept pace with many other parts of
the United States; it is therefore entirely chimerical and problematical
whether it ever will become the centre of population. He then enlarged
on the superior advantages of a populous city for the seat of
Government, and concluded by repeating that the amendment is so
reasonable in itself that he hoped every member of the committee would
vote for it.

Mr. GERRY.--In discussing this subject yesterday, I made use of such
arguments as appeared to me pertinent to the occasion. But, sir, those
arguments have had the most extraordinary construction put on them by
the gentleman from Delaware; they have been represented as tending to
excite mobs, and to raise insurrections in this city. Sir, I insist that
the observations I made had a direct contrary tendency. I said that the
bill contained those malignant principles which had a direct tendency to
agitate and inflame the minds of the citizens of America. Those
principles I was endeavoring to expose, and to show what must be their
obvious effects. Is this exciting mobs? Directly the reverse, in my
opinion. I never had any such idea; and as to the citizens of New York,
I have too just a sense of their wisdom and good judgment to harbor such
a sentiment. He then adverted to the constitution, to show that there
could be no danger of an insurrection or rebellion against the
Government. Congress is vested with a sufficient power to protect
themselves from every insult whatever; they have a right to call forth
the whole militia of the Union for their protection. [Here Mr. G. was
called to order, and some altercation ensuing, Mr. G. said he would say
nothing farther on this particular topic.] He then proceeded to state
his arguments against the Potomac, in the course of which he noticed
some observations which had fallen from Messrs. VINING and CLYMER. One
of the gentlemen had said that "Pennsylvania had a right to the seat of
the General Government." This he denied; he said no State in the Union
could pretend to such a right; Congress alone has a right to determine
where the seat of Government shall be. He entered into a lengthy
discussion on the merits of the Potomac, and among other observations
asserted that taking so southern a situation would amount to a
disqualification of many of the Northern members, who would forego their
election rather than attend the National Legislature on that river.

Mr. VINING read a report of a committee of the late Congress, respecting
two seats of Government, in which report Georgetown was mentioned. Mr.
GERRY, being one of this committee, rose to explain.

Mr. SEDGWICK, in a speech of considerable length, stated his objections
to so southern a situation as either Baltimore or the Potomac, and said
that he should have the unhappiness, he feared, of dividing on the
question from his colleagues.

Mr. SHERMAN offered some calculations respecting distances, and made
Baltimore to be the nearest to the centre of any other place that had
been mentioned.

Mr. WHITE said, he had no idea of altering the sentiments of a single
member of the committee; he did not expect the gentleman from New
Hampshire would agree with him. The gentleman from Massachusetts had
said something about the Government going into the wilderness; he said
it was true that there was not at present every accommodation which
gentlemen might wish; but there is every probability that there will be.
He said that such improvements were making in the navigation of the
Potomac as will render it a place affording every accommodation whether
Congress go there or not. He instanced several places on the Potomac
which were at this day sufficiently populous to accommodate Congress. He
then adverted to situations, and observed that a line from the Atlantic,
east and west, to the extreme point mentioned in the bill, will
intersect the State of New Jersey, include the whole of Delaware and
Maryland, and will throw thirty-one members of the representation in the
southern division of the United States. He then observed, that after the
present ferment is subsided, this position will be considered as a
permanent bond of union; and the Eastern States will find their most
essential interests promoted by the measure. He adverted to the trade of
Massachusetts, which he said was greater to Virginia than to the whole
Union besides; the Southern States will be cordial in promoting their
shipping and advancing their interests, when they observe that the
principles of justice influence them on this great national question.

He then remarked on the observation of Mr. SHERMAN respecting the
repealing of the law, and reprobated the principles on which such
observations are founded; he remarked on the attraction of populous
cities, and trusted that other ideas would prevail in this country than
what influenced in fixing the seats of Government in Europe.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) said, he was in favor of the motion, as
the only one which held out a probability of ever fixing on a southern
residence. He enlarged on the difficulty and improbability of ever
removing from Philadelphia. He said that it was evident, from the
present representation, and what is most likely it will be ten years
hence, that Congress could not be removed from that place. He then
stated the number of the members to the southward and northward of
Philadelphia, and observed that the Congress that would exist at the
expiration of ten years may think entirely different from the present,
and will not think themselves bound by the law; but if they should, what
can the measure be denominated but legislating for the next century? A
system proposed the last session, which combined a much greater interest
than the present, failed; and what reason have we to suppose that this
bill will ever be carried into execution? He said no gentleman pretends
that the place proposed is now ready for the reception of the
Government; and even if the buildings were now erected, is there any
gentleman who would give his vote for going there? He would agree to a
place in the neighborhood of Baltimore, and this he supposed was the
furthest southern position the gentlemen from the eastward will ever
consent to. From all the views he could take of the measure, he was
fully convinced that the Potomac was tacked to the bill merely to carry
Philadelphia; he wished gentlemen seriously to consider the consequences
of passing a law which would so intimately and inauspiciously affect the
interests of so many people.

Mr. MADISON objected to the motion for inserting Baltimore, as it would
be risking the bill with a place which has already been repeatedly
rejected by the Senate; he religiously believed, he said, that if
Baltimore was inserted the bill would never pass the Senate; and the
fate of the bill which the gentleman mentions ought to be a serious
warning to us never to risk this with an amendment; the instance,
therefore, produced by the gentleman, is very much against his own
argument.

The question being put for striking out the word "Potomac," and
inserting "Baltimore," it was negatived--37 to 23.


THURSDAY, July 8.

_General Post Office._

The House proceeded to consider the amendments proposed by the Senate to
the bill to establish the Post Office and post roads within the United
States.

The first amendment was to strike out the first and second sections,
which specified and established the several roads, and to insert a
clause empowering the Postmaster General, under the direction of the
President of the United States, to establish them.

A concurrence in this amendment was opposed by Messrs. BLOODWORTH,
WHITE, STEELE, LIVERMORE, HARTLEY, and GERRY.

It was said, that it was delegating the power of legislation to the
Supreme Executive in one of the most important points that could be
mentioned. The revenue also will centre in the hands of the Executive;
and in process of time this revenue may be converted into an engine
destructive to the liberties of the United States; for as it is a
perpetual law, and as the time may, and probably will come, when the
Executive may be corrupt, as the revenue increases, the officers of the
department will be increased, and we do not know to what extent the
consequences may be carried. It is unconstitutional, as that expressly
reserves the power of establishing Post Offices and post roads to the
Legislature. It was further observed, it would be throwing a burden upon
the President which he cannot execute with any convenience to himself,
and, from his situation, with satisfaction to the people. The
representatives of the people, who come from all parts of the United
States, must be supposed to have a more competent knowledge of the
proper places for establishing post roads than the Postmaster General.

A concurrence was advocated by Mr. PARTRIDGE, and Mr. SEDGWICK.

It was said, that upon an accurate calculation it was found that the
roads proposed by the bill as it passed the House, are so numerous, that
so far from affording a revenue, they will prove a great burden to the
United States. The circumstances of the country are continually
changing; the seats of Government in the several States are removed from
their ancient situations to one hundred miles' distance; to accommodate
the people in such cases, old routes must be discontinued and new roads
opened, which will be a perpetual source of legislation and unnecessary
expense. This business was left to the Postmaster General by the late
Congress, and very few complaints were heard; the Postmaster General, by
his office, must be the most competent judge, as the business will be a
principal object of his attention, and actual surveys of the roads will
be made by his assistants in all parts of the United States; but if the
responsibility of this officer is divided into sixty-five parts, every
one of which has its own particular convenience in view, it must appear
evident that all responsibility is entirely dissipated. As to the
unconstitutionality, it was said that the bill proposes no more in the
present instance than is provided for in the other Executive
Departments; the principles of conducting the business are established
by the House; the mode of carrying those principles into execution is
left with the Executive, and this of necessity is done in almost every
case whatever. The House adjourned without coming to a vote.


FRIDAY, July 9.

_Seat of Government._

The House proceeded to consider the bill sent from the Senate for the
establishing the temporary and permanent seat of Government of the
United States.

Mr. BOUDINOT, after expressing his disapprobation of the bill generally,
moved that the Potomac should be struck out and the Delaware inserted,
and called for the yeas and nays; after some debate, this motion was
negatived, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Floyd, Foster,
      Gerry, Goodhue, Grout, Huntington, Hathorn, Leonard,
      Lawrence, Livermore, Partridge, Rensselaer, Trumbull,
      Schureman, Sherman, Sylvester, Sturges, Sedgwick,
      Wadsworth--22.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown, Burke,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Clymer, Coles, Contee, Fitzsimons,
      Gilman, Heister, Hartley, Jackson, Gale, Griffin, P.
      Muhlenberg, Madison, Mathews, Moore, Page, Parker, Lee,
      Steele, Scott, Sinnickson, Stone, Sevier, Seney, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Sumter, Thatcher,
      Tucker, Vining, White, Williamson, Wynkoop--39.

Mr. AMES moved to strike out Potomac and insert Germantown, as the
permanent residence. Yeas 22, nays 39.

Variation--Mr. GILMAN, yea; Mr. TRUMBULL, nay.

Mr. SMITH (of Maryland) moved to strike out Potomac and insert between
the Potomac and Susquehanna. Yeas 25, nays 36.

Variation--Messrs. SMITH, (of Maryland,) SMITH, (of South Carolina,)
TRUMBULL, and THATCHER, yea; Mr. SHERMAN, nay.

Mr. LAWRENCE moved to strike out Potomac and insert Baltimore.

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Floyd, Foster,
      Gerry, Goodhue, Grout, Hathorn, Huntington, Lawrence,
      Leonard, Livermore, Rensselaer, Partridge, Schureman,
      Sedgwick, Seney, Sherman, Smith, (of Maryland,) Smith, (of
      South Carolina,) Sylvester, Sturges, Thatcher, Trumbull,
      Wadsworth--26.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Clymer, Coles, Contee, Fitzsimons,
      Gilman, Gale, Griffin, Hartley, Heister, Jackson, Lee,
      Madison, Mathews, Moore, Muhlenberg, Page, Parker, Scott,
      Sevier, Sumter, Sinnickson, Steele, Stone, Tucker, Vining,
      White, Williamson, Wynkoop--34.

A motion was made to adjourn; which was also negatived.

The bill was then read the third time; and on the question, Shall the
bill pass? the yeas and nays were as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown,
      Cadwalader, Carroll, Clymer, Coles, Contee, Fitzsimons,
      Gale, Griffin, Hartley, Heister, Jackson, Lee, Madison,
      Mathews, Moore, Muhlenberg, Page, Parker, Scott, Sevier,
      Sinnickson, Steele, Stone, Sumter, Vining, White,
      Williamson, Wynkoop--32.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Burke, Floyd,
      Foster, Gerry, Goodhue, Gilman, Grout, Hathorn, Huntington,
      Lawrence, Leonard, Livermore, Partridge, Rensselaer,
      Schureman, Sedgwick, Seney, Sherman, Sylvester, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Sturges, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Tucker, Wadsworth--29.[37]



THURSDAY, August 12.

Agreeably to the concurrent vote of the two Houses, an adjournment took
place this day--to meet in the city of Philadelphia on the first Monday
in December next.

Previous to the adjournment, a unanimous vote passed both Houses,
returning thanks to the Corporation of this City for the elegant and
convenient accommodations furnished the Congress of the United States.

Adjourned, _sine die_.




FIRST CONGRESS.--THIRD SESSION.

HELD AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, DECEMBER 6, 1790

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, December 6, 1790.

The Senate assembled: present,

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the
Senate.

From New Hampshire, JOHN LANGDON and PAINE WINGATE.

From Massachusetts, TRISTRAM DALTON.

From Connecticut, OLIVER ELLSWORTH.

From New York, RUFUS KING.

From Pennsylvania, WILLIAM MACLAY and ROBERT MORRIS.

From Delaware, RICHARD BASSETT.

From North Carolina, SAMUEL JOHNSTON and BENJAMIN HAWKINS.

From South Carolina, PIERCE BUTLER and RALPH IZARD.

From Georgia, WILLIAM FEW.

PHILEMON DICKINSON, from the State of New Jersey, produced his
credentials and took his seat in the Senate, in the place of Governor
PATERSON.

JAMES MONROE, appointed by the Legislature of the State of Virginia, in
the place of JOHN WALKER, who was appointed by the Executive of the said
State in the room of WILLIAM GRAYSON, deceased, produced his
credentials, and took his seat in the Senate.

The VICE PRESIDENT administered the oath required by law to Mr.
DICKINSON and Mr. MONROE, respectively.

A letter was read from WILLIAM PATERSON, Governor of the State of New
Jersey, communicating the resignation of his appointment to be a Senator
of the United States.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary inform the House of Representatives that a
quorum of the Senate is assembled, and ready to proceed to business.


TUESDAY, December 7.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of that body is assembled and ready to proceed to business.

Messrs. LANGDON and MORRIS were appointed a committee, on the part of
the Senate, to inform the President of the United States that a quorum
of the two Houses is assembled, and will be ready, in the Senate
Chamber, at such time as he may appoint, to receive any communication
which he may be pleased to make.

Mr. LANGDON, in the course of the day, reported that the President would
meet the two Houses, as proposed, to-morrow, at 12 o'clock.


WEDNESDAY, December 8.

JONATHAN ELMER, from New Jersey; CALEB STRONG, from Massachusetts; and
GEORGE READ, from the State of Delaware; attended.

A letter from the Commissioners of the city and county of Philadelphia
was received, offering to Congress the county court-house for their
accommodation during their residence in Philadelphia.

The members of the House of Representatives having taken their seats,
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES entered the Senate Chamber, and
addressed both Houses as follows:

      _Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of
      Representatives:_

      In meeting you again, I feel much satisfaction in being
      able to repeat my congratulations on the favorable
      prospects which continue to distinguish our public affairs.
      The abundant fruits of another year have blessed our
      country with plenty, and with the means of a flourishing
      commerce. The progress of public credit is witnessed by a
      considerable rise of American stock abroad as well as at
      home; and the revenues allotted for this and other national
      purposes have been productive beyond the calculations by
      which they were regulated. This latter circumstance is the
      more pleasing, as it is not only a proof of the fertility
      of our resources, but as it assures us of a further
      increase of the national respectability and credit; and,
      let me add, as it bears an honorable testimony to the
      patriotism and integrity of the mercantile and marine part
      of our citizens. The punctuality of the former in
      discharging their engagements has been exemplary.

      In conforming to the powers vested in me by acts of the
      last session, a loan of three millions of florins, towards
      which some provisional measures had previously taken place,
      has been completed in Holland. As well the celerity with
      which it has been filled, as the nature of the terms,
      (considering the more than ordinary demand for borrowing,
      created by the situation of Europe,) give a reasonable hope
      that the further execution of those powers may proceed
      with advantage and success. The Secretary of the Treasury
      has my directions to communicate such further particulars
      as may be requisite for more precise information.

      Since your last sessions I have received communications by
      which it appears that the district of Kentucky, at present
      a part of Virginia, has concurred in certain propositions
      contained in a law of that State; in consequence of which
      the district is to become a distinct member of the Union,
      in case the requisite sanction of Congress be added. For
      this sanction application is now made. I shall cause the
      papers on this very important transaction to be laid before
      you. The liberality and harmony with which it has been
      conducted will be found to do great honor to both the
      parties; and, the sentiments of warm attachment to the
      Union and its present Government, expressed by our
      fellow-citizens of Kentucky, cannot fail to add an
      affectionate concern for their particular welfare to the
      great national impressions under which you will decide on
      the case submitted to you.

      It has been heretofore known to Congress, that frequent
      incursions have been made on our frontier settlements by
      certain banditti of Indians from the north-west side of the
      Ohio. These, with some of the tribes dwelling on and near
      the Wabash, have of late been particularly active in their
      depredations; and, being emboldened by the impunity of
      their crimes, and aided by such parts of the neighboring
      tribes as could be seduced to join in their hostilities, or
      afford them a retreat for their prisoners and plunder, they
      have, instead of listening to the humane invitations and
      overtures made on the part of the United States, renewed
      their violences with fresh alacrity, and greater effect.
      The lives of a number of valuable citizens have thus been
      sacrificed, and some of them under circumstances peculiarly
      shocking, whilst others have been carried into a deplorable
      captivity.

      These aggravated provocations rendered it essential to the
      safety of the Western settlements, that the aggressors
      should be made sensible that the Government of the Union is
      not less capable of punishing their crimes, than it is
      disposed to respect their rights and reward their
      attachments. As this object could not be effected by
      defensive measures, it became necessary to put in force the
      act which empowers the President to call out the militia
      for the protection of the frontiers; and I have,
      accordingly, authorized an expedition, in which the regular
      troops in that quarter are combined with such drafts of
      militia as were deemed sufficient: the event of the measure
      is yet unknown to me. The Secretary of War is directed to
      lay before you a statement of the information on which it
      is founded, as well as an estimate of the expense with
      which it will be attended.

      The disturbed situation of Europe, and particularly the
      critical posture of the great maritime Powers, whilst it
      ought to make us the more thankful for the general peace
      and security enjoyed by the United States, reminds us, at
      the same time, of the circumspection with which it becomes
      us to preserve these blessings. It requires, also, that we
      should not overlook the tendency of a war, and even of
      preparations for a war, among the nations most concerned in
      active commerce with this country, to abridge the means,
      and thereby at least to enhance the price of transporting
      its valuable productions to their proper markets. I
      recommend it to your serious reflection how far, and in
      what mode, it may be expedient to guard against
      embarrassments from these contingencies, by such
      encouragements to our own navigation as will render our
      commerce and agriculture less dependent on foreign bottoms,
      which may fail us in the very moments most interesting to
      both of these great objects. Our fisheries, and the
      transportation of our own produce, offer us abundant means
      for guarding ourselves against this evil.

      Your attention seems to be not less due to that particular
      branch of our trade which belongs to the Mediterranean. So
      many circumstances unite in rendering the present state of
      it distressful to us, that you will not think any
      deliberations misemployed which may lead to its relief and
      protection.

      The laws you have already passed for the establishment of a
      Judiciary system have opened the doors of justice to all
      description of persons. You will consider, in your wisdom,
      whether improvements in that system may yet be made; and,
      particularly, whether a uniform process of execution, on
      sentences issuing from the Federal courts, be not desirable
      through all the States.

      The patronage of our commerce, of our merchants, and
      seamen, has called for the appointment of Consuls in
      foreign countries. It seems expedient, to regulate by law,
      the exercise of that jurisdiction, and those functions
      which are permitted them, either by express convention, or
      by a friendly indulgence, in the places of their residence.
      The Consular Convention, too, with His Most Christian
      Majesty, has stipulated, in certain cases, the aid of the
      national authority to his Consuls established here. Some
      legislative provision is requisite to carry these
      stipulations into full effect.

      The establishment of the Militia, of a Mint, of Standards
      of Weights and Measures, of the Post Office and post roads,
      are subjects which (I presume) you will resume of course,
      and which are abundantly urged by their own importance.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      The sufficiency of the revenues you have established for
      the objects to which they are appropriated, leaves no doubt
      that the residuary provisions will be commensurate to the
      other objects for which the public faith stands now
      pledged. Allow me, moreover, to hope that it will be a
      favorite policy with you not merely to secure a payment of
      the debt funded, but as far and as fast as the growing
      resources of the country will permit, to exonerate it of
      the principle itself. The appropriation you have made of
      the Western lands explains your dispositions on this
      subject, and I am persuaded the sooner that valuable fund
      can be made to contribute, along with other means, to the
      actual reduction of the public debt, the more salutary will
      the measure be to every public interest, as well as the
      more satisfactory to our constituents.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives:_

      In pursuing the various and weighty business of the present
      session, I indulge the fullest persuasion that your
      consultations will be equally marked with wisdom, and
      animated by the love of your country. In whatever belongs
      to my duty, you shall have all the co-operation which an
      undiminished zeal for its welfare can inspire. It will be
      happy for us both, and our best reward, if, by a successful
      administration of our respective trusts, we can make the
      established Government more and more instrumental in
      promoting the good of our fellow-citizens, and more and
      more the object of their attachment and confidence.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _December_ 8, 1790.

The President of the United States having retired, and the two Houses
being separated, Messrs. ELLSWORTH, KING, and IZARD, were appointed a
committee to prepare and report the draft of an Address to the
PRESIDENT, in answer to his Speech to both Houses.

      THURSDAY, December 9.

      _To the President, and the Honorable the Congress of the
      United States of America._

      The memorial of the Representatives of the people of
      Kentucky, in Convention assembled, pursuant to an act of
      the Legislature of Virginia, passed the 18th December,
      1789, entitled "An act concerning the erection of the
      District of Kentucky into an independent State," humbly
      showeth:

      That the inhabitants of this country are warmly devoted to
      the American Union, and as firmly attached to the present
      happy establishment of the Federal Government, as any of
      the citizens of the United States.

      That, migrating from hence, they have, with great hazard
      and difficulty, effected their present settlements. The
      hope of increasing numbers could alone have supported the
      early adventurers under those arduous exertions. They have
      the satisfaction to find that hope verified. At this day,
      the population and strength of this country render it fully
      able, in the opinion of your memorialists, to form and
      support an efficient domestic Government.

      The inconveniences resulting from its local situation, as a
      part of Virginia, at first but little felt, have for some
      time been objects of their most serious attention; which
      occasioned application to the Legislature of Virginia for
      redress.

      Here your memorialists would acknowledge, with peculiar
      pleasure, the benevolence of Virginia in permitting them to
      remove the evils arising from that source, by assuming upon
      themselves a state of independence.

      This they have thought expedient to do, on the terms and
      conditions stipulated in the above recited act; and fixed
      on the first day of June, 1792, as the period when the said
      independence shall commence.

      It now remains with the President and the Congress of the
      United States to sanction these proceedings, by an act of
      their honorable Legislature, prior to the first day of
      November, 1791, for the purpose of receiving into the
      Federal Union the people of Kentucky, by the name of the
      State of Kentucky.

      Should this determination of your memorialists meet the
      approbation of the General Government, they have to call a
      Convention, to form a Constitution, subsequent to the act
      of Congress, and prior to the day fixed for the
      independence of this country.

      When your memorialists reflect upon the present
      comprehensive system of Federal Government, and when they
      also recollect the determination of a former Congress on
      this subject, they are left without a doubt that the object
      of their wishes will be accomplished.

      And your memorialists, as in duty bound, shall for ever
      pray.

                                  GEORGE MUTER, _President_.
                     Attest,      THOMAS TODD, _Clerk of the Con._

A letter from the Secretary of War was communicated to the VICE
PRESIDENT, enclosing sundry papers referred to in the President's Speech
to both Houses of Congress, on the 8th instant, which, being read, were
ordered to lie for consideration.


FRIDAY, _December_ 10.

A letter from Monsieur Beniere, President of the Commonalty of Paris,
addressed to the PRESIDENT and members of Congress of the United States,
with twenty-six copies of a Civic Eulogy on BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,
pronounced the 21st day of July, 1790, in the name of the Commonalty of
Paris, by Monsieur L'Abbé Fauchet, was delivered to the Senate, by Mr.
Lear, Secretary to the President of the United States.

Read, and

_Ordered_, That the letter and copies of the Eulogy be sent to the House
of Representatives.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
they have, on their part, appointed the Rev. Dr. BLAIR one of the
Chaplains of the present Congress.

Mr. ELLSWORTH, from the committee appointed to prepare and report the
draft of an Address to the President of the United States, reported
accordingly; and, the report being amended, was adopted, as followeth:

      _To the President of the United States of America._

      We receive, sir, with particular satisfaction, the
      communications contained in your speech, which confirm to
      us the progressive state of the public credit, and afford,
      at the same time, a new proof of the solidity of the
      foundation on which it rests; and we cheerfully join in the
      acknowledgment which is due to the probity and patriotism
      of the mercantile and marine part of our fellow-citizens,
      whose enlightened attachment to the principles of good
      government is not less conspicuous in this than it has been
      in other important respects.

      In confidence that every constitutional preliminary has
      been observed, we assure you of our disposition to concur,
      in giving the requisite sanction to the admission of
      Kentucky as a distinct member of the Union; in doing which,
      we shall anticipate the happy effects to be expected from
      the sentiments of attachment towards the Union, and its
      present Government, which have been expressed by the
      patriotic inhabitants of that district.

      While we regret that the continuance and increase of the
      hostilities and depredations which have distressed our
      north-western frontiers, should have rendered offensive
      measures necessary, we feel an entire confidence in the
      sufficiency of the motives which have produced them, and in
      the wisdom of the dispositions which have been concerted,
      in pursuance of the powers vested in you; and, whatever may
      have been the event, we shall cheerfully concur in the
      provisions which the expedition, that has been undertaken,
      may require on the part of the Legislature, and in any
      other which the future peace and safety of our frontier
      settlements may call for.

      The critical posture of the European Powers will engage a
      due portion of our attention, and we shall be ready to
      adopt any measures which a prudent circumspection may
      suggest, for the preservation of the blessings of peace.
      The navigation and the fisheries of the United States are
      objects too interesting not to inspire a disposition to
      promote them, by all the means which shall appear to us
      consistent with their natural progress and permanent
      prosperity.

      Impressed with the importance of a free intercourse with
      the Mediterranean, we shall not think any deliberations
      misemployed which may conduce to the adoption of proper
      measures for removing the impediments that obstruct it.

      The improvement of the Judiciary system, and the other
      important objects to which you have pointed our attention,
      will not fail to engage the consideration they respectively
      merit.

      In the course of our deliberations upon every subject we
      shall rely upon that co-operation which an undiminished
      zeal, and incessant anxiety for the public welfare, on your
      part, so thoroughly ensure; and, as it is our anxious
      desire, so it shall be our constant endeavor, to render the
      established Government more and more instrumental in
      promoting the good of our fellow-citizens, and more and
      more the object of their attachment and confidence.

_Ordered_, That the Address to the President of the United States, in
answer to his Speech, be presented by the Vice President, attended by
the Senate, and that the committee which reported the Address wait on
the President, and desire to be informed at what time and place he will
receive the same.


MONDAY, December 13.

WILLIAM S. JOHNSON, from Connecticut, and PHILIP SCHUYLER, from New
York, attended.

Mr. ELLSWORTH, from the committee appointed on the 10th, to wait on the
President of the United States, reported:

That it would be agreeable to the President to receive the Address of
the Senate, in answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress, on
Monday next, at 12 o'clock.

Whereupon,

The Senate waited upon the President of the United States at his own
house, and the Vice President, in their name, communicated to him the
Address agreed to on the 10th instant; to which the President of the
United States was pleased to make the following reply:

      GENTLEMEN: These assurances of favorable attention to the
      subjects I have recommended, and of entire confidence in my
      views, make the impression on me which I ought to feel. I
      thank you for them both, and shall continue to rely much
      for the success of all our measures for the public good, on
      the aid they will receive from the wisdom and integrity of
      your councils.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

The Senate returned to the Senate Chamber.


WEDNESDAY, December 15.

JOSEPH STANTON, junior, from Rhode Island, attended.


MONDAY, January 10.

JOHN HENRY, from Maryland, attended.


MONDAY, January 17.

JAMES GUNN, from Georgia, attended.


FRIDAY, January 21.

CHARLES CARROLL, from the State of Maryland, attended.


MONDAY, February 14.

The Senate on Executive business. The following Message from the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES was under consideration:

_Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      Conceiving that in the possible event of a refusal of
      justice on the part of Great Britain, we should stand less
      committed should it be made to a private rather than a
      public person, I employed Mr. Gouverneur Morris, who was on
      the spot, and without giving him any definite character, to
      enter informally into the conferences before mentioned. For
      your more particular information, I lay before you the
      instructions I gave him, and those parts of his
      communications wherein the British ministers appear either
      in conversation or by letter. These are two letters from
      the Duke of Leeds to Mr. Morris, and three letters of Mr.
      Morris, giving an account of two conferences with the Duke
      of Leeds, and one with him, and Mr. Pitt. The sum of these
      is, that they declare, without scruple, they do not mean to
      fulfil what remains of the Treaty of Peace to be fulfilled
      on their part, (by which we are to understand the delivery
      of the posts and payment for property carried off,) till
      performance on our part, and compensation where the delay
      has rendered the performance now impracticable; that on the
      subject of a treaty of commerce they avoided direct
      answers, so as to satisfy Mr. Morris they did not mean to
      enter into one unless it could be extended to a treaty of
      alliance offensive and defensive, or unless in the event of
      a rupture with Spain.

      As to the sending a Minister here, they made excuses at the
      first conference, seemed disposed to it in the second, and
      in the last express an intention of so doing.

      Their views being thus sufficiently ascertained, I have
      directed Mr. Morris to discontinue his communications with
      them. GEO. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _Feb._ 14, 1791.

_Ordered_, That this Message lie for consideration.


TUESDAY, February 15.

RICHARD HENRY LEE, from Virginia, attended.

No business of importance before the Senate to-day.


THURSDAY EVENING, March 3.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they, having completed the Legislative business before them, intend
shortly to adjourn without day.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
the Senate, having completed the Legislative business before them, are
about to adjourn; and having acquainted the VICE PRESIDENT that he had
delivered the message,

The Senate adjourned without day.




FIRST CONGRESS.--THIRD SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, December 6, 1790.

On which day, being the day appointed by adjournment of the two Houses
for the meeting of the present session, the following members appeared
and took their seats, to wit:

_From New Hampshire_--ABIEL FOSTER, NICHOLAS GILMAN, and SAMUEL
LIVERMORE.

_From Massachusetts_--FISHER AMES, BENJAMIN GOODHUE, and GEORGE
THATCHER.

_From Connecticut_--BENJAMIN HUNTINGTON, ROGER SHERMAN, and JONATHAN
STURGES.

_From New York_--EGBERT BENSON, WILLIAM FLOYD, JOHN LAWRENCE, and PETER
SYLVESTER.

_From New Jersey_--ELIAS BOUDINOT, LAMBERT CADWALADER, and JAMES
SCHUREMAN.

_From Pennsylvania_--GEORGE CLYMER, THO'S FITZSIMONS, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS
MUHLENBERG, PETER MUHLENBERG, and HENRY WYNKOOP.

_From Maryland_--JOSHUA SENEY.

_From Virginia_--JOHN BROWN, SAMUEL GRIFFIN, and JAMES MADISON, Junior.

_From North Carolina_--TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH and HUGH WILLIAMSON.

_From South Carolina_--WILLIAM SMITH.

_From Georgia_--ABRAHAM BALDWIN.

Which not forming a quorum of the whole number, the House adjourned
until to-morrow.


TUESDAY, December 7.

DANIEL HEISTER and THOMAS SCOTT, from Pennsylvania; RICHARD BLAND LEE,
from Virginia; and DANIEL HUGER, from South Carolina, appeared and took
their seats.

WILLIAM B. GILES, from Virginia, returned in the place of Theodorick
Bland, deceased, also appeared, produced his credentials, and took his
seat.


WEDNESDAY, December 8.

ELBRIDGE GERRY and JONATHAN GROUT, from Massachusetts; ANDREW MOORE and
ALEXANDER WHITE, from Virginia; and THOMAS TUDOR TUCKER, from South
Carolina, appeared and took their seats.

A message from the Senate informed the House that they are ready to meet
the members of this House in the Senate Chamber, to receive the usual
communication from the President of the United States.

Mr. SPEAKER, attended by the members of this House, then withdrew to the
Senate Chamber, for the purpose expressed in the above message.

And being returned, the SPEAKER laid before the House a copy of the
Speech, delivered by the PRESIDENT (which will be found in the
proceedings of the Senate),

Which being read, it was, on motion, committed to the consideration of a
Committee of the whole House to-morrow.


THURSDAY, December 9.

JAMES JACKSON and GEORGE MATHEWS, from Georgia, appeared and took their
seats.

_Address to the President._

On motion, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the Speech of the President of the United States, Mr. LIVERMORE in the
chair.

On motion of Mr. LAWRENCE, the committee agreed to a resolution, which
the committee rose and reported to the House, which was concurred with
as follows:

      _Resolved_, that it is the opinion of this committee, that
      an Address ought to be presented by the House to the
      President of the United States, in answer to his Speech to
      both Houses, with assurances that this House will, without
      delay, proceed to take into consideration the various and
      important matters recommended to their attention.

And Messrs. MADISON, AMES, and TUCKER, were appointed to prepare the
Address.


FRIDAY, December 10.

GEORGE PARTRIDGE, from Massachusetts; JONATHAN TRUMBULL and JEREMIAH
WADSWORTH, from Connecticut; THOMAS SINNICKSON, from New Jersey; and
WILLIAM SMITH, from Maryland, appeared and took their seats.


SATURDAY, December 11.

A translation of the Letter from the President of the Commonalty of
Paris, addressed to the Federal Legislature, was read as follows:

      _Mr. President--Gentlemen:_

      The news has reached our ears--FRANKLIN is no
      more!--FRANKLIN, the citizen of the world!--All nations are
      indebted to him for instruction in every branch of science.
      They are all bound to participate in the grief occasioned
      by this common loss. But the Assembly of the
      Representatives of the Commonalty of our capital, thinking
      it their duty, in addition to the general mourning, to pay
      to his memory a further tribute of honor, have ordered, by
      a public decree, that the virtues and talents of this great
      philosopher should be perpetuated to distant ages, in a
      public and solemn Eulogy--the first of the kind ever
      bestowed by our nation on civic worth.

      By order of the Assembly I transmit it to your hands; and,
      with the most lively sensations of pleasure, embrace the
      opportunity of paying due homage to a body of men, who not
      only possess, but are justly entitled to enjoy the sweets
      of Liberty.

      May the approbation of your Assembly attend, as well the
      present itself, as the fraternal and respectful sentiments
      with which

                                  I am, Mr. President--Gentlemen,
                                  Your most obedient humble servant,
                                  BENIERE,

                            _Doctor of the Sorbonne, Suppletory Member
                             of the National Assembly, and President
                             of the Commonalty of Paris._

      To the PRESIDENT and CONGRESS _of the United States_.

The letter accompanied twenty-six copies of the Eulogium on Dr.
FRANKLIN, delivered by the Abbé Fauchet, pursuant to a decree of that
body.

Mr. BOUDINOT proposed that thirteen copies of the Eulogium be returned
to the President of the United States and the Senate; which was done.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) observed, that it would be proper to
request the President of the United States to return an answer to the
President of the Commonalty of Paris, or that a Joint Committee of the
House and Senate should be appointed for the purpose. He was not
tenacious of any particular mode, but supposed it highly proper that
some notice should be taken of the polite attention shown the Government
by the President of the Commonalty of Paris. The business was specially
committed to the SPEAKER.

Agreeably to the order of the day, the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole, to take into consideration the Address to the
President of the United States, in answer to his Speech to both Houses,
as reported yesterday. Mr. LIVERMORE in the chair.

The Address was read by the clerk, and then discussed by the committee
in paragraphs.

On reading the clause respecting the Western expedition against the
Indians,

Mr. JACKSON rose and observed, that he was as fully impressed with the
importance of an Indian war, and of extending the protection of
Government to our defenceless frontiers, as any man whatever, and had no
doubt of the necessity of the measures taken to chastise the banditti
on the Ohio; but as a Representative from the State of Georgia, he
should think himself inexcusable were he not to express his astonishment
that no notice is taken in the President's speech of the treaty with the
Creek Nation; a treaty which has spread alarm among the people of that
State--a treaty by which more than three millions of acres of land, the
property of the State of Georgia, guarantied to that State by the
Constitution of the United States, are ceded away without any
compensation. Mr. J. then adverted to several articles of the treaty,
which he said controverted the plainest principles of the constitution,
particularly those parts which secure to every citizen the rights of
property. He contrasted the present situation of the inhabitants of
Georgia, with what it was under the British Government, and said this
treaty placed them in a less eligible situation in respect to the
Indians.

It had been said, exclaimed he, that there are secret articles in the
treaty. Good God! at this early period are there to be secret articles
existing between the United States and any other nation under heaven!
Treaties by the constitution are to be considered the supreme law of the
land; but will Congress permit the laws of the United States, like those
of _Caligula_, to be placed where they cannot be read, and then punish
the people for not obeying them? The people will never submit to be
bound by secret articles.

[Here the Chairman interrupted Mr. JACKSON, by inquiring whether his
observations were intended as introductory to any motion on the
paragraph just read.]

Mr. J. replied, that it was his intention, at a future day, to introduce
a motion, that the President be requested to lay before this House the
treaty with the Creek Indians--not excepting the secret articles. He
then expatiated on the sufferings of the people of Georgia, and asked,
what must be their feelings when they reflect on the preparations made
to chastise the Wabash banditti, while the exertions of Congress have
not been called forth to their relief. The President sent three
Commissioners to Georgia (not one of whom was a citizen of that State).
They investigated the truth of her representations, and made a report
favorable to her claims, that the lands in dispute were fairly
purchased, and as fully obtained as the Confederation, or the nature of
the case would admit; but what has been the result? The treaty, so far
from recognizing the rights of Georgia, has sacrificed them--the report
of the Commissioners does not appear to have been attended to. On the
other hand, a savage of the Creeks has been invited and brought to the
seat of Government, and there loaded with favors, and caressed in the
most extraordinary manner.

He said, he would not at present engross any more of the time of the
House, only to give notice that, at a future opportunity, he should move
that the President of the United States be requested to lay before the
House for their consideration, the treaty with the Creek Indians--not
excepting the secret articles.

The paragraph respecting encouraging our own navigation being read,

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) observed, that he did not rise to propose
any alterations in the style of the Address; the language was such as
might be expected from the acknowledged abilities of the gentleman who
drafted it. The paragraph just read, he conceived, pledged the House to
take measures in respect to our own navigation, which may, in the issue,
prove injurious to the agricultural interests of the United States. At
this early period of the session, it appeared extremely improper for the
House to commit itself, especially as few, if any of the States, are
fully represented on the floor. He was afraid that the mode of
expression adopted in the Address would conduce to the exclusion of
foreign bottoms altogether. If the opinion of the committee should be
adopted by the House, he conceived it would be anticipating a decision
to the precluding future discussions of the subject. He foresaw that
this paragraph would be called up at some future period, and brought as
an argument against any different propositions that might be
offered--and thus the question be determined without any debate. He
thought the Address went into too minute a consideration of the several
parts of the Speech, and could have wished that more general terms had
been used. As a substitute for the paragraph under consideration, he
moved the following amendment in substance:

      "We shall consider with attention the best means of
      guarding against the embarrassments you mention, and will
      take such measures as may remove every obstruction to the
      prosperity of the commerce and agriculture of the United
      States."

Mr. WILLIAMSON observed, that he saw no material difference between the
paragraph in the report and the amendment proposed. The mode of
expression adopted by the committee is in so general terms, that he
hoped it would have met the full approbation of every member of the
committee. The President proposes that the commerce of the United States
should be relieved from all injurious restrictions; nothing can be more
just and reasonable: and this is perfectly compatible with supporting
the agricultural interests of the country; the promotion of the former
involves that of the latter. He touched on the impositions of Great
Britain on our commerce, and observed, that reason and justice point out
the propriety of seeking redress. He, however, saw no opposition in the
two propositions; but as the obvious design in bringing forward the
substitute is to preclude such an inquiry as the exigency of the case
seems to require, he hoped it would not be adopted.

Mr. JACKSON observed that he had seconded the motion of the gentleman
from South Carolina, because he thought there was an obvious difference
in the two modes of expression. He then entered into a discussion of the
subject generally; and enlarged on the injurious consequences which
would result to the Southern States particularly by enhancing the duties
on foreign bottoms. He said, that the tonnage was at present so high as
to prevent foreigners from becoming our carriers; several instances of
this had been mentioned to him from good authority; and while the
American shipping was incompetent to the object, and he called on
gentlemen to show that it was, the exclusion of foreign ships from our
ports must be ruinous to South Carolina and Georgia; therefore, he hoped
the amendment would take place.

Mr. SHERMAN said, that the words in the report appeared to him less
exceptionable than those in the proposed amendment, even on the
principle supported by the gentleman in favor of the amendment. In the
report it was only said, we should consider what means, &c., but the
amendment declared we should take effectual measures. The words in the
report only binding us to consider--those in the amendment obliging us
to act. He thought the answer should be general, and was therefore
against the amendment.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) observed, that the member last up had
confined his observation to the first words in the paragraph objected
to. If he will take the trouble of reading a little further, he will
see, that as the report stands, we give it as our opinion, that foreign
bottoms ought to be excluded, which would be severely felt by the States
of South Carolina and Georgia. We cannot wholly depend upon our own
vessels for the exportation of our produce; they are not sufficiently
numerous, nor will they be for many years; therefore, let us not at this
time, in a hasty manner, declare, that all articles exported shall be
carried in our own bottoms. To settle this important question, Mr. S.
thought that some time should be given to reflect, and a day fixed for
discussion; in the mean time, he thought it improper at this stage of
the session, that the opinion of the House should be given.

Mr. WILLIAMSON remarked, that the report did not say that we should have
no dependence on foreign bottoms; but that we should not depend
altogether upon them for the exportation of our produce. He had no idea
of excluding foreign bottoms. He was for making provision in case that
resource should fail.

Mr. JACKSON.--To show the importance of foreign shipping to the Southern
States, and the inadequacy of our own to transport their produce,
notwithstanding the low duty on American shipping, Mr. J. read a
statement of the tonnage duties paid by each, in the State of Georgia,
for the same period; the foreign tonnage amounted to eight thousand two
hundred and twenty-seven dollars, the American to six hundred and
twenty-nine dollars only. This being the fact, he inquired, what could
be done with the Southern produce, in case of the exclusion of foreign
bottoms? It must rot in the planter's hands. With respect to the
amendment's being as positive as the clause in the report, as had been
asserted, if this is the case he could see no objection to its being
adopted.

Mr. TUCKER said, he thought it improper that in an Address on this
occasion, the committee should go into a particular detail on every
subject; much less commit their judgment without a previous discussion.
The President may have maturely considered the subject during the
recess, but the committee cannot be supposed to be prepared for a
decision. The thinness of the House was a further objection, in his
opinion, to entering into a discussion of the question. He was not
pleased with the paragraph in the report, as it seemed to imply that
nothing had been done for the encouragement of our own navigation, the
reverse of which was fact. The posture of affairs in Europe suggested no
stronger reasons for giving further encouragement to our own navigation
than what was presented last session; the expediency of the measure is
not therefore apparent from any change of circumstances. Though he was
dissatisfied with the report, the amendment proposed fell short of his
wishes. It did not recognize what had been done for the encouragement of
American shipping. He would, therefore, propose a substitute by leave of
his colleague; which he did to the following purport: "The encouragement
of our own navigation has at all times appeared to us highly important,
and has employed a large share of our deliberations; we shall continue
to pay due attention to the subject, and consider by what means our
commerce and agriculture may be best promoted."

Mr. SMITH withdrew his motion to admit Mr. TUCKER's.

Mr. SENEY said, he could not conceive what ground of apprehension there
was in the Address, to lead gentlemen to suppose that the opinion of the
House would be committed by its adoption. He thought it couched in the
most general and unexceptionable terms. The amendment proposed he did
not think essentially variant from the paragraph under consideration;
but as the original was well expressed, he saw no reason for expunging
the clause; it contained an assertion, the truth of which he supposed
would not be controverted. As to the objection against going into a
detail of particulars, it was fully justified by precedent in the last
Address; the gentleman from South Carolina, he will recollect, was on
the committee who framed it; that Address more pointedly committed the
House than the present.

Mr. MADISON thought proper to take some notice of the objections that
had been made to the report. There were two modes of proceeding, which
might be adopted in drawing up the answer. The first method was
generally to declare, that the House would take into their serious
consideration the business recommended to their attention by the
President. And this, he observed, would be saying nothing, for, as by
the constitution it was the President's duty to communicate what matters
he judged of importance, so it was undoubtedly that of the House to pay
attention to the objects recommended. The second method was, to enter
into a detail of the different points mentioned in the President's
Address, and in such cases where there was no doubt as to the propriety
of measures being taken, assure him, in the answer, that measures would
be adopted; and if any thing doubtful occurred, merely promise that the
subject would be attended to. This rule the committee had followed in
drawing up their report, and as in the business mentioned in the
paragraph now before the House, they did not hesitate to believe some
measures necessary, they could see no impropriety in assuring him that
the best would be adopted. He added, that as it is clear that a war in
Europe would, by depriving us of foreign bottoms to export our produce,
injure this country; and as wars were doubtful, it was of the utmost
importance that the American navy be put on so respectable a footing as
not to need foreign aid for the exportation of her produce. He further
observed, that the answer returned last session was more full, and went
even to give the President assurances that the House would concur in
certain points proposed for their consideration in his address. He
concluded by remarking, that the amendment proposed was binding on the
House quite as much as the paragraph in the report.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) said, it was true those who reported the
Address the last session, adverted to particulars; but were cautious in
their mode of expression, and adopted ambiguous language to avoid giving
an opinion. This would appear by recurring to that Address. The charge
of inconsistency on his part was therefore not well founded. Mr. S. read
some paragraphs of that Address, and observed that the House was not
pledged by the expressions then read; but in the present Address there
is an opinion given. It says that we ought not to depend on foreign
bottoms, because in case of war we may be deprived of that resource.
These declarations originated the objections, and gave rise to the
amendment. He proposed, therefore, as gentlemen appear to have no
objection to either mode of expression, that they would accommodate for
the sake of harmony and unanimity.

The question on the amendment was lost by a considerable majority.

The remainder of the Address was read, and agreed to by the committee.
The committee then rose and reported, and the House adopted it
unanimously.

A committee was then appointed to wait on the President of the United
States, to know at what time and place it would be convenient for him to
receive the Address.

The committee having waited on the President, Mr. MADISON reported, that
the President was pleased to return for answer, that, at two o'clock on
Monday next, he would receive the Address at his own house.

Messrs. WILLIAMSON and SHERMAN were added to the committee on the bill
to amend the act for promoting the progress of the useful arts.

Mr. MATHEWS was appointed on the committee on the militia bill, _vice_
Mr. JACKSON, who begged leave to decline serving, as his colleague had
been heretofore on that business, and must consequently be better
acquainted with the subject than he was.


MONDAY, December 13.

GEORGE LEONARD from Massachusetts; JOHN VINING, from Delaware; JOSIAH
PARKER, from Virginia; JOHN BAPTIST ASHE, from North Carolina; and
EDANUS BURKE, from South Carolina, appeared and took their seats.

_Eulogium on Dr. Franklin._

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) introduced the following motion, which was
read, and laid on the table:

      The House being highly sensible of the polite attention of
      the Commonalty of Paris, in directing a eulogium to the
      illustrious memory of Dr. Benjamin Franklin, pronounced
      before them, to be transmitted to the President and
      Congress of the United States,

      _Resolved_, That the Speaker communicate the sense of this
      House in a letter addressed to the President and Commonalty
      of Paris.

_Address to the President._

At two o'clock, the House, preceded by the Sergeant-at-Arms, waited on
the President of the United States, at his house where the SPEAKER
delivered the following Address in answer to his Speech to both Houses:

      SIR: The Representatives of the people of the United States
      have taken into consideration your Address to the two
      Houses at the opening of the present session of Congress.

      We share in the satisfaction inspired by the prospects
      which continue to be so auspicious to our public affairs.
      The blessings resulting from the smiles of Heaven on our
      agriculture, the rise of public credit, with the further
      advantages promised to it, and the fertility of resources
      which are found so little burdensome to the community,
      fully authorize our mutual congratulations on the present
      occasion. Nor can we learn, without an additional
      gratification, that the energy of the laws for providing
      adequate revenues have been so honorably seconded by those
      classes of citizens whose patriotism and probity were more
      immediately concerned.

      The success of the loan, opened in Holland under the
      disadvantages of the present moment, is the more important,
      as it not only denotes the confidence already placed in the
      United States, but as the effects of a judicious
      application of that aid will still further illustrate the
      solidity of the foundation on which the public credit
      rests.

      The preparatory steps taken by the State of Virginia, in
      concert with the District of Kentucky, towards the erection
      of the latter into a distinct member of the Union, exhibit
      a liberality mutually honorable to the parties. We shall
      bestow on this important subject the favorable
      consideration which it merits, and with the national policy
      which ought to govern our decision, shall not fail to
      mingle the affectionate sentiments which are awakened by
      those expressed in behalf of our fellow-citizens of
      Kentucky.

      Whilst we regret the necessity which has produced offensive
      hostilities against some of the Indian tribes north-west of
      the Ohio, we sympathize too much with our Western brethren,
      not to behold with approbation the watchfulness and vigor
      which have been exerted by the Executive authority for
      their protection; and which, we trust, will make the
      aggressors sensible that it is their interest to merit, by
      a peaceable behavior, the friendship and humanity which the
      United States are always ready to extend to them.

      The encouragement of our own navigation has at all times
      appeared to us highly important. The point of view under
      which you have recommended it to us is strongly enforced by
      the actual state of things in Europe. It will be incumbent
      on us to consider in what mode our commerce and agriculture
      can be best relieved from an injurious dependence on the
      navigation of other nations, which the frequency of their
      wars renders a too precarious resource for conveying the
      productions of our own country to market.

      The present state of our trade in the Mediterranean seems
      not less to demand, and will accordingly receive, the
      attention which you have recommended.

      Having already concurred in establishing a Judiciary
      system, which opens the doors of justice to all without
      distinction of persons, it will be our disposition to
      incorporate every improvement which experience may suggest;
      and we shall consider, in particular, how far the
      uniformity which in other cases is found convenient in the
      administration of the General Government through all the
      States may be introduced into the forms and rules of
      executing sentences issuing from the Federal Courts.

      The proper regulation of the jurisdiction and functions
      which may be exercised by Consuls of the United States in
      foreign countries, with the provisions stipulated to those
      of His Most Christian Majesty established here, are
      subjects of too much consequence to the public interest and
      honor not to partake of our deliberations.

      We shall renew our attention to the establishment of the
      militia and other subjects unfinished at the last session,
      and shall proceed in them with all the despatch which the
      magnitude of all, and the difficulty of some of them, will
      allow.

      Nothing has given us more satisfaction than to find that
      the revenues heretofore established have proved adequate to
      the purposes to which they were allotted. In extending the
      provision to the residuary objects, it will be equally our
      care to secure sufficiency and punctuality in the payments
      due from the Treasury of the United States. We shall also
      never lose sight of the policy of diminishing the public
      debt, as fast as the increase of the public resources will
      permit; and are particularly sensible of the many
      considerations which press a resort to the auxiliary
      resources furnished by the public lands.

      In pursuing every branch of the weighty business of the
      present session, it will be our constant study to direct
      our deliberations to the public welfare. Whatever our
      success may be, we can at least answer for the fervent love
      of our country, which ought to animate our endeavors. In
      your co-operation, we are sure of a resource which
      fortifies our hopes that the fruits of the established
      Government will justify the confidence which has been
      placed in it, and recommend it more and more to the
      affection and attachment of our fellow-citizens.

To the foregoing Address the PRESIDENT was pleased to reply:

      GENTLEMEN: The sentiments expressed in your Address are
      entitled to my particular acknowledgment. Having no object
      but the good of our country, this testimony of approbation
      and confidence, from its immediate representatives, must be
      among my best rewards, as the support of your enlightened
      patriotism has been among my greatest encouragements. Being
      persuaded that you will continue to be actuated by the same
      auspicious principle, I look forward to the happiest
      consequences from your deliberations during the present
      session.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.


TUESDAY, December 14.

JEREMIAH VAN RENSSELAER, from New York, and THOMAS HARTLEY, from
Pennsylvania, appeared and took their seats.


FRIDAY, December 17.

JOHN HATHORN, from New York, and JOHN SEVIER, from North Carolina,
appeared and took their seats.

BENJAMIN BOURNE, a member returned from Rhode Island, produced his
credentials, and took his seat.


MONDAY, December 27.

_Public Lands._

The House then went into Committee of the Whole on the state of the
Union, Mr. LIVERMORE in the chair.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the establishment of land
offices for the disposal of the vacant lands belonging to the United
States was taken up; when

Mr. BOUDINOT offered the following resolution:

      _Resolved_, That it is the sense of the committee that a
      Land Office be established at the seat of the General
      Government, under the direction of ---- Commissioners.

Mr. SCOTT wished the House to take a general view of the business before
they went into the particulars of the Secretary's report. Upon the
whole, he was pleased with the plan drawn up by that officer; one part,
however, he objected to--that part of the report which provided for the
distribution of the land. He did not approve of setting apart tracts for
particular descriptions of purchasers. As an amendment, he offered seven
propositions, which he wished, for the present, to lie on the table, and
which he proposed to offer as substitutes to different parts of the
Secretary's report, as they came before the House. His principal object
was to let the tracts which Congress proposed to sell be
indiscriminately located.

Mr. BOUDINOT thought the committee could not then enter into the minutiæ
of the business. It was enough to fix the general principles, viz:
Whether there shall be a General Land Officer and two subordinates?
Whether they shall be under the direction of Commissioners? And whether
certain tracts of land should be reserved by Congress for certain
purposes? And then to appoint a committee to bring in a bill on those
principles, and to take into consideration the minutiæ of the business.

Mr. SCOTT moved as a substitute his second proposition, that such
districts as shall be set apart for sale, shall include the actual
settlements, and be left to be indiscriminately located. He said it was
improper to set aside different tracts for different modes of
location--some in large tracts, others in small lots. He conceived it
would be the interest of Government to let every one purchase where he
pleased, and as much or as little as he chose. From experience, he knew
that those parts were always settled with the most celerity that were
not bound down to any of those restrictions. For his part, he could see
no good argument in favor of them.

He wished some of the gentlemen who approved of this mode would give him
some reasons for preferring it. There could be no fear of individual
settlers scattering and losing themselves in the backwoods; there was a
sufficient check to prevent it--the Indians would keep them compact much
more effectually than any regulations Congress could make. If, after
granting certain scattered tracts to individual settlers, a considerable
tract, including these, was wanted, he could see no inconvenience in
granting it, reserving to the former settlers their rights.

Mr. WILLIAMSON rose to give the gentleman last up one reason for
opposing indiscriminate location. Hitherto, he owned, much mischief had
not arisen from this mode of settlement; but now there were persons rich
in securities and cash, ready to take up considerable quantities of
land, which, if they were permitted to select here and there, would
select every choice tract they could; and those who might not have the
same means of purchasing immediately at command, could only obtain the
indifferent parcels. Many, he knew, had it in contemplation to do this,
if the opportunity offered. He instanced North Carolina as an example of
the injurious tendency of this liberty; where many tracts are unsaleable
owing to this circumstance. If these tracts were to be purchased by
actual settlers, the case would be different; they would only be taken
up by persons under the name of actual settlers. Such a practice would
be an impediment to such companies of Europeans as might wish to settle
among us.

Mr. SCOTT said he expected the gentleman would have offered more solid
objections to his plan, and more forcible arguments in favor of the
other. Though the first settlers had the choice of the land, yet he
conceived the remaining part would acquire a considerable additional
value from the surrounding settlements. As for the European companies
who might be tempted to settle among us, he did not contemplate it as
an object so desirable. A body of French people settling in that way
would preserve their language and manners two thousand years perhaps.
This would not be for the true interest of the country; all its
inhabitants should, by mutual intercourse, become assimilated, and no
name be known but that of Americans.

Mr. BOUDINOT was against indiscriminate location. He had seen the bad
effects of it in the State from which he came. Persons had bought up the
low lands, and sold them again to such as absolutely needed a water lot
to their farms, at enormous prices. He mentioned another objection to
the plan--the tendency it had to create lawsuits. He said more money had
been spent at law, in disputes arising from that mode of settlement, in
New Jersey, than would have been necessary to purchase all the land of
the State. The late Congress, he was informed, had adopted a method to
obviate the inconveniences of the former mode--the lands were laid out
into a mile square; these were divided into four equal squares, and in
that form sold.

Mr. SCOTT said there were tracts of land which it is impossible to sell,
even by offering good parcels with them. Between Philadelphia and his
home there were spots which were only intended by nature for the birds
and beasts--that could be of no value for cultivation. He could not see
much probability that the best land would be picked out. The difficulty
of exploring a wild and uncultivated desert opposed a considerable
barrier to such attempts.

Mr. SCOTT's amendment was lost.


TUESDAY, December 28.

_Land Offices._

The House then went again into a Committee of the Whole on the state of
the Union, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair. The report of the Secretary of the
Treasury on the subject of a Land Office being under consideration.

Mr. SCOTT said, he was ready to give some information relative to the
extent of the seven ranges. He produced a map of them, from which it
appeared that they included thirty-five lots, each six miles square. The
tract is in the shape of a triangle, of which one leg measured about
sixty, and the other forty-two--in all, about twelve hundred square
miles. His amendment was agreed to.

The next article was agreed to, with a trifling amendment, without
debate.

Then the following was read:

      "That the price shall be thirty cents per acre, to be paid
      either in gold or silver, or public securities, computing
      those which shall bear an immediate interest of six per
      cent. as at par with gold and silver, and those which shall
      bear a future or less interest, if any there be, at a
      proportional value."

Mr. SCOTT moved that thirty cents should be struck out.

Mr. SHERMAN was in favor of inserting fifty cents per acre. He said
there was every reasonable probability the lands would be worth that sum
in a few years.

Mr. LAWRENCE said, that as the quality of the land would vary, it
appeared proper to fix on two prices at which they should be sold, viz:
That the price shall not be more than ----, nor less than ----. He
submitted the idea to the consideration of the committee.

Mr. SEDGWICK preferred the insertion of a sum below which the lands
should not be sold.

Mr. WILLIAMSON suggested the propriety of making a difference in the
price to those who purchase large quantities, from the price to those
who purchase small quantities.

The motion for striking out was lost.

Mr. SEDGWICK then moved to amend the clause, by inserting "that the
price per acre shall not be less than thirty cents."

Mr. STONE objected to the motion. He said the operation of it would be
to leave it discretionary with the Surveyors to fix the price of the
various tracts. This would be to constitute a tribunal in a measure
independent of the Government. He thought the policy of the Government
should be to fix on a price, which shall be so reasonable, that persons
may feel every inducement to pay it before they take up the lands; for
it has been found by experience, that when once a tract of distant
country is taken possession of, you never can get any thing more than
the settlers are willing to pay. He insisted that it was impracticable
to fix the relative value of unlocated lands--it had been repeatedly
tried without effect. He asked if any of the States had ever established
various rates for their lands? He knew of none.

Mr. SEDGWICK answered the inquiry respecting the relative value of lands
being ascertained in the several States. He said, that so far as his
information extended, which respected only the States of New York, New
Hampshire, and Massachusetts, this had invariably been the case. Every
man knows there is a most essential difference in the value of lands.
Those on navigable rivers may be ten times as valuable as those on the
top of a mountain. This every individual is so sensible of, that a
difference in the price is constantly made; and why the Government
should not make a difference, it is impossible to say. Any man, by
casting his eye upon the map, can at once determine that some part of
the land is unspeakably more valuable than other parts. He was certain
that vesting a discretionary power, in the disposal of the lands, would
be productive of the greatest advantage to the United States, and on
this principle he could not conceive why the Surveyors should not
determine the relative quality, that the United States may stand some
chance of getting the value of this property.

Mr. LIVERMORE was in favor of Mr. SEDGWICK's motion, and enlarged on the
unreasonableness of fixing a particular price.

Mr. JACKSON was opposed to investing a discretionary power to determine
the price with any persons whatsoever. It had been productive of
mischievous consequences in the State of Georgia. He was for fixing a
price, and the highest price--the best the land would bear; when that is
sold, if the revenue will not bear the price established, it can then be
reduced.

Mr. SCOTT objected to the motion. He stated several difficulties; the
principal was, that foreigners would be deterred from adventuring, owing
to the uncertainty in the price; for when they arrive in the country to
settle, they must purchase, and they will then lie at the mercy of
speculators.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The people have great dependence on the Western territory
as a fund to extinguish their debt; it therefore becomes the duty of the
Government to obtain the best price they can for it. The question is,
whether we shall fix a price, or adopt the plan proposed by the
gentleman from Massachusetts. He was in favor of the latter, and said he
doubted not it would be easy to make a discrimination in the relative
qualities of the lands. This difference in price may render it worth
while for the Commissioners to have the land of a particular district
explored. He replied to the objection from the want of integrity in the
surveyors. Admitting the full force of the objection, it was probable
that the United States would gain by it; at any rate, it would not lose;
and it was probable that, to avoid suspicion, if the surveyors should be
interested in the tract surveyed, they would give more than thirty
cents. With respect to foreigners, after they arrive in this country,
they then will be on the same footing with our own citizens. He adverted
to the mode which had been adopted by New York--they had sold lands in
every way, at a certain price, at auction, and are now selling them at
the discretion of Commissioners, at a rate not below a certain sum.

Mr. STONE objected to the mode of leaving the price unfixed, as it would
involve a complex system, subjecting the purchasers to great
inconvenience, perplexity, and uncertainty. He reprobated the system
adopted by New York, and asked the gentleman (Mr. LAWRENCE) whether New
York had not been subjected to great loss and vexation in consequence of
the plan they had pursued? He wished the system of New York should be
fully understood, in order that the United States may avoid it. He
concluded by saying, that he was in favor of fixing a price, and
supposed that the Western Territory, sold at thirty cents per acre,
would sink the whole of the national debt.

Mr. LAWRENCE replied to Mr. STONE. He said, that when the State of New
York sold their lands at a fixed price, there had been complaints on
account of the best tracts being taken up. When they had sold them at
auction, the value of the lands had been generally realized in
proportion to the quality. With respect to the last mode adopted, the
result was not yet known.

Mr. WHITE said, if gentlemen had proposed the amendment to the clause
which respects large purchases, he should not have objected to it. He,
however, objected to it in the present case, and, in order to show that
a fixed price was most eligible for small quantities, he instanced the
practice of Lord Fairfax, who had been a great proprietor in Virginia;
and also the practice of the first proprietors of Pennsylvania. These
sold their lands, good and bad, at one price; their experience for such
a length of time, near a century, he thought sufficient to show that
mode to be the most eligible. He would not object to fixing that
condition to special contract.

Mr. SEDGWICK obviated the objection in the first instance, by saying
that the officers will be able to determine, with very considerable
precision, what will be for the interest of the United States. He said
experience had proved that there were no insuperable difficulties in the
case.

Mr. MOORE observed, that the actual value of the best lands in that
territory was about thirty cents per acre. When all of that description
is sold, the next will bring the same price; from whence he inferred,
that there could be no difficulty or loss attending fixing the price. He
stated some difficulties which would result from adopting the mode
proposed.


WEDNESDAY, January 5.

_Duties on Spirits._

The House, agreeably to the order of the day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair, and took into
consideration the bill repealing, after a certain time, the act laying
duties on distilled spirits, &c., and imposing others in their stead.

Mr. JACKSON moved to strike out the essential part of the first clause.
He stated his objections at large against the principles of the bill,
and reprobated the funding system, and an excise in particular, as an
auxiliary to it.

The tenor of his observations was to show that this mode of taxation was
odious, unequal, unpopular, and oppressive, more particularly in the
Southern States; in which he observed its unequal operation would be
most sensibly felt, as the citizens of those States have no alternative
to adopt by which they can diminish the weight of the tax; no breweries
or orchards to furnish a substitute for spirituous liquors; hence they
become a necessary article. He contended that they were not only
necessary, but salutary in the Southern regions. This, he said, had been
acknowledged by an Eastern author, _Mr. Morse_, an authority which he
presumed would not be disputed by the Northern gentlemen, especially
when it was considered he was a clergyman. Mr. M. declares that grog is
a necessary article of drink in the Southern States.

Mr. J. took notice of the petition of the College of Physicians, which
had lately been read in the House on the subject of distilled spirits.
He disapproved highly of their interfering in the business. He thought
they might with equal propriety interpose their offices to prevent the
use of many other articles which were deemed pernicious or of a
poisonous quality. He instanced mushrooms; they might petition Congress
to pass a law interdicting the use of catsup, because some ignorant
persons had been poisoned by eating mushrooms.

Mr. J. then gave a short sketch of the history of excises in England. He
said they always had been considered by the people of that country as an
odious tax, from the time of _Oliver Cromwell_ to the present day; even
_Blackstone_, a high prerogative lawyer, has reprobated them. He said,
he hoped this country would take warning by the experience of the people
of Great Britain, and not sacrifice their liberties by wantonly
contracting debts which would render it necessary to burden the people
by such taxes as would swallow up their privileges. We are, said he, too
much in the habit of imitating that country; and I plainly perceive that
the time will come when a shirt shall not be washed without an excise.
He then expatiated on the unequal operation of excises, and instanced
the experience of this State. A few counties, said he, approximate to
the capital, have borne the weight of the whole, while the distant parts
of the State did not feel the burden; and, by an indication of several
particulars, he showed its unequal operation in the Southern States. It
will deprive the mass of the people of almost the only luxury they
enjoy, that of distilled spirits. He did not see the necessity of
passing this law the present session. The amount of the produce of the
duties laid last session is not yet known, nor is it yet ascertained
whether the citizens will subscribe to the assumption. Let us not lay a
tax for a purpose which may never exist; for my part, I hope they never
will subscribe. He then adverted to the excess of duties already laid,
and the probability of a great increase of that excess; and urged the
propriety of waiting at least another quarter to see what that excess
may amount to. These observations he enforced by recurring to the recent
transactions of the States of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina;
and he expected to hear very shortly that the Assembly of Georgia had
expressed similar opinions with the latter States on the business of the
assumption. He concluded by expressing a general disapprobation of the
various parts of the bill.

Mr. PARKER said, he had seconded the motion of the gentleman from
Georgia, not because he was more averse to this particular clause than
to the subsequent parts of the bill. He exceedingly disliked the several
provisions contained in it. He then adverted to the general process of
the revenue business the last session; and observing on the conduct of
the mercantile interest, to which so much credit had been given, said,
he thought they were not entitled to the liberal encomiums which had
been bestowed on them for their promptitude in paying the duties, as
the certainty and increase of the revenue had served to enhance the
value of the public securities, of which it is well known they hold a
very considerable portion.

He then touched on the subsequent parts of the bill, which he reprobated
as hostile to the liberties of the people, as contrary to the general
sentiment; not only as partial and unequal in the mode of assessment,
but particularly on account of the mode of collecting the tax. It will,
said he, convulse the Government; it will let loose a swarm of harpies,
who, under the denomination of revenue officers, will range through the
country, prying into every man's house and affairs, and like a
Macedonian phalanx bear down all before them. And though the Government
has proceeded with a degree of prosperity and success beyond the most
sanguine expectations, yet he very much doubted the policy of trying its
strength by an experiment of this nature.

Recurring to the actual and probable produce of the duties already laid,
he attempted to show that the additional sum of upwards of eight hundred
thousand dollars, contemplated to be raised by this bill, is not
necessary. He controverted the policy of the measure, and contended that
it would, in all probability, rather diminish than increase the revenue
of the United States. For the mercantile part of the community, who have
been applauded for acting so honorably in making their entries, and
paying the impost, will find it for their interest to alter their
conduct; they will combine to defeat the excise, which will in its
operations bear so unequally on them.

He objected very particularly to the bill on account of its tendency to
promote smuggling. Mr. P. said, no man was more heartily disposed than
he was to give his approbation to every just measure for supporting the
public credit, and doing every thing in his power to support the
constitutional operations of the Government; but this mode of raising a
revenue he considered as particularly odious to the people; and at the
present moment he was not satisfied that such an increase to the public
burdens is necessary.

Mr. STONE said, he had no objection to the design of the bill so far as
additional revenue was necessary; but the mode of raising it by excise
he exceedingly disliked. He had no doubt that other means might be
devised; but at present he thought the committee was not sufficiently
informed respecting the actual and probable amount of the revenue from
the duties already imposed, to determine the necessity of an addition to
the revenue. He therefore moved that the committee should rise without
any further discussion of the bill at this time, and that a select
committee should be appointed to make the necessary previous inquiries
upon the subject, and report to the House.

Mr. FITZSIMONS observed that there was already on the table a statement
from the proper officers of the product of the revenue, from September,
1789, to September, 1790.

This statement was read.

The motion for the committee's rising was put and lost.

The question on Mr. JACKSON's motion for striking out the clause was
put, and negatived by a great majority.


THURSDAY, January 6.

_Duties on Spirits._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
bill repealing after the last day of ---- next, the act laying duties on
distilled spirits, &c., and imposing others in their stead. Mr. BOUDINOT
in the chair.

The twelfth section, which specifies the rates of duties, being read,

Mr. PARKER moved that it should be struck out, in order to admit a
substitute which should provide for a different mode of raising the
requisite additional revenue; the proposition he had in view, he said,
was a duty on molasses. This, he observed, would answer every purpose,
without being liable to the objections which had been offered against
the plan of the bill.

Mr. MADISON observed, that he had felt the force of the objections which
had been urged against the bill. He was in general principled against
excises, but of all excises, that on ardent spirits he considered the
least exceptionable. The question now to be determined, he conceived,
was this--is an addition to the present amount of the revenue necessary?
It had appeared that an addition is necessary; for his own part, he
should prefer direct taxation to any excises whatever; but he conceived
this would be contrary to the sentiments of a majority of the people of
the United States; and he was fully convinced that it was contrary to
the opinion of a great majority of the House. If, said he, any mode
could be adopted, without having recourse to excises, he would be the
last that would give them support; but he conceived there was none, and
the plan proposed was divested of the most exceptionable provisions
usually connected with an excise system.

Mr. JACKSON observed, that his defeat yesterday should not deter him,
while he had a monitor within, from rising in his place to do his duty,
in opposition to a system unfriendly to the liberties of the people. He
said, he was not the first on this floor who had been outvoted by silent
majorities; gentlemen of superior abilities had met with similar
treatment. He, however, felt so much respect for himself as to suppose
that this silence proceeded from an inability to answer the arguments
which he had the honor to offer against what he considered a most
ruinous and mischievous system of taxation.

He then stated certain particulars respecting the produce of the
revenue, to show that so great a sum as is proposed to be raised by
excise is unnecessary.

He doubted not other resources of revenue might be explored which would
be more palatable; he instanced a tax on salaries, pensions, and
lawyers, and in these particulars, he wished that the example of Great
Britain might be followed.

He then dilated on the practice of smuggling, which he contended would
be promoted by this bill; also the difficulties and opposition which
were justly to be expected, by which the dignity of the Government would
be insulted. Can this Government, said he, protect its officers from the
resentment of any one State in the Union? He reprobated the idea of
placing the Government in such a situation.

Mr. LAWRENCE observed, that he doubted not every gentleman's mind was
open to conviction, and he hoped and expected that every question would
be treated dispassionately. He did not rise yesterday to answer the
gentleman, because he was not impressed with the force of his arguments
in the manner the gentleman supposed the House was. He then adverted to
the act of the last session, by which the debts of the particular States
were assumed. Having taken this debt upon ourselves, the consequence is
obvious, nor can we ever get over the dishonor of not making the
necessary provision for paying it. He then adverted to the statements
which had been submitted to the House by the officer to whom the Union
had intrusted the direction of its finances. From these it fully
appeared that a much greater deficiency in the revenue existed than some
gentlemen appeared willing to allow. If this deficiency exists, and if
the United States are bound to make provision for the debts they have
assumed to pay, the duties contemplated by the bill appear the most
obvious for the Government to recur to. He adverted to the idea of
direct taxation, and inquired, on what principle will gentlemen consent
to this mode of raising the necessary supplies? Will they make the
representation of the several States the rule by which it shall be
apportioned? He doubted whether direct taxes on this principle would be
agreeable, even to the gentlemen who have mentioned them. He then
remarked on the objections to an excise, on account of the mode of
collection. He said a rigorous collection would bear hard only on the
dishonest, while it would protect the fair trader from bearing an undue
proportion of the public burdens.

He observed on the uneasiness which is said to prevail in some of the
States; and to obviate the force of these reflections he instanced the
harmony and peace that prevailed in those States which bear a much
greater proportion of the public burdens than those which complain, as
was abundantly evident from the documents in possession of the House.

Mr. STEELE stated his objections at large to an excise; he adverted to
the particular situation of affairs in some of the Southern States,
especially North Carolina. The Assembly of that State had rejected the
proposal of taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States, with scorn; they had also refused to admit Continental prisoners
into their jails; and another circumstance more hostile to the General
Government than either of the foregoing had taken place, which he
forbore to mention. He said such was the present state of the public
mind, in various parts of the Union, that he should dread taking any
measures which might serve to increase the fermentation which the people
are in. An excise he considered of this nature; it would in its
operations produce the worst consequences. A more exceptionable mode of
taxation he conceived could not be devised. A direct or poll tax, he
supposed, would not be so odious; and though, for his own part, he
should prefer an excise to either of the former taxes, yet such was the
aversion of the people to it, that he should prefer almost any other
alternative. He thought other objects might be found from which the
necessary revenue could be raised. He instanced duties on inland
navigation, law proceedings, legal conveyances, &c.

He then adverted to the operation of an excise, especially in the State
of North Carolina, and said that the consumption of ardent spirits in
that State was so great that the duty would amount perhaps to ten times
as much as in the State of Connecticut. On the whole, he hoped, if the
section is not struck out, that the excise will be reduced.

Mr. SHERMAN observed, that the subject now before the committee was
thoroughly discussed the last session; and as nothing new or of weight
or importance had been offered the present session against it, he
thought it would be a useless waste of the time of the House to go into
a particular reply to the objections offered against the bill. This he
thought a sufficient answer to the charge of carrying questions by
silent majorities.

He then entered into a short consideration of the subject generally, and
defended the system from the charges which had been adduced respecting
its unequal operation.

Mr. LIVERMORE was in favor of the bill. He said he considered it as an
equal and just mode of taxation; and, as such, will be agreeable to the
people--they will consider it as drinking down the national debt. So
far, said he, as my observations have extended, I have not found a
single individual who has objected to it. He then obviated the
objections to the bill, which he conceived arose principally from the
word excise. He thought the term very improperly applied on the present
occasion, for the duty cannot be said to be an excise. He then gave a
description of what had been considered in times past as an excise,
which, to be sure, is a very unequal tax, inasmuch as it fell on the
poor only, who were obliged to purchase in small quantities; while the
rich, by storing their cellars, escaped the duty. But this bill provides
that the duty shall fall equally on the rich and poor. It is to be paid,
or secured, by the importer of foreign spirits, and on the still-head on
domestic spirits. This will equalize the burden, and leave no room for
complaint. He then adverted to direct taxation; and by a variety of
particulars, showed that it was utterly impossible to lay a direct tax
that would not prove unjust, unequal, and grievously oppressive.

Mr. BLOODWORTH spoke against the bill. He dilated largely on the present
uneasiness which prevailed in the State of North Carolina. His
experience, he said, was directly contrary to that of the gentleman from
New Hampshire; the people to the southward universally condemned an
excise.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, he was unhappy to hear that discontents prevailed in
any part of the United States. He could assure gentlemen that he did not
contemplate the execution of the laws by military force. He was sure
that in no part of the Legislature were entertained designs inimical to
the public liberty. In framing the present bill, great attention had
been paid to prevent its being attended with those qualities which, in
other countries, rendered taxation by excise justly obnoxious to popular
resentment. He relied on the good sense and well-informed understandings
of the people in every part of America, for the execution of such
systems for the support of public credit, and for the diminution of the
national debt, as should be devised by the wisdom of their
Representatives. For the same purposes, he said, he confided in the
patriotism of the gentlemen who came from those districts of country
where uneasiness was said to exist. He believed there was indeed
considerable deficiency to be provided for, for the support of
Government and of the public credit. This belief was founded in his
confidence in the information received from the Secretary of the
Treasury. But if there was no deficiency, his disposition to support the
bill would be the same; for he had never believed that a public debt was
a public benefit. Is it not, then, the duty of those to whom the people
have delegated the important trust of guarding their prosperity, in a
season of profound peace, to liberate them from the burden and pressure
of debt? Therefore the only question to be determined is, whether the
proposed duties are a proper source from whence we might derive the
necessary aids to provide for the payment of the interest, or the
diminution of the principal of our debt? He believed that of all the
subjects of revenue which were within the power of Congress, none was so
proper as the duty on ardent spirits, contemplated by the bill. In this
sentiment, he believed he concurred with that of the great body of the
people. The several species of taxation may be divided into the four
following: by impost; a tax on internal negotiations; direct taxes; and
that now under consideration, excise. The impost duties had been
extended as far as was, in the opinion of any gentleman, dictated by
sound policy. The tax on internal negotiations, which could not be
carried on to any considerable extent without the intervention of
stamps, was subject to the objection brought against the present bill,
and that in a degree incomparably beyond it, of being opposed by public
opinion. Direct taxes are still more objectionable on that account, at
least in every part of the country to which his knowledge extended. They
are of all taxes the most unequal, and in this country would be found
the most oppressive. They are unequal, because with whatever exactness
they might be apportioned upon capital or income, the only two
principles on which an apportionment can be made, they may, and will be,
very unequal as to the burden imposed; because a man's ability to pay
taxes is not in proportion either to his capital, his property, or his
income, but to that part of his income which is over and above his
necessary expenses, according to the usual manner of living for persons
of his degree in the community. They will be oppressive in this country,
because in many of the States the plentiful circulation of money, and
the facility of obtaining it, does not extend to the interior parts, nor
could it be obtained by many of our citizens without a great sacrifice
of property. It may be added, that from the extent of our settlements
compared with the number of our citizens, the expense of collection
would be immense.

In regard to excises, Mr. S. said, that in all insensible modes of
taxation, it should be observed, that a much greater sum would be
obtained from an individual than by any mode of direct imposition: this,
without entering into a discussion of the reasons upon which it was
founded, is demonstrated by fact. He instanced the porters of London,
from whom, in the single article of beer, was drawn ten times as much as
could be procured by the most rigorous mode of direct taxation. With
regard to the proposed duties, though the well-meant consideration of
morality which had been urged by some gentlemen weighed but little with
him, because he doubted whether it was well founded, yet, if the
consumption should be lessened, he did not believe it would be attended
with any sensible inconvenience. The consumption, at present, amounts to
an enormous quantity; from these considerations, as the measure is
dictated by sound policy, he hoped and believed it would be supported by
a good degree of unanimity.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) adverted to the funding system, to show
that the faith of the United States was pledged to raise a sufficient
revenue to discharge the debt, which, by that system, they have engaged
to pay. The Secretary's statements point out a deficiency; those
statements, he had no doubt, were as accurate as the nature of things
would admit. Gentlemen who find fault with the proposed plan do not
offer a substitute. He then entered into a defence of the bill, and
showed in what respects it differed from the English plan of an excise.

He said, the present bill was not so exceptionable on account of its
violating private property as the collection law.

He instanced, in a particular clause of that law, the power of entering
houses by warrant from a justice of the peace--trial by jury is secured
by this bill, and other provisions friendly to personal rights are
added.

Direct taxes are as much objected to by North Carolina as the excise;
and though direct taxes are mentioned, no plan is offered.

He then enlarged on the importance of punctuality in paying the interest
of the public debt, and of having a surplus revenue in the Treasury. He
doubted not the gentlemen in favor of the bill were as patriotic as
those who are averse to it. Difference of opinion is to be expected; but
he had a better opinion of the good sense of the community than to
suppose they would be led away by a sound; they will see and judge for
themselves; and when they see that the law is free from all those
obnoxious qualities which have been suggested, they will submit to it
without complaint, especially when they realize that the tax is equal,
and the only effective resource within the present command of the
Government. The General Government is authorized to lay excises--North
Carolina knew this when she adopted the constitution. The opposition, he
suspected, was against the object to which the money is to be
appropriated.

Mr. GILES said, the sentiments of the people of the Southern States have
been so differently represented from what he conceived to be the state
of facts, that, in justice to them he conceived himself bound to take
some notice of the observations which had fallen from gentlemen. He then
stated certain principles on which taxation should be formed. Taxes
should be necessary, and raised on a plan consistent with the principles
of liberty. He adverted to the necessity, which, he observed, was
abundantly apparent from the report of the Secretary of the Treasury;
but he did not confine his opinion to what had fallen from him. He
instanced other reasons which would occasion a necessity for
replenishing the public Treasury. The expediency of the present mode he
argued from the impost's being carried to the utmost; from the
approbation of this mode by a majority of the people; and though
uneasiness might prevail in some of the Southern States, he considered
them as originating altogether from want of due information. Possessed
of that information, he could pledge himself to the committee that they
would cheerfully acquiesce in whatever the Legislature should decide to
be for the general interest.

With respect to the bill's being agreeable to the principles of liberty
and republicanism, this would more properly come into view when that
part of the bill which designates the mode of collection comes under
consideration. At present he would only say, that he had observed with
pleasure, that there appeared to be a universal disposition in the
members of the House to manifest the most scrupulous attention, in all
their deliberations, to the liberties of the people.

On the whole, he had no doubt that, on mature reflection, the people
would acquiesce in the present plan, when the honor, security, and peace
of the United States appeared to be essentially connected with a
further provision for the public exigencies.

Mr. STONE particularly alluded to the statement offered by Mr. JACKSON,
by which it appears that only the sum of 146,000 dollars was
wanting--whereas the Secretary's report calls for the enormous sum of
800,000 dollars. He called on gentlemen to show the errors of the
statement offered by the gentleman. It had not been done.

He then adverted to the number of people that would probably be wanted
in order to make the duty productive. He believed they would be so
numerous as to be sufficient to constitute an army.

Mr. FITZSIMONS read an estimate of the actual and probable produce of
the present impost and tonnage for the current year, by which it appears
there will be a deficiency of upwards of 300,000 dollars; but taking
into consideration certain contingencies, which, should they take place,
will diminish the amount of the present duties, it appeared that the
deficiency would be much larger than the sum mentioned; but even in case
of a surplus being produced by this bill, there are objects to which it
can be applied highly beneficial to the United States. He instanced
sinking the deferred stock, and the three per cents. The reduction of
the public debt is an object which ought never to be lost sight of.


MONDAY, January 10.

_Vacancy in the Presidency._

In Committee of the Whole on the bill, declaring what officer, in case
of vacancy [by death, removal, or inability] in the offices of President
and Vice President, shall act as President, Mr. BOUDINOT in the chair.

The first clause of the bill was read, which contains a blank to be
filled up, designating the person who shall act as President.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) observed that, by the constitution, the
vacancy is to be filled with an officer of the United States. This
narrows the discussion very much. But he conceived there was a previous
question necessary to be determined; and that was, whether the person
appointed to supply the vacancy should hold the office during the time
for which the President and Vice President were elected, or whether he
was to hold the office only till a new election could take place. He
thought that, by the constitution, a new election was not to take place
till the term for which the President and Vice President had been
elected was expired.

He then descanted on the respective offices of the Chief Justice,
Secretary of State, and Secretary of the Treasury; and, by several
particulars, showed that the appointment would most naturally devolve on
the Secretary of State. He accordingly moved that the blank be filled
with the words "The Secretary of State."

Mr. LIVERMORE observed, that in considering this question, he thought no
reference should be had to the officers which had been mentioned, for,
as it was supposed that the case contemplated would not happen once in
a hundred years, he conceived that the present characters, who now hold
the above offices, would be entirely out of the question. He had in view
a different person, and that was the President of the Senate, _pro
tempore_, and moved that the blank be filled with this person.

Mr. WHITE observed, that the constitution says the vacancy shall be
filled by an officer of the United States. The President, _pro tempore_,
of the Senate, is not an officer of the United States. Besides, this
will give one branch of the Legislature the power of electing a
President. This, he conceived, was contrary to the constitution, as both
branches have a right to an equal voice in the appointment in this case.
This will introduce the very evil intended to be guarded against.

Mr. WILLIAMSON said, the motion was directly repugnant to the
constitution. Why not choose the Speaker of this House?

Mr. LIVERMORE said, he was well aware of the objections offered by the
gentlemen. He could have wished the constitution had pointed out the
person. But he conceived that the Senate was the only body that could do
this business. If either of the officers mentioned should be the person
designated to supply the vacancy, it would be in the power of the Vice
President, by virtue of the power of removing officers, absolutely to
appoint a successor, without consulting either branch of the
Legislature.

Mr. SHERMAN observed that this matter is left with the Legislature. The
whole power of the people, in case of vacancy, devolves on the
Legislature. The particular officer is not pointed out; it lies with
Congress to say who it shall be. The President of the Senate is an
officer of the United States. In case of the death of a Governor and
Lieutenant Governor, it is common in the several States, for the oldest
councillor to preside. He instanced the case of the abdication of James
II. Adverting to the constitution, he showed that the appointment of
Vice President, in certain cases, devolves on the Senate. The vacancy
may be filled for a longer or shorter time, and this appears to be a
question previous in its nature to be determined.

Mr. SEDGWICK said he should be in favor of the motion of the gentleman
from New Hampshire, if it was not for the express provision in the
constitution, which says, the office shall be filled by an officer of
the United States. Should the vacancy now happen, there would be no
officer of the Senate that could be appointed.

He mentioned that the office of Chief Justice was considered as next to
that of President, and therefore on the whole, he considered him as the
most proper person to fill the vacancy. He thought the bill respecting
the votes for President and Vice President should be first determined.
He moved, therefore, that the committee should rise, and take up the
next bill.

Mr. CARROLL and Mr. LIVERMORE objected to the motion for the committee's
rising.

Mr. MADISON was also opposed to the motion. He enlarged on the subject,
and said he thought it a duty urged by a variety of considerations,
important in themselves, and more so, perhaps, in their consequences,
that the decision should now be made.

Mr. SMITH started a variety of objections to Mr. LIVERMORE's
proposition. He thought it unconstitutional, as it would, in its
operation, deprive a State of a vote in the Senate.

Mr. BOURNE said he seconded the motion for the committee's rising,
because he conceived there was other business of more immediate
importance to be considered; and he saw no necessity for coming to a
decision on this question at the present time.

Mr. LAWRENCE supposed that the blank could be filled up in the House; he
was, therefore, in favor of the committee's rising.

The motion for the committee's rising was negatived.

Mr. BENSON was in favor of filling up the blank with the Chief Justice.
He observed that the objection arising from the Vice President's having
it in his power to name his successor, in case the Secretary of State is
inserted, does not apply to the Chief Justice. He is independent of the
Executive.

He pointed out several particulars, in which there was an
incompatibility in the offices of Secretary of State, and that of
President. He observed that the appointment to the Regency, in all
countries, is generally of the first law officer.

Mr. JACKSON objected to the Chief Justice, and said the Speaker of the
House of Representatives was, in his opinion, the next officer in point
of dignity to the President and Vice President.

Mr. MADISON objected to the Chief Justice, as it would be blending the
Judiciary and the Executive. He objected to the President _pro tem._ of
the Senate. He will be a Senator of some particular State, liable to be
instructed by the State, and will still hold his office--thus he will
hold two offices at once. He adverted to the other objections which had
been offered against the Secretary of the State, and showed the
compatibility of the two offices.

Mr. STONE stated sundry difficulties respecting all the officers that
had been named; but, on the whole, thought there were fewer against the
Secretary of State than any other officer that had been mentioned.

Mr. SENEY was opposed to coming to any decision at the present time. He
thought more important business was before the House. He was not for
making any decision that would give umbrage to any officer of the
Government. The Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Treasury
were equally entitled to public notice.

Mr. CARROLL was in favor of coming to a decision; and if nothing more
could be offered against the motion for filling up the blank with the
Secretary of State, he presumed the committee were ripe for a decision.
He referred to the situation of countries who had not, in season, made
provision for a Regent, &c.

Mr. SHERMAN said, he was in favor of the committee's rising and
reporting the bill, and leaving the blanks to be filled up in the House.

Mr. WHITE was in favor of filling up the blank in the committee--he saw
no reason for a delay. The officers mentioned are as well known now as
they will be three days hence. The President and Vice President being in
health, is a reason why the subject should now be considered; it can be
done with coolness and freedom from all warmth.

Mr. LAWRENCE said, he thought there was no necessity for precipitating
the decision. With respect to every person that has been named,
difficulties have been started. The subject is important, and time
should be given to deliberate on the several officers that have been
named. He hoped, therefore, that the committee would rise and report the
bill, and leave the blank to be filled up at another time.

Mr. BURKE was in favor of the committee's rising. He observed, that the
members in general appeared to be very much undetermined. This is the
first day the subject has been under consideration. He hoped the members
would not be precipitated to vote on the occasion.

Mr. CARROLL said, if the committee should rise, he hoped the bill would
not be reported, but that they would sit again.

Mr. BURKE said, he hoped the committee would sit again.

The question on the committee's rising and reporting progress, was
carried in the affirmative.


THURSDAY, January 13.

_Vacancy in the Presidency._

In Committee of the Whole, on the bill declaring the officer who, in
case of vacancy in the offices of President and Vice President, shall
exercise the office of President of the United States, Mr. BOUDINOT in
the chair.

The motion for filling up the blank with "the Secretary of State for the
time being," was renewed by Mr. CARROLL.

Mr. LIVERMORE observed, that the character of the gentleman who fills
that office should have no weight in determining the question, because
the House was about to provide for a case that might not happen before a
number of years were elapsed. The House should fix on the officer who
would, from the nature of his office, most naturally succeed. He hoped
they would not determine in favor of an officer of their own creating,
and of which no mention is made in the constitution. The Chief Justice,
he remarked, had been spoken of: one great objection he mentioned
against him--the provision which the constitution makes in case the
President is impeached, viz: that he should preside. As this was an
elective Government, he wished its principles preserved, and not to see
the Chief Magistracy filled by an officer not the choice of the people.
The President of the Senate _pro tem_, appeared to him a much fitter
officer to fill that station: he was originally chosen by the people to
the Senate.

When amendments to the constitution came to be thought of, perhaps it
would be proper to provide for this case by a special clause in it,
empowering the Electors who had chosen the President and Vice President,
in case of vacancy, to meet again, and make another choice; only,
however, for the remainder of the four years; because, at the end of
that time, the power of choosing the Electors should return to, and be
exercised by the several States.

If the motion before the committee was negatived, he gave notice that he
would bring in his, viz: to fill up the blank with the person last
antecedently chosen President of the Senate.

Mr. BALDWIN said, that he should vote for the present motion, because he
conceived that the constitution is express, that an officer of the
Government, designated either by the law or the constitution, should be
appointed to fill this vacancy. He stated some objections against the
Chief Justice. He is an officer who ought to be entirely detached from
all political agitations whatever--his mind ought to be kept calm and as
unembarrassed as possible. He quoted the precedent established in the
law instituting the Governor of the Western Territory--there the
Secretary is to succeed the Governor. The Secretary of State is an
Executive officer, an assistant to the President, and must be supposed,
from his situation, to be the most proper person to supply the vacancy.

Mr. SHERMAN was of opinion, that putting the Chief Magistracy into the
hands of a subordinate officer, was by no means proper. As to the
observations made by the gentleman last up, on the arrangements in the
Government of the Western Territory, he did not think they could be
applied to the present case. That Government is a subordinate one, and a
kind of legislative power is vested in the Governor of selecting, from
the laws and regulations of the different States, such as he thought
requisite for the Government of those he had under his care.

He was in favor of giving the supreme Executive, in case of accident, to
the President of the Senate. The Government would certainly suffer fewer
inconveniences by that arrangement than if the head of a department was
put in. The Vice President, by the constitution, succeeds to the
President--the President of the Senate to the office of the first; it is
therefore very natural that he should also exercise the duties of the
second in case of a vacancy.

To designate any officer as possible successor to the President, would
be giving him too much dignity, and raising him, in a manner, even above
the Legislature.

Mr. CARROLL observed, that the vacancy might happen in the recess of the
Legislature, or in the absence of the President of the Senate; the
Secretary of State would always be at the seat of Government. Besides,
the constitution declares the vacancy shall be filled by an officer of
the Government. The President of the Senate is only an officer _pro
tem_. If the framers of the constitution had intended the vacancy should
be filled by an officer named in it, they could have designated him; but
this they had not done; he therefore supposed they had in view some
officer not then in existence.

Mr. GERRY regretted that the subject should have been taken up at this
moment, when so much important business is before Congress. He adverted
to the motion, and said, that the character which now fills the office
of Secretary of State undoubtedly possessed the confidence of the
Legislature in the fullest manner, and very justly; but when the
exigency shall arrive for which we now are about to provide, a character
may fill that office who would be a scourge to the Union. Besides, said
he, if the office of Vice President was now to be filled, the Secretary
of State would be ineligible, coming from the same State with the
President. He stated other objections from the constitution. He thought
the nomination should not be confined to officers of the United States.
He supposed the views of Government may be extended even to officers of
the several States. He, however, wished the whole business postponed;
but if this idea is overruled, he suggested the propriety of filling the
blank with the constitutional clause respecting the highest candidates
who are primarily voted for as President and Vice President.

Mr. SMITH remarked, that there appeared to be so great a diversity of
opinion on the subject before the House, that he doubted the possibility
of procuring a majority for either of the motions that had been made.
There would be objections, he conceived, to any proposition that could
be offered; but the committee should determine on that to which there
were fewest. To the Secretary of State he thought there were less than
to any other officer proposed. Those against the Chief Justice he
thought unanswerable. Indeed, the gentleman who proposed him had not
offered any answer to the objections made to that officer.

The duties of the President of the Senate, and those of the President of
the United States, appeared to him incompatible. The first was the
Representative of a particular State, and bound to obey the instructions
of it. If he was to be deprived of his seat in the Senate, his State
would lose a vote there, and the balance of that branch of the
Legislature would be destroyed.

He recapitulated the objections that had already been made to the Chief
Justice's filling the chair. His power of expounding treaties would be
improperly mixed with that of making them; that of condemning for
offences, with a power of granting reprieves and pardons. Then the Chief
Justice could not act with propriety as Commander-in-Chief of the army
and navy. It had been said, he observed, that the Judiciary business
might go on for some time without the assistance of the Chief Justice.
He thought not; there were three Circuit Courts, and two Judges for
each, including the Chief Justice. If he was absent, the business of one
of the circuits could not proceed; besides, he should preside in the
Supreme Court.

He concluded by saying, that the office of Secretary of State and the
duties of President were analogous. He was a kind of assistant to the
Chief Magistrate, and would, therefore, very properly supply his place;
besides, he was always at the seat of Government.

Mr. BURKE said, that he had consulted a gentleman skilled in the
doctrine of chances, who, after considering the subject, had informed
him, that there was an equal chance that such a contingency would not
happen more than once in eight hundred and forty years. He hoped,
therefore, that the committee would not spend any more time upon the
subject, but postpone it altogether.

Mr. GILES conceived, that the probability of the event taking place was
much greater than Mr. BURKE seemed to think. According to the doctrine
of politics, he said, it was not more than fifty to one that it would
not happen in two months. However, even if the chance was much less, it
was the duty of the House to make provision for the accident before it
occurred. If it was left till the case actually took place, it would
then be too late to think of remedying the evil; for it was to be
provided for by a Legislative act, which could not be made complete
without the President's approbation and signature, and could therefore
not be obtained when the chair was vacant. Then, if the event should
happen before it was provided for, there would be, he conceived, an end
to this Government.

He used another argument to urge the necessity of a speedy provision.
Suppose, said he, the Vice President should die, then the fate of this
Government would remain in the hands of the President, who, by
resigning, would destroy its organization, without leaving a
constitutional mode of filling the vacancy.

In addition to the loss of this Government, would not every member of
the Legislature, he asked, lose his character, credit, and reputation?

Having shown the necessity of making immediate provision for a case of
so much importance to the very existence of the Government, Mr. GILES
declared he was in favor of filling up the blank with the Secretary of
State. He chiefly rested his opinion on the idea, that if the
constitution had not intended that the vacancy should be filled by some
officer not there mentioned, they would have determined who it should
be.

Mr. SEDGWICK was sorry that the business had been brought forward, and
more so that gentlemen should discover a zeal on the occasion which
indicated too much of taking a personal interest in the question.

He did not apprehend the consequences which would follow, if the
accident should occur, would be so dreadful as the gentleman last up
appeared to think. There was more danger, he conceived, in ruffling
men's tempers now, by designating one officer heir apparent (if he might
be allowed the expression) to the office of Chief Magistrate.

He objected to filling up the blank with the Secretary of State; it
would be putting in the hands of the President (or of the Vice
President) a power of appointing his successor. The authority with which
the Chief Justice is vested, the respect which his station commands, and
his independence, induced him, he said, at first to think him the most
proper person to be at the head of affairs, in case of vacancy in the
Chief Magistracy. However, if it could not be agreed to postpone the
business, he should now vote for the President of the Senate _pro tem_.

Mr. BENSON said, that an honorable gentleman (Mr. SMITH) had remarked
that he had not attempted to answer the objections which were made to
the Chief Justice's being designated to fill the vacancy, and had drawn
the conclusion that the objections were unanswerable. He was sensible
that there might and would be objections to any officer that could be
mentioned; but those against the Chief Justice he did not think
unanswerable. It had been objected that there would be an impropriety in
his condemning as Chief Justice, and pardoning as President. But
something like this is frequently the case. He supposed that whoever
exercised the office of Chief Magistrate would for the time resign his
first office. He only mentioned this to show that the objections made to
the Chief Justice had not been answered because they were deemed
unanswerable. But his wish was to see the vacancy filled by an
independent officer; he had, therefore, no objection to the President of
the Senate _pro tem_.

Mr. JACKSON moved that the consideration of this business be postponed,
which was agreed to. The committee rose and reported.


FRIDAY, January 21.

_Duty on Spirits._

The House resumed the consideration of the new Revenue Bill.

Mr. JACKSON proposed an amendment, by adding a clause to prevent
inspectors, or any officers under them, from interfering, either
directly or indirectly, in elections, further than giving their own
votes, on penalty of forfeiting their offices.

This being seconded,

Mr. SHERMAN said, he should propose an addition to the amendment, and
that was to extend the prohibition to every other person whatever. He
supposed that to practise the arts of electioneering would be as
criminal in persons in general as in the officers of the revenue; but if
any provision is necessary in the case, he thought it might be made in
some other bill.

Mr. LIVERMORE approved the motion. These officers, said he, will hold
their places under the Government, and, from the duties assigned them,
will acquire such a knowledge of persons and characters, as will give
them great advantages, and enable them to influence elections to a great
degree. He thought the proposition important, and merited the attention
of the House.

Mr. VINING observed, that the motion went to disfranchise a great number
of citizens of the rights of suffrage. It appeared to him, also, to be
unconstitutional, as it will deprive them of speaking and writing their
minds; a right of which no law can divest them. He offered some
observations on the eligibility of the duty now contemplated, in
preference to direct taxes; and then urged the bad policy of rendering
the law odious, by fixing a stigma on the officers appointed to execute
it.

Mr. JACKSON replied to the observations against his motion. He said the
experience of Great Britain showed the propriety of the prohibition. He
read a section from a law passed in the reign of William and Mary on the
subject. A law was found necessary in that country to prevent the
interference of excise officers in elections, though the excise law then
in existence was only for ten years, and that now before us is a
perpetual law; for it is to exist till the whole State debts are
extinguished. He denied that it was a disfranchisement of the citizens;
they will have the same right to vote at the elections as other
citizens; it only goes to defining an offence, which may be of
pernicious consequence. Did I consider it as depriving the citizens of
the rights of suffrage, I would be the last to vote for it. He adverted
particularly to the dangerous influence that some future President would
acquire, by virtue of the power which he will possess of removing these
officers. He read some clauses from the British Excise Law, to show its
resemblance to the law now under consideration. He added some strictures
on the bill, and regretted that it had not been recommitted; but to
render it less odious and mischievous he strongly urged the necessity of
the section he had proposed.

Mr. BENSON said, there appeared to him to be an absurdity to say a man
shall forfeit an office which he holds during pleasure.

Mr. GERRY objected to the motion, because he thought it did not go far
enough; it ought to extend to all other revenue officers. He gave a
short account of the nature of civil government; no form, said he, is
stationary, they are always verging either to Democracy or Monarchy, or
to Aristocracy and Despotism. From hence, he drew an inference favorable
to a provision which should tend to abate and lessen the influence of
the Executive power in certain cases.

Mr. AMES objected to the motion. He said, the circumstances of this
country and Great Britain were not similar. That country is without a
constitution; the United States are blessed with one, which defines the
rights of the electors and the elected; rights of which they cannot be
deprived. The law which the gentleman referred to was not passed till
the abuses it was intended to remedy had arisen to an enormous height.
If ever there should be a necessity for a similar law in this country,
which he by no means expected, it will then be time enough to make the
regulation; but this clause will muzzle the mouths of freemen, and take
away the use of their reason.

Mr. BLOODWORTH replied to Mr. AMES. He observed, that corruptions had
taken place; elections have been influenced, and human nature being the
same, the same evils are to be expected. He thought it would be best to
prevent the evil if possible by enacting a law in season, and not wait
till the mischief is done.

Mr. SENEY was in favor of the clause. He thought it would be a salutary
provision, and no infringement on the rights of the people, as it would
be optional to accept the offices or not, with this restriction.

Mr. STONE was in favor of the motion. He observed, that it was a painful
consideration that a number of citizens should be disfranchised, and
deprived of their reason and speech, but this is a dilemma to which we
shall be reduced by means of this excise law; we must either deprive the
excise officers of this privilege of interfering, or give up the freedom
of elections.

Mr. VINING controverted the oft-repeated observation, that there was an
analogy between the two countries, Great Britain and America. He urged
an acceleration of the bill; delays he thought did not produce
conviction, they only serve to inflame; he hoped the clause would not be
agreed to, nor the bill recommitted.

Mr. LAWRENCE was sorry that there were so many impediments thrown in the
way of this bill. He could wish that the clause might be deferred, and
made the subject of a separate discussion. He objected to it as not
extensive enough. It ought to include all the officers of the
Government. At present, he should waive any further remarks, but hoped
the motion would not be agreed to at this time, but wished that the bill
might be finished.

Mr. SEDGWICK opposed the motion. He said, the natural tendency would be
to render the law odious; to deprive the Government of the services of
the best men in our country. Let me ask gentlemen, if they, or any of
their connections, would accept an appointment under this law, with such
an exceptionable clause in it? He observed on the total difference in
the circumstances of this country and those of Great Britain; and asked,
shall we transplant the corrupt maxims of that country to this? I hope
we shall not.

Mr. GERRY replied to the several objections which had been offered
against the motion. It will be too late, said he, when the evil takes
place to apply the remedy. The President will then have it in his power
to influence the elections in such manner as to procure a Legislature
that would not consent to a law for applying a remedy.

Mr. AMES reprobated the motion in very pointed terms, as impolitic in
respect to the law, as repugnant to the constitution, and as degrading
to human nature. Besides, he observed, that it was nugatory in itself,
because it goes to deprive the citizens of an inalienable right, which
you cannot take from them, nor can they divest themselves of it.

Mr. JACKSON made a short reply to Mr. AMES. He observed, that he had
always supposed that the English nation possessed a constitution, and
that the violation of the freedom of elections was the greatest
infringement on that constitution.

Mr. SHERMAN observed, that this motion went to create a positive
offence. He said he could not conceive any reason why this offence
should be chargeable on one description of officers only; he thought it
ought to go through, and include every class. He replied to the several
objections arising from the influence of the President; and observed,
that fixing such a stigma would oblige the President to appoint mean and
ordinary characters--characters fit to make tools of; for persons of
credit and respectability will not accept of appointments under such a
disqualification.

The question was determined in the negative, the yeas and nays being as
follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown, Burke,
      Floyd, Gerry, Grout, Hathorn, Heister, Jackson, Livermore,
      Mathews, Moore, Parker, Rensselaer, Seney, Sylvester,
      Stone, Tucker, and White--21.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Bourne, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Foster, Gale, Gilman, Goodhue,
      Griffin, Giles, Hartley, Huntington, Lawrence, Lee,
      Leonard, Madison, P. Muhlenberg, Schureman, Scott,
      Sedgwick, Sevier, Sherman, Sinnickson, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Smith, (of South Carolina,) Steele, Sturges,
      Thatcher, Trumbull, Vining, Wadsworth, Williamson, and
      Wynkoop--37.[38]


THURSDAY, January 27.

_Duty on Spirits._

The engrossed bill, repealing, after the last day of June next, the
duties heretofore laid on distilled spirits imported from abroad, and
laying others in their stead, and also upon spirits distilled within the
United States, and for appropriating the same, was passed by a majority
of fourteen.

The yeas and nays being called for, were as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Bourne, Cadwalader,
      Carroll, Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gerry, Gilman,
      Goodhue, Griffin, Grout, Huntington, Lawrence, Lee,
      Leonard, Livermore, Madison, Partridge, Schureman,
      Sedgwick, Sherman, Sylvester, Sinnickson, Smith (of South
      Carolina), Sturges, Thatcher, Trumbull, Vining, Wadsworth,
      White, and Wynkoop--35.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown, Burke,
      Giles, Hartley, Hathorn, Heister, Jackson, Mathews, Moore,
      Muhlenberg, Parker, Van Rensselaer, Seney, Smith (of
      Maryland), Steele, Stone, Tucker, and Williamson--21.


TUESDAY, February 1.

_Bank of the United States._

The bill sent from the Senate, to incorporate the subscribers to the
Bank of the United States, was read the third time; and, the question
being on the passage of the bill,

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) observed, that the bill being taken up
rather unexpectedly yesterday, gentlemen did not appear prepared to
discuss the subject. It therefore was suffered to be read in Committee
of the Whole, and passed to the third reading, in his opinion, rather
informally; as the members were thereby deprived of giving their
sentiments in the usual manner on a bill of the greatest importance. He
thought it susceptible of various amendments. [The SPEAKER having
observed, that the bill, agreeably to the rules of the House, could not
be amended without being recommitted,] Mr. S. moved, that the bill
should be recommitted, for the purpose of making sundry alterations, and
removing objections which he thought the bill liable to. He then
enumerated several objections. Those who are to receive the
subscriptions, he said, by the bill, are not obliged to give any bonds
for their fidelity. He thought the clause which excludes foreigners from
voting by proxy exceptionable; and the time in which subscriptions are
to be received, he thought too contracted.

Mr. JACKSON said he was in favor of the motion for a recommitment; but
not for the reasons offered by the gentleman from South Carolina. He was
opposed to the principle of the bill altogether. He then adverted to the
situation of the United States, and observed, that it was so different
from that of Great Britain, at the time the Bank was established in that
country, that no reason in favor of the institution can be deduced from
thence. He adverted to the arguments arising from the facility which
banks afford of anticipating the public resources in case of emergency.
This idea of anticipations he reprobated, as tending to involve the
country in debt, and an endless labyrinth of perplexities. This plan of
a National Bank, said he, is calculated to benefit a small part of the
United States, the mercantile interest only; the farmers, the yeomanry,
will derive no advantage from it; as the bank bills will not circulate
to the extremities of the Union. He said he had never seen a bank bill
in the State of Georgia, nor will they ever benefit the farmers of that
State, or of New Hampshire. He urged that there was no necessity for
instituting a new bank. There is one already established in this city,
under the style of the Bank of North America. This proposed institution
is an infringement of the charter of that bank, which cannot be
justified. He urged the unconstitutionality of the plan; called it a
monopoly; such a one as contravenes the spirit of the constitution; a
monopoly of a very extraordinary nature; a monopoly of the public moneys
for the benefit of the corporation to be created. He then read several
passages from the _Federalist_, which he said were directly contrary to
the assumption of the power proposed by the bill. He hoped, therefore,
that it would be recommitted; and he could not help hoping, also, that
it would be deferred to the next session.

Mr. LAWRENCE observed, that the friends of the institution proposed had
been unjustly charged with precipitating the bill; but, he said, it had
long been in the hands of the members; they have had time to consider
it; the usual forms have been observed in its progress thus far; and if
those who are opposed to the bill did not see proper to come forward
with their objections, it surely is their own fault, and the advocates
of the bill are not justly chargeable with precipitancy. He then
particularly replied to the objections offered by Mr. SMITH, of South
Carolina; and after considering them, said, that those objections did
not, in his opinion, constitute sufficient reason to induce a
recommitment of the bill. He then noticed the constitutional objections
of Mr. JACKSON, and said, the Government of the United States is vested
by the constitution with a power of borrowing money; and in pursuance of
this idea, they have a right to create a capital, by which they may,
with greater facility, carry the power of borrowing on any emergency
into effect. Under the late Confederation, the Pennsylvania Bank, called
the Bank of North America, was instituted. He presumed that it will not
be controverted, that the present Government is vested with powers equal
to those of the late Confederation. He said, that he had no doubt its
operation would benefit, not only the centre, but the extremities also
of the Union. The commercial, mechanical, and agricultural interests of
the United States are so combined, that one cannot be benefited without
benefiting the other. He concluded by observing, that he thought the
Legislature of the United States could not better answer the purposes of
their appointment, than by passing this bill. He hoped, therefore, that
it would not be recommitted, but that it would now pass.

Mr. LEE observed, that having been confined by sickness, he was
precluded from attending the House yesterday; but sick as he was, had he
supposed that there was a prospect of a bill of such magnitude and
importance passing without a discussion of its principles, he certainly
would have attended, and offered his objections to various parts of it,
which he thought very exceptionable. He hoped, therefore, it would now
be recommitted; that a bill which is so unequal and so partial may
undergo a thorough discussion.

Mr. TUCKER was in favor of a recommitment. He acknowledged that those
who had their objections to the bill were certainly blamable for not
coming forward with them yesterday. He then stated sundry objections to
the bill. The time allowed to receive the subscriptions, he said, is too
short, and will benefit those only in the vicinity of the Bank. The
clause which authorizes the loaning of one hundred thousand dollars to
the Government, without express provision by law, he thought
exceptionable, as the Executive will be able, by this means, to borrow
at any time, without being authorized, to almost any amount, of the
Bank. The loan of two millions of dollars by the United States to the
Bank, he objected to; as diverting that sum from the particular object
for which it was borrowed. There is no appropriation, he said, of the
half yearly dividend of profits accruing to the United States, which, he
observed, was a very essential defect. Mr. T. stated other objections,
as reasons for a recommitment.

Mr. WILLIAMSON was in favor of the recommitment, to give those who say
they have not had an opportunity of offering their objections, time to
do it; and if the motion be not agreed to, he should not give his vote
for the bill. He then adverted to the objections deduced from the
constitution, and explained the clause respecting monopolies as
referring altogether to commercial monopolies.

Mr. SHERMAN objected to the recommitment. He said, that though the bill
could not be amended without its being recommitted, yet it was open to
discussion and objection previous to taking a vote on its passage. He
did not think the objections offered afforded sufficient reasons for a
recommitment. He replied to the observations offered by several
gentlemen who had spoken in favor of the motion.

Mr. GERRY expressed his surprise at the observations of gentlemen who
had neglected to offer their objections to the bill before, and said it
could only be imputed to their own neglect, and not to any precipitancy
on the part of the friends of the bill. Mr. G. noticed several
objections which had been offered, and said, if nothing more important
could be offered, he thought it would be unjustifiable in the House to
go into a committee.

Mr. MADISON observed, that at this moment it was not of importance to
determine how it has happened that the objections which several
gentlemen now say they have to offer against the bill were not made at
the proper time. It is sufficient for them, if the candor of the House
should lead them now to recommit the bill, that in a Committee of the
Whole they may have an opportunity of offering their objections.

Mr. AMES replied to Mr. MADISON. He said, he did not conceive that the
appeal now made to the candor of the House was in point. The gentlemen
who object to the bill had an opportunity to offer their objections;
the customary forms have been attended to; and the whole question for
the recommitment turns on the force of the objections which are now
offered to the general principles of the bill altogether. The candor of
the House, he conceived, was entirely out of the question, and therefore
not to be appealed to; but the justice due to their constituents in the
proper discharge of the duty reposed in them. He said, it appeared to
him absurd to go into Committee of the Whole to determine whether the
bill is constitutional or not. If it is unconstitutional, that amounts
to a rejection of it altogether.

Mr. MADISON thought there was the greatest propriety in discussing a
constitutional question in Committee of the Whole.

Mr. STONE and Mr. GILES were in favor of the recommitment. They objected
to the unconstitutionality of the bill, and to several of its particular
clauses.

Mr. VINING said, he thought it was a subject of congratulation that the
bill was in its present situation; it had happily passed to the third
reading without that tedious discussion which bills usually receive. The
subject has been a considerable time before the House, and gentlemen
have had time to contemplate it. The bill is now in the stage to which
gentlemen very usually reserve themselves to state their objections at
large, and he hoped they would now do it. He was not perfectly satisfied
as to the constitutional point. He therefore hoped gentlemen would state
their objections, that those who are satisfied on that point may offer
their reasons.

Mr. BOUDINOT stated the process of the business yesterday. He observed
that he had then the honor to be in the chair. He had read the bill very
distinctly and deliberately, with proper pauses; he thought that the
fullest opportunity had been offered for gentlemen to come forward with
their objections. He was opposed to the recommitment, as it would, he
feared, issue in a defeat of the bill this session. He had one
difficulty, however, respecting the unconstitutionality of the bill,
which he hoped to have removed; and he hoped that a full discussion of
its general principles would take place.

The motion for a recommitment was lost, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Bourne, Brown,
      Burke, Carroll, Contee, Gale, Grout, Giles, Jackson, Lee,
      Madison, Mathews, Moore, Parker, Smith, (of Maryland,)
      Smith, (of South Carolina,) Stone, Tucker, White, and
      Williamson--23.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Cadwalader, Clymer,
      Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Hartley,
      Hathorn, Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Leonard, Livermore,
      Muhlenberg, Partridge, Rensselaer, Schureman, Scott, Seney,
      Sherman, Sylvester, Sinnickson, Steele, Sturges, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Vining, Wadsworth, and Wynkoop--34.


WEDNESDAY, February 2.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill sent from the Senate to
incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of the United States.

The bill being on its passage,

Mr. MADISON began with a general review of the advantages and
disadvantages of banks. The former he stated to consist in, first, the
aid they afford to merchants, who can thereby push their mercantile
operations further with the same capital. Second, The aids to merchants
in paying punctually the customs. Third, Aids to the Government in
complying punctually with its engagements, when deficiencies or delays
happen in the revenue. Fourth, In diminishing usury. Fifth, In saving
the wear of gold and silver kept in the vaults, and represented by
notes. Sixth, In facilitating occasional remittances from different
places where notes happen to circulate.

The effect of the proposed Bank, in raising the value of stock, he
thought had been greatly overrated. It would no doubt raise that of the
stock subscribed into the Bank; but could have little effect on stock in
general, as the interest on it would remain the same, and the quantity
taken out of the market would be replaced by bank stock.

The principal disadvantages consisted in, first, banishing the precious
metals, by substituting another medium to perform their office. This
effect was inevitable. It was admitted by the most enlightened patrons
of banks, particularly by _Smith on the Wealth of Nations_. The common
answer to the objection was, that the money banished was only an
exchange for something equally valuable that would be imported in
return. He admitted the weight of this observation in general; but
doubted whether, in the present habits of this country, the returns
would not be in articles of no permanent use to it.

Second. Exposing the public and individuals to all the evils of a run on
the Bank, which would be particularly calamitous in so great a country
as this, and might happen from various causes, as false rumors, bad
management of the institution, an unfavorable balance of trade from
short crops, &c.

It was proper to be considered, also, that the most important of the
advantages would be better obtained by several banks, properly
distributed, than by a single one. The aids to commerce could only be
afforded at or very near the seat of the Bank. The same was true of aids
to merchants in the payment of customs. Anticipations of the Government
would also be most convenient at the different places where the interest
of the debt was to be paid. The case in America was different from that
in England: the interest there was all due at one place, and the genius
of the Monarchy favored the concentration of wealth and influence at the
metropolis.

He thought the plan liable to other objections. It did not make so good
a bargain for the public as was due to its interests. The charter to the
Bank of England had been granted for eleven years only, and was paid for
by a loan to the Government on terms better than could be elsewhere got.
Every renewal of the charter had, in like manner, been purchased; in
some instances, at a very high price. The same had been done by the
banks of Genoa, Naples, and other like banks of circulation. The plan
was unequal to the public creditors; it gave an undue preference to the
holders of a particular denomination of the public debt, and to those at
and within reach of the seat of Government. If the subscriptions should
be rapid, the distant holders of evidences of debt would be excluded
altogether.

In making these remarks on the merits of the bill, he had reserved to
himself the right to deny the authority of Congress to pass it. He had
entertained this opinion from the date of the constitution. His
impression might, perhaps, be the stronger, because he well recollected
that a power to grant charters of incorporation had been proposed in the
General Convention and rejected.

Is the power of establishing an incorporated bank among the powers
vested by the constitution in the Legislature of the United States? This
is the question to be examined.

After some general remarks on the limitations of all political power, he
took notice of the peculiar manner in which the Federal Government is
limited. It is not a general grant, out of which particular powers are
excepted; it is a grant of particular powers only, leaving the general
mass in other hands. So it had been understood by its friends and its
foes, and so it was to be interpreted.

As preliminaries to a right interpretation, he laid down the following
rules:

An interpretation that destroys the very characteristic of the
Government cannot be just.

Where a meaning is clear, the consequences, whatever they may be, are to
be admitted--where doubtful, it is fairly triable by its consequences.

In controverted cases, the meaning of the parties to the instrument, if
to be collected by reasonable evidence, is a proper guide.

Contemporary and concurrent expositions are a reasonable evidence of the
meaning of the parties.

In admitting or rejecting a constructive authority, not only the degree
of its incidentality to an express authority is to be regarded, but the
degree of its importance also; since on this will depend the probability
or improbability of its being left to construction.

Reviewing the constitution with an eye to these positions, it was not
possible to discover in it the power to incorporate a bank. The only
clauses under which such a power could be pretended, are either:

1. The power to lay and collect taxes to pay the debts, and provide for
the common defence and general welfare; or,

2. The power to borrow money on the credit of the United States; or,

3. The power to pass all laws necessary and proper to carry into
execution those powers.

The bill did not come within the first power. It laid no tax to pay the
debts, or provide for the general welfare. It laid no tax whatever. It
was altogether foreign to the subject.

No argument could be drawn from the terms "common defence and general
welfare." The power as to these general purposes was limited to acts
laying taxes for them; and the general purposes themselves were limited
and explained by the particular enumeration subjoined. To understand
these terms in any sense that would justify the power in question, would
give to Congress an unlimited power; would render nugatory the
enumeration of particular powers; would supersede all the powers
reserved to the State Governments. These terms are copied from the
Articles of Confederation; had it ever been pretended that they were to
be understood otherwise than as here explained?

It had been said, that "general welfare" meant cases in which a general
power might be exercised by Congress, without interfering with the
powers of the States; and that the establishment of a National Bank was
of this sort. There were, he said, several answers to this novel
doctrine.

1. The proposed Bank would interfere, so as indirectly to defeat a State
Bank at the same place.

2. It would directly interfere with the rights of the States to prohibit
as well as to establish Banks, and the circulation of bank notes. He
mentioned a law in Virginia actually prohibiting the circulation of
notes payable to bearer.

3. Interference with the power of the States was no constitutional
criterion of the power of Congress. If the power was not given, Congress
could not exercise it; if given, they might exercise it, although it
should interfere with the laws, or even the constitution of the States.

4. If Congress could incorporate a bank merely because the act would
leave the States free to establish banks also, any other incorporations
might be made by Congress. They could incorporate companies of
manufacturers, or companies for cutting canals, or even religious
societies, leaving similar incorporations by the States, like State
Banks, to themselves. Congress might even establish religious teachers
in every parish, and pay them out of the Treasury of the United States,
leaving other teachers unmolested in their functions. These inadmissible
consequences condemned the controverted principle.

The case of the Bank established by the former Congress had been cited
as a precedent. This was known, he said, to have been the child of
necessity. It never could be justified by the regular powers of the
Articles of Confederation. Congress betrayed a consciousness of this in
recommending to the States to incorporate the Bank also. They did not
attempt to protect the bank notes by penalties against counterfeiters.
These were reserved wholly to the authority of the States.

The second clause to be examined is that which empowers Congress to
borrow money.

Is this bill to borrow money? It does not borrow a shilling. Is there
any fair construction by which the bill can be deemed an exercise of the
power to borrow money? The obvious meaning of the power to borrow money,
is that of accepting it from, and stipulating payment to those who are
able and willing to lend.

To say that the power to borrow involves a power of creating the
ability, where there may be the will, to lend, is not only establishing
a dangerous principle, as will be immediately shown, but is as forced a
construction as to say that it involves the power of compelling the
will, where there may be the ability to lend.

The third clause is that which gives the power to pass all laws
necessary and proper to execute the specified powers.

Whatever meaning this clause may have, none can be admitted, that would
give an unlimited discretion to Congress.

Its meaning must, according to the natural and obvious force of the
terms and the context, be limited to means necessary to the end, and
incident to the nature of the specified powers.

The clause is in fact merely declaratory of what would have resulted by
unavoidable implication, as the appropriate, and, as it were, technical
means of executing those powers. In this sense it has been explained by
the friends of the constitution, and ratified by the State conventions.

The essential characteristic of the Government, as composed of limited
and enumerated powers, would be destroyed, if, instead of direct and
incidental means, any means could be used, which, in the language of the
preamble to the bill, "might be conceived to be conducive to the
successful conducting of the finances, or might be conceived to tend to
give facility to the obtaining of loans." He urged an attention to the
diffuse and ductile terms which had been found requisite to cover the
stretch of power contained in the bill. He compared them with the terms
necessary and proper, used in the constitution, and asked whether it was
possible to view the two descriptions as synonymous, or the one as a
fair and safe commentary on the other.

If, proceeded he, Congress, by virtue of the power to borrow, can create
the means of lending, and, in pursuance of these means, can incorporate
a bank, they may do any thing whatever creative of like means.

The East India Company has been a lender to the British Government, as
well as the Bank, and the South Sea Company is a greater creditor than
either. Congress, then, may incorporate similar companies in the United
States, and that too not under the idea of regulating trade, but under
that of borrowing money.

Private capitals are the chief resources for loans to the British
Government. Whatever then may be conceived to favor the accumulation of
capitals may be done by Congress. They may incorporate manufacturers.
They may give monopolies in every branch of domestic industry.

If, again, Congress, by virtue of the power to borrow money, can create
the ability to lend, they may, by virtue of the power to levy money,
create the ability to pay it. The ability to pay taxes depends on the
general wealth of the society, and this, on the general prosperity of
agriculture, manufactures, and commerce. Congress then may give bounties
and make regulations on all of these objects.

The States have, it is allowed on all hands, a concurrent right to lay
and collect taxes. This power is secured to them, not by its being
expressly reserved, but by its not being ceded by the constitution. The
reasons for the bill cannot be admitted, because they would invalidate
that right; why may it not be conceived by Congress, that a uniform and
exclusive imposition of taxes, would not less than the proposed Banks
"be conducive to the successful conducting of the national finances, and
tend to give facility to the obtaining of revenue, for the use of the
Government?"

The doctrine of implication is always a tender one. The danger of it has
been felt in other Governments. The delicacy was felt in the adoption of
our own; the danger may also be felt if we do not keep close to our
chartered authorities.

Mark the reasoning on which the validity of the bill depends! To borrow
money is made the end, and the accumulation of capitals implied as the
means. The accumulation of capitals is then the end, and a bank implied
as the means. The bank is then the end, and a charter of incorporation,
a monopoly, capital punishments, &c., implied as the means.

If implications thus remote and thus multiplied, can be linked together,
a chain may be formed that will reach every object of legislation, every
object within the whole compass of political economy.

The latitude of interpretation required by the bill is condemned by the
rule furnished by the constitution itself.

Congress have power "to regulate the value of money;" yet it is
expressly added, not left to be implied, that counterfeiters may be
punished.

They have the power "to declare war," to which armies are more incident
than incorporated banks to borrowing; yet the power "to raise and
support armies" is expressly added; and to this again, the express power
"to make rules and regulations for the government of armies;" a like
remark is applicable to the powers as to the navy.

The regulation and calling out of the militia are more appertinent to
war than the proposed Bank to borrowing; yet the former is not left to
construction.

The very power to borrow money is a less remote implication from the
power of war, than an incorporated monopoly bank from the power of
borrowing; yet, the power to borrow is not left to implication.

It is not pretended that every insertion or omission in the constitution
is the effect of systematic attention. This is not the character of any
human work, particularly the work of a body of men. The examples cited,
with others that might be added, sufficiently inculcate, nevertheless, a
rule of interpretation very different from that on which the bill rests.
They condemn the exercise of any power, particularly a great and
important power, which is not evidently and necessarily involved in an
express power.

It cannot be denied that the power proposed to be exercised is an
important power.

As a charter of incorporation, the bill creates an artificial person,
previously not existing in law. It confers important civil rights and
attributes which could not otherwise be claimed. It is, though not
precisely similar, at least equivalent, to the naturalization of an
alien, by which certain new civil characters are acquired by him. Would
Congress have had the power to naturalize, if it had not been expressly
given?

In the power to make by-laws, the bill delegated a sort of Legislative
power, which is unquestionably an act of a high and important nature. He
took notice of the only restraint on the by-laws, that they were not to
be contrary to the law and the constitution of the Bank, and asked what
law was intended; if the law of the United States, the scantiness of
their code would give a power never before given to a corporation, and
obnoxious to the States, whose laws would then be superseded, not only
by the laws of Congress, but by the by-laws of a corporation within
their own jurisdiction. If the law intended was the law of the State,
then the State might make laws that would destroy an institution of the
United States.

The bill gives a power to purchase and hold lands; Congress themselves
could not purchase lands within a State "without the consent of its
Legislature." How could they delegate a power to others which they did
not possess themselves?

It takes from our successors who have equal rights with ourselves, and
with the aid of experience will be more capable of deciding on the
subject, an opportunity of exercising that right for an immoderate term.

It takes from our constituents the opportunity of deliberating on the
untried measure, although their hands are also to be tied by it for the
same term.

It involves a monopoly, which affects the equal rights of every citizen.

It leads to a penal regulation, perhaps capital punishments, one of the
most solemn acts of sovereign authority.

From this view of the power of incorporation exercised in the bill, it
could never be deemed an accessory or subaltern power, to be deduced by
implication as a means of executing another power; it was in its nature
a distinct, an independent and substantive prerogative, which not being
enumerated in the constitution, could never have been meant to be
included in it, and not being included could never be rightfully
exercised.

He here adverted to a distinction, which he said had not been
sufficiently kept in view, between a power necessary and proper for the
Government or Union, and a power necessary and proper for executing the
enumerated powers. In the latter case, the powers included in the
enumerated powers were not expressed, but to be drawn from the nature of
each. In the former, the powers composing the Government were expressly
enumerated. This constituted the peculiar nature of the Government; no
power, therefore, not enumerated could be inferred from the general
nature of Government. Had the power of making treaties, for example,
been omitted, however necessary it might have been, the defect could
only have been lamented, or supplied by an amendment of the
constitution.

But the proposed Bank could not even be called necessary to the
Government: at most it could be but convenient. Its uses to the
Government could be supplied by keeping the taxes a little in advance;
by loans from individuals; by the other banks, over which the Government
would have equal command; nay greater, as it might grant or refuse to
these the privilege (a free and irrevocable gift to the proposed Bank)
of using their notes in the Federal revenue.

He proceeded next to the contemporary expositions given to the
constitution.

The defence against the charge founded on the want of a bill of rights
presupposed, he said, that the powers not given were retained; and that
those given were not to be extended by remote implications. On any other
supposition, the power of Congress to abridge the freedom of the press,
or the rights of conscience, &c., could not have been disproved.

The explanations in the State Conventions all turned on the same
fundamental principle, and on the principle that the terms necessary and
proper gave no additional powers to those enumerated.

[Here he read sundry passages from the Debates of the Pennsylvania,
Virginia, and North Carolina Conventions, showing the grounds on which
the constitution had been vindicated by its principal advocates, against
a dangerous latitude of its powers, charged on it by its opponents.]

He did not undertake to vouch for the accuracy or authenticity of the
publications which he quoted. He thought it probable that the
sentiments delivered might, in many instances, have been mistaken, or
imperfectly noted; but the complexion of the whole, with what he himself
and many others must recollect, fully justified the use he had made of
them.

The explanatory declarations and amendments accompanying the
ratifications of the several States formed a striking evidence, wearing
the same complexion. He referred those who might doubt on the subject,
to the several acts of ratification.

The explanatory amendments proposed by Congress themselves, at least,
would be good authority with them; all these renunciations of power
proceeded on a rule of construction, excluding the latitude now
contended for. These explanations were the more to be respected, as they
had not only been proposed by Congress, but ratified by nearly
three-fourths of the States. He read several of the articles proposed,
remarking particularly on the 11th and 12th; the former, as guarding
against a latitude of interpretation; the latter, as excluding every
source of power not within the constitution itself.

With all this evidence of the sense in which the constitution was
understood and adopted, will it not be said, if the bill should pass,
that its adoption was brought about by one set of arguments, and that it
is now administered under the influence of another set? and this
reproach will have the keener sting, because it is applicable to so many
individuals concerned in both the adoption and administration.

In fine, if the power were in the constitution, the immediate exercise
of it cannot be essential; if not there, the exercise of it involves the
guilt of usurpation, and establishes a precedent of interpretation
levelling all the barriers which limit the powers of the General
Government, and protect those of the State Governments. If the point be
doubtful only, respect for ourselves, who ought to shun the appearance
of precipitancy and ambition; respect for our successors, who ought not
lightly to be deprived of the opportunity of exercising the rights of
legislation; respect for our constituents, who have had no opportunity
of making known their sentiments, and who are themselves to be bound
down to the measure for so long a period; all these considerations
require that the irrevocable decision should at least be suspended until
another session.

It appeared on the whole, he concluded, that the power exercised by the
bill was condemned by the silence of the constitution; was condemned by
the rule of interpretation arising out of the constitution; was
condemned by its tendency to destroy the main characteristic of the
constitution; was condemned by the expositions of the friends of the
constitution, whilst depending before the public; was condemned by the
apparent intention of the parties which ratified the constitution; was
condemned by the explanatory amendments proposed by Congress themselves
to the constitution; and he hoped it would receive its final
condemnation by the vote of this House.


THURSDAY, February 3.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill sent from the Senate, to
incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of the United States.

A motion was made by Mr. WILLIAMSON to recommit the bill, for the
purpose of amending the first section by prolonging the time for
receiving subscriptions from October to April; this motion occasioned
some debate, and was determined in the negative; the yeas and nays being
as follow:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown, Burke, Carroll,
      Contee, Gale, Giles, Grout, Jackson, Lee, Madison, Mathews,
      Moore, Sevier, Smith, (of South Carolina,) Steele, Stone,
      Tucker, White, and Williamson--21.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Bourne, Cadwalader,
      Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue, Griffin,
      Hartley, Hathorn, Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Leonard,
      Livermore, Muhlenberg, Parker, Partridge, Rensselaer,
      Schureman, Scott, Sedgwick, Seney, Sherman, Smith, (of
      Maryland,) Sylvester, Sinnickson, Sturges, Thatcher,
      Trumbull, Vining, Wadsworth, and Wynkoop--38.

Mr. AMES.--Little doubt remains with respect to the utility of banks. It
seems to be conceded within doors and without, that a public bank would
be useful to trade, that it is almost essential to revenue, and that it
is little short of indispensably necessary in times of public emergency.
In countries whose forms of government left them free to choose, this
institution has been adopted of choice, and in times of national danger
and calamity, it has afforded such aid to Government as to make it
appear, in the eyes of the people, a necessary means of
self-preservation. The subject, however intricate in its nature, is at
last cleared from obscurity. It would not be difficult to establish its
principles, and to deduce from its theory such consequences as would
vindicate the policy of the measure. But why should we lose time to
examine the theory when it is in our power to resort to experience?
After being tried by that test, the world has agreed in pronouncing the
institution excellent. This new capital will invigorate trade and
manufactures with new energy. It will furnish a medium for the
collection of the revenues; and if Government should be pressed by a
sudden necessity, it will afford seasonable and effectual aid. With all
these and many other pretensions, if it was now a question whether
Congress should be vested with the power of establishing a bank, I trust
that this House and all America would assent to the affirmative.

This, however, is not a question of expediency, but of duty. We are not
at liberty to examine which of several modes of acting is entitled to
the preference. But we are solemnly warned against acting at all. We are
told that the constitution will not authorize Congress to incorporate
the subscribers to the bank. Let us examine the constitution, and if
that forbids our proceeding, we must reject the bill; though we shall do
it with deep regret that such an opportunity to serve our country must
be suffered to escape for the want of a constitutional power to improve
it.

The gentleman from Virginia considers the opposers of the bill as
suffering disadvantage, because it was not debated as bills usually are
in the Committee of the Whole. He has prepared us to pronounce a
eulogium upon his consistency by informing us that he voted in the old
Congress against the Bank of North America, on the ground of his present
objection to the constitutionality. He has told us that the meaning of
the constitution is to be interpreted by contemporaneous testimony. He
was a member of the Convention which formed it, and of course his
opinion is entitled to peculiar weight. While we respect his former
conduct, and admire the felicity of his situation, we cannot think he
sustains disadvantage in the debate. Besides, he must have been prepared
with objections to the constitutionality, because he tells us they are
of long standing, and had grown into a settled habit of thinking. Why,
then, did he suffer the bill to pass the committee in silence? The
friends of the bill have more cause to complain of disadvantage; for
while he has had time to prepare his objections, they are obliged to
reply to them without premeditation.

In making this reply I am to perform a task for which my own mind has
not admonished me to prepare. I never suspected that the objections I
have heard stated had existence; I consider them as discoveries; and had
not the acute penetration of that gentleman brought them to light, I am
sure that my own understanding would never have suggested them.

It seems strange, too, that in our enlightened country the public should
have been involved in equal blindness. While the exercise of even the
lawful powers of Government is disputed, and a jealous eye is fixed on
its proceedings, not a whisper has been heard against its authority to
establish a bank. Still, however unseasonably, the old alarm of public
discontent is sounded in our ears.

Two questions occur; may Congress exercise any powers which are not
expressly given in the constitution, but may be deduced by a reasonable
construction of that instrument? And, secondly, will such a construction
warrant the establishment of the Bank?

The doctrine that powers may be implied which are not expressly vested
in Congress has long been a bugbear to a great many worthy persons. They
apprehend that Congress, by putting constructions upon the constitution,
will govern by its own arbitrary discretion; and therefore that it ought
to be bound to exercise the powers expressly given, and those only.

If Congress may not make laws conformably to the powers plainly implied,
though not expressed in the frame of Government, it is rather late in
the day to adopt it as a principle of conduct. A great part of our two
years' labor is lost, and worse than lost to the public, for we have
scarcely made a law in which we have not exercised our discretion with
regard to the true intent of the constitution. Any words but those used
in that instrument will be liable to a different interpretation. We may
regulate trade; therefore we have taxed ships, erected light-houses,
made laws to govern seamen, &c., because we say that they are the
incidents to that power. The most familiar and undisputed acts of
legislation will show that we have adopted it as a safe rule of action,
to legislate beyond the letter of the constitution.

He proceeded to enforce this idea by several considerations, and
illustrated it by various examples. He said, that the ingenuity of man
was unequal to providing, especially beforehand, for all the
contingencies that would happen. The constitution contains the
principles which are to govern in making laws; but every law requires an
application of the rule to the case in question. We may err in applying
it; but we are to exercise our judgments, and on every occasion to
decide according to an honest conviction of its true meaning.

The danger of implied power does not arise from its assuming a new
principle; we have not only practised it often, but we can scarcely
proceed without it; nor does the danger proceed so much from the extent
of the power as from its uncertainty. While the opposers of the Bank
exclaim against the exercise of this power by Congress, do they mark out
the limits of the power which they will leave to us, with more certainty
than is done by the advocates of the Bank? Their rules of interpretation
by contemporaneous testimony, the debates of conventions, and the
doctrine of substantive and auxiliary powers, will be found as obscure,
and of course as formidable, as that which they condemn; they only set
up one construction against another.

The powers of Congress are disputed. We are obliged to decide the
question according to truth. The negative, if false, is less safe than
the affirmative, if true. Why, then, shall we be told that the negative
is the safe side? Not exercising the powers we have, may be as
pernicious as usurping those we have not. If the power to raise armies
had not been expressed in the enumeration of the powers of Congress, it
would be implied from other parts of the constitution. Suppose, however,
that it were omitted, and our country invaded, would a decision in
Congress against raising armies be safer than the affirmative? The blood
of our citizens would be shed, and shed unavenged. He thought,
therefore, that there was too much prepossession with some against the
Bank, and that the debate ought to be considered more impartially, as
the negative was neither more safe, certain, nor conformable to our duty
than the other side of the question. After all, the proof of the
affirmative imposed a sufficient burden, as it is easier to raise
objections than to remove them. Would any one doubt that Congress may
lend money, that they may buy their debt in the market, or redeem their
captives from Algiers? Yet no such power is expressly given, though it
is irresistibly implied.

If, therefore, some interpretation of the constitution must be indulged,
by what rules is it to be governed? The great end of every association
of persons or States is to effect the end of its institution. The matter
in debate affords a good illustration: a corporation, as soon as it is
created, has certain powers, or qualities, tacitly annexed to it, which
tend to promote the end for which it was formed; such as, for example,
its individuality, its power to sue and be sued, and the perpetual
succession of persons. Government is itself the highest kind of
corporation; and from the instant of its formation, it has tacitly
annexed to its being, various powers which the individuals who framed it
did not separately possess, but which are essential to its effecting the
purposes for which it was framed; to declare, in detail, every thing
that Government may do could not be performed, and has never been
attempted. It would be endless, useless, and dangerous; exceptions of
what it may not do are shorter and safer.

Congress may do what is necessary to the end for which the constitution
was adopted, provided it is not repugnant to the natural rights of man,
or to those which they have expressly reserved to themselves, or to the
powers which are assigned to the States. This rule of interpretation
seems to be safe, and not a very uncertain one, independently of the
constitution itself. By that instrument certain powers are specially
delegated, together with all powers necessary or proper to carry them
into execution. That construction may be maintained to be a safe one
which promotes the good of society, and the ends for which the
Government was adopted, without impairing the rights of any man, or the
powers of any State.

This, he said, was remarkably true of the Bank; no man could have cause
to complain of it; the bills would not be forced upon any one. It is of
the first utility to trade. Indeed, the intercourse from State to State
can never be on a good footing without a bank, whose paper will
circulate more extensively than that of any State bank. Whether the
power to regulate trade from State to State will involve that of
regulating inland bills of exchange and bank paper, as the instruments
of the trade, and incident to the power, he would not pause to examine.
This is an injury and wrong which violates the right of another. As the
bank is founded on the free choice of those who make use of it, and is
highly useful to the people and to Government, a liberal construction is
natural and safe. This circumstance creates a presumption in favor of
its conformity to the constitution. This presumption is enforced by the
necessity of a bank to other governments. The most orderly governments
in Europe have banks. They are considered as indispensably necessary;
these examples are not to be supposed to have been unnoticed. We are to
pay the interest of our debt in thirteen places. Is it possible to
transport the revenue from one end of the continent to the other? Nay, a
week before the quarter's interest becomes due, transfers will be made
which will require double the sum in Boston which was expected. To guard
against this danger, an extra sum must be deposited at the different
loan offices. This extra sum is not to be had; our revenue is barely
equal to the interest due. This imposes an absolute necessity upon the
Government to make use of a bank. The answer is, that the State banks
will supply this aid. This is risking a good deal to the argument
against the Bank; for will they admit the necessity, and yet deny to the
Government the lawful and only adequate means for providing for it? Ten
of the States have no banks; those who have may abolish theirs, and
suffer their charters to expire. But the State banks are insufficient to
the purpose; their paper has not a sufficient circulation; of course
their capitals are small. Congress is allowed to have complete
legislative power over its own finances; and yet without the courtesy of
the States it cannot be exercised. This seems to be inconsistent.

If a war should suddenly break out, how is Congress to provide for it?
Perhaps Congress would not be sitting; great expenses would be incurred;
and they must be instantly provided for. How is this to be done? By
taxes? And will the enemy wait till they can be collected? By loans at
home? Our citizens would employ their money in war speculations, and
they are not individually in a condition to lend a sufficient sum in
specie. Or shall we send across the sea for loans? The dispute between
England and Spain furnishes an example; the aid of their banks for
several millions was prompt and effectual. Or, will you say that
Congress might issue paper money? That power, ruinous and fallacious as
it is, is deduced from implication, for it is not expressly given. A
bank only can afford the necessary aid in time of sudden emergency. If
we have not the power to establish it, our social compact is incomplete,
we want the means of self-preservation.

I shall, perhaps, be told that necessity is the tyrant's plea. I answer
that it is a miserable one when it is urged to palliate the violation of
private right. Who suffers by this use of our authority? Not the States,
for they are not warranted to establish a National Bank; not
individuals, for they will be assisted in trade, and defended from
danger by it.

Having endeavored to enforce his argument, by noticing the uses of banks
to trade, to revenue, to credit, and, in cases of exigency, he adverted
to the authority of our own precedents. Our right to govern the Western
Territory is not disputed. It is a power which no State can exercise; it
must be exercised, and therefore it resides in Congress. But how does
Congress get this power? It is not expressly given in the constitution,
but is derived either from the nature of the case, or by implication
from the power to regulate the property of the United States. If the
power flows from the nature and necessity of the case, it may be
demanded, is the renot equal authority for the Bank? If it is derived
from the power of Congress to regulate the territory and other property
of the United States, and to make all needful rules and regulations
concerning it, and for the disposal of it, a strict construction would
restrain Congress merely to the management and disposal of property, and
of its own property; yet it is plain that more is intended. Congress has
accordingly made rules, not only for governing its own property, but the
property of the persons residing there. It has made rules which have no
relation to property at all--for punishing crimes. In short, it
exercises all power in that territory. Nay, it has exercised this very
power of creating a corporation. The government of that territory is a
corporation; and who will deny that Congress may lawfully establish a
bank beyond the Ohio? It is fair to reason by analogy from a power which
is unquestionable, to one which is the subject of debate.

He then asked, whether it appeared, on this view of the subject, that
the establishment of a National Bank would be a violent
misinterpretation of the constitution? He did not contend for an
arbitrary, unlimited discretion in the Government to do every thing. He
took occasion to protest against such a misconception of his argument.
He had noticed the great marks by which the construction of the
constitution, he conceived, must be guided and limited; and these, if
not absolutely certain, were very far from being arbitrary or unsafe. It
is for the House, to judge whether the construction which denies the
power of Congress is more definite and safe.

In proving that Congress may exercise powers which are not expressly
granted by the constitution, he had endeavored to establish such rules
of interpretation, and had illustrated his ideas by such observations as
would anticipate, in a considerable degree, the application of his
principles to the point in question. Before he proceeded to the
construction of the clauses of the constitution which apply to the
argument, lie observed that it would be proper to notice the qualities
of a corporation, in order to take a more exact view of the controversy.

He adverted to the individuality and the perpetuity of a corporation,
and that the property of the individuals should not be liable for the
debts of the bank or company. These qualities are not more useful to the
corporation than conformable to reason; but Government, it is said,
cannot create these qualities. This is the marrow of the argument; for
Congress may set up a bank of its own, to be managed as public property,
to issue notes which shall be received in all payments at the Treasury,
which shall be exchangeable into specie on demand, and which it shall
be death to counterfeit. Such a bank would be less safe and useful than
one under the direction of private persons; yet the power to establish
it is indisputable. If Congress has the authority to do this business
badly, the question returns, whether the powers of a corporation, which
are essential to its being well done, may be annexed as incident to it.
The Bank of New York is not a corporation, yet its notes have credit.
Congress may agree with that bank, or with a company of merchants, to
take their notes, and to cause all payments to pass through their
coffers. Every thing that Government requires, and the bank will
perform, may be lawfully done without giving them corporate powers; but
to do this well, safely, and extensively, those powers are
indispensable. This seems to bring the debate within a very narrow
compass.

This led him to consider whether the corporate powers are incidental to
those which Congress may exercise by the constitution.

He entered into a discussion of the construction of that clause which
empowers Congress to regulate the territory and other property of the
United States. The United States may hold property; may dispose of it;
they may hold it in partnership; they may regulate the terms of the
partnership. One condition may be, that the common stock only shall be
liable for the debts of the partnership, and that any purchaser of a
share shall become a partner. These are the chief qualities of a
corporation. It seems that Congress, having power to make all needful
rules and regulations for the property of the United States, may
establish a corporation to manage it: without which we have seen that
the regulations cannot be either safe or useful; the United States will
be the proprietor of one-tenth of the bank stock.

Congress may exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever over
the ten miles square, and the places ceded by the States for arsenals,
light-houses, docks, &c. Of course it may establish a bank in those
places with corporate powers. The bill has not restrained the bank to
this city; and if it had, the dispute would lose a part of its
solemnity. If, instead of principles, it concerns only places, what
objection is there to the constitutional authority of Congress to fix
the Bank at Sandy Hook, or Reedy Island, where we have light-houses, and
a right of exclusive legislation? A bank established there, or in the
district located by law on the Potomac for the seat of Government, could
send its paper all over the Union; it is true that the places are not
the most proper for a bank; but the authority to establish it in them
overthrows the argument which is deduced from the definite nature of the
powers vested in Congress, and the dangerous tendency of the proposed
construction of them.

The preamble of the constitution warrants this remark, that a bank is
not repugnant to the spirit and essential objects of that instrument.

He then considered the power to borrow money. He said it was natural to
understand that authority as it was actually exercised in Europe; which
is, to borrow of the bank. He observed, the power to borrow was of
narrow use without the institution of a bank; and in the most dangerous
crisis of affairs would be a dead letter.

After noticing the power to lay and collect taxes, he adverted to the
sweeping clause, as it is usually called, which empowers Congress to
exercise all powers necessary and proper to carry the enumerated powers
into execution. He did not pretend that it gives any new powers; but it
establishes the doctrine of implied powers. He then demanded whether the
power to incorporate a bank is not fairly relative, and a necessary
incident to the entire powers to regulate trade and revenue, and to
provide for the public credit and defence.

He entered into a particular answer to several objections, and after
recapitulating his argument, he concluded with observing that we had
felt the disadvantages of the Confederation. We adopted the
constitution, expecting to place the national affairs under a Federal
head; this is a power which Congress can only exercise. We may reason
away the whole constitution. All nations have their times of adversity
and danger; the neglect of providing against them in season may be the
cause of ruining the country.


FRIDAY, February 4.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill for incorporating the
Bank of the United States.

The question being on the passage of the bill,

Mr. SEDGWICK said, he would endeavor not to fatigue the patience of the
House in the observations he should make on the important subject now
under consideration. Without entering into the discussion on a scale so
extensive as had been indulged by some gentlemen, he would dwell only on
a few important principles, and such consequences as were conclusively
deducible from them, which had made a strong impression on his own mind.
The opposition to the bill had called in question the constitutional
powers of Congress to establish the proposed corporation, and the
utility of banks, neither of which till within a few days did he suppose
was doubted by any intelligent man in America; and had charged the
present system with holding out unequal terms against the Government to
those who should subscribe to the proposed stock.

With regard to the question of constitutionality, much had been said
which, in his opinion, had not an intimate relation to the subject now
before the House. We have with great earnestness been warned of the
danger of grasping power by construction and implication; and this
warning has been given in very animated language by the gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. MADISON.) I do not wish to deprive that member of the
honor of consistency; but I well remember the time when the energy of
his reasoning impressed on the minds of the majority of this House a
conviction that the power of removal from office, holden at pleasure,
was, by construction and implication, vested by the constitution in the
President; for there could be no pretence that it is expressly granted
to him.

He would only observe, in answer to every thing which had been said of
the danger of extending construction and implication, that the whole
business of legislation was a practical construction of the powers of
the Legislature; and that probably no instrument for the delegation of
power could be drawn with such precision and accuracy as to leave
nothing to necessary implication. That all the different Legislatures in
the United States had, and this, in his opinion, indispensably must
construe the powers which had been granted to them, and they must assume
such auxiliary powers as are necessarily implied in those which are
expressly granted. In doing which, it was no doubt their duty to be
careful not to exceed those limits to which it was intended they should
be restricted. By any other limitation the Government would be so
shackled that it would be incapable of producing any of the effects
which were intended by its institution.

He observed, that on almost all the great and important measures which
come under the deliberation of Congress there were immense difficulties
to be surmounted. If we attempt, said he, to proceed in one direction,
our ears are assailed with the exclamation of "the constitution is in
danger!" if we attempt to attain our objects by pursuing a different
course, we are told the pass is guarded by the stern spirit of
democracy. Did I concur with gentlemen in opinion on this subject, I
should think it my duty to go home to my constituents, and honestly
declare to them that by their jealousy of power they had so restrained
the operations of the Government that we had not the means of effecting
any of the great purposes for which the constitution was designed,
without attempting, what perhaps would be found impracticable, to fix by
general rules the nice point within which Congress would be authorized
to assume powers by construction and implication, and beyond which they
may be justly considered as usurpers.

He wished gentlemen to reflect what effect a single principle,
universally acknowledged, would have in determining the question now
under consideration. It is universally agreed that wherever a power is
delegated for express purposes, all the known and usual means for the
attainment of the objects expressed are conceded also. That to decide
what influence this acknowledged principle would have on the subject
before the House, it would be necessary to reflect on the powers with
which Congress are expressly invested. He then repeated that Congress
was authorized to lay and collect taxes, to borrow money on the credit
of the United States, to raise and support armies, provide and maintain
navies, to regulate foreign and domestic trade, and to make all laws
necessary and proper to carry these and the other enumerated powers into
effect. They were, in fine, intrusted with the exercise of all those
powers which the people of America thought necessary to secure their
fame and happiness against the attacks of internal violence and external
invasion; and in the exercise of those powers, the Legislature was
authorized, agreeably to the principle which he had mentioned, to employ
all the known and usual means necessary and proper to effectuate the
ends which are expressed. It might be of use to determine with precision
what was the meaning of the words _necessary_ and _proper_--they did not
restrict the power of the Legislature to enacting such laws only as are
indispensable. Such a construction would be infinitely too narrow and
limited; and, to apply the meaning strictly, it would prove, perhaps,
that all the laws which had been passed were unconstitutional; for few,
if any of them, could be proved indispensable to the existence of the
Government. The conduct of Congress had a construction on those words
more rational and consistent with common sense and the purposes for
which the Government was instituted; which he conceived to be that the
laws should be established on such principles, and such an agency in the
known and usual means employed in the execution of them, as to effect
the ends expressed in the constitution with the greatest possible degree
of public utility.

If banks were among the known and usual means to effectuate or
facilitate the ends which had been mentioned, to enable the Government,
with the greatest ease and least burden to the people, to collect taxes,
borrow money, regulate commerce, raise and support armies, provide and
maintain fleets, he thought the argument irrefragable and conclusive to
prove the constitutionality of the bill. Pursuing further the same idea,
he asked for what purposes were banks instituted and patronized by
Governments which were unrestricted by constitutional limitations? Were
they not employed as the means and the most useful engines to facilitate
the collection of taxes, borrowing money, and the other enumerated
powers? Besides, he said, it was to be observed that the constitution
had expressly declared the ends of legislation; but in almost every
instance had left the means to the honest and sober discretion of the
Legislature. From the nature of things this must ever be the case; for
otherwise the constitution must contain not only all the necessary laws
under the existing circumstances of the community, but also a code so
extensive as to adapt itself to all future possible contingencies. By
our constitution, Congress has not only the power to lay and collect
taxes, but to do every thing subordinate to that end; the objects, the
means, the instruments, and the purposes, are left to the honest and
sober discretion of the Legislature. The power of borrowing money was
expressly granted; but all the known and usual means to that end were
left in silence. The same observations might with truth be made
respecting the other delegated powers. The great ends to be obtained as
means to effectuate the ultimate end--the public good and general
welfare--are capable, under general terms, of constitutional
specification; but the subordinate means are so numerous, and capable of
such infinite variation, as to render an enumeration impracticable, and
must therefore be left to construction and necessary implication. He
said, on this ground, he was willing to leave the general argument; it
was simple, intelligible, and he hoped would be thought conclusive.

He said the constitutionality had been attacked from another quarter. It
was said, we could not give commercial advantages to one port above
another. The constitutional provision which had been quoted was
undoubtedly intended to prevent a partial regulation of commerce; if
extended to the case under consideration, it would much more strongly
prove that Congress ought not to reside in any commercial city; for he
verily believed that the commercial advantages of Philadelphia were
incomparably greater from that residence than they could be supposed
from the institution of a National Bank. Indeed, it was his opinion
that, considering that this city had a bank, the capital of which was
adequate to all her commercial exigencies; that she could enlarge that
capital as her necessity should require; and that her bank will, if this
bill should be rejected, receive the benefit of national operations, the
measure will not advance her individual interest.

With regard to the utility of banks, he observed that he would not
attempt to display a knowledge of the subject by repeating all he had
read and heard in relation to it, nor fatigue the House by a detail of
his own reflections and reasoning upon it; the causes were unnecessary
to be explained; the effects had been such in all countries where banks
had been instituted, as to produce a unanimous opinion that they were
alike useful for all the great purposes of Government, and to promote
the general happiness of the people. Nor was our own experience wanting
to the same purpose. At a time when our public resources were almost
annihilated, our credit prostrate, our Government imbecile, and its
patronage inconsiderable, a bank of small capital was among the most
operative causes which produced that first dawn that ultimately
terminated in meridian splendor by the establishment of peace,
independence, and freedom. There were two circumstances which he would
take the liberty to mention, which would render banks of more importance
in this country than in any other country where they are at present in
use: the first, the commercial enterprise of our merchants compared
with the smallness of their capitals, which, as we had no large
manufacturing capitals, whereby the precious metals could be retained in
circulation, would frequently, by their exportation, greatly distress
the people; the other originated from a measure of the Government.
Congress, from a laudable intention of accommodating their constituents,
instituted Treasuries in all the States; in some of these there would
be, in the ordinary course of events, a deficiency, and in others a
redundancy. To keep them in equilibrium by the transportation of the
precious metals, or by the purchase of bills in the market, would be not
only inconvenient and expensive, but would keep out of circulation a
considerable part of the medium of the country.

Gentlemen had been pleased to consider the proposed terms as giving an
undue advantage to the stockholders. He would leave this part of the
subject to gentlemen who better understood it; only observing, that as
Government must rely principally on merchants to obtain the proposed
stock, it would be necessary to afford to them sufficient motives to
withdraw from their commercial pursuits a part of their capitals.

He would attempt an answer to some of those desultory objections which
had been made, and in doing this, he would omit to answer such as had
been, in his opinion, already refuted. He observed, that it had been
said that granting charters of incorporation was a high prerogative of
Government. He supposed it was not intended that it was, in the nature
of things, too transcendent a power to be exercised by a National
Government, but that the exercise of it should only be in consequence of
express delegation. Let this objection be compared with the conduct of
Congress on another subject, in all respects at least as important.
There is not, by the constitution, any power expressly delegated to
mortgage our revenues, and yet, without any question being made on the
constitutionality of the measure, we have mortgaged them to an immense
amount. From whence, he asked, do we acquire the authority to exercise
this power? Not from express grants, but being empowered to borrow money
on the credit of the United States, we have very properly considered the
pledging funds as among the known and usual means necessary and proper
to be employed for the attainment of the end expressly delegated.

It has been said that the bill authorized the stockholders to purchase
real estate. He considered the provision in the bill in that regard, not
a grant, but a limitation of power. Any man, or body of men, might, by
the existing laws, purchase, in their own private capacities, real
estate to any amount. This right was limited as it respected the
proposed corporation.

It is said there are banks already, and therefore the proposed
incorporation is unnecessary. To this he answered, that if the
Government should agree to receive all its demands in the paper of the
existing banks, it would give to them every advantage which, in the
opinion of gentlemen, renders the present system objectionable, without
stipulating for any equivalent to the Government. But are, he asked,
gentlemen serious in these observations? Do they believe the capitals of
those banks adequate to the exigencies of the nation? Do they believe
that those banks possess any powers by which they can give a projectile
force to their paper, so as to extend its circulation throughout the
United States? Or do they really wish to have the Government repose
itself on institutions with which they have no intimate connection, and
over which they have no control?

Mr. S. concluded by observing he was very confident a majority of the
House could never be induced to believe that it was the intention of the
constitution to deprive the Legislature of one of the most important and
necessary means of executing the powers expressly delegated.

Mr. LAWRENCE.--The advocates of this measure stand in an unfortunate
situation; for being those who in general advocate national measures,
they are charged with designs to extend the powers of the Government
unduly. He, however, consoled himself with a conscious attachment to the
constitution, and with the reflection that their conduct received the
approbation of their constituents. If the present be contrasted with the
former circumstances of this country, he doubted not the measures of
this Government would continue to receive the approbation of the people
of the United States.

The silence of the people on the subject now before the House is
strongly presumptive that the measure of the Bank is not considered by
them as unconstitutional. He then endeavored to show the
constitutionality of the bank system. It must be conceded that there is
nothing in the constitution that is expressly against it, and therefore
we ought not to deduce a prohibition by construction; he adverted to the
amendment proposed by Congress to the constitution, which says, "powers
not delegated are retained;" here, said he, to prove that the Bank is
unconstitutional, the constructive interpretation so much objected
against is recurred to.

The great objects of this Government are contained in the context of the
constitution. He recapitulated those objects, and inferred that every
power necessary to secure these must necessarily follow; for as to the
great objects for which this Government was instituted, it is as full
and complete in all its parts as any system that could be devised; a
full, uncontrollable power to regulate the fiscal concerns of this
Union, is a primary consideration in this Government, and from hence it
clearly follows that it must possess the power to make every possible
arrangement conducive to that great object.

He then adverted to the late Confederation, and pointed out its defects
and incompetency; and hence the old Congress called on the States to
enact certain laws which they had not power to enact; from hence he
inferred, that as the late Confederation could not pass those laws, and
to capacitate the Government of the United States, and form a more
perfect union, the constitution under which we now act was formed. To
suppose that this Government does not possess the powers for which the
constitution was adopted, involves the grossest absurdity.

The deviation from charters, and the infringement of parchment rights,
which had been justified on the principle of necessity by the gentleman
from Virginia, (Mr. MADISON,) he said had been made on different
principles from those now mentioned; the necessity, he contended, did
not at the time exist; the old Congress exercised the power, as they
thought, by a fair construction of the Confederation.

On constructions, he observed, it was to be lamented that they should
ever be necessary; but they had been made; he instanced the power of
removability, which had been an act of the three branches, and has not
been complained of. It was at least as important a one as the present.

But the construction now proposed, he contended, was an easy and natural
construction. Recurring to the collection law, he observed, that it was
by construction that the receipts are ordered to be made in gold and
silver.

With respect to creating a mass of capital, he supposed just and upright
national measures would create a will to form this capital.

Adverting to the idea that Congress has not the power to establish
companies with exclusive privileges, he observed, that by the amendments
proposed by New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and New York, it plainly
appears that these States considered that Congress does possess the
power to establish such companies.

The constitution vests Congress with power to dispose of certain
property in lands, and to make all useful rules and regulations for that
purpose; can its power be less over one species of its own property than
over another?

With respect to giving preference to one State over another, he
observed, that ten years hence the seat of Government is to be on the
Potomac, and wherever the Government is finally settled, the place will
enjoy superior advantages; but still the Government must go thither, and
the places not enjoying those advantages must be satisfied.

It is said we must not pass a problematical bill, which is liable to a
supervision by the Judges of the Supreme Court; but he conceived there
was no force in this, as those judges are invested by the Constitution
with a power to pass their judgment on all laws that may be passed.

It is said that this law may interfere with the State Governments; but
this may or may not be the case; and in all interference of the kind the
particular interest of a State must give way to the general interest.

With respect to the corporation possessing the power of passing laws,
this, he observed, is a power incidental to all corporations; and in
the instance of the Western Territory, Congress have exercised the power
of instituting corporations or bodies politic, to the greatest possible
extent.

He defended the right of Congress to purchase and possess property, and
quoted a passage in the Constitution to show that they possess this
right.

He then touched on the expediency of banks, and of that proposed in
particular. The advantages generally derived from these institutions, he
believed, applied peculiarly to this country. He noticed the objection
from banks banishing the specie; he said the surplus only would be sent
out of the country; but is it given away? No, sir, it is sent off for
articles which are wanted, and which will enrich the country.

With respect to a run on the Bank, he mentioned the circumstances under
which those runs on the British banks, which had been noticed, took
place; and showed there was no parallel that would probably ever take
place in this country.

For several particulars he showed that the objection which arose from
the United States not having a good bargain by the system was not well
founded. He then mentioned the peculiar advantages which the United
States will enjoy over common subscribers.

The objection from banks being already established in the several States
he obviated by stating the mischiefs which might arise from an ignorance
of the situation of those banks; and concluded by some remarks on the
inexpediency of the General Government having recourse to institutions
of merely a local nature.

Mr. JACKSON said, that having been the person who brought forward the
constitutional objection against the bill, he thought himself bound to
notice the answers which had been offered to that objection. Newspaper
authorities, said he, have been alluded to, and their silence on the
subject considered as indicating the approbation of the people. He would
meet the gentlemen on that ground; and, though he did not consider
newspapers as an authority to be depended on, yet if opinions through
that channel were to be regarded, he would refer the gentlemen to those
of this city; the expediency and constitutionality of the bill have been
called in question by the newspapers of this city.

The latitude contended for in constructing the constitution on this
occasion he reprobated very fully. If the sweeping clause, as it is
called, extends to vesting Congress with such powers, and necessary and
proper means are an indispensable implication in the sense advanced by
the advocates of the bill, we shall soon be in possession of all
possible powers, and the charter under which we sit will be nothing but
a name.

This bill will essentially interfere with the rights of the separate
States, for it is not denied that they possess the power of instituting
banks; but the proposed corporation will eclipse the Bank of North
America, and contravene the interests of the individuals concerned in
it.

He then noticed the several arguments drawn from the doctrine of
implication; the right to incorporate a National Bank has been adduced
from the power to raise armies; but he presumed it would not be
contended that this is a bill to provide for the national defence. Nor
could such a power, in his opinion, be derived from the right to borrow
money. It has been asked what the United States could do with the
surplus of their revenue without the convenience of a bank in which to
deposit it with advantage? For his part, though he wished to anticipate
pleasing occurrences, he did not look forward to the time when the
General Government would have this superabundance at its disposal. The
right of Congress to purchase and hold lands has been urged to prove
that they can transfer this power; but the General Government is
expressly restricted in the exercise of this power; the consent of the
particular State to the purchase for particular purposes only is
requisite; these purposes are designated, such as building light-houses,
erecting arsenals, &c.

It has been said that banks may exist without a charter; but that this
incorporation is necessary in order that it may have a hold on the
Government. Mr. J. strongly reprobated this idea. He was astonished to
hear such a declaration, and hoped that such ideas would prevent a
majority of the House from passing a bill that would thus establish a
perpetual monopoly; we have, said he, I believe, a perpetual debt; I
hope we shall not have a perpetual corporation. What was it drove our
forefathers to this country? Was it not the ecclesiastical corporations
and perpetual monopolies of England and Scotland? Shall we suffer the
same evils to exist in this country instead of taking every possible
method to encourage the increase of emigrants to settle among us? For if
we establish the precedent now before us, there is no saying where it
will stop.

The power to regulate trade is said to involve this as a necessary
means; but the powers consequent on this express power are specified,
such as regulating light-houses, ships, harbors, &c. It has been said
that Congress has borrowed money; this shows that there is no necessity
of instituting any new bank, those already established having been found
sufficient for the purpose. He denied the right of Congress to establish
banks at the permanent seat of Government, or on those sandheaps
mentioned yesterday; for if they should, they could not force the
circulation of their paper one inch beyond the limits of those places.
But it is said, if Congress can establish banks in those situations, the
question becomes a question of place, and not of principle; from hence
it is inferred that the power may be exercised in any other part of the
United States. This appeared to him to involve a very dangerous
construction of the powers vested in the General Government.

Adverting to the powers of Congress in respect to the finances of the
Union, he observed that those powers did not warrant the adoption of
whatever measures they thought proper. The constitution has restricted
the exercise of those fiscal powers; Congress cannot lay a poll tax, nor
impose duties on exports; yet these undoubtedly relate to the finances.

The power exercised in respect to the Western Territory, he observed,
had reference to property already belonging to the United States; it
does not refer to property to be purchased, nor does it authorize the
purchase of any additional property; besides, the powers are express and
definite, and the exercise of them in making needful rules and
regulations in the government of that Territory does not interfere with
the rights of any of the respective States.

Mr. J. denied the necessity of the proposed institution; and noticing
the observation of Mr. AMES, that it was dangerous on matters of
importance not to give an opinion, observed that be could conceive of no
danger that would result from postponing that construction of the
constitution now contended for to some future Congress, who, when the
necessity of a banking institution shall be apparent, will be as
competent to the decision as the present House.

Alluding to the frequent representations of the flourishing condition of
the country, he inferred that this shows the necessity of the proposed
institution does not exist at the present time; why, then, should we be
anticipating for future generations? State banks he considered
preferable to a National Bank, as counterfeits can be detected in the
States; but if you establish a National Bank, the checks will be found
only in the city of Philadelphia or Conococheague. He passed a eulogium
on the Bank of Pennsylvania; the stockholders, said he, are not
speculators; they have the solid coin deposited in their vaults.

He adverted to the preamble and context of the constitution, and
asserted that this context is to be interpreted by the general powers
contained in the instrument. Noticing the advantages which it had been
said would accrue to the United States from the Bank, he asked, is the
United States going to commence stockjobbing? The "general welfare" are
the two words that are to involve and justify the assumption of every
power. But what is this general welfare? It is the welfare of
Philadelphia, New York, and Boston; for as to the States of Georgia and
New Hampshire, they may as well be out of the Union for any advantages
they will receive from the institution. He reprobated the idea of the
United States deriving any emolument from the Bank, and more especially
he reprobated the influence which it was designed the Government should
enjoy by it. He said the Banks of Venice and Amsterdam were founded on
different principles. In the famous Bank of Venice, though the
Government holds no shares, yet it has at command five millions of
ducats; but the United States were to be immediately concerned in
theirs, and become stockholders.

The Bank of Amsterdam was under the entire direction of the
burgomasters, who alone had the power of making by-laws for its
regulation. This power, by the bill, was given up by Government, very
improperly he thought, and was to be exercised by the stock-jobbers.

The French Bank, he added, was first established upon proper principles
and flourished, but afterwards became a royal bank; much paper was
introduced, which destroyed the establishment, and was near oversetting
the Government.

The facility of borrowing he deprecated; it will involve the Union in
irretrievable debts; the facility of borrowing is but another name for
anticipation, which will in its effects deprive the Government of the
power to control its revenues; they will be mortgaged to the creditors
of the Government. Let us beware of following the example of Great
Britain in this respect. He said, undue advantages had been taken in
precipitating the measure, and the reasonable proposition respecting the
State debts is not admitted. This I consider as partial and unjust.

A gentleman from Virginia has well observed that we appear to be divided
by a geographical line; not a gentleman scarcely to the eastward of a
certain line is opposed to the Bank, and where is the gentleman to the
southward that is for it? This ideal line will have a tendency to
establish a real difference. He added a few more observations, and
concluded by urging a postponement, if any regard was to be had to the
tranquillity of the Union.

Mr. BOUDINOT said he meant to confine himself to two or three great
points on which the whole argument appeared to him to rest. He
considered the objections to the bill as pointed against its
constitutionality and its expediency. It was essential, he observed,
that every member should be satisfied, as far as possible, of the first;
for however expedient it might be, if it was clearly unconstitutional,
the bill should never receive the sanction of the representatives of the
people. He would, in a great measure, refer its expediency, if
constitutional, to the experience of every gentleman of the House, as
the most satisfactory proof on that head, and he conceived there was no
need of much argument in support of its decision. The first question
then was, is Congress vested with a power to grant the privileges
contained in the bill? This is denied, and ought to be proved. In order
to show in what manner this subject had struck his mind, he first laid
down these principles:

Whatever power is exercised by Congress must be drawn from the
constitution; either from the express words or apparent meaning, or from
a necessary implication arising from the obvious intent of the framers.

That whatever powers (vested heretofore in any individual State) not
granted by this instrument, are still in the people of such State, and
cannot be exercised by Congress. That whatever implication destroys the
principle of the constitution ought to be rejected. That in construing
an instrument, the different parts ought to be so expounded as to give
meaning to every part which will admit of it.

Having stated these preliminaries, Mr. B. proceeded to inquire what were
the powers attempted to be exercised by this bill? For, until the powers
were known, the question of constitutionality could not be determined.

By it Congress was about to exercise the power of incorporating certain
individuals, thereby establishing a banking company for successfully
conducting the finances of the nation.

The next inquiry is, what rights will this company enjoy in this new
character, that they do not enjoy independent of it? Every individual
citizen had an undoubted right to purchase and hold property, both real
and personal, to any amount whatever; to dispose of this property to
whom and on what terms he pleased; to lend his money on legal interest
to any person willing to take the same; and indeed to exercise every
power over his property that was contained in the bill. Individual
citizens, then, having these powers, might also associate together in
company or copartnership, and jointly exercising the same rights, might
hold lands in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, to any amount
whatever; might put any sum of money into joint stock; might issue their
notes to any amount; might make by-laws or articles of copartnership for
their own government; and, finally, might set up a bank to any amount,
however great, and no authority in the Government could legally
interfere with the exercise of these rights. The great difference
between this private association of citizens, in their individual
capacities, and the company to be created by this bill, and which is
held up in so dangerous a light, is, that the one exposes the company to
the necessity of using each individual's name in all their transactions;
suits must be brought in all their names; deeds must be taken and given
in like manner; each one in his private estate is liable for the default
of the rest; the death of a member dissolves the partnership as to him;
and for want of a political existence the union may be dissolved by any
part of its members, and of course many obvious inconveniences must be
suffered merely of an official kind. By the bill these difficulties are
to be removed by conveying three qualities to them.

1st. Individuality, or constituting a number of citizens into one legal
artificial body, capable by a fictitious name of exercising the rights
of an individual.

2d. Irresponsibility in their individual capacity, not being answerable
beyond the joint capital.

3d. Durability, or a political existence for a certain time, not to be
affected by the natural death of its members.

These are the whole of the powers exercised, and the rights conveyed. It
is true these are convenient and advantageous to the company, but of
trifling importance when considered as a right of power exercised by a
National Legislature for the benefit of the Government. Can it be of any
importance to the State whether a number of its citizens are considered,
in legal contemplation, as united in an individual capacity, or
separately as so many individuals, especially if the public weal is
thereby promoted? By their irresponsibility being known, every person
dealing with them gives his tacit consent to the principle, and it
becomes part of the contract. And by political duration their powers and
abilities are limited, and their rights restricted, so as to prevent any
danger that might arise from the exercise of their joint natural right,
not only as to the amount of their capital, but as to the by-laws they
may make for their government.

A private bank could make contracts with the Government, and the
Government with them, to all intents and purposes, as great and
important as a public bank, would their capital admit of it; though they
would not possess such qualities as to justify the confidence of
Government, by depending on them in a time of danger and necessity. This
might put it in the power of any individuals to injure the community in
its essential interests by withdrawing the capital when most needed. To
prevent this, and many other inconveniences, it is necessary that a bank
for the purposes of Government should be a legally artificial body,
possessing the three qualities above mentioned.

Mr. B. then took up the constitution, to see if this simple power was
not fairly to be drawn by necessary implication from those vested by
this instrument in the legislative authority of the United States. It
sets out in the preamble with declaring the general purposes for which
it was formed: "The insurance of domestic tranquillity, provision for
the common defence, and promotion of the general welfare." These are the
prominent features of this instrument, and are confirmed and enlarged by
the specific grants in the body of it, where the principles on which the
Legislature should rest after their proceedings are more fully laid
down, and the division of power to be exercised by the general and
particular Governments distinctly marked out. By the 8th section,
Congress has power "to levy taxes, pay debts, provide for the common
defence and general welfare, declare war, raise and support armies,
provide for and maintain a navy;" and as the means to accomplish these
important ends, "to borrow money," and finally, "to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers."
Let us, then, inquire, is the constituting a public bank necessary to
these important and essential ends of Government? If so, the right to
exercise the power must be in the supreme Legislature.

He argued that the power was not contained in express words, but that
it was necessarily deduced by the strongest and most decisive
implication, because he contended that it was a necessary means to
attain a necessary end. Necessary implication had led Congress under the
power to lay and collect impost and taxes, to establish officers for the
collection, to inflict penalties against those who should defraud the
revenue, to oblige vessels to enter at one port and deliver in another;
subjected them to various ceremonies in their proceedings, for which the
owners were made to pay; and he conceived that it was not so great an
exertion of power by implication to incorporate a company for the
purpose of a bank. He also deduced the right from the power of paying
debts, raising armies, providing for the general welfare and common
defence, for which they were to borrow money. All these necessarily
include the right of using every proper and necessary means to
accomplish these necessary ends. It is certain, he said, that money must
be raised from the people. This could not be done in sums sufficient for
the exigencies of Government in a country where the precious metals were
as scarce as in this. The people in general are poor when compared with
European nations; they have a wilderness to subdue and cultivate; taxes
must be laid with prudence, and collected with discretion; the
anticipation of the revenues, therefore, by borrowing money, becomes
absolutely necessary. If so, then as the constitution had not specified
the manner of borrowing, or from whom the loan was to be obtained, the
supreme Legislature of the Union were at liberty, it was their duty, to
fix on the best mode of effecting the purposes of their appointment. For
it was a sound principle, that when a general power is granted, and the
means are not specified, they are left to the discretion of those in
whom the trust is reposed, provided they do not adopt means expressly
forbidden. The public defence, or general welfare, resting on the annual
supplies from uncertain revenues, would expose the very existence of the
community. It is the duty of those to whom the people have committed
this power to prepare in time of peace for the necessary defence in a
time of war. The United States are now happily in a state of peace; but
it was impossible for any one to say how long it would continue. By
prudent management it might be long preserved; but this prudence
consisted in being always found in a state of preparation to defend our
country.

The constitution contemplates this very duty by authorizing Congress to
provide for the common defence by borrowing money. Why borrow money? Are
not the annual revenues sufficient? It might be so, if nothing was to be
attended to but internal wants; but the common defence and general
welfare loudly call for that provision which will produce a constant
guard on external enemies and internal insurrections. To this necessary
end it becomes Congress to provide that the necessary means may be
always at hand, by being able to arm their citizens and provide their
support while engaged in the defence of their common country. This can
be done only by borrowing money, which is usually of citizens or
foreigners; if of the first, it must be from individuals or from private
banks: will it be prudent to trust to either? Loans from individuals
were attempted during the war, when patriotism produced a will in some
lenders, and others were glad to get rid of a depreciating paper
currency almost on any terms whatever.

But even these loans, arising from this paper medium with which the
market was glutted, were altogether insufficient; and by one change of
circumstances every hope was precluded of being any way successful in
procuring money from that source. The circumstances of individuals, too,
in this country are such, when compared with the wants of a nation, as
to render the source too vague and uncertain to rely upon; and it would
be a most improvident execution of the powers granted for the express
purpose of the common defence and general welfare. Private banks are
almost as inadequate to the object, and for reasons already given, were
neither to be depended on for will or capital as to the supply for the
principal wants of Government. They are generally established for
commercial purposes, and on capitals not always sufficient for them. If
they should be prevailed upon at any time to attempt to supply the
demands of a nation at war, it must be from a general combination of
their whole stocks, to the destruction of the original designs of their
several institutions. This ought not to be expected; for as far as it
goes to the depression of the mercantile interests, so far it is
injurious to the Government; besides, a dependence upon such a
combination would be impolitic, both from its slowness and uncertainty.
The votes of a few individuals affected by local, selfish, or adverse
politics, might endanger the whole people. Such a dependence ought not
to be attributed to the wise framers of the constitution, neither does
the language warrant it. But foreign loans have been mentioned, as a
proper source for this purpose. The imprudence of placing the common
defence of a nation on the will of those who have no interest in its
welfare is a good answer to this observation. Would it be prudent to
trust a foreigner, perhaps a rival, if not an enemy, with your supply of
what has emphatically been called the sinews of war? Would it not expose
us to exorbitant demands, and often a refusal? Many adventitious
circumstances of a war, increasing demands from all quarters, scarcity
of coin, and difficulty of communication, as well as the intrigues of
courts, all loudly oppose the measure, as contrary to the spirit and
meaning of a provision for the common defence and general welfare. The
only resort then, he conceived, was by a timely provision to secure
institutions at home from which loans might be obtained at all times on
moderate terms, and to such amount as the necessity of the State might
require. But gentlemen say that the constitution does not expressly
warrant the establishment of such a corporation. If by _expressly_,
express words are meant, it is agreed that there are no express words;
and this is the case with most of the powers exercised by Congress; for
if the doctrine of necessary implication is rejected, he did not see
what the supreme Legislature of the Union could do in that character. If
this power is not clearly given in the constitution by necessary
implication, then is a necessary end proposed and directed, while the
common and usual necessary means to attain that end are refused, or at
least not granted.

Mr. B. was firmly of opinion that a National Bank was the necessary
means, without which the end could not be obtained. Theory proved it so
in his opinion, and the experience of the Union in a day of distress had
fully confirmed the theory. The struggles of the friends of freedom
during the late contest had nearly been rendered abortive for want of
this aid. That danger which was then so hardly avoided became a solemn
memento to this House to provide against a similar case of necessity.
This was the time to do it with advantage, being in such profound peace.
He had not heard any argument by which it was proved that individuals,
private banks, or foreigners, could with safety and propriety be
depended on as the efficient and necessary means for so important a
purpose. Although money was at present plentiful in Europe, and might be
borrowed on easy terms, it might not be so to-morrow, in case a war
should break out, and our necessities become pressing. He again
enumerated the harmless qualities with which it was proposed to vest the
bank corporation, by the bill on the table, for the important purposes
of the common defence and general welfare. Gentlemen had not yet pointed
out any danger arising to the community, neither did he think it
possible that any could ever be mentioned equal to those of suffering
the Government to depend on individuals or private banks for loans in a
day of distress.

But it was said that this bill gave the corporation a right to hold real
property in a State, which Congress had no power to do. The terms of the
bill are misapprehended; this is a right which has been already shown,
attaches to the citizens individually, or in their associated capacity;
the bill, therefore, does no more than to vest a number with an
artificial single capacity under a fictitious name, and by that name to
hold lands, make by-laws, &c.; all which they might have done before as
citizens in a collective capacity. So far from giving a new power, their
original individual rights are limited for the public safety as to the
amount of their stock and the duration of their existence.

Mr. B. then proceeded to cite numerous instances of powers exercised by
Congress during the last two years, deduced under the constitution by
necessary implication, to show the utter impossibility of carrying any
one provision of that authority into execution for the benefit of the
people without this reasonable latitude of construction. He also
adverted to some instances of the like conduct under the former
Confederation. It had been urged that the new Congress had no rights or
powers but what had been vested in and given to them by the individual
States, and therefore they could not accept a cession from Great Britain
by the treaty of peace of the lands extending to the Lake of the Woods,
because not before included in any individual State. Every member was
soon convinced of the absurdity of the argument, and by a necessary
implication established the power of the Confederated Legislature.
During the war the Commander-in-chief gave a passport to a British
officer to transmit clothing to the British prisoners at Lancaster. He
accordingly conveyed a very large quantity of British goods into
Pennsylvania for that purpose; which being directly against an express
law of that State, they were seized and condemned by the proper
magistrate. On a complaint to the Legislature of the State, they
referred the same to their Judicial officers, upon whose report (that
Congress being vested with the power of declaring war, the right of
giving safe passports to an enemy was necessarily implied, which,
therefore, was duly exercised by their Commander-in-chief, though no
express power was given to him for that purpose) the Legislature
declared their law directing the condemnation of the goods void _ab
initio_, and the judgment of condemnation had no effect.

This was also the rule that governed this House with regard to the
removability of officers by the President, and the authority given to a
Council to legislate for the Western Territory. In fine, he concluded,
that it was universally understood that whenever a general power was
given, especially to a supreme Legislature, every necessary means to
carry it into execution were necessarily included. This was the common
sense of mankind, without which it would require a multitude of volumes
to contain the original powers of an increasing Government that must
necessarily be changing its relative situation every year or two.

If power was given to raise an army, the making provision for all the
necessary supplies and incidental charges was included. If a navy was to
be formed, the manning and supplying the warlike stores are necessarily
included. If a power is given to borrow money, a right to mortgage or
pledge the public property to secure the repayment is understood to be
vested in the borrower. Take up the present statute book, and every page
will afford evidence of this doctrine. Examine the law with regard to
crimes and punishments; under the power of establishing courts, we have
implied the power of punishing the stealing and falsifying the records,
and ascertained the punishment of perjury, bribery, and extortion. Under
the power of regulating trade, we have accepted cessions of real estate,
and built light-houses, piers, &c. All this is under the doctrine of
necessary implication for the public good; and in cases not so strong as
the present, and on the exercise of which no gentleman thought proper to
start this objection.

This construction appears so natural and necessary, that the good sense
of every gentleman on the floor has hitherto led him to proceed on this
principle ever since we began to legislate; what principle of the
constitution does it destroy? It gives nothing that can affect the
rights of any State or citizen. Indeed, it has been said that it is
exercising a high act of power; he thought it had been shown to be
rather of the inferior kind; but allow the position, and who so proper
as the Legislature of the whole Union to exercise such a power for the
general welfare? It has also been said that this power is a mere
conveniency for the purpose of fiscal transactions, but not necessary to
attain the ends proposed in the constitution. This is denied, and at
best is mere matter of opinion, and must be left to the discretion of
the Legislature to determine.

Mr. B. said, he should now conclude what he had to say, had not an
honorable gentleman (Mr. JACKSON) brought forward the observations of
the author of the _Federalist_, vol. 2, p. 72, 73, 74, to show a
different contemporaneous exposition of the constitution, and charged
the author, who he alleged was said to be also the author of the present
plan before the House, with a change of sentiment. As this gentleman is
not here to speak for himself, he ought to have the next best chance by
having what he then wrote candidly attended to, especially as gentlemen
allow him to be a good authority. Mr. B. read only part of the 73d page
referred to by Mr. JACKSON, in these words: "Had the Convention
attempted a positive enumeration of the powers necessary and proper for
carrying their other powers into effect, the attempt would have involved
a complete digest of laws on every subject to which the constitution
relates; accommodated, too, not only to the existing state of things,
but to all the possible changes which futurity may produce; for in every
new application of a general power, the particular powers which are the
means of attaining the general power must always necessarily vary with
that object, and be often properly varied whilst the object remains the
same." How these sentiments can be said to be a different
contemporaneous exposition must be left to the House to determine.

Mr. B. then begged the indulgence of the House to hear the same
gentlemen when arguing expressly on that part of the constitution now
under consideration; and then read pp. 144, 145, and 146, of the 1st
vol. of the _Federalist_, which are too long to be inserted. He declared
that, in his opinion, it was impracticable to put together language in
the same length that could more forcibly and pointedly elucidate and
prove the construction contended for in support of the bill on the
table. There remained yet but two objections, to answer which Mr. B.
would detain the House a little longer.

The gentleman from Georgia (Mr. JACKSON) had charged the measure with
establishing the commercial interests, to the great injury of the
agricultural. If this was true he never would agree to it, for he
considered the agricultural interests of America as its great and sure
dependence. Mr. B. confessed that so far from seeing these measures in
this point of light, he could not bring his mind to comprehend how the
commercial interests of a country could be promoted without greatly
advancing the interests of agriculture. Will the farmer have any
temptation to labor, if the surplus of what he raises beyond his
domestic consumption is to perish in his barn for want of a market? Can
a market be obtained without the merchant? If commerce flourishes, the
merchants increase, and of course the demand for the produce of the
land; but if the mercantile interests fail, there is none to export the
surplus produced by agriculture. If the farmer should undertake to
export his own produce, he could not give his whole attention to his
affairs; or, if the merchant should attempt to raise the grain he
wanted, he could not carry on his merchandise. The one interest depends
on the other; a separation destroys both.

But the incapacity of the Bank to extend its influence to the extremes
of the Union has been argued from the gentleman never having seen a note
of the present Bank of North America in Georgia; he therefore concludes
that bank has never been of any service to her agricultural interests.
Mr. B. said that he drew very different conclusions from this fact. He
supposed that by means of the bank the traders with Georgia had been
enabled to send her the precious metals, while the bank paper had
answered their purposes nearer home, where it circulated with undoubted
credit. He instanced a case of a Philadelphia merchant, who was
possessed of £100 in gold, and £100 credit at the bank; the merchant
wanted £100 worth of rice of a Georgia planter, and the like value in
flour of a Pennsylvania farmer. When he purchased the one of the
Georgian, he could safely pay him the whole in gold, while he found the
Pennsylvanian would as readily receive the bank paper for his flour; but
had there been no bank, he could have purchased but £50 worth of each,
and the Georgia and Pennsylvanian both would have gone without a market
for the residue. In short, the whole Union may be likened to the body
and limbs; you cannot aid or comfort one but the other must be likewise
benefited.

He said it was, however, difficult and impracticable to show that every
measure adopted by the Government should have an effect perfectly equal
over so extensive a country as that of the United States; it was
sufficient if, upon the whole, the measures of Government, taken all
together, produced the desired equality.

The last objection was, that by adopting this bill we exposed the
measure to be considered and defeated by the Judiciary of the United
States, who might adjudge it to be contrary to the constitution, and
therefore void; and not lend their aid to carry it into execution. This,
he alleged, gave him no uneasiness. He was so far from controverting
this right in the Judiciary, that it was his boast and his confidence.
It led him to greater decision on all subjects of a constitutional
nature, when he reflected that if, from inattention, want of precision,
or any other defect, he should do wrong, that there was a power in the
Government which could constitutionally prevent the operation of such a
wrong measure from affecting his constituents. He was legislating for a
nation, and for thousands unborn; and it was the glory of the
constitution that there was a remedy even for the failures of the
supreme Legislature itself.

Upon the whole, then, he said, that on taking the power in question in
every point of view, and giving the constitution the fullest
consideration, under the advantage of having the objections placed in
the strongest point of light by the great abilities of the gentlemen in
the opposition, he was clearly in favor of the bill; as to its
expediency, there could be little doubt in the minds of any gentleman;
and unless more conclusive arguments could be adduced to show its
unconstitutionality, he should in the end vote for passing the bill.


SATURDAY, February 5.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill for incorporating the
Bank of the United States.

The question being on the passage of the bill,

Mr. SMITH observed, that he considered it his duty to offer the reasons
which should influence him in giving his vote on this occasion. He had
wished amendments to the bill, as some parts of it, he confessed, did
not perfectly please him; but his wishes having been overruled, the
question now is, whether the bill shall pass? Though he came southward
of the Potomac, the principle of the bill met his approbation. It would
be a deplorable thing if this Government should enact a law subversive
of the constitution, or that so enlightened a body as the Senate of the
United States should, by so great a majority as were in favor of this
bill, pass a law so hostile to the liberties of this country, as the
opposition to this measure have suggested the bank system to be; and it
would be very extraordinary if an officer of this Government who has
produced a performance explanatory of the constitution, of such
celebrity as to be resorted to as an authority, should be so
inconsistent with himself as to propose a law entirely subversive of the
principles laid down in his able defence of the constitution.

He then adverted to the objection drawn from that article of the
constitution, that no preference shall be given to one port over
another. He showed that the clause was inserted for a particular
purpose, and could not be cited as a rule not to be deviated from, as a
preference was and must necessarily be given to one port over another.
He produced numerous instances in point. In consequence of various
clauses in the revenue laws, general regulations sometimes operate
partially, and commercial arrangements, apparently unequal, produce the
good of the community at large.

In reference to construing the constitution, he observed, that the
present moment, when the powers of the Government were assailed from
various quarters, he conceived the most improper to contract these
powers.

The right to construe the constitution he argued from the principles
advanced by Mr. MADISON, in the debate on the power of removability, and
read sundry observations from _Lloyd's Register_, made by that
gentleman, corroborative of this sentiment. Those arguments, he
conceived, applied very aptly to the present subject.

Matters of a fiscal nature necessarily devolve on the General
Government, and he urged that every power resulting from the
acknowledged right of Congress to control the finances of this country
must be as necessarily implied as in the case of the power of
removability.

He then alluded to the expediency of a National Bank. The Secretary gave
notice, in his first report, that this plan was in contemplation.
Nothing was ever read with greater avidity; and though it is now more
than a year since this intimation was given, yet no objections have been
offered against it either by the States or by individuals--even the
State of North Carolina has not mentioned it. [Here Mr. BLOODWORTH (if
the reporter did not misunderstand) informed Mr. SMITH that the report
had not been seen by the Legislature of North Carolina.] Mr. SMITH said
he was sorry for it--and then proceeded to notice some partial
quotations, made by Mr. JACKSON, from _Dr. Smith's Wealth of Nations_,
against bank systems. He said, he could have wished the gentleman had
been more copious in his quotations from that author; if he had, he
would have found that that author has fully demonstrated their utility.

He noticed the divisions of opinions on the subject of a National Bank
in the city of Philadelphia. He supposed ideas of personal advantages
induced these opposing sentiments. He, however, thought this subject
should be taken up altogether on general principles; and even if its
immediate influence should not extend to the extremes of the Union, if
the establishment promises a general preponderating advantage, local
considerations must be considered in a secondary point of view. The
principal inquiry is, will the institution facilitate the management of
the finances? This, he thought, had been made apparent. This is the
opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, after due and mature
consideration of the subject; and he certainly enjoys the best means of
forming an opinion; he is at the head of the Fiscal Department, and
deservedly enjoys the public confidence. Very little has been offered to
disprove his sentiments on this part of the question, and the
inexpediency of the measure should be clearly proved before the plan is
rejected; for an officer who deservedly enjoys the public confidence is
entitled to the support of the Legislature in those plans which are
expedient and constitutional.

Mr. S. mentioned instances in which Congress exercised power by
implication, and observed, that this was necessary to the execution of
the duties which devolve on the Government by the constitution. The
power to establish a National Bank must reside in Congress, for no
individual State can exercise any such power. The right of no particular
State is therefore infringed by the institution. It had repeatedly been
said, that Philadelphia would derive peculiar advantages from the Bank
of the United States, but, he said, if the present plan should fail, it
was a question whether the stockholders of the Bank of North America
would not derive greater advantages from the necessity which, in that
case, Government would be under of resorting to them for loans. The
institution, as before observed, is founded on general principles, and
will undoubtedly, in its operations, prove of general utility.

Mr. STONE said, if, upon questions like the present, he had given pain
to members he regarded, they might be assured the pain was reciprocal.
Let us cherish mutual toleration. We might conceive that each pursued
the system which he advocated from the purest motives. We differ in our
ideas of Government, and our sense of the sacredness of the written
compact. We varied widely in our opinions of the direction of this
Government. The great lesson of experiment would show who is right; but
we are influenced in our habits of thinking by our local situations,
and, perhaps, the distinct interests of the States we represent. He
observed, that upon the present occasion, the opinions respecting the
constitution seem to be divided by a geographical line, dividing the
continent. Hence it might be inferred, that other considerations mixed
with the question; and it had been insinuated that it was warped by the
future seat of Government. But other causes may be assigned for the
diversity of sentiment--the people to the eastward began earliest in
favor of liberty. They pursued freedom into anarchy--starting at the
precipice of confusion, they are now vibrating far the other way. He
said, that all our taxes are paid by the consumers of manufactures;
those taxes are all bounties upon home manufactures. The people to the
eastward are the manufacturers of this country; it was no wonder that
they should endeavor to strengthen the hands of a Government by which
they are so peculiarly benefited.

It is a fact that the greatest part of the Continental debt has
travelled eastward of the Potomac. This law is to raise the value of the
Continental paper. Here, then, is the strong impulse of immediate
interest in favor of the Bank. He took notice of the distinction made by
the plan of the bill, between Continental and State paper. The State
paper, on account of partial payments of interest, still remained in the
respective States. But this could not, by the present system, be
subscribed; so that the Southern States were deprived of the advantage
that might have been given to the only paper they have. But if gentlemen
charge us with defending the seat of Government, let them remember that
this betrays consciousness of an attack. If they believe that this
scheme tends to break the faith of the Union pledged to the Potomac, it
is no wonder they suppose we oppose it upon that ground. He would not
have mentioned this subject, had it not been hinted at. But let the
whole of it come forth; let gentlemen consult their own bosoms; let the
public decide the truth of his observations. He hoped he should not be
suspected of any bias. That so uniform had been his conduct upon all
questions, turning upon principles similar to the present, that every
member in the House, he believed, had conjectured rightly of the side he
would take, before he had uttered a word upon the subject, When
implication first raised its head in this House, he started from it as a
serpent which was to sting and poison the constitution. He felt in
unison with his country. The fears, the opinions, the jealousies of
individuals and of States, had been explained by a gentleman from
Virginia, (Mr. MADISON.) He should only remark, that all those who
opposed the Government dreaded this doctrine; those who advocated it,
declared that it could not be resorted to; and all combined in opinion
that it ought not to be tolerated. Never did any country more completely
unite in any sentiment than America in this, "that Congress ought not to
exercise, by implication, powers not granted by the constitution." And
is it not strange? For the admission of this doctrine destroys the
principle of our Government at a blow; it at once breaks down every
barrier which the Federal constitution had raised against unlimited
legislation. He said, that necessity was the most plausible pretext for
breaking the spirit of the social compact, but the people of this
country have anticipated that pretext. They have said to the Ministers
of this country, "we have given you what we think competent powers, but
if experience proves them inadequate, we will enlarge them; but, in the
mean time, dare not usurp those which we have reserved."

It is agreed on all hands, that the power to incorporate the subscribers
to a banking company, is not expressly granted, and although gentlemen
have agreed that it is implied--that it is an incident, that it is a
means for effectuating powers expressly granted, yet they are not agreed
as to the particular power to which this is an incident. They admit,
that the sweeping clause in the constitution confers no additional
power. But if he understood the gentlemen, several of them were of
opinion that all governments, instituted for certain ends, draw to them
the means of execution as of common right. This doctrine would make ours
but a short constitution. [Here he read the preamble and then said:]
Here is your constitution! Here is your bill of rights! Do these
gentlemen require any thing more respecting the powers of Congress, than
a description of the ends of government? And if, of right, they can
carry these into effect, will they regard the means, though they be
expressly pointed out? But I would ask if there is any power under
heaven which could not be exercised within the extensive limits of this
preamble?

The Convention might have stopped here; and there was no need, according
to the doctrine of the gentleman, to point out any of the means for the
ends mentioned in the preamble. That portion of the constitution which
by all America has been thought so important, according to their logic,
would become a dead letter; but the preamble, in fair construction, is a
solemn compact, that the powers granted shall be made use of to the ends
thereby specified.

He then reprobated, in pointed terms, the latitude of the principles
premised. He said the end of all government is the public good; and if
the means were left to legislation, all written compacts were nugatory.
He observed, that the sober discretion of the Legislature, which, in the
opinions of gentlemen, ought to be paramount, was the very thing
intended to be curbed and restrained by our constitution.

He then declared, that our form of government not only pointed out the
ends of government, but specified the means of execution. He said, we
may make war--this would draw to it the power of raising an army and
navy, laying taxes, establishing a judiciary, &c. But the spirit of the
constitution, in this respect, had been well explained by Mr. MADISON,
and he should not recapitulate.

He said, a gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. SMITH) had remarked that
all our laws proceeded upon the principle of expediency--that we were
the judges of that expediency--as soon as we gave it as our opinion that
a thing was expedient, it became constitutional. What then remains of
your constitution, except its mode of organization? We may look into it
to refresh our memories respecting the times, places, and manner of
composing the Government; that, as to the powers of Congress, were he of
that gentleman's opinion, he would never look into it again. Gentlemen
see the difficulties of their theories, and are obliged to confess that
these incidental powers are not easily defined. They rest in the sober
discretion of the Legislature.

One gentleman (Mr. AMES) has said, no implication ought to be made
against the law of nature, against rights acquired, or against power
pre-occupied by the States; that it is easier to restrain than to give
competent powers of execution. Now these notions are hostile to the main
principle of our Government, which is only a grant of particular
portions of power, implying a negative to all others. It has been shown
that the ends of government will include every thing. If gentlemen are
allowed to range in their sober discretion for the means, it is plain
that they have no limits. By the cabalistic word _incident_, your
constitution is turned upside down, and instead of being a grant of
particular powers, guarded by an implied negative to all others, it is
made to imply all powers. But, strange to tell, America forgot to guard
it by express negative provisions. Is there any difference in effect
between lodging general powers in a government, and permitting the
exercise of them by subtle constructions? He said there was a
difference. In the one case the people fairly gave up their liberty, and
stood prepared; in the other, they were unexpectedly tricked out of
their constitution.

The preceding remarks showed how dangerous is the doctrine of
implication, and upon what small data ingenuity can raise the most
dangerous superstructure. He should now take a view of these precedents,
in the former and present Congress, which are relied on to justify the
present measure.

1st. The Bank of North America. Here he stated the distressful and
critical situation of America at the period of its establishment; he
remarked, that it was at the time of the declension of the Continental
money. He showed that there were no powers in the Confederation to which
(even according to the reasoning of the other side) this power could be
incidental, but what required the vote of nine States; that the
ordinance passed by a vote of seven States, which showed that necessity
alone gave birth to that measure. He showed the dissimilarity of the
situations of the former and this Congress, and the difference in their
powers, and, consequently, in the dangers to be apprehended from the
encroachment of either.

2d. The redemption of our prisoners at Algiers. This comes within the
power to regulate trade. If, said he, we are not capable of redeeming,
by the best means in our power, our citizens, our trade may be entirely
ruined; and hence, the law which would be made for their redemption
would be necessary and proper. But, by the constitution, the Executive
may make treaties; these may be general, or for a particular object, and
the Legislature may effectuate them by grants of money.

3d. We have bought certificates, and not destroyed them. This, they say,
is implied from the power of paying the debts.

He asked if, before the purchase, the certificates were debts due from
the United States? And demanded, if, by the purchase, they were divested
of that quality? In my judgment, when a debt is fairly cancelled, it is
as much like a payment as need be.

4th. We had no right, except by implication, to give a salary to the
Vice President. He had voted against the salary, and had been for a _per
diem_ allowance, because he thought the Vice President was viewed by the
constitution only as the President of the Senate. But this example fails
most palpably, as Congress, in the compensations, are not confined by
the constitution either to a particular sum or mode of payment.

5th. Congress have made corporations, and exercised complete legislation
in the Western Territory. He said, to answer this case, nothing more was
necessary than to read the clause in the constitution which gives to
Congress expressly the power to make all the rules and regulations for
them.

It seemed to him as if gentlemen were inverting the order of things, by
making powers where there were none, and attempting to prove express
grants to the implications.

6th. Our regulations respecting freighters and owners, and between
captains and seamen. He had not those regulations correctly in his
memory, but he believed them proper and necessary regulations of
commerce.

7th. It has been said we have exclusive jurisdiction in places belonging
to Congress, and within the ten miles square. We could erect a bank in
any of those places; its influence would extend over the continent; the
principle upon which we founded this power could not be confined to a
particular time or a spot of land. Gentlemen ridicule the idea that the
exercise of a pervading influence and a general principle should be
limited by any particular number of years, or be confined within a fort.
He said, the power of exclusive legislation in those places was
expressly granted, and, under its influence, the Congress might exercise
complete and exclusive legislation within those limits; that the power
was confined to the places. But if the general powers of this
constitution are to be governed by the same rules of construction, and
we are to have no regard to place, it follows that Congress can exercise
exclusive legislation over this continent. He was astonished at this
doctrine. It would be equally reasonable to say, that France, because
within the limits of her own dominions, and over her own property, she
exercised exclusive legislation, that hence she had a right to legislate
for the world.

8th. The power of removal of officers by the President alone. He said,
it was known he had opposed that doctrine. He left it to be defended by
those who had voted for it. But he hoped Mr. Smith, of South Carolina,
and some other gentlemen, who had opposed it, would review the arguments
they had used upon that occasion.

He observed, after taking a view of these precedents on the danger of
laying down improper principles in legislation, how eagerly men grasped
at the slightest pretexts for exercise of power. He shuddered to think
what a broad and commanding position this Bank will form for further
encroachments.

A gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. SEDGWICK) has said, that whenever a
power is granted, all the known and usual means of execution are always
implied. The idea had been properly examined by Mr. GILES, but he would
ask, if incorporating the subscribers to a bank was the known and usual
means of borrowing money, especially when the subscribers were not
obliged to loan; or of collecting taxes, when no taxes were levied on
the bank.

But gentlemen tell us, that if we tie up the constitution too tightly,
it will break; if we hamper it, we cannot stir; if we do not admit the
doctrine, we cannot legislate at all. And with a kind of triumph, they
say that implication is recognized by the constitution itself in the
clause wherein we have power to make all laws, to carry, &c. He said, he
was ready to meet the gentlemen upon this ground. This clause was
intended to defeat those loose and proud principles of legislation which
had been contended for. It was meant to reduce legislation to some rule.
In fine, it confined the Legislature to those means that were necessary
and proper.

He said, it would not be pretended that it was necessary and proper for
the collection of taxes. Indeed, one gentleman (Mr. AMES) had attempted
to show that the payments in specie could not be made, if by chance a
great quantity of debt suddenly accumulated in a particular place. But
it might be remembered, that this necessity, if it arrived, was created
by the Legislature, and that would be strange reasoning which broke a
good constitution to mend a bad law. No taxes are to be collected by
this bill.

It would not be necessary and proper as a means of borrowing money,
because, first, we do not want to borrow money, and, if we did, this
law, though it may be the probable, is not the necessary mean; for if it
was the interest of the stockholders, they might, and he believed would,
refuse to loan. He said, that the institution might be defended upon
more plausible grounds, if the Bank had been taxed; or if a condition to
loan money to the public had been part of the plan. Upon what ground,
then, do gentlemen stand? They can only say, that they have implied a
great and substantive power in Congress, which gives to Government, or
to individuals, the influence of fifteen millions of dollars,
irrevocably, for twenty years, with a power of making by-laws, &c.,
because there is a probability that this institution may be convenient
and agreeable in the operations of Government. He asked, upon parallel
principles, what might Congress not do? He said, that the gentleman from
Virginia, (Mr. MADISON,) pursuing the doctrine into all the forms in
which it might appear, had struck upon several cases which were very
pointed--an incorporation of manufacturers with exclusive privileges;
merchants with the same; a national religion. This a gentleman (Mr.
AMES) has said was unfair and extravagant reasoning; and yet, in five
minutes, the gentleman's own reasoning led him to ask, with warmth, if
Congress could not join stocks with a company to trade to Nootka? And he
condescended to doubt, if the privileges given to such a company might
not be exclusive. He saw clearly, himself, that his theory led to the
latter conclusion; for if expediency, if convenience, if facility, if
fears of war, if preparations for events which might never happen, can
justify an incorporation upon the present plan, the same suggestions,
the same logic, will legalize incorporations with exclusive privileges.
The deductions of the gentleman from Virginia are sound and right, and
cannot be fairly controverted. Congress may then do any thing. Nay, if
the principles now advocated are right, it is the duty of the
Legislature of the Union to make all laws; not only those that are
necessary and proper to carry the powers of the Government into effect,
but all laws which are convenient, expedient, and beneficial to the
United States. Then where is your constitution! Are we not now sitting,
in our sober discretion, a General Government, without the semblance of
restraint? Yes, said he, we have still a constitution, but where is it
to be found? Is it written? No. Is it among the archives? No. Where is
it? It is found in the sober discretion of the Legislature--it is
registered in the brains of the majority!

He proceeded. I say there is no necessity, there is no occasion, for
this Bank. The States will institute banks which will answer every
purpose. But a distrust of the States is shown in every movement of
Congress--will not this implant distrust also in the States? Will you
gain by this contest? This scheme may give, and I am convinced will
give, partial advantages to the States. In the fair administration of
our Government, no partial advantages can be given; but, by this bill, a
few stockholders may institute banks in particular States, to their
aggrandizement and the oppression of others. This Bank will swallow up
the State banks; it will raise in this country a moneyed interest at the
devotion of Government; it may bribe both States and individuals. He
said, gentlemen asked who would be offended or hurt by this plan? Have
we heard any complaints against it? Have the newspapers reprobated it?
These questions had no influence on his mind. He said it was one of
those sly and subtle movements which marched silently to its object; the
vices of it were at first not palpable or obvious; but when the people
saw a distinction of banks created--when they viewed with astonishment
the train of wealth which followed individuals, whose sudden exaltation
surprised even the possessors--they would inquire how all this came
about? They will then examine into the powers by which these phenomena
have arisen, and they will find--they will reprobate the falsehood of
the theories of the present day.

He said, that gentlemen had told us of the sudden irruptions of enemies.
When those necessities arrive, it is time enough to make use of them to
break your constitution. But, gentlemen say, upon emergencies the Bank
will loan money. We differ in opinion. I think when we want it most, the
Bank will be most unable and unwilling to lend. If we are in
prosperity, we can borrow money almost any where; but in adversity,
stockholders will avoid us with as much caution as any other
capitalists.

But a gentleman (Mr. AMES) tells us not to be alarmed, the Bank will not
eat up liberty--he said he was not afraid. He was not under any
apprehensions that all the little influence that Congress possessed
would destroy the great spirit of American liberty. The body of the
people would laugh at and ridicule any attempt to enslave them; but a
conduct which had that tendency might arouse alarming passions. He said,
there existed at this moment ill-blood in the United States, which to
quiet he would readily agree to enter into a foreign war. America with
us, we might defy the world. There was but one people he was afraid of
offending. This was America. He was not afraid of foreign enemies, but
the resentment of our own country is always a subject of serious
apprehension. He observed, that there were other parts of this important
and diffusive subject which he might have touched, but he had fatigued
himself and the House.

Mr. SMITH (of South Carolina) said, as he had been greatly misunderstood
by the gentleman last up, he wished to explain the position he had laid
down. He had never been so absurd as to contend, as the gentleman had
stated, that whatever the Legislature thought expedient, was therefore
constitutional. He had only argued that in cases where the question was,
whether a law was necessary and proper to carry a given power into
effect, the members of the Legislature had no other guide but their own
judgment, from which alone they were to determine whether the measure
proposed was necessary and proper to carry the powers vested in Congress
into full effect. If, in such cases, it appeared to them, on solemn
deliberation, that the measure was not prohibited by any part of the
constitution, was not a violation of the rights of any State or
individual, and was peculiarly necessary and proper to carry into
operation certain essential powers of the Government, it was then not
only justifiable on the part of Congress, but it was even their duty to
adopt such measure. That, nevertheless, it was still within the province
of the Judiciary to annul the law, if it should be by them deemed not to
result by fair construction from the powers vested by the constitution.


MONDAY, February 7.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill for incorporating the
Bank of the United States.

The question being on the passage of the bill,

Mr. GILES.--In the course of discussing the present important question,
it has been several times insinuated that local motives, and not a
candid and patriotic investigation of the subject upon its merits, have
given rise to that difference of opinion which has been heretofore
manifested in this House. I shall not examine the truth of this
observation, but merely remark, that the causes which may have produced
the arguments against the proposed measure, whatever they may be, can
neither add to, nor take from, their merit or influence, and, of course,
the insinuations might have been spared without injury to the subject;
but so far as the observation may have been intended to apply to myself,
I can truly say, that if a bias were to influence my conduct, it would
rather direct it to favor, than to oppose the proposed measure. This
bias would arise from two causes: the one from the respect which I
entertain for the judgments of the majority who advocate the measure;
the other of a more serious nature. I have observed with regret a
radical difference of opinion between gentlemen from the Eastern and
Southern States, upon the great Governmental questions, and have been
led to conclude, that the operation of that cause alone might cast
ominous conjecture on the promised success of this much valued
Government. Mutual concessions appear to be necessary to obviate this
effect, and I have always been pleased in manifesting my disposition to
make advances; but from the most careful view of the arguments in favor
of the proposed measure considered under this impression, they do not
seem to me sufficient to establish the propriety of its adoption, and I
am therefore impelled, by the joint influence of duty and opinion, to be
one in the opposition.

A gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. AMES) prefaced his observations with
this remark, that it is easier to point out defects and raise objections
to any proposed system, than to defend it from objections, and prove its
affirmative propriety, and warned the House against the effects of
arguments of this nature, urged in opposition to the measures now under
consideration. I agree with the gentleman in this idea in general, but
we should reflect that in the present case the address of the arguments
in favor of the measure is made to one of the strongest affections of
the human mind, the love of dominion; and hence we may justly conclude,
that they will be received and relished with their full and unabated
influence. This reflection appears to me to be at least a counterpoise
to that remark.

The advocates of this bill have been called on, and I conceive with
propriety, to show its constitutionality and expediency, both of which
have been doubted by those of the opposition. In support of the first
position, a multitude of arguments have been adduced, all of which may
be reducible to the following heads; such as are drawn from the
constitution itself; from the incidentality of this authority to the
mere creation and existence of government; from the expediency of the
measure itself; and from precedents of Congress; to which may be added a
similar exercise of authority by Congress, under the former
Confederation.

Observations arising from the constitution itself, were of two kinds.
The right of exercising this authority is either expressed in the
constitution, or deducible from it by necessary implication. One
gentleman only, from Massachusetts, (Mr. SEDGWICK,) has ventured to
assert, that, discarding the doctrine of implication, he could show that
the right to exercise the authority contended for was expressly
contained in the constitution. This, I presume, must have been a mistake
in language, because the difference between an express and an implied
authority appears to me to consist in this--in the one case, the natural
import of the words used in granting the authority would of themselves
convey a complete idea to the mind of the authority granted, without the
aid of argument or deduction; in the other, to convey a complete idea to
the mind, the aid of argument and deduction is found necessary to the
usual import of words used; and that gentleman proceeded with a labored
argument to prove, that the authority was expressly granted, which would
have been totally useless, if his assertion had been just.

[Mr. SEDGWICK rose to explain; he never conceived the authority granted
by the express words of the constitution, but absolutely by necessary
implication from different parts of it.]

I shall not contend as to the assertion, but shall proceed to consider
the arguments in favor of the measure upon the doctrine of implication;
which, indeed, are those only which deserve consideration.

In doing this, I shall consider the authority contended for to apply to
that of granting charters to corporations in general, for I do not
recollect any circumstance, and I believe none has been pretended, which
could vary this case from the general exercise of that authority. To
establish the affirmative of this proposition, arguments have been drawn
from the several parts of the constitution; the context has been
resorted to. "We, the people of the United States, in order to form a
more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity,
provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure
the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity," &c. It has
been remarked, that here the ends for which this Government was
established are clearly pointed out; the means to produce the ends are
left to the choice of the Legislature, and that the incorporation of a
bank is one necessary mean to produce these general ends. It may be
observed, in reply, that the context contemplates every general object
of Government whatever; and if this reasoning were to be conclusive,
every object of Government would be within the authority of Congress,
and the detail of the constitution would have been wholly unnecessary,
further than to designate the several branches of the Government which
were to be intrusted with this unlimited, discretionary choice of means,
to produce these specified ends. The same reasoning would apply as
forcibly to every clause of the constitution, restraining the authority
of Congress to the present case, or to any one in which the constitution
is silent. The only candid construction arising from the context appears
to me to be this; it is designed, and it is the known office of every
member to point out the great objects proposed to be answered by the
subsequent regulations of which the constitution is composed. These
regulations contain the means by which these objects are presumed to be
best answered. These means consist in a proper distribution of all
Governmental rights between the Government of the United States and the
several State governments, and in fixing limits to the exercise of all
authorities granted to the Government of the United States. The context,
therefore, gives no authority whatever, but only contemplates the ends
for which certain authorities are subsequently given. Arguments drawn
from this source appear to be ineffectual in themselves, and the
reliance of gentlemen upon them indicates a suspicion and distrust of
such as may be drawn from other parts of the constitution. The advocates
of the bill have turned away from this context, and have applied to the
body of the constitution in search of arguments. They have fixed upon
the following clauses, to all or some one of which they assert the
authority contended for is clearly incidental; the right to lay and
collect taxes, &c., &c.; to provide for the common defence and general
welfare, &c.; to borrow money, &c.; to regulate commerce with foreign
nations, &c. The bill contemplates neither the laying nor collecting
taxes, and, of course, it cannot be included in that clause; indeed, it
is not pretended, by the bill itself, to be at all necessary to produce
either of those ends; the furthest the idea is carried in the bill, is,
that it will tend to give a facility to the collection.

The terms "common defence and general welfare" contain no grant of any
specific authority, and can relate to such only as are particularly
enumerated and specified. "To borrow money." Gentlemen have relied much
upon this clause; their reasoning is, that a right to incorporate a bank
is incidental to that of borrowing money, because it creates the ability
to lend, which is necessary to effectuate the right to borrow. I am at a
loss to discover one single relation between the right to borrow, and
the right to create the ability to lend, which is necessary to exist
between principal and incident. It appears to me that the incidental
authority is paramount to the principal, for the right of creating the
ability to lend is greater than that of borrowing from a previously
existing ability. I should, therefore, rather conclude that the right to
borrow, if there be a connection at all, would be incidental to the
right to grant charters of incorporation, than the reverse of that
proposition, which is the doctrine contended for by the advocates of the
measure. The same reasoning which would establish a right to create the
ability to lend, would apply more strongly to enforce the will after
the ability is created; because the creator would have a claim of
gratitude at least upon the created ability, which if withheld, perhaps,
with justice might be insisted on. "To regulate commerce with foreign
nations." This is by no means a satisfactory ground for the assumption
of this authority; for if it be deemed a commercial regulation, there is
a clause in the constitution which would absolutely inhibit its
exercise. I allude to that clause which provides that no preference
shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of
one State over those of another; and it seems to be admitted, that one
principal effect to be produced by the operation of this measure will be
to give a decided commercial preference to this port over every other in
the United States.

Gentlemen finding it difficult to show that necessary relation and
intimate connection between the authority contended for, and any one of
the specified authorities before mentioned, which would be essential to
the establishment of their doctrine, have referred to what has been
generally called the sweeping clause, and have made deductions from the
terms "necessary" and "proper;" they have observed that certain
specified authorities being granted, all others necessary to their
execution follow without any particular specification. This observation
may in general be true, but its fallacy here consists in its application
to this particular case. It cannot be applied until the exercise of this
authority be proved to be necessarily connected with some one of the
previously enumerated authorities, and here the argument, as well as the
fact, fails.

The authority contended for seems to me to be a distinct substantive
branch of legislation, and, perhaps, paramount to any one of the
previously enumerated authorities, and should therefore not be usurped
as an incidental subaltern authority.

I am confirmed in this opinion from the indistinct, confused conceptions
of gentlemen who advocate the measure. They rely upon the incidentality
of this authority to some one of those particularly specified, and yet
have applied it as an incident to several distinct, unconnected subjects
of legislation; and then, distrusting their own conclusions, or as if
the inquiry would be too troublesome or minute, they leave this ground,
and assert that it is incidental to the result of the whole combined
specified authorities. Gentlemen must, therefore, view this right
through different optics, at different times; or, what I rather believe
to be the fact, they have no distinct view of it at all, the right
having no existence.

A gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. SEDGWICK,) finding the usual import
of the terms used in the constitution to be rather unfavorable to the
doctrines advanced by him, has favored us with a new exposition of the
word "necessary." He says that "necessary," as applicable to a mean to
produce an end, should be construed so as to produce the greatest
quantum of public utility. I have been taught to conceive that the true
exposition of a necessary mean to produce a given end was that mean
without which the end could not be produced.

The gentleman's reasoning, however, if pursued, will be found to teem
with dangerous effects, and would justify the assumption of any given
authority whatever. Terms are to be so construed as to produce the
greatest degree of public utility. Congress are to be the judges of this
degree of utility. This utility, when decided on, will be the ground of
constitutionality. Hence any measure may be proved constitutional which
Congress may judge to be useful. These deductions would suborn the
constitution itself, and blot out the great distinguishing
characteristic of the free constitutions of America, as compared with
the despotic Governments of Europe, which consist in having the
boundaries of governmental authority clearly marked out and ascertained.

The exclusive jurisdiction over ten miles square has been adverted to by
one gentleman (Mr. AMES) as a specified authority, to which the one
contended for is suggested to be incidental. He has reasoned in this
manner: Congress possess jurisdiction over ten miles square, &c.;
Congress may therefore establish a bank within the ten miles square,
and, as principle is not applicable to place, Congress may exercise the
same authority any where else. This seems to me to be an ingenious
improvement upon sophistical deduction; the gentleman, however, should
have reflected that the ground upon which he built the right to exercise
this authority was that of exclusive jurisdiction, and to extend the
principle it is necessary to extend the right of exclusive jurisdiction;
without this, the basis of his argument fails, and the superstructure,
however beautiful, must follow; for the principle, if at all deducible
from that source, is expressly confined to place, and cannot operate
beyond it.

I shall now consider the second resource, whence the constitutional
right of exercising the proposed authority is derived; its incidentality
to the mere creation and existence of government. It has been observed,
that in all governments there are certain rights tacitly granted, and
certain other rights retained; that it is impossible, in framing a
constitution, to enumerate every minute governmental right, and that
such an attempt would be chimerical and vain. And hence the
incidentality of this authority to the mere existence of government is
inferred. These observations seem to me to apply to a government growing
out of a state of society, and not to a government composed of chartered
rights from previously existing governments, or the people of those
governments. I have been taught to consider this as a Federal, not as a
consolidated Government, and am not prepared or disposed at present to
relinquish that idea. A gentleman from New York (Mr. LAWRENCE) has
remarked, that the Government is consolidated _quo ad_ the powers
granted, and of course _quo ad_ their incidents; but he should first
have shown that the authority contended for is one of those granted, or
incidental to some one of them, before the application can be made. The
observation can have no tendency to establish either of those positions.
What effect would this doctrine, if admitted, have upon the State
governments? And how would it be relished by them? Their dignity and
consequence will not only be prostrated by it, but their very existence
radically subverted. A third resource of deducing this constitutional
authority is resorted to--the expediency of the proposed measure itself.
I presume the great object of the constitution was to distribute all
governmental rights between the several State Governments and the
Government of the United States; the expediency, therefore, of the
exercise of all constitutional rights, as they relate to State or
General Governments, is properly contemplated and decided by the
constitution, and not by the Governments among which the distribution is
made. A gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. SMITH) has said, that the
expediency and constitutionality of the proposed measure cannot be
considered separately, because the constitutionality grows out of the
expediency. This is but candidly unveiling the subject of that
sophistical mask which has been ingeniously thrown over it by some
gentlemen; for all the arguments adduced in favor of the measure, from
whatever source they arise, if pursued, will be found to rush into the
great one of expediency, to bear down all constitutional provisions, and
to end themselves in the unlimited ocean of despotism.

Several gentlemen have said, that this authority may be safely
exercised, since it does not interfere with the rights of States or
individuals. I think this assertion not very correct; if the States be
constitutionally entitled to the exercise of this authority, it is an
intrusion on their rights to do an act which would eventually destroy or
impede the freest exercise of that authority; for it is totally
immaterial whether the effect be produced by the operation of this, or
by an inhibition in express terms. The States may not only incorporate
banks, but may of right prohibit the circulation of bank paper within
their respective limits; the act, therefore, if it be intended to have
an effectual operation, will certainly infringe this right, or exist at
the mercy of the State governments. This reasoning, however, places the
subject in another point of view a little singular. It contemplates the
authority contended for as vacant ground, and justifies the tenure by
the mere title of occupancy. In almost all the remarks in favor of the
measure, gentlemen seem to have forgotten the peculiar nature of this
Government. It being composed of mere chartered authorities, all
authority not contained within that charter would, from the nature of
the grant, have been retained to the granting party; and I will venture
to assert, that this opinion was the _sine qua_ _non_ of the adoption
and existence of this Government; but if this opinion had been doubtful,
Congress themselves have made an express declaration in favor of this
construction to the proposed amendments to the constitution. Gentlemen
have inferred a constitutional right to exercise the authority contended
for from a fourth resource--the former usages and habits of Congress. In
affirmance of this argument, several acts of Congress have been referred
to--the power of removal from office, the government of the Western
Territory, the cession from North Carolina, the purchase of West Point,
&c. I shall not examine into the propriety of these several acts, though
I conceive it would not be difficult to show, that they differ
materially, upon constitutional grounds, from the one now proposed. I
shall only remark, that, if Congress have heretofore been in the usage
and habit of disregarding and violating the constitution, it is high
time that that habit and usage be corrected. I hope and trust that the
people of the United States will not tamely see the only security of
their rights and liberties invaded and violated, but also see one
violation of it with impunity boldly urged as an argument to justify
another.

An instance of a similar exercise of authority by the Congress which
existed under the former Confederation, has been mentioned in favor of
its exercise by the present Congress. The argument has been, that as the
powers of the present Congress are greater than those of the former
Congress, and the former were competent to the exercise of this right,
the present must be more so. It is to be remarked, that that act was the
child of necessity, and that Congress doubted its legitimacy, and the
act itself was never confirmed by a judicial decision; and it should be
also remarked, that the same Congress did not pretend to possess the
right to punish those who should counterfeit the paper of the Bank, and
recommended it to the States to confirm the act which they had done, and
to pass laws for the purpose of punishing those who should counterfeit
the paper, and it is a little remarkable that this circumstance, which
is one of the most essential to the existence and operation of this act,
is withheld from our view. But as I think arguments drawn from this
source wholly foreign to the subject, I shall make no further remark
upon them.

I shall now suggest a few observations respecting the expediency of the
proposed measure. In doing this, I shall not say any thing as to the
utility of banks in general, nor as to the effects of the banks of
England, Scotland, Holland, &c. I possess not sufficient practical or
theoretical knowledge to justify the inquiry; I shall only point out a
few circumstances, which are peculiarly attached to the government we
are now administering, which might vary the application of general
rules, drawn from governments of a different nature, and which possess
the unquestioned right of granting charters of incorporation.

In the first place, the right of exercising that authority by the
Government is at least problematical, it is nowhere granted in express
terms; the Legislature, therefore, can have no competent security
against a judicial decision but a dependent or a corrupt court. I
presume that a law to punish with death those who counterfeit the paper
emitted by the Bank will be consequent upon the existence of this act.
Hence a judicial decision will probably be had of the most serious and
awful nature; the life of an individual at stake on the one hand, an
improvident act of the Government on the other. A distrust arising from
this cause will for ever keep the Bank in jeopardy, and the very first
trial of this nature will probably subject the Bank to a run which it
will be unable to withstand; for all stockholders will require the
greatest possible security for their money, and a distrust of such an
institution will be its destruction. This observation seems to me to
have peculiar force, from the great proportion of paper to that of gold
and silver, upon which the Bank is proposed to be founded. The peculiar
relation between the General and State Governments, will naturally
produce a contest for governmental rights, until long experience shall
settle the precise boundaries between them. The present measure appears
to me to be an unprovoked advance in this scramble for authority, and a
mere experiment how far we may proceed without involving the opposition
of the State Governments. It should be remarked that this Government is
in its childhood; it is therefore unfitted for such bold and manly
enterprises, and policy would dictate that it should wait at least until
it may have become more matured or invigorated. Two modes of
administering this Government present themselves; the one with mildness
and moderation, by keeping within the known boundaries of the
constitution, the other, by the creation and operation of fiscal
mechanism; the first will ensure us the affections of the people, the
only natural and substantial basis of Republican Governments; the other
will arise and exist in oppression and injustice, will increase the
previously existing jealousies of the people, and must be ultimately
discarded, or bring about a radical change in the nature of our
Government. Having suggested these observations upon the measure in
general, I shall now proceed to point out a few objections to the
details of the bill. I think the authority given to the Bank to purchase
and hold lands objectionable; in the first place I doubt the
constitutional right of Congress to invest such an authority; the lands
within the United States are holden of the individual States, and not of
the United States; and that tenure appears to me to be the true ground
upon which the right to exercise that authority grows. I believe it is
admitted, that although Congress may naturalize a foreigner, they cannot
authorize him to purchase lands; and I think the case at least as
strong, when they first create an artificial person, and then invest the
authority; besides, if we have any reference to the experience of other
countries, we shall find it dangerous to allow incorporated bodies to
hold lands at all. The exercise of that right produced great oppression
in England, and nothing but the masterly activity of an absolute prince
could apply a competent remedy. A gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr.
SEDGWICK) has denied that the Bank is invested with this right. It is
true it is confined to the mode of purchasing by mortgage, but that is
the most effectual mode of purchasing, and the most ruinous to the
landholder.

I will merely mention one other objection without a comment--the
authority given to make laws not contrary to law or its own
constitution; but the most objectionable clause is that which limits its
duration, and pledges the faith of the United States that no other bank
shall be established in the mean time, however dangerous and offensive
the present measure might prove in its operation, and whatever may be
the utility and advantage in any other scheme of banking which
experience may suggest. Such a stipulation cannot be justified but from
the most pointed necessity, and from the maturest deliberation. When I
search for the necessity of this measure, it escapes me; it is not
pretended in the bill itself; the chief stimulus which I can discover to
the existence of this measure, is to give artificial impulse to the
value of stock. This is not a sufficient justification; the subject has
not been sufficiently considered, and I therefore hope it may be
postponed to some future session of Congress; many evils may be avoided
by such a conduct, none can result from it.

Mr. GERRY said, he should principally confine himself to the objections
of the gentleman first up from Virginia, (Mr. MADISON,) not from a
disrespect to the observations of other gentlemen in the opposition, but
because he considered their arguments as grafts on the original stock of
those urged by the gentleman alluded to, and if the trunk fell, its
appendages must fall also.

The objects of the bill were to render the fiscal administration
successful, and to give facility to loans on sudden emergencies, and to
benefit trade and industry in general; and that these were objects of
high importance had not been denied, neither had it been asserted that
they ought not, if possible, to be attained.

It is objected, however, that the mode proposed by the bill is
unconstitutional, and the bill itself defective.

The mode proposed is a National Bank; to establish which he thought
Congress were as competent as either House were to adjourn from day to
day.

It is said that Congress have no power relating to this subject, except
what is contained in the clauses for laying and collecting taxes,
imposts, excises, &c.; for borrowing money, and for making all laws
necessary and proper for carrying these powers into effect; and that
these do not authorize the establishment of a National Bank.

To ascertain this, the gentleman from Virginia proposes a candid
interpretation of the constitution, which we shall agree to, and he
offers to assist us with his rules of interpretation, for his good
intentions in doing which we give him full credit; but as he
acknowledges that he has been long decided against the authority of
Congress to establish a bank, and is therefore prejudiced against the
measure; as his rules, being made for the occasion, are the result of
his interpretation, and not his interpretation of the rules; as they are
not sanctioned by law exposition, or approved by experienced judges of
the law, they cannot be considered as a criterion for regulating the
judgment of the House, but may, if admitted, prove an _ignis fatuus_
that may lead to destruction.

We wish not, however, by establishing our own rules of interpretation,
to enjoy the privilege which is denied to the gentleman, but will meet
him on fair ground, by applying rules which have the sanction mentioned;
and as the learned _Judge Blackstone_ has laid down such, it is presumed
the gentleman from Virginia will not contend for a preference, or refuse
to be tried by this standard.

The Judge observes: "That the fairest and most rational method to
interpret the will of the legislator is by exploring his intentions at
the time when the law was made by signs the most natural and probable;
and these signs are either the words, the context, the subject-matter,
the effect and consequence, or the spirit and reason of the law." With
respect to words, the Judge observes, that "they are generally
understood in their usual and most ordinary signification, not so much
regarding the grammar as their general and popular use."

The gentlemen on different sides of the question do not disagree with
respect to the meaning of the terms _taxes_, _duties_, _imposts_,
_excises_, &c., or of _borrowing money_, but of the word _necessary_:
and the question is, what is the general and popular meaning of this
term? Perhaps the answer to the question will be truly this, that in a
general and popular one the word does not admit of a definite meaning,
but that this varies according to the subject and circumstances. With
respect to the subject for instance, if the people, speaking of a
garrison besieged by a superior force, and without provisions, or a
prospect of relief, should say it was under the necessity of
surrendering, they would mean a physical necessity, for troops cannot
subsist long without provisions; but if speaking of a debtor, the people
should say he was frightened by his creditor and then reduced to the
necessity of paying his debts, they would mean a legal, which is very
different from a physical necessity; for although the debtor, by
refusing payment, might be confined, he would be allowed subsistence,
and the necessity he was under to pay his debts would not extend beyond
his confinement. Again, if it should be said that a client is under the
necessity of giving to his lawyer more than legal fees, the general
popular meaning of necessity would, in this instance, be very different
from that in the other; the necessity would neither be physical nor
legal, but artificial, or, if I may be allowed the expression, a
long-robe necessity.

The meaning of the word "_necessary_," varies also according to
circumstances; for although Congress have power to levy and collect
taxes, duties, &c., to borrow money, and to determine the time, quantum,
mode, and every regulation necessary and proper for supplying the
Treasury, yet the people would apply a different meaning to the word
"necessary" under different circumstances. For instance, without a
sufficiency of precious metals for a medium, laws creating an artificial
medium would be generally thought necessary for carrying into effect the
power to levy and collect taxes; but if there was a sufficiency of such
metals, those laws would not generally be thought necessary. Again, if
specie was scarce, and the credit of the Government low, collateral
measures would be by the people thought necessary for obtaining public
loans: but not so, if the case was reversed. Or, if part of the States
should be invaded and overrun by an enemy, it would be thought necessary
to levy on the rest heavy taxes, and collect them in a short period, and
to take stock, grain, and other articles from the citizens without their
consent, for the common defence; but in a time of peace and safety, such
measures would be supposed unnecessary. Instances may be multiplied in
other respects; but it is conceived that these are sufficient to show
that the popular and general meaning of the word "necessary," varies
according to the subject and circumstances.

The second rule of interpretation relates to the _context_, and the
Judge conceives that "if words are still dubious, we may establish their
meaning by the context; thus the preamble is often called in to help the
construction of an act of Parliament." The constitution, in the present
case, is the great law of the people, who are themselves the sovereign
Legislature, and the preamble is in these words: "We, the people of the
United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice,
insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defence, promote
the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution for the
United States of America."

These are the objects for which the constitution was established, and in
administering it we should always keep them in view. And here it is
remarkable, that although the common defence and general welfare are
held up in the preamble among the primary objects of attention, they are
again mentioned in the eighth section of the first article, whereby we
are enjoined in levying taxes, duties, &c., particularly to regard the
common defence and general welfare; indeed common sense dictates the
measure; for the security of our property, families, and liberty--of
every thing dear to us, depends on our ability to defend them. The
means, therefore, for attaining this object, we ought not to omit a
year, month, or even a day, if we could avoid it; and we are never
provided for defence unless prepared for sudden emergencies. Should
Government be surprised in this case, it would be as dishonorable as for
a general to be surprised in a state of warfare, and the event to the
community may be much more fatal. If provision then for sudden
emergencies is indispensable, it must be evident that it will depend in
a great measure on the ability of the Government to command, at all
times, for this purpose, a sufficient sum of money, which is justly
denominated the sinews of war; and how is this to be effected? By
emissions of bills of credit? During the Revolution, bills of credit, it
must be acknowledged, have done wonders; they have, in conflict with the
banks, Treasury, and public credit of Great Britain, risen superior to
them all, and have since died a natural death. We have honored them with
a funeral pile; we now bid peace to their manes, and devoutly hope that
bills of credit will for ever be extinct in the United States. Are we to
depend, then, on taxes for commanding money in cases of urgent
necessity? These, as has been shown by other gentlemen, will be too slow
in their operations, unless, indeed, we should levy a tax for drawing
into and locking up in the Treasury three or four millions of dollars; a
law which would be universally considered as unnecessary and improper.

By loans, and loans only, can provision be made for sudden emergencies;
but if loans should be made previously to an emergency, the people would
be unnecessarily burdened by the interest thereof, and most of the other
evils would ensue that would arise from previous taxes; and if they were
to be made at an emergency, without previous arrangements, of whom are
we to borrow? Of individuals? These cannot be depended on, as has been
fully proved by our own experience at the commencement of the
Revolution. Are we to apply to the banks already established in the
States for loans? These can no more be depended upon than individuals;
for stockholders having not more attachment to Government than other
citizens, would, in cases of public danger, attend to the preservation
of their property by other means than loaning it to Government. And
moreover, the united capitals of all the banks existing in the Union
would be insufficient for Government, for they do not amount to a
million and a half of dollars, and only a part in this could, in any
case, be reasonably expected on loan.

Are we to apply to foreign banks or individuals? These, as has been
shown, are too remote; and if not, we have not been able, without the
assistance of an ally, to obtain foreign loans during the war, and
perhaps the power on whose assistance we may rely would be hostile to
us. Such dependence, then, as has been stated, would necessarily leave
us in a deplorable state; and it must be evident that a previous
arrangement to aid loans in cases of sudden emergency is necessary and
proper in the general and popular use of the term, inasmuch as any other
measure that Congress can adopt would be inadequate to the purpose of
common defence; and what previous arrangement can we make so proper as
that of a National Bank? If gentlemen in the opposition know of any, let
them produce it, and let the merits of it be investigated; for it is
unreasonable to propose a rejection of this plan without producing a
better. The plan proposed by the Secretary of the Treasury, which is now
the subject of discussion, does honor, like all his other measures, to
his head and heart; it will be mutually beneficial to the stockholders
and to Government, and consequently so to the people. The stockholders
by this plan will be deeply interested in supporting Government; because
three-quarters of their capital, consisting of funded certificates,
depend on the existence of Government, which therefore is the prop of
their capital, the main pillar that supports the bank. Again, the credit
of Government, which is immaterial to the other banks, is essential to
the National Bank, for the annual interest of three-quarters of its
capital, which must form a great share of its profits, will depend
altogether on the credit of Government, and produce, on the part of the
stockholders, the strongest attachment to it. On the other hand, it will
be the interest of Government to support the Bank, as well on account of
the benefits which the public will generally derive from the
institution, and the profits arising from the shares of Government in
the stock which will be hereafter noticed, as of the supplies of money
which it will be for the interest of the Bank to furnish in cases of
urgent necessity. Whenever these exist, Congress may lay a tax for
supplying the Treasury, and anticipate it with certainty by means of the
National Bank. It being then our duty to provide for the common defence
in cases of emergency, the provision must evidently be made by taxes,
loans, or by arrangements for obtaining the latter on the earliest
notice; and previous taxes and loans being oppressive, improper, and
unnecessary, the arrangements for aiding loans become indispensable, and
a bank consequently necessary and constitutional.

The third rule of the Judge, relative to the "subject-matter" of a law,
it is unnecessary to apply, because the members agree in their ideas
relative to the meaning of the terms taxes, duties, loans, &c.

The fourth rule, which relates to "effects and consequences," is
important; and here the learned Judge observes that "as to effects and
consequences, the rule is, where the words bear none, or a very absurd
signification, if literally understood, we must a little deviate from
the received sense of them." In the present case, the gentlemen in the
opposition generally, as well as the gentleman first up from Virginia,
give the whole clause by which Congress are authorized "to make all laws
necessary and proper," &c., no meaning whatever; for they say, the
former Congress had the same power under the Confederation without this
clause as the present Congress have with it. The _Federalist_ is quoted
on this occasion, but although the author of it discovered great
ingenuity, this part of his performance I consider as a political
heresy. His doctrine, indeed, was calculated to lull the consciences of
those who differed in opinion with him at that time; and having
accomplished his object, he is probably desirous that it may die with
the opposition itself. The rule in this case says, that where the words
bear no signification, we must deviate a little; and as this deviation
cannot be made by giving the words less than no meaning, it must be made
by a more liberal construction than is given by gentlemen in the
opposition. Thus their artillery is turned on themselves, for their own
interpretation is an argument against itself.

The last mentioned rule relates to the spirit and reason of the law, and
the Judge is of opinion "that the most universal and effectual way of
discovering the true meaning of a law, when the words are dubious, is by
considering the reason and spirit of it, or the cause which moved the
Legislature to enact it". The causes which produced the constitution
were an imperfect union, want of public and private justice, internal
commotions, a defenceless community, neglect of the public welfare, and
danger to our liberties. These are known to be the causes not only by
the preamble of the constitution, but also from our own knowledge of the
history of the times that preceded the establishment of it. If these
weighty causes produced the constitution, and it not only gives power
for removing them, but also authorizes Congress to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying these powers into effect, shall we
listen to assertions that these words have no meaning, and that this
constitution has not more energy than the old? Shall we thus unnerve the
Government, leave the Union, as it was under the Confederation,
defenceless against a banditti of Creek Indians, and thus relinquish the
protection of its citizens? Or shall we, by a candid and liberal
construction of the powers expressed in the constitution, promote the
great and important objects thereof? Each member must determine for
himself; I shall without hesitation choose the latter, and leave the
people and States to determine whether or not I am pursuing their true
interest. If it is inquired where we are to draw the line of a liberal
construction, I will also inquire where the line of restriction is to be
drawn? The interpretation of the constitution, like the prerogative of a
sovereign, may be abused; but from hence the disuse of either cannot be
inferred. In the exercise of prerogative the minister is responsible for
his advice to his sovereign, and the members of either House are
responsible to their constituents for their conduct in construing the
constitution. We act at our peril; if our conduct is directed to the
attainment of the great objects of Government, it will be approved, and
not otherwise; but this cannot operate as a reason to prevent our
discharging the trusts reposed in us.

Let us now compare the different modes of reasoning on this subject, and
determine which is right, for both cannot be.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) has urged the dangerous
tendency of a liberal construction; but which is most dangerous, a
liberal or a destructive interpretation? The liberty we have taken in
interpreting the constitution, we conceive to be necessary, and it
cannot be denied to be useful in attaining the objects of it; but whilst
he denies us this liberty, he grants to himself a right to annul a part,
and a very important part of the constitution. The same principle that
will authorize a destruction of part, will authorize the destruction of
the whole of the constitution; and if gentlemen have a right to make
such rules, they have an equal right to make others for enlarging the
powers of the constitution, and indeed of forming a despotism. Thus, if
we take the gentleman for our pilot, we shall be wrecked on the reef
which he cautions us to avoid.

The gentleman has referred us to the last article of the amendments
proposed to the constitution by Congress, which provides that the powers
not delegated to Congress, or prohibited to the States, shall rest in
them or the people; and the question is, what powers are delegated? Does
the gentleman conceive that such only are delegated as are expressed? If
so, he must admit that our whole code of laws is unconstitutional. This
he disavows, and yields to the necessity of interpretation, which, by a
fair and candid application of established rules of construction to the
constitution, authorizes, as has been shown, the measure under
consideration.

The usage of Congress has also been referred to; and if we look at their
acts under the existing constitution, we shall find they are generally
the result of a liberal construction. I will mention but two. The first
relates to the establishment of the Executive Departments, and gives to
the President the power of removing officers. As the constitution is
silent on this subject, the power mentioned, by the gentleman's own
reasoning, is vested in the States or the people; he, however, contended
for an assumption of the power, and when assumed, urged that it should
be vested in the President, although, like the power of appointment, it
was by a respectable minority in both Houses conceived that it should
have been vested in the President and Senate. His rule of interpretation
then was therefore more liberal than it is now. In the other case,
Congress determined by law, with the sanction of the President, when and
where they should hold their next session, although the constitution
provides that this power should rest solely in the two Houses. The
gentleman also advocated this measure, and yet appears to be
apprehensive of the consequences that may result from a construction of
the constitution which admits of a National Bank. But from which of
these measures is danger to be apprehended? The only danger from our
interpretation would be the exercise by Congress of a general power to
form corporations; but the dangers resulting from the gentleman's
interpretations, in the cases alluded to, are very different; for what
may we not apprehend from the precedent of having assumed a power on
which the constitution was silent, and from having annexed it to the
Supreme Executive? If we have this right in one instance, we may extend
it to others, and make him a despot. And here I think it necessary to
declare, that such is my confidence in the wisdom, integrity, and
justice of the Chief Magistrate, as that I should be at ease, if my
life, liberty, and property were at his disposal; but this is a trust
which I am not authorized to make for my constituents; and as his
successors in office will possess equal powers, but may not possess
equal virtues, caution with respect to them is necessary. Again, what
may be the result of the precedent relating to the session of Congress?
If we had a right by law to determine where the next Congress should
hold their session, one Congress may oblige another to sit in Kentucky,
or in the intended State Yazoo, under the protection of a Choctaw chief,
or his Excellency, Governor Tallan. It must therefore be evident that
the usage of Congress in both instances is against the gentleman, and
that the dangers from the precedent of establishing a bank are
comparatively small to those resulting from the other measures referred
to.

The gentleman from Virginia has endeavored to support his interpretation
of the constitution by the sense of the Federal Convention; but how is
this to be obtained? By applying proper rules of interpretation? If so,
the sense of the Convention is in favor of the bill; or are we to depend
on the memory of the gentleman for a history of their debates, and from
thence to collect their sense? This would be improper, because the
memories of different gentlemen would probably vary, as they had already
done, with respect to those facts; and if not, the opinions of the
individual members who debated are not to be considered as the opinions
of the Convention. Indeed, if they were, no motion was made in that
Convention, and therefore none could be rejected for establishing a
National Bank; and the measure which the gentleman has referred to was a
proposition merely to enable Congress to erect commercial corporations,
which was, and always ought to be, negatived.

The gentleman's arguments respecting the sense of the State Conventions
have as little force as those relating to the Federal Convention. The
debates of the State Conventions, as published by the short-hand
writers, were generally partial and mutilated; in this, if the
publications are to be relied on, the arguments were all on one side of
the question; for there is not in the record, which is said to contain
the Pennsylvania debates, a word against the ratification of the
constitution; although we all know that arguments were warmly urged on
both sides.

The gentleman has quoted the opinions, as recorded in the debates of
this State and North Carolina, of two of our learned judges; but the
speech of one member is not to be considered as expressing the sense of
a convention; and if it was, we have no record which can be depended on
of such speeches. Indeed, had even this been the case, the Union was at
that time divided into two great parties, one of which feared the loss
of the Union if the constitution was not ratified unconditionally, and
the other the loss of our liberties if it was. The object on either side
was so important as perhaps to induce the parties to depart from candor,
and to call in the aid of art, flattery, professions of friendship,
promises of office, and even good cheer; and when these failed, the
_Federal Bull_ was published, denouncing political death and destruction
to anti-federal infidels. Under such circumstances, the opinions of
great men ought not to be considered as authorities, and in many
instances could not be recognized by themselves.

Mr. G. then observing that the sense of the States respecting a bank
would be best ascertained by their legislative acts, showed, from the
journals of Congress, that when restrained by the Confederation from
exercising any powers but what were expressly delegated, Congress had,
without any authority, established a bank whose capital might extend to
ten millions of dollars; and had not only pledged the faith of the Union
not to erect any other, but had recommended it to the States to prohibit
any State establishment of the kind, and had also determined that the
bank bills should be receivable in the taxes and duties of every State.
That the States did not remonstrate against, or tacitly acquiesce in,
but actually supported the measures of Congress relative to the bank,
whilst the war continued, and after the peace. That this was the
strongest evidence the States could give that they thought the measure
salutary, and had no objection to it on the ground of its being
unconstitutional. He then urged, that if the States and the people at
large had no objection to a bank in that case, they could not in this;
and inquired whether there was any evidence of their disapprobation of
such an institution in the debates of their Conventions or propositions
for amendments? To this he answered in the negative, and urged, that
whilst the Conventions were silent on the subject, and had no objections
to such a measure, several of them had proposed amendments to the
constitution for restraining Congress from establishing commercial
corporations; which evinced their disapprobation of such institutions,
and admitted at the same time, in some degree, the power of Congress,
under the existing constitution, to form them.

Mr. G. then showed, that as a monopoly had been urged as an objection to
the bill, no such consequence could result from it; for the bill does
not restrain State or private banks, or even individuals, from
negotiations of a similar nature with those permitted to the
stockholders; nor does it restrain the States from forming similar
corporations. This plan has not a feature of monopoly, and the gentlemen
who oppose it contend for a bank which, according to its original
institution, was founded in monopoly.

He then answered the arguments urged against the authority of Congress
to enable corporations to hold lands, when they had no power themselves
of purchasing and holding land; and showed, that although Congress are
restrained from purchasing lands, (except in certain cases,) and from
exercising over the same exclusive legislation, yet that they may hold
lands obtained by execution, conquest, and by other means as well as by
those clauses of the constitution which relate to lands now belonging to
the Union; and that Congress had often invested others with powers which
they themselves could not exercise.

He then noticed the argument, that, by a law of Virginia, notes payable
to the bearer, or order, would not circulate in that State, and observed
that this law could not be supposed to extend to bank notes; and if it
did, it would be null and void, because the constitution of the Union,
and laws, made in pursuance thereof, were paramount to the laws and
constitutions of the several States. Having considered the arguments
against the constitutionality of the bill, he entered into the policy
and utility of the measure.


TUESDAY, February 8.

_Bank of the United States._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill for incorporating the
Bank of the United States.

The question still being on the passage of the bill,

Mr. VINING apologized for rising to offer his sentiments on this
subject, which had been already so ably discussed; but considering the
nature of the objections as arising from constitutional principles, it
had acquired an importance which would justify his troubling the House
with some remarks.

He began by noticing the leading argument of Mr. MADISON respecting the
sense of the Continental Convention on the power proposed to be
exercised by Congress in this bill. He showed that the opinion of the
gentleman, in this instance, was, if not singular, different from that
of his contemporaries; at least a similar objection had not been started
by those gentlemen of the Senate, who had been members of the
Convention; but granting that the opinion of the gentleman from Virginia
had been the full sense of the members of the Convention, their opinion
at that day, he observed, is not a sufficient authority by which for
Congress at the present time to construe the constitution.

Mr. V., in explaining the powers proposed by the bill to be given to the
corporation of the Bank, adverted to the particular power of "making
rules and regulations not contrary to law." He showed that this term law
means the common law; and alluded to the inquiry of Mr. MADISON, as to
what law was intended by this clause, who, in answering his own
question, said, "that if the laws of the United States were intended,
the power contemplated was dangerous and unconstitutional, as those laws
were very few in number."

Mr. V. observed, that the restriction contended for by the gentleman as
the result of his objection, would annihilate the most essential rights
and privileges of the citizens of the United States. He then observed, a
corporation is nothing more than constituting a body with powers to
effect certain objects in a combined capacity, which an individual may
do in his individual capacity, agreeable to the usage and customs of
common law.

Adverting to the act by which the United States became a free and
independent nation, he said, from that declaration, solemnly recognized
at home and abroad, they derive all the powers appertaining to a nation
thus circumstanced, and consequently the power under consideration. He
traced the origin of corporations to the time of Numa, the first of
which was for agricultural purposes; they were afterwards extended to
other objects; and from that day to this, all civilized and independent
nations have been in the practice of creating them; and what do they
amount to but this--enabling a number of persons, in a combined
capacity, to do that to a more certain effect than an individual may do;
but subject to the control of common law, in all its regulations and
transactions.

On the doctrine of construction, as applied to the constitution, he
observed, that on some occasions the constitution is like the sensitive
plant, which shrinks from the smallest touch; on others it is like the
sturdy oak, which braves the force of thunder. He referred to the act
containing the power of removability; in which the utmost latitude of
construing the constitution was contended for and adopted; and, said he,
the funding system cannot be defended on any other principle than of
implication.

He then inquired, of what right does this incorporation deprive a single
citizen? And can an act possibly meet the disapprobation of a single
person which does not infringe his rights, and which puts money into his
pocket? I think not. He insisted that the power of Congress alone was
equal to establishing a bank competent to creating a currency which
shall pervade all parts of the Union; the paper of the State banks
cannot circulate beyond the bounds of the particular States.

From the restrictions to the Government contended for by the opposers of
the bill, he compared the constitution to a horse finely proportioned in
every respect to the eye, and elegantly caparisoned, but deficient in
one, and the most essential requisite, that of ability to carry the
owner to his journey's end; he had rather, he said, mount the old
Confederation, and drag on in the old way, than be amused with the
appearance of a Government so essentially defective.

Mr. MADISON observed, that the present is a question which ought to be
conducted with moderation and candor; and, therefore, there is no
occasion to have recourse to those tragic representations which have
been adduced. Warmth and passion should be excluded from the discussion
of a subject which ought to depend on the cool dictates of reason for
its decision.

Adverting to the observation of Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina,) "that it
would be a deplorable thing for the Senate of the United States to have
fallen on a decision which violates the constitution," he inquired, What
does the reasoning of the gentleman tend to show but this, that from
respect to the Senate this House ought to sanction their decisions? And
from hence it will follow, that the President of the United States
ought, out of respect to both, to sanction their joint proceedings; but
he could remind the gentleman of his holding different sentiments on
another occasion.

Mr. M. then enlarged on the exact balance or equipoise contemplated by
the constitution, to be observed and maintained between the several
branches of Government; and showed, that except this idea was preserved,
the advantages of different independent branches would be lost, and
their separate deliberations and determinations be entirely useless.

In describing a corporation, he observed, that the powers proposed to be
given are such as do not exist antecedent to the existence of the
corporation; these powers are very extensive in their nature, and to
which a principle of perpetuity may be annexed.

He waived a reply to Mr. VINING's observations on the common law, [in
which that gentleman had been lengthy and minute, in order to invalidate
Mr. MADISON's objections to the power proposed to be given to the Bank,
to make rules and regulations, not contrary to law.] Mr. M. said the
question would involve a very lengthy discussion; and other objects more
intimately connected with the subject remained to be considered.

The power of granting charters, he observed, is a great and important
power, and ought not to be exercised unless we find ourselves expressly
authorized to grant them. Here he dilated on the great and extensive
influence that incorporated societies had on public affairs in Europe.
They are powerful machines, which have always been found competent to
effect objects on principles in a great measure independent of the
people.

He argued against the influence of the precedent to be established by
the bill; for though it has been said, that the charter is to be granted
only for a term of years, yet he contended, that granting the powers on
any principle is granting them in _perpetuum_; and assuming this right
on the part of the Government involves the assumption of every power
whatever.

Noticing the arguments in favor of the bill, he said, it had been
observed that "Government necessarily possesses every power." However
true this idea may be in the theory, he denied that it applied to the
Government of the United States.

Here he read the restrictive clause in the constitution; and then
observed, that he saw no pass over this limit.

The preamble to the constitution, said he, has produced a new mine of
power; but this is the first instance he had heard of, in which the
preamble has been adduced for such a purpose. In his opinion, the
preamble only states the objects of the Confederation, and the
subsequent clauses designate the express powers by which those objects
are to be obtained; and a mean is proposed through which to acquire
those that may be found still requisite, more fully to effect the
purposes of the Confederation.

It is said, "there is a field of legislation yet unexplored." He had
often heard this language; but he confessed he did not understand it. Is
there a single blade of grass--is there any property in existence in the
United States, which is not a subject of legislation, either of the
particular States, or of the United States? He contended that the
exercise of this power, on the part of the United States, involves, to
all intents and purposes, every power which an individual State may
exercise. On this principle, he denied the right of Congress to make use
of a bank to facilitate the collection of taxes. He did not, however,
admit the idea, that the institution would conduce to that object. The
bank notes are to be equal to gold and silver, and consequently will be
as difficult to obtain as the specie. By means of the objects of trade
on which gold and silver are employed, there will be an influx of those
articles; but paper being substituted, will fill those channels which
would otherwise be occupied by the precious metals. This, experience
shows, is the uniform effect of such a substitution.

The right of Congress to regulate trade is adduced as an argument in
favor of this of creating a corporation; but what has this bill to do
with trade? Would any plain man suppose that this bill had any thing to
do with trade?

He noticed the observation respecting the utility of banks to aid the
Government with loans. He denied the necessity of the institution to aid
the Government in this respect. Great Britain, he observed, did not
depend on such institutions; she borrows from various sources.

Banks, it is said, are necessary to pay the interest of the public debt.
Then they ought to be established in the places where that interest is
paid; but can any man say, that the bank notes will circulate at par in
Georgia? From the example in Scotland, we know that they cannot be made
equal to specie, remote from the place where they can be immediately
converted into coin; they must depreciate in case of a demand for
specie; and if there is no moral certainty that the interest can be
paid by these bank bills, will the Government be justified in depriving
itself of the power of establishing banks in different parts of the
Union?

We reason, and often with advantage, from British models; but in the
present instance there is a great dissimilarity of circumstances. The
bank notes of Great Britain do not circulate universally. To make the
circumstances parallel, it ought to have been assumed as a fact, that
banks are established in various parts of Great Britain, at which the
interest of the national debt is paid; but the fact is, it is only paid
in one place.

The clause of the constitution which has been so often recurred to, and
which empowers Congress to dispose of its property, he supposed referred
only to the property left at the conclusion of the war, and has no
reference to the moneyed property of the United States.

The clause which empowers Congress to pass all laws necessary, &c., has
been brought forward repeatedly by the advocates of the bill; he noticed
the several constructions of this clause which had been offered. The
conclusion which he drew from the commentary of the gentleman from
Massachusetts, (Mr. GERRY,) was, that Congress may do what they please;
and recurring to the opinion of that gentleman in 1787, he said the
powers of the constitution were then dark, inexplicable, and dangerous;
but now, perhaps, as the result of experience, they are clear and
luminous!

The constructions of the constitution, he asserted, which have been
maintained on this occasion, go to the subversion of every power
whatever in the several States; but we are told, for our comfort, that
the judges will rectify our mistakes. How are the judges to determine in
the case; are they to be guided in their decisions by the rules of
expediency?

It has been asked, that if those minute powers of the constitution were
thought to be necessary, is it supposable that the great and important
power on the table was not intended to be given? Mr. M. interpreted this
circumstance in a quite different way, viz: if it was thought necessary
to specify in the constitution those minute powers, it would follow that
more important powers would have been explicitly granted, had they been
contemplated.

The Western Territory business, he observed, was a case _sui generis_,
and therefore cannot be cited with propriety. West Point, so often
mentioned, he said, was purchased by the United States, pursuant to law,
and the consent of the State of New York is supposed, if it has not been
expressly granted; but, on any occasion, does it follow that one
violation of the constitution is to be justified by another?

The permanent residence bill, he conceived, was entirely irrelative to
the subject; but he conceived it might be justified on truly
constitutional principles.

The act vesting in the President of the United States the power of
removability has been quoted; he recapitulated, in a few words, his
reasons for being in favor of that bill.

The Bank of North America he had opposed, as he considered the
institution as a violation of the Confederation. The State of
Massachusetts, he recollected, voted with him on that occasion. The Bank
of North America was, however, the child of necessity; as soon as the
war was over, it ceased to operate as to Continental purposes. But,
asked he, are precedents in war to justify violations of private and
State rights in a time of peace? And did the United States pass laws to
punish the counterfeiting the notes of that bank? They did not, being
convinced of the invalidity of any such law; the bank, therefore, took
shelter under the authority of the State.

The energetic administration of this Government is said to be connected
with this institution. Mr. M. here stated the principles on which he
conceived this Government ought to be administered; and added, other
gentlemen may have had other ideas on the subject, and may have
consented to the ratification of the constitution on different
principles and expectations; but he considered the enlightened opinion
and affection of the people the only solid basis for the support of this
Government.

Mr. M. then stated his objections to the several parts of the bill. The
first article he objected to was the duration. A period of twenty years
was, to this country, as a period of a century in the history of other
countries; there was no calculating for the events which might take
place. He urged the ill policy of granting so long a term, from the
experience of the Government in respect to some treaties, which, though
found inconvenient, could not now be altered.

The different classes of the public creditors, he observed, were not all
put on an equal footing by this bill; but in the bill for the disposal
of the Western Territory this had been thought essential. The holders of
six per cent. securities will derive undue advantages. Creditors at a
distance, and the holders of three per cent. securities, ought to be
considered, as the public good is most essentially promoted by an equal
attention to the interest of all.

I admit, said he, that the Government ought to consider itself as the
trustee of the public on this occasion, and therefore should avail
itself of the best disposition of the public property.

In this view of the subject, he objected to the bill, as the public, he
thought, ought to derive greater advantages from the institution than
those proposed. In case of a universal circulation of the notes of the
proposed bank, the profits will be so great that the Government ought to
receive a very considerable sum for granting the charter.

There are other defects in the bill, which render it proper and
necessary, in my opinion, that it should undergo a revision and
amendment before it passes into a law. The power vested by the bill in
the Executive to borrow of the bank, he thought was objectionable; and
the right to establish subordinate banks ought not to be delegated to
any set of men under Heaven.

The public opinion has been mentioned. If the appeal to the public
opinion is suggested with sincerity, we ought to let our constituents
have an opportunity to form an opinion on the subject.

He concluded by saying, he should move for the previous question.

The previous question, "Shall the main question now be put?" being
determined in the affirmative,

Mr. GERRY rose to reply to Mr. MADISON; but the House discovering an
impatience to have the main question put, after a few remarks, he waived
any further observations.

The yeas and nays were then taken as follows, on the passage of the
bill:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Ames, Benson, Boudinot, Bourne, Cadwalader,
      Clymer, Fitzsimons, Floyd, Foster, Gerry, Gilman, Goodhue,
      Hartley, Hathorn, Heister, Huntington, Lawrence, Leonard,
      Livermore, P. Muhlenberg, Partridge, Rensselaer, Schureman,
      Scott, Sedgwick, Seney, Sevier, Sherman, Sylvester,
      Sinnickson, Smith, (of Maryland,) Smith, (of South
      Carolina,) Steele, Sturges, Thatcher, Trumbull, Vining,
      Wadsworth, and Wynkoop--39.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Ashe, Baldwin, Bloodworth, Brown, Burke,
      Carroll, Contee, Gale, Grout, Giles, Jackson, Lee, Madison.
      Mathews, Moore, Parker, Stone, Tucker, White, and
      Williamson--20.


MONDAY, February 14.

_Commerce with England._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and House of Representatives:_

      Soon after I was called to the administration of the
      Government, I found it important to come to an
      understanding with the Court of London, on several points
      interesting to the United States; and particularly to know
      whether they were disposed to enter into arrangements, by
      mutual consent, which might fix the commerce between the
      two nations on principles of reciprocal advantage. For this
      purpose, I authorized informal conferences with their
      Ministers; and from these, I do not infer any disposition,
      on their part, to enter into any arrangements merely
      commercial. I have thought it proper to give you this
      information, as it might, at some time, have influence on
      matters under your consideration.

                                  GEO. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _February 14, 1791_.


THURSDAY, March 3.

_Jails of the States._

On motion that the House do come to the following resolution:

      Whereas Congress did, by a resolution of the 23d of
      September, 1789, recommend to the several States to pass
      laws making it expressly the duty of the keepers of their
      jails to receive, and safely keep therein, all prisoners
      committed under authority of the United States: In order,
      therefore, to ensure the administration of justice:

      _Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
      United States of America in Congress assembled_, That, in
      case any State shall not have complied with the said
      recommendation, the Marshal in such State, under the
      direction of the Judge of the District, be authorized to
      hire a convenient place to serve as a temporary jail, and
      to make the necessary provision for the safe-keeping of
      prisoners committed under the authority of the United
      States, until permanent provision shall be made by law for
      that purpose; and the said Marshal shall be allowed his
      reasonable expenses incurred for the above purposes, to be
      paid out of the Treasury of the United States.

It was resolved in the affirmative.

_Session Closed._

The business of the session being gone through, on motion,

      _Resolved_, That the thanks of the House of Representatives
      of the United States be presented to Frederick Augustus
      Muhlenberg, in testimony of their approbation of his
      conduct in the chair, and in the execution of the difficult
      and important trust reposed in him as Speaker of the said
      House.

It was resolved, unanimously: whereupon

Mr. SPEAKER made his acknowledgments to the House, in manner following:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      This unexpected mark of your approbation of my conduct has
      made so deep an impression on my mind, that I cannot find
      words to express the high sense of gratitude I entertain on
      this occasion.

      I have not vanity sufficient to suppose that my feeble,
      though well-meant, endeavors merit so great a reward; for
      it was your kind indulgence and support alone which enabled
      me to go through the duties of the station which you were
      pleased to assign me; but I shall ever consider this
      distinguished and honorable testimony as the most fortunate
      circumstance in my life.

      Gentlemen, I most sincerely thank you. May every possible
      happiness attend you and every individual of this body, and
      may your zealous endeavors to promote the welfare of our
      beloved country, which I have so long and so often been a
      witness to, be crowned with unbounded success.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate, to inform them that
this House, having completed the business before them, are now about to
adjourn without day, and that the Clerk of this House do go with the
said message.

The Clerk accordingly went with the said message, and being returned,

A message was received from the Senate, notifying that the Senate,
having completed the legislative business before them, are now about to
adjourn; whereupon,

Mr. SPEAKER adjourned the House without day.




SECOND CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

HELD AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, OCTOBER 24, 1791, TO MAY 8, 1792.


LIST OF MEMBERS.

SENATORS.

_New Hampshire._--John Langdon, Paine Wingate.

_Vermont._--S. R. Bradley, Moses Robinson.

_Massachusetts._--George Cabot, Caleb Strong.

_Rhode Island._--Theodore Foster, Joseph Stanton.

_Connecticut._--Oliver Ellsworth, Roger Sherman.

_New York._--Aaron Burr, Rufus King.

_New Jersey._--Philemon Dickinson, John Rutherford.

_Pennsylvania._--Robert Morris, James Ross.

_Delaware._--Richard Bassett, George Read.

_Maryland._--Charles Carroll, John Henry.

_Virginia._--Richard H. Lee, James Monroe.

_North Carolina._--Benjamin Hawkins, Samuel Johnston.

_South Carolina._--Pierce Butler, Ralph Izard.

_Georgia._--William Few, James Gunn.


REPRESENTATIVES.

_New Hampshire._--Nicholas Gilman, S. Livermore, Jeremiah Smith.

_Vermont._--Nathaniel Niles, Israel Smith.

_Massachusetts._--Fisher Ames, S. Bourne, Elbridge Gerry, Benjamin
Goodhue, George Leonard, T. Sedgwick, George Thatcher, Artemas Ward.

_Rhode Island._--Benjamin Bourne.

_Connecticut._--James Hillhouse, Amasa Learned, Jonathan Sturges,
Jonathan Trumbull, Jeremiah Wadsworth.

_New York._--Egbert Benson, James Gordon, John Laurance, C. C.
Schoonmaker, Peter Sylvester, T. Tredwell.

_New Jersey._--Elias Boudinot, Jonathan Dayton, Aaron Kitchell.

_Pennsylvania._--William Findlay, Thomas Fitzsimons, Andrew Gregg,
Thomas Hartley, Daniel Heister, Israel Jacobs, John W. Kittera,
Frederick A. Muhlenberg.

_Delaware._--John Vining.

_Maryland._--Philip Key, William Pinkney, Joshua Seney, Updine
Sheredine, Samuel Sterrett, William Vans Murray.

_Virginia._--John Browne, William B. Giles, Samuel Griffin, Richard
Bland Lee, James Madison, Andrew Moore, John Page, Josiah Parker, A. B.
Venable, Alexander White.

_North Carolina._--John B. Ashe, Timothy Bloodworth, William B. Grove,
Nathaniel Macon, John Sevier, John Steele, Hugh Williamson.

_South Carolina._--Robert Barnwell, Daniel Huger, William Smith, Thomas
Sumter, Thomas Tudor Tucker.

_Georgia._--Abraham Baldwin, Anthony Wayne, Francis Willis.


PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.

MONDAY, October 24, 1791.

This being the day fixed by law for the annual meeting of Congress, at
the first session of the second Congress, the following members of the
Senate appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats:

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President and President of the Senate.

JOHN LANGDON and PAINE WINGATE, from New Hampshire.

CALEB STRONG and GEORGE CABOT, from Massachusetts.

THEODORE FOSTER and JOSEPH STANTON, jr., from Rhode Island.

ROGER SHERMAN, from Connecticut, in the place of WILLIAM S. JOHNSON,
resigned.

AARON BURR, from New York.

PHILEMON DICKINSON and JOHN RUTHERFORD, from New Jersey.

ROBERT MORRIS, from Pennsylvania.

GEORGE READ, from Delaware.

SAMUEL JOHNSTON and BENJAMIN HAWKINS, from North Carolina.

PIERCE BUTLER and RALPH IZARD, from South Carolina; and

WILLIAM FEW, from Georgia.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. Butler, Morris, and Dickinson, be a committee to
wait on the President of the United States, and inform him that a quorum
of the Senate is assembled, and ready to receive any communication he
may be pleased to make to them.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
a quorum of the Senate is assembled and ready to proceed to business;
and that they have notified the President of the United States that they
are ready to receive such communications as he may be pleased to make to
them.

Mr. IZARD, from the joint committee appointed to wait on the President
of the United States, agreeably to the resolution of the two Houses, of
this day, reported that they had executed the business, and that the
President of the United States proposed to-morrow, at 12 o'clock, to
meet the two Houses of Congress in the Senate Chamber.


TUESDAY, October 25.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary inform the House of Representatives that
the Senate are ready to meet them in the Senate Chamber, to receive any
communications the President of the United States may be pleased to make
to the two Houses of Congress; and that the usual seats will be assigned
them.

The House of Representatives having accordingly taken their seats, the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES came into the Senate Chamber, and
addressed both Houses of Congress as followeth:[39]

      _Fellow-Citizens of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      I meet you upon the present occasion with the feelings
      which are naturally inspired by a strong impression of the
      prosperous situation of our common country, and by a
      persuasion, equally strong, that the labors of the session
      which has just commenced will, under the guidance of a
      spirit no less prudent than patriotic, issue in measures
      conducive to the stability and increase of national
      prosperity.

      Numerous as are the Providential blessings which demand our
      grateful acknowledgments, the abundance with which another
      year has again rewarded the industry of the husbandman is
      too important to escape recollection.

      Your own observations in your respective situations will
      have satisfied you of the progressive state of agriculture,
      manufactures, commerce, and navigation. In tracing their
      causes, you will have remarked, with particular pleasure,
      the happy effects of that revival of confidence, public as
      well as private, to which the Constitution and laws of the
      United States have so eminently contributed; and you will
      have observed, with no less interest, new and decisive
      proofs of the increasing reputation and credit of the
      nation. But you, nevertheless, cannot fail to derive
      satisfaction from the confirmation of these circumstances,
      which will be disclosed in the several official
      communications that will be made to you in the course of
      your deliberations.

      The rapid subscriptions to the Bank of the United States,
      which completed the sum allowed to be subscribed in a
      single day, is among the striking and pleasing evidences
      which present themselves, not only of confidence in the
      Government, but of resource in the community.

      In the interval of your recess, due attention has been paid
      to the execution of the different objects which were
      specially provided for by the laws and resolutions of the
      last session.

      Among the most important of these, is the defence and
      security of the Western frontiers. To accomplish it on the
      most humane principles was a primary wish.

      Accordingly, at the same time that treaties have been
      provisionally concluded, and other proper means used to
      attach the wavering, and to confirm in their friendship the
      well-disposed tribes of Indians, effectual measures have
      been adopted to make those of a hostile description
      sensible that a pacification was desired upon terms of
      moderation and justice.

      These measures having proved unsuccessful, it became
      necessary to convince the refractory of the power of the
      United States to punish their depredations. Offensive
      operations have therefore been directed, to be conducted,
      however, as consistently as possible with the dictates of
      humanity. Some of these have been crowned with full
      success, and others are yet depending. The expeditions
      which have been completed were carried on under the
      authority, and at the expense, of the United States, by the
      militia of Kentucky; whose enterprise, intrepidity, and
      good conduct are entitled to peculiar commendation.

      Overtures of peace are still continued to the deluded
      tribes, and considerable numbers of individuals belonging
      to them have lately renounced all further opposition,
      removed from their former situations, and placed themselves
      under the immediate protection of the United States.

      It is sincerely to be desired, that all need of coercion in
      future may cease; and that an intimate intercourse may
      succeed, calculated to advance the happiness of the
      Indians, and to attach them firmly to the United States.

      In order to this, it seems necessary--

      That they should experience the benefits of an impartial
      dispensation of justice.

      That the mode of alienating their lands, the main source of
      discontent and war, should be so defined and regulated as
      to obviate imposition, and, as far as may be practicable,
      controversy concerning the reality and extent of the
      alienations which are made.

      That commerce with them should be promoted under
      regulations tending to secure an equitable deportment
      towards them, and that such rational experiments should be
      made, for imparting to them the blessings of civilization,
      as may from time to time suit their condition.

      That the Executive of the United States should be enabled
      to employ the means to which the Indians have been long
      accustomed for uniting their immediate interests with the
      preservation of peace.

      And that efficacious provision should be made for
      inflicting adequate penalties upon all those who, by
      violating their rights, shall infringe the treaties, and
      endanger the peace of the Union.

      A system corresponding with the mild principles of religion
      and philanthropy towards an unenlightened race of men,
      whose happiness materially depends on the conduct of the
      United States, would be as honorable to the national
      character as conformable to the dictates of sound policy.

      Pursuant to the authority contained in the several acts on
      that subject, a district of ten miles square, for the
      permanent seat of the Government of the United States, has
      been fixed, and announced by proclamation; which district
      will comprehend lands on both sides of the river Potomac,
      and the towns of Alexandria and Georgetown. A city has also
      been laid out, agreeably to a plan which will be placed
      before Congress. And, as there is a prospect, favored by
      the rate of sales which have already taken place, of ample
      funds for carrying on the necessary public buildings, there
      is every expectation of their due progress.

      The completion of the census of the inhabitants, for which
      provision was made by law, has been duly notified,
      (excepting one instance in which the return has been
      informal; and another, in which it has been omitted or
      miscarried,) and the returns of the officers who were
      charged with this duty, which will be laid before you, will
      give you the pleasing assurance, that the present
      population of the United States borders on four millions of
      persons.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate:_

      Two treaties which have been provisionally concluded with
      the Cherokees and Six Nations of Indians, will be laid
      before you for your consideration and ratification.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      In entering upon the discharge of your legislative trust,
      you must anticipate, with pleasure, that many of the
      difficulties, necessarily incident to the first
      arrangements of a new Government, for an extensive country,
      have been happily surmounted by the zealous and judicious
      exertions of your predecessors, in co-operation with the
      other branch of the Legislature. The important objects
      which remain to be accomplished, will, I am persuaded, be
      conducted upon principles equally comprehensive, and
      equally well calculated for the advancement of the general
      weal.

      It is particularly pleasing to me to be able to announce to
      you that the revenues which have been established promise
      to be adequate to their objects, and maybe permitted, if no
      unforeseen exigency occurs, to supersede, for the present,
      the necessity of any new burdens upon our constituents.[40]

      An object which will claim your early attention is a
      provision for the current service of the ensuing year,
      together with such ascertained demands upon the Treasury as
      require to be immediately discharged, and such casualties
      as may have arisen in the execution of the public business,
      for which no specific appropriation may have yet been made;
      of all which a proper estimate will be laid before you.

       _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      I shall content myself with a general reference to former
      communications for several objects, upon which the urgency
      of other affairs has hitherto postponed any definitive
      resolution. Their importance will recall them to your
      attention; and, I trust that the progress already made in
      the most arduous arrangements of the Government will afford
      you leisure to resume them with advantage.

      There are, however, some of them of which I cannot forbear
      a more particular mention. These are: the Militia, the Post
      Office and Post Roads, the Mint, Weights and Measures, and
      a provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United
      States.

      The disorders in the existing currency, and especially the
      scarcity of small change, a scarcity so peculiarly
      distressing to the poorer classes, strongly recommend the
      carrying into immediate effect the resolution already
      entered into concerning the establishment of a Mint.
      Measures have been taken pursuant to that resolution for
      procuring some of the most necessary artists, together with
      the requisite apparatus.

      A provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United
      States is particularly urged, among other reasons, by the
      important considerations, that they are pledged as a fund
      for reimbursing the public debt; that, if timely and
      judiciously applied, they may save the necessity of
      burthening our citizens with new taxes for the
      extinguishment of the principal; and that, being free to
      discharge the principal but in a limited proportion, no
      opportunity ought to be lost for availing the public of its
      right.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _October 25, 1791_.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES having retired, and the two Houses
being separated,

_Ordered_, That Messrs. BURR, CABOT, and JOHNSTON, be a committee to
prepare and report the draft of an Address to the President of the
United States, in answer to his Speech delivered this day to both Houses
of Congress.

_Ordered_, That the Speech of the President of the United States,
delivered this day, be printed for the use of the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, October 26.

RUFUS KING, from the State of New York, and JOHN HENRY, from the State
of Maryland, attended.


THURSDAY, October 27.

The following message was received from the President of the United
States:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      I lay before you a copy of a letter, and of sundry
      documents, which I have received from the Governor of
      Pennsylvania, respecting certain persons who are said to
      have fled from justice out of the State of Pennsylvania,
      into that of Virginia; together with a report of the
      Attorney General of the United States upon the same
      subject.

      I have received from the Governor of North Carolina a copy
      of an Act of the General Assembly of that State,
      authorizing him to convey to the United States the right
      and jurisdiction of the said State over one acre of land in
      Ocracock Island, and ten acres on the Cape Island, within
      the said State, for the purpose of erecting light-houses
      thereon, together with the deed of the Governor, in
      pursuance thereof, and the original conveyances made to the
      State by the individual proprietors, which original
      conveyances contain conditions that the light-house on
      Ocracock shall be built before the first day of January,
      1801, and that on the Cape Island, before the eighth day of
      October, 1800. And I have caused these several papers to be
      deposited in the office of the Secretary of State.

      A statement of the Returns of the Enumeration of the
      Inhabitants of the United States, which have been received,
      will at this time be laid before you.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _October 27, 1791_.

Mr. BURR reported, from the committee appointed to prepare an Address to
the President of the United States, in answer to his Speech to both.
Houses of Congress at the opening of the session.

_Ordered_, That to-morrow be assigned to take the report into
consideration.


FRIDAY, October 28.

Agreeably to the order of the day, the Senate proceeded to take into
consideration the Address reported by the committee, in answer to the
Speech of the President of the United States, on the 24th instant, to
both Houses of Congress; which report was agreed to, as follows:

      _To the President of the United States:_

      SIR: The Senate of the United States have received with the
      highest satisfaction the assurances of public prosperity
      contained in your Speech to both Houses. The multiplied
      blessings of Providence have not escaped our notice, or
      failed to excite our gratitude.

      The benefits which flow from the restoration of public and
      private confidence are conspicuous and important; and the
      pleasure with which we contemplate them is heightened by
      your assurance of those further communications which shall
      confirm their existence and indicate their source.

      While we rejoice in the success of those military
      operations which have been directed against the hostile
      Indians, we lament with you the necessity that has produced
      them; and we participate the hope that the present prospect
      of a general peace, on terms of moderation and justice, may
      be wrought into complete and permanent effect; and that the
      measures of Government may equally embrace the security of
      our frontiers and the general interests of humanity. Our
      solicitude to obtain which, will insure our zealous
      attention to an object so warmly espoused by the principles
      of benevolence, and so highly interesting to the honor and
      welfare of the nation.

      The several subjects which you have particularly
      recommended, and those which remain of former sessions,
      will engage our early consideration. We are encouraged to
      prosecute them with alacrity and steadiness, by the belief
      that they will interest no passion but that for the general
      welfare; by the assurance of concert, and by a view of
      those arduous and important arrangements which have been
      already accomplished.

      We observe, sir, the constancy and activity of your zeal
      for the public good. The example will animate our efforts
      to promote the happiness of our country.

_Ordered_, That the Address to the President of the United States, in
answer to his Speech, be presented by the Vice President, attended by
the Senate; and that the committee which reported the Address wait on
the President of the United States, and desire to be informed at what
time and place he will receive the same.


MONDAY, October 31.

JAMES MONROE, from the State of Virginia, attended, and took his seat.

MOSES ROBINSON, from the State of Vermont, produced his credentials, and
took his seat in the Senate.

Mr. BURR, from the committee appointed on the 28th to wait on the
President of the United States, reported, that it would be agreeable to
the President of the United States to receive the Address of the Senate,
in answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress, on Monday next at
12 o'clock.

Whereupon, the Senate waited on the President of the United States at
his own house, and the VICE PRESIDENT, in their name, communicated to
him the Address agreed to on the 28th instant, to which the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES was pleased to make the following reply:

      GENTLEMEN: This manifestation of your zeal for the honor
      and the happiness of our country derives its full value
      from the share which your deliberations have already had in
      promoting both.

      I thank you for the favorable sentiments with which you
      view the part I have borne in the arduous trust committed
      to the Government of the United States; and desire you to
      be assured that all my zeal will continue to second those
      further efforts for the public good which are ensured by
      the spirit in which you are entering on the present
      session.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

The Senate returned to the Senate Chamber.


FRIDAY, November 4.

STEPHEN R. BRADLEY, from the State of Vermont, appeared, produced his
credentials, and took his seat.


WEDNESDAY, November 9.

OLIVER ELLSWORTH, from the State of Connecticut, attended, and took his
seat.


THURSDAY, November 10.

JAMES GUNN, from the State of Georgia, attended, and took his seat.


FRIDAY, January 6.

CHARLES CARROLL, from the State of Maryland, attended, and took his
seat.


MONDAY, January 9.

RICHARD BASSETT, from the State of Delaware, attended, and took his
seat.


MONDAY, March 5.

The following Message was received from the President of the United
States:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      Knowing the friendly interest you take in whatever may
      promote the happiness and prosperity of the French nation,
      it is with pleasure that I lay before you the translation
      of a letter which I have received from his Most Christian
      Majesty, announcing to the United States of America his
      acceptance of the constitution presented to him in the name
      of his nation.

                                  G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _March 5, 1792_.

[Translation.]

      _Very dear, Great Friends and Allies:_

      We make it our duty to inform you that we have accepted the
      constitution which has been presented to us in the name of
      the nation, and according to which France will be
      henceforth governed.

      We do not doubt that you take an interest in an event so
      important to our kingdom, and to us; and that it is with
      real pleasure we take this occasion to renew to you
      assurances of the sincere friendship we bear you.
      Whereupon, we pray God to have you, very dear, great
      friends and allies, in his just and holy keeping.

      Written at Paris, the 19th of September, 1791.

                                  Your good friend and ally,

                                  LOUIS.

      MONTMORIN.

      THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA.


TUESDAY, March 13.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the motion made yesterday on the
Message from the President of the United States, transmitting a copy of
a letter from his Most Christian Majesty to the United States of
America.

A motion was made and seconded to postpone this motion, in order to take
up the following:

      "_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
      informed that the Senate have received with satisfaction
      the official intelligence that the King of the French has
      accepted the constitution presented to him by the National
      Assembly, and are highly gratified by every event that
      promotes the freedom and prosperity of the French nation
      and the happiness and glory of their King."

It passed in the negative; yeas 6, nays 21--as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Bassett, Cabot, Ellsworth, King, Strong, and Wingate.

NAYS.--Messrs. Bradley, Burr, Butler, Carroll, Dickinson, Few, Foster,
Gunn, Hawkins, Henry, Johnston, Izard, Langdon, Lee, Monroe, Morris,
Read, Robinson, Rutherford, Stanton, and Sherman.

The original motion, being amended, was agreed to. Whereupon, it was

_Resolved_, That the President be requested to make known to the King of
the French, that the Senate of the United States have received with the
highest satisfaction the official communication of his acceptance of the
constitution which, it is their earnest wish, may establish, on a solid
basis, the freedom and prosperity of the French nation, and the
happiness and glory of the Monarch presiding over it.


WEDNESDAY, March 14.

_Ordered_, That the resolution of the Senate, on the Message of the
President of the United States, enclosing the letter from his Most
Christian Majesty, be signed by the Vice President, and laid before the
President of the United States, by the Secretary.


MONDAY, March 26.

A motion was made by Mr. MONROE, seconded by Mr. LEE, as follows:

"_Resolved_, That it be a standing rule, that the doors of the Senate
Chamber remain open whilst the Senate shall be sitting in their
Legislative capacity, except on such occasions as in their judgment may
require secrecy; and that this rule shall commence and be in force on
the first day of the next session of Congress;" and it passed in the
negative--yeas 8, nays 17, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Butler, Carroll, Foster, Hawkins, Johnston, King, Lee,
and Monroe.

NAYS.--Messrs. Bassett, Bradley, Cabot, Dickinson, Ellsworth, Few, Gunn,
Henry, Izard, Langdon, Read, Robinson, Rutherford, Sherman, Stanton,
Strong, and Wingate.


WEDNESDAY, April 18.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the election of
a President _pro tempore_ as the constitution provides, and the Hon.
RICHARD HENRY LEE was duly elected.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United
States, and lay before him an attested copy of this proceeding, and that
he notify the House of Representatives of the election of a President
_pro tempore_.


THURSDAY, April 19.

_Resolved_, That the President _pro tempore_ of the Senate, as a member,
retain his right to vote upon all questions.


TUESDAY EVENING, May 8.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House of Representatives, having completed the business before them, are
about to adjourn.

In conformity to the resolution of the 4th instant, the President _pro
tempore_ adjourned the Senate to the first Monday in November next,
being the time appointed by law for the next annual meeting of Congress.




SECOND CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, October 24, 1791.

This being the day appointed by law for the meeting of the present
Congress, the following members appeared, produced their credentials,
and took their seats:

_From New Hampshire_, NICHOLAS GILMAN, SAMUEL LIVERMORE, and JEREMIAH
SMITH.

_From Massachusetts_, FISHER AMES, SHEARJASHUB BOURNE, ELBRIDGE GERRY,
BENJAMIN GOODHUE, GEORGE THATCHER, and ARTEMAS WARD.

_From Rhode Island_, BENJAMIN BOURNE.

_From Connecticut_, JAMES HILLHOUSE, JONATHAN STURGES, JONATHAN
TRUMBULL, JEREMIAH WADSWORTH, and AMASA LEARNED.

_From New York_, JAMES GORDON, JOHN LAURANCE, PETER SYLVESTER, and
THOMAS TREDWELL.

_From New Jersey_, ELIAS BOUDINOT.

_From Pennsylvania_, THOMAS FITZSIMONS, DANIEL HEISTER, and FREDERICK
AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG.

_From Delaware_, JOHN VINING.

_From Maryland_, JOSHUA SENEY, and SAMUEL STERRETT.

_From Virginia_, JOHN BROWN, WILLIAM B. GILES, SAMUEL GRIFFIN, JAMES
MADISON, ANDREW MOORE, and ALEXANDER WHITE.

_From North Carolina_, JOHN STEELE, and HUGH WILLIAMSON.

_From South Carolina_, DANIEL HUGER, WILLIAM SMITH, and THOMAS TUDOR
TUCKER.

_From Georgia_, FRANCIS WILLIS.

A quorum of the members being present, the House proceeded to ballot for
Speaker, when it appeared that JONATHAN TRUMBULL, from Connecticut, was
elected.

On being conducted to the chair, Mr. TRUMBULL addressed the House as
follows:

      GENTLEMEN: I find myself unable to express to you the full
      sense I have of the distinguished honor you have done me in
      the choice of your Speaker.

      The diffidence I feel in my abilities to discharge, with
      propriety, the duties of the chair, is almost insuperable
      in my own mind. But, encouraged by the known candor of this
      honorable body, and depending, as I think I may confidently
      do, on the kind assistance of each individual in it, I
      shall enter on its duties, with full assurances to you,
      gentlemen, that I shall endeavor to conduct myself with
      that impartiality, integrity, and assiduity, which become
      the conspicuous station in which you have been pleased to
      place me.

The House then proceeded to ballot for a Clerk, when there appeared a
unanimous vote for JOHN BECKLEY.

The oath to support the constitution was then administered to the
members present, and the oath of office to the Speaker and Clerk.

_Ordered_, That the Speaker appoint committees until the House shall
otherwise determine.

A message was received from the Senate, informing the House that a
quorum of that body is assembled and ready to proceed to business; and
that the Senate have informed the President of the United States that
they are ready to receive any communications he may be pleased to make
to them.

_Resolved_, That Mr. SMITH, of South Carolina, Mr. LAURANCE, and Mr.
WHITE, be a committee on the part of this House, to act jointly with the
committee from the Senate, to wait on the President.

_Ordered_, That a committee be appointed to prepare and report Standing
Rules and Orders of proceeding for the House. Messrs. MUHLENBERG,
TUCKER, WILLIAMSON, AMES, and SMITH, of New Hampshire, were named.

JOSEPH WHEATON was appointed Sergeant-at-Arms; and GIFFORD DALLEY,
Doorkeeper, and THOMAS CLAXTON, assistant Doorkeeper.

_Resolved_, That two Chaplains, of different denominations, be appointed
to Congress for the present session, to interchange weekly.

Mr. SMITH, from the joint committee appointed to wait on the President
of the United States, reported that the President would make a
communication to both Houses to-morrow at twelve o'clock, in the Senate
Chamber.

A message from the Senate announced the agreement of that body to the
resolution of this House for the appointment of two Chaplains, and had
elected the Right Reverend Bishop WHITE, on their part.


TUESDAY, October 25.

The following members appeared, presented their credentials, and took
their seats: ABRAHAM CLARK, JONATHAN DAYTON, and AARON KITCHELL, from
New Jersey; and ISRAEL JACOBS, from Pennsylvania.

The House proceeded to ballot for a Chaplain, when a majority of the
votes were found in favor of the Rev. Mr. BLAIR.

A message being received from the Senate, stating that they were ready
to receive the communication from the President of the United States,
the Speaker, attended by the members of the House, withdrew to the
Senate Chamber for the purpose of receiving the same.

On the return of the members, the Speaker laid before the House a copy
of the Speech delivered by the President, (which will be found in the
proceedings of the Senate.)

The Speech was committed to a Committee of the Whole to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, October 26.

_President's Speech._

The House then went into Committee of the Whole, on the President's
Speech, Mr. MUHLENBERG in the chair.

The Speech being read, Mr. VINING moved a resolution, of which the
following is the purport:

      "_Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee that
      an Address should be presented to the President of the
      United States by the House of Representatives, in answer to
      his Speech, to congratulate him on the prosperous situation
      of the United States, expressive of the approbation of the
      House of the wise and prudent measures he has pursued
      during their recess, in the execution of the duties
      committed to his charge: promising speedy attention to the
      important and momentous objects recommended to their
      consideration, and expressing their approbation of the
      humane and effectual steps taken, under his direction, for
      the defence of the Western frontiers."

This resolution was objected to by Messrs. LAURANCE, SEDGWICK, SMITH,
(of South Carolina,) and LIVERMORE, upon the principle, that it
expressed the sense of the House upon points which required further
information and investigation before the House could, with propriety,
determine. It was difficult to say, before proper documents were laid
before the House, whether the measures adopted for the defence of the
Western frontiers were the most prudent that could be adopted. It was
impossible positively to assert, that the President, in the execution of
the duties assigned him in carrying into effect the excise act, had done
all for the best. Every member that spoke agreed in expressing his
individual opinion, that no doubt the President had acted with his
wonted prudence and wisdom in the execution of the trusts reposed in
him; but also agreed that it was improper, indeed, it was no compliment
paid to the President, to approve, before a formal examination.

In answer to these objections it was observed, that so far as
circumstances had been made known to the members, relative to the steps
taken by the President during the recess of the Federal Legislature, so
far they claimed the approbation of the House; and that the opinion of
the House was only meant to be given as far as they were informed. It
was urged, that the answer of the House should be a candid expression of
their feelings; feelings which the prosperous situation of the country
undoubtedly called forth, and which the issue of the measures adopted
could not fail to excite.

Several modifications were proposed to the resolution, which was finally
agreed to, as follows:

      "_Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee that
      a respectful Address ought to be presented by the House of
      Representatives to the President of the United States, in
      answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress at the
      commencement of this session, containing assurances that
      this House will take into consideration the various and
      important matters recommended to their attention."

Mr. MADISON, Mr. LAURANCE, and Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina,) were
appointed a committee to prepare an Address, pursuant to the resolution.


THURSDAY, October 27.

Mr. MADISON, from the committee appointed, reported an Address to the
President of the United States, in answer to his Speech to both Houses
of Congress; which was read, and ordered to be committed to a Committee
of the whole House immediately.

_Address to the President._

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the whole
House on the said Address; and, after some time spent therein, Mr.
MUHLENBERG reported that the committee had had the said Address under
consideration, and made no amendment thereto. Whereupon, it was

_Resolved, unanimously_, That this House doth agree to the said Address,
in the words following:

      SIR: In receiving your Address, at the opening of the
      present session, the House of Representatives have taken an
      ample share in the feelings inspired by the actual
      prosperity and flattering prospects of our country; and
      whilst, with becoming gratitude to Heaven, we ascribe this
      happiness to the true source from which it flows, we behold
      with an animating pleasure the degree in which the
      Constitution and laws of the United States have been
      instrumental in dispensing it.

      It yields us particular satisfaction to learn the success
      with which the different important measures of the
      Government have proceeded; as well those specially provided
      for the last session, as those of preceding date. The
      safety of our Western frontier, in which the lives and
      repose of so many of our fellow-citizens are involved,
      being peculiarly interesting, your communications on that
      subject are proportionally grateful to us. The gallantry
      and good conduct of the militia, whose services were called
      for, is an honorable confirmation of the efficacy of that
      precious resource of a free State. And we anxiously wish
      that the consequences of their successful enterprises, and
      of the other proceedings to which you have referred, may
      leave the United States free to pursue the most benevolent
      policy towards the unhappy and deluded race of people in
      our neighborhood.

      The amount of the population of the United States,
      determined by the returns of the census, is a source of the
      most pleasing reflections, whether it be viewed in relation
      to our national safety and respectability, or as a proof of
      that felicity in the situation of our country, which favors
      so unexampled a rapidity in its growth. Nor ought any to be
      insensible to the additional motive suggested by this
      important fact to perpetuate the free Government
      established with a wise administration of it, to a portion
      of the earth which promises such an increase of the number
      which is to enjoy those blessings within the limits of the
      United States.

      We shall proceed with all the respect due to your patriotic
      recommendations, and with a deep sense of the trust
      committed to us by our fellow-citizens, to take into
      consideration the various and important matters falling
      within the present session; and, in discussing and deciding
      each, we shall feel every disposition, whilst we are
      pursuing the public welfare, which must be the supreme
      object with all our constituents, to accommodate, as far as
      possible, the means of attaining it to the sentiments and
      wishes of every part of them.

Mr. MADISON, from the committee appointed to wait on the President of
the United States, to know when and where it will be convenient for him
to receive the Address of this House, in answer to his Speech to both
Houses of Congress, reported that the committee had waited on the
President, who signified to them that it would be convenient to him to
receive the said Address at twelve o'clock to-morrow, at his own house.


FRIDAY, October 28.

The SPEAKER, attended by the House, then withdrew to the house of the
President of the United States, and there presented to him the Address
of this House, in answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress; to
which the President made the following reply:

      _Gentlemen:_

      The pleasure I derive from an assurance of your attention
      to the objects I have recommended to you is doubled by your
      concurrence in the testimony I have borne to the prosperous
      condition of our public affairs.

      Relying on the sanctions of your enlightened judgment, and
      on your patriotic aid, I shall be the more encouraged in
      all my endeavors for the public weal, and particularly in
      those which may be required on my part for executing the
      salutary measures I anticipate from your present
      deliberations.

                                        G. WASHINGTON.


MONDAY, October 31.

Several other members, to wit: from Vermont, NATHANIEL NILES and ISRAEL
SMITH; from Maryland, UPTON SHERIDINE; from North Carolina, WILLIAM
BARRY GROVE; and from South Carolina, ROBERT BARNWELL; appeared,
produced their credentials, and took their seats in the House.


TUESDAY, November 1.

ANTHONY WAYNE, member from Georgia, and JOSIAH PARKER, from Virginia,
took their seats this day.


THURSDAY, November 3.

Two other members, to wit, RICHARD BLAND LEE and JOHN PAGE, from
Virginia, appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats in
the House.


FRIDAY, November 4.

Another member, to wit, EGBERT BENSON, from New York, appeared, produced
his credentials, and took his seat in the House.


MONDAY, November 7.

Several other members, to wit: from Pennsylvania, WILLIAM FINDLAY; from
North Carolina, JOHN BAPTIST ASHE; and from Georgia, ABRAHAM BALDWIN;
appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats in the House.


TUESDAY, November 8.

Another member, to wit, ANDREW GREGG, from Pennsylvania, appeared,
produced his credentials, and took his seat in the House.

_John Torrey._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on the
Report of the Secretary of War on the petition of John Torrey,
administrator of Major Joseph Torrey, deceased.

Mr. AMES objected to the motion for accepting the Report of the
Secretary of War. He said, it must be apparent that he was placed by
accident in a relation to the subject in debate, which he should not
have adopted of choice. With very little knowledge of the parties and
their connections, and the interests that would be involved by the
decision, he seemed to be considered as standing sponsor for the
petitioner. He might justify this active support of the petition, by
assigning motives which were common to other gentlemen; but as they have
continued silent, I will assign a reason for speaking, which is peculiar
to myself. Nothing excites a person to a more fervid defence of his
opinions, than the supposed discovery that they are misunderstood, and
the force of the reasons on which he had formed them unduly estimated.

Congress promised half-pay to the officers who should continue in
service _to the end of the war_. This was afterwards made a commutation
for half-pay. Major Torrey continued in service till September, 1783,
when he died. The question is, did he continue in service to the end of
the war? The provisional articles of peace were signed on the 30th
November, 1782; but they were to remain without force till terms of
peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain and France. This took
place on the 30th January, 1783, and the ratifications were exchanged on
the 3d February, 1783, at Paris. The provisional treaty between Great
Britain and America was then _a treaty of peace_, and according to the
words of that treaty was _concluded_. Accordingly, on the 11th April,
1783, Congress by a proclamation made known those facts, and the
stipulations made, in regard to the periods when hostilities should
cease, by the contracting parties to the treaty. Hostilities did cease,
and before the end of April, 1783, all America was in perfect peace. The
late hostile nations shook hands, our vessels sailed in safety, and by
sea and land reconciliation succeeded to hostility.

But did all this put an end to the war? The children in the street would
answer this question: they would say, it is peace when it is not war. Of
all facts, the most notorious seems to be the state of war; and it is
the fact that the war was at an end, (and not any after resolve of
Congress,) that the commutation of Major Torrey was made to hinge upon.
When the meaning of a bargain is disputed, it is usual to search out the
intention of the contracting parties when it was made. Supposing,
instead of interpreting a resolve of Congress, any twelve of this body
had to try a case between two private persons; suppose that a man had
given his note of hand for a sum to be paid at the _end of the war_.
Would twelve of this House, or would any jury in the country say that
the war continued longer than hostilities? In private life, a man would
think it touched his character to refuse paying his note in such case.
Surely a government ought to perform its promise with as much delicacy
and exactness. Congress did not promise the half-pay, and afterward the
commutation, on the condition that a man should serve till they should
think proper to say the war was at an end. He depended on the stubborn
_fact_ that it did end, which no resolution of Congress could change;
and not on the refining opinion when the officers might safely be
discharged--for that we see might be differently formed, according to
the different views of policy and safety at the time. An officer having
this promise of Congress, has a right to this commutation on the
cessation of hostilities, in pursuance of the treaty. If this is
disputed, the meaning of the words, "_the end of the war_," should be
decided as it was understood at the time of the promise. Will any one
believe that the 3d November, 1783, was the term, after the state of war
and all the treaties which put an end to it, had been long passed? If
any doubt still remains, writers on the law of nations should be
consulted. For the officer may justly claim an execution of the promise
according to law; that is the umpire between Government and the people.
On appealing to the law of nations, we find that war is defined to be
"the state in which a nation prosecutes its right by force." "Peace is
opposed to the state of war--an accommodation is proposed and conditions
agreed on, and thus peace puts an end to war." "When the powers at war
agree to lay down their arms, the agreement is the treaty of peace."
"The general and necessary effects of peace, are the reconciliation of
enemies and the cessation of hostilities; it restores the two nations to
their natural state." Would any jury in this country say, that the
matter of fact and the principles of law were not in favor of the
petition? Apply these maxims of law to the case. The provisional
articles of November, 1782, were of themselves nothing, it is true, but
they were to constitute the treaty of peace, whenever Great Britain and
France had agreed on the terms of peace. As these two powers did agree
on the 30th January, and ratified the terms on the 3d February, 1783,
_then_ the provisional articles, to use the very words of the preamble,
did _constitute the treaty of peace_; it was _then_ a _concluded_ thing;
and peace in fact took place in the several parts of the world on the
appointed days.

It has been said, that the preliminaries were no more than a suspension
of arms--that the state of war still continues, until a _definitive_
treaty. To this it is answered, that preliminaries bind the national
faith; if violated, the perjured faithless nation would kindle a new
war. By the law of nations there is not such a distinction as that which
is alleged, between preliminary and definitive treaties. Let the
authorities for such a distinction be produced by those who make it. But
they do not exist--a truce does not put an end to a war--a truce is,
however, a suspension of war for a specified term. At the end of this
term, the war begins again, of course, without any fresh declaration.
But a suspension of hostilities for an indefinite period, is not a
truce, but a peace; especially if it is added, that it is agreed upon by
the belligerent nations in consequence of a settlement of their
disputes, and if it happens in fact that the war is not revived. Those
who make so much of a definitive treaty, and so light of preliminaries,
should consider that, on their own system, the former is a kind of
defeasance which annuls the latter. But when the definitive treaty is
signed, the preliminaries, which before were liable to be annulled, now
become of force, and the treaty, now become indefeasible, takes its date
from the preliminaries. Though this mode of reasoning has not much
weight on my mind, it ought to have some with those who have set up the
distinction which it is adduced to overthrow.

These are the reasons on which I have formed my opinion that the war
ended in fact in April, 1783, when hostilities ceased by mutual
agreement of the powers at war. My opinion is supported by authority
much more reputable than any I can give to it. The law courts in this
country have decided it judicially; cases of captured vessels, and the
question of interest on British debts, have produced decisions in every
State of the Union, unless I am misinformed, that the war ended in March
or April, 1783. The courts in England, and in every country where the
war spread, on trials of property, have made similar decisions. Major
Torrey died in September, 1783; shall this body decide against the
settled rule of all the law courts?

It remains to remove some objections:

It is alleged, that Congress have by various resolves fixed the period
of the war, and have declared that the 3d November, 1783, is the term.
If they had declared that it should be computed from the end of the
world, it would not alter the truth of the fact. _After_ declarations
ought not to be received to change their own promises. But a
declaration, or a dozen of them, made for another purpose, and not to
declare the meaning of the contract, cannot on any principle be received
to interpret it. It is not necessary, however, to contend against those
resolves of Congress. They are irreconcilable with the former engagement
to Major Torrey. In undertaking to reconcile them, I feel that I impose
a task on myself, which is made heavy by the prepossessions of many of
my friends; I believe the minds of gentlemen are perfectly fair, and
well-disposed to doing the petitioner justice. But I hope I shall not be
thought to intend any offence, when I remark that certain ideas, such as
that this claim is cut off by resolves of Congress, and that on allowing
it, confusion would take place in the business of the public offices,
were started with the discussion, and they have remained so woven into
the texture of the debate, that I think it hard to unravel them. It was
soon manifested that there was a general disposition to vote against the
petition. This opportunity for debate seems to have been accorded as of
grace, rather than as a means of removing any existing doubts of their
own. Having adopted these opinions, this is rather a form of refusal
than a mode of inquiring; and it seems to have been chosen with every
circumstance of decency, and with all possible steadfastness of purpose.
Yet I will proceed to state, that the point whether the war was at an
end when hostilities ended in April, 1783, being already considered
fully, we are to look for other reasons than such as relate to the
commutation, to explain the resolves of Congress which continued the
service of the officers beyond the end of the war, and as late as
November, 1783. A mistake seems to have crept in here. It seems to be
supposed that the officers were engaged to serve to the end of the war,
just long enough to secure their commutation. But the commutation
depended on one thing--the term of their service on another. The former
was their right at the end of the war; but they were to remain in
service till dismissed, unless they should think fit sooner to resign.
They held their commissions during the pleasure of Congress. Though
when the war ended they had a right to the commutation, they had no
right to say their service was at an end. They did not choose to resign:
Congress, for wise reasons, did not choose to dismiss them. A foreign
army was still in New York. They were sent home on furlough, but drawing
pay, and liable to be called into the field. Congress, in their
resolves, did not say that it was not peace, but in effect that it was
unsafe to disarm. Gentlemen are not well agreed among themselves as to
the end of the war. Some fix it at the definitive treaty of September 3,
1783; others at November 3. Their conclusions agree as illy with their
principles; for if the definitive treaty put an end to the war, how can
the same gentlemen say that the war was kept alive, on the journals of
Congress, till November, 1783? Here, then, were Peace and War subsisting
quietly together during two months.

The fears of making confusion by opening a door to many applications,
seem to be groundless. A man must have died between the end of
hostilities and November, 1783, to place a claim on the like footing.
The living have had their commutations; they cannot come: and no other
officer died in that period, as far as I can learn. I have inquired, and
cannot find at the office of the Secretary of War any precedent which
militates with this claim, or any reason to suppose that any similar one
will be offered. The case is a new one; it stands alone, and probably
ever will, and it must be decided on its own merits. Believing the fact
to be indisputable that Major Torrey served to the end of the war,
confiding in the principles of the law of nations, and the settled
decisions of the Judicial Courts, I have endeavored to explain my ideas
with perspicuity, and to impress them with force. I have said more than
questions touching an individual will often be found to merit; but when
public principles are construed to the prejudice of private rights, the
debate cannot be treated too seriously.

Mr. BOUDINOT said, he differed in opinion from the gentleman in his
construction of the business. He did not coincide in the idea that the
decision of the present question should be on a strictly judicial
principle. The petition is founded on certain resolutions and laws of
Congress; and as there are certain established rules which have been
observed in settling with every other officer similarly circumstanced,
Congress cannot now with propriety break through those rules; to these
they ought to adhere, till by the decision of some judicial court it
shall appear that they are contrary to the rules of justice. [Here Mr.
AMES requested Mr. BOUDINOT to point out the rules to which he
referred.] Mr. B. referred to the report now under consideration, which
was founded on a resolution of Congress, that the time for which the
army was engaged should expire in November, 1783. This has been made a
rule in all the settlements with the officers of the army.

The terms of the contract, between the officers and the United States,
depended, he said, on the decision of the sovereign power; that was
authorized alone to determine when the war should cease. That power was
vested in the then existing Congress, who, although they entered into
provisional articles in November, 1783, did not, however, think proper
immediately to disband their armies or put an end to the war, as it was
yet uncertain whether those provisional articles would be ratified by
Great Britain, or a treaty of peace concluded between Great Britain and
France; a circumstance which was necessary before those articles could
be definitively binding. It was only when the definitive treaty was
made, that Congress determined the period of the war. The army, when
finally disbanded and paid up to that day, acknowledged, by accepting
their pay, that it was then only the war ended; and, as far as was in
their power, assented to the principle which he maintained, that the
provisional articles had not before put an end to the war. Suppose that,
on the arrival of the definitive treaty, Congress had not agreed to the
terms, would the war have then been considered as at an end? Would not
Congress have been in the same situation as before the signing of the
provisional articles? It was necessary that Congress should, by a
definitive act, determine when the war ceased. Congress had passed such
an act; and the House at present cannot with propriety enter into a
resolution to alter the period. The argument of inconvenience ought also
to have some weight with the House; for if any alteration were now to be
made in the law, it must have a retrospect to all the widows and
children of deceased officers, who have received half pay for years
past. Besides, many officers who have not hitherto considered themselves
as entitled to half pay, would, in consequence of such an alteration,
have a right to apply for it.

Mr. LAURANCE said, he doubted not the gentleman who supported the
petition was fully satisfied as to the justice of the claim which he
advocated with so much ardor; he begged leave to state his opinion,
however, on the subject, in which he should differ from that gentleman.

The contract with the officers of the late army was, that those should
be entitled to certain benefits who served to the end of the war. But
Major Torrey was not thus circumstanced, as he died previous to the
period when the war ceased, and left neither widow nor orphan to receive
the benefit of the provisions allowed by law; his case is not
contemplated by any existing resolution of Congress.

It is well known that hostilities ceased at the time of publishing the
provisional articles which formed the basis for the treaty of peace; but
can any man say that every soldier had a right on that event to demand a
discharge? Surely not. The provisional articles had the peace in
contemplation, but the army was not to be discharged till the articles
of the definitive treaty were ratified by the belligerent powers. The
army of the United States was, therefore, only furloughed, and Congress
retained the power of recalling them into service; and had the officers
and soldiers been recalled from their furloughs to take the field, it
would have been a continuance of the same war; but if the definitive
treaty had been signed, and hostilities had commenced the very next day,
it would have been a new war, and would have been prosecuted on entirely
new principles. The second article of the provisional treaty looks
forward to a _future_ period for a conclusion of the war; and he
inferred, that the definitive articles being ratified, and the
ratifications exchanged, alone constituted a termination of the war. Mr.
L. added some observations on the legal ideas of Mr. Ames, in which he
also differed from that gentleman; and concluded by expressing his
approbation of the Report of the Secretary of War.

Mr. AMES's remarks were further combated by Mr. WILLIAMSON, Mr. DAYTON,
Mr. HILLHOUSE, Mr. WADSWORTH, Mr. CLARK, and Mr. WHITE.

Mr. WAYNE was opposed to the report, and stated certain particulars to
show that the army was not furloughed by Congress because it was
apprehended there would be any further demand for their services, but
because it was inconvenient to give them an absolute discharge at that
period.

The motion for accepting the Secretary's Report was carried by a large
majority.


WEDNESDAY, November 9.

Two other members, to wit: from Maryland, WILLIAM VANS MURRAY; and from
South Carolina, THOMAS SUMTER; appeared, produced their credentials, and
took their seats in the House.

The Speaker laid before the House a letter from the Governor of
Maryland, enclosing a letter to him from WILLIAM PINKNEY, a member
returned to serve in this House for the said State, containing his
resignation of that appointment; also a return of JOHN FRANCIS MERCER,
elected a member to serve in this House, in the room of the said WILLIAM
PINKNEY: which were read, and ordered to be referred to the standing
Committee of Elections.


THURSDAY, November 10.

_The Census._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the Schedule of the Enumeration of the Inhabitants of the United States.

Mr. LAURANCE had previously moved, that until the next enumeration the
number of Representatives should be one for every thirty thousand
persons.

Mr. DAYTON moved to strike out "thirty," before "thousand." This
amendment was under consideration.

Mr. GERRY observed, that in all the decisions of the Legislature, we
ought to follow as far as possible the opinion of the great body of the
people. If this opinion should be found to be against the ratio of
thirty thousand, the amendment ought to be adopted; but if we refer to
the amendments, proposed by the Conventions to the constitution, we
shall find that five States are in favor of one Representative to every
thirty thousand persons, till the number should amount to two hundred.
None of the propositions now moved as amendments to the motion of the
gentleman from New York, amount to that number. Several others of the
Conventions were of opinion that the representation was too small to
secure the liberties of this country. This Government, said he, is a
Government of representation; the people may control their
Representatives, but their influence is small in respect to the Senate
and the Executive, and still less over the officers of Government. On
what then do the people depend for checking encroachments, or preventing
abuses? On their Representatives? If these should be too few, or if they
should fail them, they never can redress their grievances without having
recourse to violence. If the number is small, a majority may be the more
easily corrupted. On the other hand, too large a number will be attended
with difficulties; a medium then is most eligible. An adequate number is
absolutely necessary; and to show that one to thirty thousand would not
produce more than an adequate number, he referred to the ratio of
representation in England and France, in which there was a greater
proportion of Representatives than in the Legislature of the United
States.

He then adverted to the objection arising from the additional expense;
but, he observed, after Congress shall have passed a few more of the
most important acts, it is not probable that the public business will in
future require that the sessions should be for more than four months
annually; this would reduce the expense greatly, in the first instance;
and, agreeably to a calculation, an addition of forty-seven members to
the present number, would make the aggregate expense but about
one-eighteenth part more than at present, supposing the sessions to be
four months long. But he considered the objection on account of the
expense as merely speculative.

Although Congress is not positively bound by the constitution to give
one member for every thirty thousand inhabitants, yet he would ask,
whether the citizens of the United States did not expect that this ratio
would be adopted? and whether they would not consider it as an abuse of
power, if Congress, instead of one to thirty thousand, should settle the
representation at one to forty thousand? Eight States have already
adopted the first article of the proposed amendments to the
constitution: and if the House should either settle the number of the
Representative body, as it now stands, or reduce it, or establish it at
one hundred, perhaps they might, before the end of the session, be
obliged to repeal their act--as they would be bound by the amendment,
as soon as it is ratified by a sufficient number of States. If gentlemen
thought it probable that the proposed amendment would be ratified by the
several States, they ought already to consider it as a rule for their
conduct, and be restrained by it, from giving less than one
Representative for thirty thousand inhabitants. After the representation
amounts to one hundred, Congress will, no doubt, have a right to fix it
there, until it is increased by the ratio of one to forty thousand: but
that is a power which, he presumed, Congress will not exercise; but that
they then will establish some ratio, by which the increase of
representation shall keep pace with the increase of population, until
the House consists of two hundred members.

Mr. BOUDINOT was convinced of the propriety of striking out the word
"thirty." The House ought to consider what would be an adequate number
for doing the business of the Union; and that number ought not to be
exceeded, except to answer some very valuable purpose. Business would
proceed with difficulty, if the representation was so numerous as it
would become by the ratio of one to thirty thousand. The present
representation of the United States is in a ratio very different from
that of one to thirty thousand; and yet he thought it fully adequate.
From a rough calculation, the ratio of thirty thousand would produce one
hundred and thirteen members; thirty-five thousand would give
ninety-seven; and forty thousand would produce eighty-one. If the number
once settled was to rest there, he would not be over anxious to oppose
the increase; but if gentlemen would take into view the increase
consequent on the next enumeration, they would find that the number will
by far exceed the due bounds.

He thought the people of the United States would be duly represented,
and to their entire satisfaction, if the ratio was set higher than
thirty thousand; nor could he imagine that such an exact proportion,
between the Representatives and the represented, was at all requisite to
secure their liberties, or to do the necessary business of Government.
This indeed might be the case, if the power vested in Congress was
proportionate to their number; but, since the House would possess the
same powers, whether it consisted of a greater or a smaller number, he
thought the people equally secure in either case. The ratio of
thirty-five thousand, which would produce ninety-seven members, would,
in his opinion, be a very proper one. If, however, the people should
think otherwise, they had it in their power to correct the mistake, by
ratifying the proposed amendment. Their not having as yet ratified it,
was to him an argument that they thought the ratio too low; or, at
least, that they considered the question as doubtful. Some of the
States, he observed, have postponed the consideration of the amendment;
and eight only have as yet agreed to it. On the whole, the House might
safely adopt the ratio of one to thirty-five thousand; for that the
increasing population of the United States would ever supply a
representation sufficiently numerous to answer every good purpose.

Mr. CLARK observed, that his objection was not merely on account of the
pay of the members, but an increase in the representation would bring an
additional expense on the people, by increasing the number of public
officers; as almost every man would wish to see his friend provided for.
The liberties of America could be in no danger from the present ratio of
representation. The doors of the House are open, and the people know
what their Representatives are doing.

Mr. STEELE was in favor of the motion for striking out _thirty_. In
discussing the important subject before the committee, he observed that
there were two inquiries to be attended to: What is the proper number to
constitute a Representative body for the United States, and what ratio
will leave the fewest fractions in the respective States? One member to
thirty thousand, he conceived, would give too numerous a representation.
According to the present number of inhabitants, it will almost double
the present number; it will divide and diminish the responsibility, make
the House too unwieldy, retard public business, and increase the public
expenses unnecessarily. An adequate representation, he thought, would be
comprised within a much smaller number.

Gentlemen have called our attention to the House of Commons of Great
Britain, and the National Assembly of France; but God forbid that we
should draw our precedents from such examples as may be cited from
European representation.

He was opposed to thirty thousand as the ratio: it would, in fractions,
throughout the United States, leave above three hundred and sixty-nine
thousand citizens unrepresented. Thirty-five thousand he thought the
most eligible number, as it would leave the fewest fractions.

Mr. LAURANCE agreed that an adequate number was the great object to be
attended to; but he contended that the original motion would give this
number more completely than a larger ratio: and it ought to be
considered, that, before the next enumeration, it will not be probably
more than one to fifty thousand. As to the increase of expense, he
observed that the great objects being accomplished, the future sessions
will be short; besides which, the compensation of the members may be
diminished. But he considered a necessary increase in the expense to be
fully counterbalanced by affording greater security to the liberties of
the people. The firmness of a government depends on a strong Executive;
but this Executive should be founded on a broad bottom; and the broader
the basis, the more secure is the public freedom under a vigorous
Executive.

The existence of the Union may depend on the fullness of the
representation. The inequality in the proportional increase of the
number of inhabitants in different States, ought also to be taken into
consideration; for it is very probable that in a short time, while some
of the smaller States had a Representative for every thirty thousand,
others would not have one to forty thousand. He was governed by general
principles, and not by any calculations of fractional numbers: the
constitution contemplates the ratio he had proposed, and therefore he
hoped the motion for striking out would not obtain.

Mr. GOODHUE observed, that the situation and circumstances of the
Government of the United States are so different from those of France or
Great Britain, that no parallel could be drawn respecting them. Nor is
there an absolute similarity between this Government and those of the
State Governments. The objects of legislation which come under the
cognizance of Congress, are but few compared with those which engage the
British House of Commons and the National Assembly of France. A much
larger representation for them, and in our State Legislatures, is
therefore more proper, than is necessary for us in the General
Government. He doubted the opinion that a large representation was less
liable to corruption than a small one: some facts appear to confirm the
former sentiment. He did not consider the expense as a material
objection, if an increase of the number be necessary to doing more ample
justice, or for the greater security of the liberties of the people;
but, as he thought this was by no means the case, he was in favor of
striking out "thirty," in order to insert a larger number.

Mr. BARNWELL agreed with the gentleman last up. He should vote for
striking out "thirty," in order to substitute the largest number that
had been mentioned. Mr. B. entered into an abstract and philosophical
discussion of the principle of representation in Government. The leading
sentiment was, that a large proportion of Representatives is not
necessary to obtain the best objects of legislation, in expressing the
will of the people, or to secure the liberties of the constituent body.
The great point, he observed, was, to combine the greatest portion of
honesty with a due degree of activity. That number which would comprise
a due proportion of these, would be competent to all the purposes of
legislation, whether the number for which it legislates is ten thousand,
or five hundred thousand. On this principle, he was decidedly against a
large number, and in favor of a small one. Adverting to the British
House of Commons and the National Assembly of France, with respect to
the former, he said, their corruption is, in a great degree, owing to
their numbers: as to the latter, he observed, that the National Assembly
had acted, in his opinion, politically and wisely. They set out with a
large representation, in conformity to the sentiments of the people at
the moment; but, on experience, finding the number too great, they have
reduced it from twelve hundred to about two hundred and fifty. He
believed that the general sense of the people was against a large
representation in Congress; the inconveniences experienced from numerous
bodies in the State Legislatures have led several of the States to
lessen the number. He instanced Georgia, South Carolina, and
Pennsylvania.

Mr. BALDWIN was opposed to the motion. One Representative for thirty
thousand appeared to him by no means a great representation. The opinion
that, of late, had been so often advanced from the press, and in public
discussion, for reducing the Representative branch in Government to a
small number, he held to be full of dangerous error. He was sensible
that the terms great and small were so merely relative in their
signification, that it was difficult precisely to understand each other
in the use of them. Perhaps they may most properly, both of them, be
considered as extremes. No doubt representation, which of late seems to
be used as the character of Republican Government, is a great
improvement upon Democracy, or legislation by the whole body of the
people. He could conceive that a representation might be so large as to
partake of the evils of assembling the whole body of the people; but it
was a very improbable and not a dangerous extreme: the other extreme was
full of danger. These observations acquire much force, when applied
particularly to the Governments of this country: enfeeble the
representative part of them, and you sap the very principles of life.
They stand on a different basis from the Governments which have gone
before them, and may justly be said to be new experiments in government;
time, as yet, has scarcely given room to judge of the probable issue;
but this we may pronounce with much certainty--Let the principles of
representation languish, and they have no chance of success.

It had not been found practicable to ground representation in the
Federal Constitution upon any other principle than that of numbers; but
extent of territory is unquestionably one of the natural principles on
which it rests, and should if possible be regarded. One for thirty-four
or thirty-five thousand may be deemed a proper representation in the
Kingdom of France, or of Great Britain. The four millions which compose
the United States, compactly settled where there was great sameness in
the country, and pretty equally distant from a common centre, would be
properly represented by a smaller number than in their present sparse
settlement. But still further: the settlement of the United States is a
fillet stretched along the sea-coast for seventeen hundred miles,
comprehending as great a variety of climate and interests as one of the
other quarters of the globe. It is difficult to conceive of a situation
which calls for a greater extension of the principle of representation.

It has been said, that one for thirty thousand will make too large and
unwieldy a body. He was sensible that was a point that did not admit of
being determined by any conclusive reasoning; it was a mere matter of
opinion; sound judgment only is to be used, time and experience will
come on and confirm or correct the opinion. In such a case, it is wise
to inquire how this has been judged of by others who have had a
Representative body. In France, one thousand two hundred was not thought
too great a representation in forming their National Assembly; and the
number established by their new constitution for their stated
Legislature was not two hundred and fifty, as the member last up had
stated, but, if he had not been misinformed by the publications in this
country, it was nearly seven hundred and fifty.

In the Kingdom of Great Britain, five hundred is not thought too great a
representation: and can one hundred and thirteen, which is the greatest
number contended for, be considered in this country as a huge and
impracticable mass of representation?

It had ever appeared to him to be among the strongest marks of our youth
and inexperience, that we grow wise too suddenly. He was afraid this
instantaneous wisdom which sprung up so at once, and set at nought, or
removed to the extreme of absurdity and folly, the deliberate and tried
opinions of the most profound and enlightened among men, in
circumstances peculiarly favorable to honest decision, will itself be
left by time on that extreme.

The Federal Government, it must be admitted, is in fact pretty highly
seasoned with prerogative; practice has already evinced the necessity,
in many instances, of increasing it, by devolving much of the
Legislative power upon the Executive Department, arising from the
difficulty of making particular provisions and details in our laws, and
accommodating them to the various interests of so extensive a country.

The other branch of the Legislature has many traits of a perpetual--at
least of a very solid constituent part of the Government. He did not
mention these as imperfections in the Government; they are perfections,
if the other parts can be in due proportion: but it is surely a sound
reason against taking positive measures at this time to diminish the
Representative branch. For his own part, he was not well satisfied as to
the intention. If there is any reason to apprehend that the Government
will depart from the point on which it was first placed, he could
scarcely suppose that any one could be honestly alarmed with the fear
that the departure would be towards Democracy. He concluded, by
expressing his hopes that the representation to the next Congress would
be fixed at one for thirty thousand, as it had hitherto been, and that
the motion for striking out would not prevail.


FRIDAY, November 11.

JOHN W. KITTERA, from Pennsylvania, appeared, produced his credentials,
and took his seat in the House to-day.


MONDAY, November 14.

A petition of James Jackson, of the State of Georgia, was presented to
the House and read, complaining of the undue election and return of
ANTHONY WAYNE, one of the members returned to serve in this House for
the said State.


_Ratio of Representation._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the Schedule of the Enumeration of the Inhabitants of the United States.

Mr. FINDLAY declared himself to be in favor of one Representative for
every thirty thousand persons. The opinion of the people should be the
guide of the committee; that opinion, he conceived, to be in favor of
the ratio he had mentioned.

The representation ought as nearly as possible to express not only the
will, but to participate in the wishes and interests of the people. A
large representation embraces these interests more fully, and is more
competent to giving and receiving information. The objects of
legislation are such as come home to the doors, to the feelings of every
man; the Government ought therefore to secure the confidence of the
people by a large representation. The expense he considered as trifling
compared to the benefits--and the people expect and are willing to pay
for being well governed, and having their liberties secured. An
increased representation is an additional security against corruption.
As to delays occasioned by a numerous body, he observed that the
Representatives were chosen to deliberate and to mature every subject
before decision; he instanced the advantages derived from the numerous
representations in France and in Ireland; the former had framed a
constitution in two years for twenty-six millions of citizens, and
provided for securing the liberties of their country--and the latter had
proved a successful barrier against the encroachments of the arbitrary
power of England. He concluded, by asserting that the voice of the
people was in favor of the amendment proposed to the constitution, which
would give one Representative to every thirty thousand persons.

Mr. GILES said this subject had struck him in two points of view:
whether Congress are not precluded from exercising any discretion on the
subject? and whether, if they are not, it is expedient for them to
exercise this discretion at this time? The ratio of representation is a
constitutional, and not a Legislative act. He referred to the
constitution, in which it is said that there shall be one Representative
to every State; and, secondly, that until the enumeration, the number
should be as therein appointed to each State. After the enumeration, the
number is mentioned below which it shall not be placed; but there is a
negative power to increase the ratio, and from this negative power, a
positive discretionary power is inferred. But, he observed that Congress
had precluded itself from a right to exercise this discretionary power,
by sending out to the several State Legislatures an amendment on this
very subject. This amendment he considered in a serious point of view;
and had this idea been attended to at the commencement of the
discussion, he conceived that it would have prevented the opinion from
being brought forward whether it was expedient that any change in the
ratio of the representation should take place. The idea of one to thirty
thousand, he considered as fully settled in the minds of the people; and
a change on the part of the Government would indicate a changeable
disposition, and a mutability of counsels, which is but another name for
weakness.

Mr. G. then took a view of the objects of legislation to the State
Assemblies, and of those of the General Government. In the former, above
one thousand persons are employed, though their attention is confined to
their internal police. Those of the General Government, on the other
hand, are on the great objects of the whole finance of the Union, a sum
of more than eighty millions of dollars, &c., &c.

It is said that we shall want abilities, but I should be sorry if a
representation of ten times the present number of this House should
comprise the abilities of a single State.

He assigned different causes than numbers, for the corruption in the
British House of Commons; among these were the frequent mortgages of the
funds, and the immense appropriations at the disposal of the Executive,
the mode of their elections, &c. A large number is not so easily
corrupted as a small body.

An inequality of circumstances, he then observed, produces revolutions
in Government, from Democracy to Aristocracy and Monarchy. Great wealth
produces a desire of distinctions, rank, and titles. The revolutions in
property in this country have created a prodigious inequality of
circumstances. Government has contributed to this inequality; the Bank
of the United States is a most important machine in promoting the
objects of this moneyed interest. This bank will be the most powerful
engine to corrupt this House. Some of the members are directors of this
institution; and it will only be by increasing the representation that
an adequate barrier can be opposed to this moneyed interest. He next
adverted to certain ideas which he said had been disseminated through
the United States; and here he took occasion to observe, that the
Legislature ought to express some public disapprobation of these
opinions. The strong Executive of this Government ought to be balanced
by a full representation in this House. He hoped the motion to strike
out thirty thousand would not obtain.

Mr. BOUDINOT closed the debate of this day by a few remarks, reinforcing
his former observations in favor of an increased ratio.


TUESDAY, November 15.

_Ratio of Representation._

The House again resolved itself into a committee of the whole House on
the Schedule of the Enumeration of the Inhabitants of the United States.

Mr. PAGE addressed the Chair as follows:

Mr. CHAIRMAN: I can no longer refrain from expressing my sentiments
respecting the question before the committee; not only because I wish if
possible to remove the error which I think several members, for whom I
have the highest respect, have fallen into, but because I feel myself
more interested in the question than I ever was in any one I have had to
decide on.

Sir, it gave me pain to find those worthy members calculating and coldly
applying the rules of arithmetic to a subject beyond the power of
numbers to express the degree of its importance to their
fellow-citizens. I was distressed, sir, to find that, in their honest
zeal for securing order, despatch of business, and dignity in
respectability of members in the General Legislature, they used
arguments which have been applied in other countries to the
establishment of insolent aristocracies--in some, tyrannical
despotisms--and in others, kings; those countries which were most on
their guard with a semblance of a free Government.

Sir, the errors I wish to correct are these. They think that because it
is _proposed_, by a _proposed_ amendment to the constitution, to
authorize them to interfere in the business of ascertaining and fixing
the ratio of representation to the population of the States, that
Congress ought, without any hesitation, to enter on that business; but I
humbly conceive that Congress, as this is a delicate question in which
their own weight and importance must unite with the weight and
substantial interest of their constituents, ought to listen to the
suggestions of delicacy, and leave its discussion to a disinterested
convention of the States. I say it appears to me no small error to quit
the plain path of legislation, marked out for us by the constitution,
needlessly to wander into the field of political speculation respecting
its supposed defects.

Let me, therefore, advise to leave the restriction of the numbers of
members of this House to the people, or to some future Congress, which
can see more plainly than can now be descried, the evils of a too
numerous representation. By so doing, we shall avoid, if not an improper
measure, at least a rash step--at least we shall stand clear of a charge
of indelicacy, and deprive our enemies of the triumph they expected in
the completion of their predictions, that Congress would never propose
any amendments to the constitution but such as would be subservient to
their own views and aggrandizement. Let us not give the enemies of our
new Government cause to exult, and its friends to sigh and mourn. Let us
not give our friends occasion to repeat what many have said, that so
many of our citizens have been led away by theoretical writers on
government, as to render it problematical whether the American States
are not at this time as much indebted to the National Assembly for its
remains of Republican principles, as France was to Congress, in 1776,
for their first ideas of that liberty which they now enjoy. Let us not,
in this moment of general exultation of the friends to the rights of
man, take a step which may damp their joy, and lead them to fear that
Americans, who were foremost in the glorious career of liberty, have
stopped short.

But, not to take up the precious time of this House with relations of
facts to show what was and is the opinion of our fellow-citizens on this
interesting subject, I will only state a few arguments which have weight
with me as being in themselves evident truths, viz: Our constitution
being framed by the people, and introduced to us in their name, and
Congress being the creatures of their will, spoken into existence by the
word of their power, for Congress to lessen _their_ weight, to diminish
their importance, and to exclude them from as full a share in their own
Government as can be consistent with the nature of it, and indeed from
that share which they claim, must be impolitic and dangerous.

But, granting that the people wished not a greater share in the General
Government than is proposed by the amendment, as it is impossible, in a
country like the United States, that one man can be sufficiently
informed of the opinions, wishes, and real interests of thirty-five
thousand of his fellow-citizens, and therefore laws might be enacted
contrary to the opinions, wishes, and interests of the people, in which
they might nevertheless acquiesce, sacrificing their interests for the
sake of peace and quiet to the wills of their Representatives, one
thirty-five-thousandth part of their own number, what friend to his
country would wish to see such a dangerous influence on the one hand,
and such a blind submission on the other? How long could an enlightened
people remain in such a state of insensibility and torpor? And what
might not be the consequence of their awakening from their lethargy? If
not an expensive revolution, an expensive repeal of laws. And here I
will remark, that the smallest number of Legislators, and they, too,
well selected for their wisdom and respectability, if unacquainted with
their constituents, might pass well-framed laws, founded on the wisdom
of other countries, and yet find them disagreeable to their
constituents, and be under a necessity of repealing them; but this could
not be the case, if the people had in that Legislature a sufficient
number of Representatives on whose fidelity, attachment, and
disinterestedness they could rely. This, sir, is a truth worthy of our
attention--an ignorance of which, or inattention thereto, I suspect has
been the occasion of much political evil in the world. Happily for
France, the people had such a number of Representatives in the National
Assembly as could engage their feeling, inform their judgment, attach
their interest, and establish their confidence in their fidelity and
disinterestedness; had that number been much smaller, it is probable
France would never have been delivered from oppression by their
exertions.

I know, sir, that many friends of our constitution thought that the
convention did not pay a sufficient attention to the interests of their
constituents, when they restrained them from having more than one
Representative for every thirty thousand citizens. I know that there is
a report that the people are indebted to their President, even for this
share in their Government; and I believe, sir, if this report be true,
that whatever has been so justly said of him, as compared to Fabius, to
Hannibal, to Alexander, may be forgotten, when this instance of his
wisdom, disinterestedness, and attachment to the interests of his
fellow-citizens, will be more and more known and applauded, and be for
ever engraved on the hearts of their posterity. Shall we, then, Mr.
Chairman, the direct Representatives of the people, be less attentive to
their interest, and that too respecting their share in the deliberations
of their own House of Representatives, than the President of their
convention was? I trust not.

I will not pretend to say, however, whether in an Assembly where
attempts are frequently made to carry into effect the projects of
monarchical or aristocratical juntos, the virtuous struggles of
patriotic members may not produce mob-like disorders; but in an Assembly
like Congress, where I should suppose no such question can be agitated;
none which may not be discussed with temper and decency, such disorder
need not be apprehended. I should suppose there would be less clanger of
animosities and disorderly debates in Congress, amongst twelve hundred
members, than in the British Parliament, if it consisted but of one
hundred. Where we have all but one and the same great object in view,
the happiness of our country, (not the interests of a particular body of
men born with privileges insulting to the feelings and rights of
freemen, nor the whims of an individual, born to trample on his
fellow-creatures,) we can have no cause to be dissatisfied with one
another.

Surely, sir, unless these gentlemen suppose the members of Congress void
of sense, or of every idea of decency and propriety, they cannot suppose
that even five hundred members would not be easily restrained within the
bounds of order.

Mr. CLARK said, he did not rise to trouble the House with a lengthy
discourse, for he had always believed that long speeches answer no
valuable purpose. He meant only to offer a few remarks on what had been
said in opposition to his former observations, and he hoped that,
although the gentlemen contend for the ratio of 30,000 as the only basis
whereon to found the liberties of the people, he should not be
stigmatized with the name of an aristocrat for voting in favor of a
large ratio. Hitherto he had not borne that character, and he could not
suppose himself yet infected, unless he had caught the disorder since he
became a member of the present House. Much has been said about the
influence of the bank, and that bank directors are members of the House
of Representatives. The bank (said he) is public property, and therefore
he could not see the force of the gentleman's arguments respecting the
dangerous influence of that institution, unless it was that he was
displeased at the distribution of the shares, so much of the stock being
held at New York and to the eastward, and so little at Conococheague. In
the same predicament he viewed the other objections respecting the
influence of speculators; for he did not know that any members of the
House were speculators, neither could he see any danger from bribery.

In reply to Mr. FINDLAY'S observation, that more wisdom would be brought
into the House by increasing the ratio, he asked whether this would not
also bring in more folly? For the probability is, that the ratio of both
wisdom and folly will increase with the increase of numbers, and
likewise of honesty and dishonesty; and with respect to the smallness of
the district, or that it was safer for a small number to send a member
than a greater, he was of a different opinion, as he believed that if
ever the practice of bribery should come into play in America, it would
be easier for a Representative to purchase a small district than a large
one. If ever the liberties of the people are endangered, it will not be
by the smallness of the representation, but by the corruption of
electors and elections. This is the door which Congress should guard in
the strictest manner, and that will secure the people against corruption
in the House.

A gentleman from Georgia has observed, that the disposition of a great
many millions of dollars has been in the hands of a quorum of this
House, of whom it requires only seventeen to form a majority. On this
Mr. C. observed, that the old Congress, which was composed of a much
smaller number, were intrusted with the disposal of larger sums,
although there were sometimes only two members from the largest State,
Virginia, and no complaints were heard of their conduct.

But there is an argument which ought to have weight in the present
question. The Senate, although a much smaller body than this House, are
fully competent to judge of our proceedings, and of the safety of the
country. Indeed, (said Mr. C.,) it appears very evident to me that we
are not in want of a larger number in the House of Representatives to
debate any question, if it be considered how much has already been said
on the subject now before us.

Mr. VINING expressed much surprise that the subject, which to him
appeared perfectly definable, should have occasioned the debate to
travel so widely from the line marked out by the constitution. The
pendulum seems to vibrate between the numbers 81, 96, and 113; and
should that pendulum rest on any one of them in preference to the
others, he could not suppose that it would affect the liberties of
America. Why, therefore, all this extraneous argument about a point of
so easy decision? We are sent here to administer the Government, the
first principles of which are already fixed, so that neither branch can
encroach on the other. The Senate, the House of Representatives, the
President, have each defined powers; and whilst those remain, I shall
always believe the liberties of America are invulnerable.

Under this impression, Mr. Chairman, I shall vote for striking out
30,000, in order to accommodate the question to a medium. But I shall do
this on different principles from some other gentlemen; notwithstanding,
I at the same time confess that the ratification of the first amendment
to the constitution ought to govern us in deciding this question. The
spirit of the amendment appears to me clearly to imply that we should
not suffer the number of Representatives to exceed one for 30,000. I am
here, not as a person who shall exercise discretionary opinions, but
judge by the letter of the constitution. And in this case we may
increase the number, but we cannot make it less after the enumeration.
In the mean time, until that enumeration is complete, the representation
remains as it has been hitherto, which I believe may be about one member
to every 40,000 or 41,000.

If we go upon theory only, I would enlarge the representation to its
greatest extent, and hand down the principle to futurity, in letters of
gold, that a very great representation--that Democracy is the very best
Government that can possibly be devised, provided it were practicable to
give it stability. Next to a government as free as theory could extend,
we have the freest in the world--a Government of representation, which
will increase with the population of the country, and the ten new States
will always preserve an equilibrium; but if you increase it to an
extreme, you may render it tumultuous, although it may be safe.

I cannot, however, see the propriety of comparing this to the Government
of Great Britain, although that is called a Government of
Representation, consisting of two Houses of Parliament, one of which is
elective, the Lords are hereditary, and the King can do no wrong; and it
has hitherto been, I believe, the next best Government, after our own,
in the world. And yet we know with how much reluctance Ireland obtained
a participation of the trade and commerce of Great Britain; although a
FLOOD bellowed forth with the voice of liberty like a Demosthenes, still
nothing could induce the British Ministry to give way, until the
_volunteers_ effected it. And have we not the volunteers, sir, in this
country to protect our rights? Yes, sir, the American volunteers are
perfectly competent to this service.

I am under no apprehensions from the stockholders of the bank, or the
speculators in the funds; for it is their interest to have a wise and
good representation. The people who are employed in the more simple path
of agriculture, removed at a great distance, are not more interested in
the security of the Government than the more informed stockholder. As an
example of the discernment of the great commercial people of London and
Bristol, I need only mention their choice of a FOX and a BURKE, for
until a late day Mr. Burke was the champion of the people and the friend
of liberty.

If our Senate should take any unwarrantable stride towards aristocracy,
have we not the power to check them? No President can very well attempt
it at any time hereafter; and we are perfectly secure in the present
time from all suspicion of corruption.

Mr. HILLHOUSE said he had ever been a friend to a Republican form of
Government, and God forbid, that he should ever give his vote for any
measure that should endanger the liberties of his country. He was in
favor of an energetic government, as that alone can secure the blessings
of liberty. As to the dread of corruption in this House, which some
gentlemen appeared to entertain, he thought there was no foundation for
such an apprehension; at least as the idea refers to one or two hundred
Representatives--two hundred he contended, were as easily corrupted as
one. But the corruption contemplated was a mere matter of opinion; no
facts, he presumed, existed in this country to justify a positive
assertion; and as to foreign countries, it seems to be conceded that a
larger number than any that has been mentioned is susceptible of undue
influence. He then adverted to the restrictions on the President of the
United States, and the Senate, in respect to the means of corrupting the
Legislature. The constitution has also made provision to secure the
independence of the members, &c. He then urged some difficulties which
would be occasioned by a small ratio. He observed that the population of
some of the States is nearly stationary: if a small ratio is now
established, the consequence will be, when it is augmented, that the
representation of those States must be diminished. This would be a
measure that would be greatly disliked. With respect to the proposed
amendment, he thought it was entirely out of the question, till it was
ratified by three-fourths of the States. A very numerous representation
would tend to weaken, if not destroy the State Governments, and, in the
issue, would destroy the General Government. For, said he, they mutually
depend on each other for support.

Mr. KITCHELL was in favor of a numerous representation. He thought the
amendment proposed to the constitution ought to be the guide to the
House on this occasion. He did not draw his ideas of what should
constitute a proper representation, from the examples cited from foreign
countries; nor was he actuated by an apprehension of corruption, as more
applicable to a small number than to a large one; but when he considered
the various objects, views, denominations, professions, callings and
interests of the citizens of the United States, he was fully convinced
that a large representation was necessary to embrace the wishes and
answer the expectations of the people. He should, therefore, vote
against the motion for striking out thirty thousand.

Mr. GERRY took a general survey of the arguments against the proposed
ratio of one to thirty thousand. In noticing the objection from the
instability of the State Legislatures, he said it was not owing to their
numbers, but to the mode in which they are elected. Were the Senates and
Executives of the several States chosen as those of the General
Government, there would have been as much stability and consistency in
their transactions, as in those of the Government of the Union. A
gentleman had said that the proposed amendments to the constitution had
been adopted with reluctance by some of the States which had accepted
them. He called on the gentleman to produce his authorities for this
assertion. A relative proportion between the members of the House and
the Senate had been suggested; this idea had no foundation in the
constitution. And he further observed, that the constitution has so
completely guarded and secured the rights and independence of the
Senate, that he could not conceive of the apprehensions of gentlemen,
who appear to think that an increase of the members of this House will
overwhelm that branch of the Legislature. In all events, the privileges
of that body will remain the same. The States, it is said, have reduced
their Representative Assemblies. This, so far from being an argument
against the proposed ratio, was directly in favor of it. The diminution
of the State Legislatures has been occasioned by the idea which the
people entertain of the increasing importance of the General Government.
The objects of legislation to both Governments are nearly similar; they
relate to those important concerns which interest the feelings of every
citizen of the United States; all the difference lies in the magnitude
of their respective spheres of action. Hence, it must evidently be the
wish and expectation of the people, that their interests in every point
of view, should be fully and adequately represented in this House.

The resolution being again read, in the following words:

      "_Resolved_, That the number of Representatives shall,
      until the next enumeration, be one for thirty thousand."

The question was taken thereupon and agreed to by the House; yeas 35,
nays 23, as follows:

YEAS.--Abraham Baldwin, Egbert Benson, John Brown, William Findlay,
Thomas Fitzsimons, Elbridge Gerry, William B. Giles, James Gordon,
Andrew Gregg, Samuel Griffin, Daniel Heister, Daniel Huger, Israel
Jacobs, Aaron Kitchell, John W. Kittera, John Laurance, Amasa Learned,
Richard Bland Lee, James Madison, Andrew Moore, Frederick Augustus
Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray, John Page, Josiah Parker, Joshua Seney,
Upton Sheridine, Thomas Sumter, Peter Sylvester, Thomas Tredwell,
Thomas Tudor Tucker, Abraham Venable, Jeremiah Wadsworth, Anthony Wayne,
Alexander White, and Francis Willis.

NAYS.--Fisher Ames, John Baptist Ashe, Robert Barnwell, Elias Boudinot,
Shearjashub Bourne, Benjamin Bourne, Abraham Clark, Nicholas Gilman,
Benjamin Goodhue, William Barry Grove, James Hillhouse, Samuel
Livermore, Nathaniel Macon, Nathaniel Niles, Theodore Sedgwick, Jeremiah
Smith, Israel Smith, William Smith, John Steele, Jonathan Sturges,
George Thatcher, John Vining, and Artemas Ward.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in pursuant to the said
resolution; and that Mr. PAGE, Mr. MURRAY, and Mr. MACON do prepare and
bring in the same.


TUESDAY, November 22.

A memorial of the committee of the counties of Washington, Westmoreland,
Fayette, and Alleghany, in the State of Pennsylvania, was presented to
the House and read, stating their objections to an act, passed at the
last session, imposing a duty on spirits distilled within the United
States, and praying that the same may be repealed. Referred to the
Secretary of the Treasury for his information.

_Representative from Maryland._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on the
report of the standing Committee of Elections, to whom was referred the
Letter from the Executive of the State of Maryland, containing the
resignation of WILLIAM PINKNEY, a member returned to serve in this House
for the said State; and also a certificate of the election of JOHN
FRANCIS MERCER, in the room of the said WILLIAM PINKNEY.

The law of the State of Maryland regulating elections being called for,
was produced and read; by which it appeared that the Governor and
Council of that State were authorized to fill up vacancies in the
representation of that State in Congress.

Some objections having been offered against accepting the report,

Mr. SENEY observed, that the case appeared to him to be so plain that he
was surprised to find gentlemen objecting to an acceptation of the
report of the committee. He then stated the whole process of the
business, in the resignation of Mr. PINKNEY and the election of Mr.
MERCER, in which the law of the State had been strictly adhered to. He
concluded by saying, that two cases in point had already occurred in the
State of Connecticut, and no difficulty respecting them had taken place
in the House.

Mr. GILES said, that he was a member of the select committee which had
made the report; and from an accurate attention to all the circumstances
of the case, he was led to think the report a very improper one. From
recurring to the constitution, he was of opinion that a resignation did
not constitute a vacancy. The constitution speaks only of vacancies in
general, and does not contemplate one as resulting from a resignation.
Adverting to the British House of Commons, he observed that in that body
there could be no resignation. This is an established principle. The
people having once chosen their representatives, their power ceases, and
consequently the body to which the resignation ought to be made no
longer exists. From the experience of the British Government in this
respect, he argued against a deviation from this rule. He showed from
the constitution, that the Executives of the States who are empowered to
fill vacancies, are not at all authorized to declare the existence of
such vacancies; for, if they are to judge in the case, the whole power
is invested in them of determining the whole business of vacancies--an
idea that materially and essentially affects the privileges of the
members of the House. He remarked that, even by the law of Maryland, the
requisite steps had not been pursued by the Executive of that State. He
concluded by saying that, if the principles he had advanced were just,
he hoped the report would not be accepted.

Mr. SMITH (S. C.) had had his doubts on the report; but on more mature
consideration he was convinced that on account of the inconvenience
which would result from rejecting it, and from other considerations, it
was proper to adopt it, but not without a full discussion. He then
stated some particulars to show that the vacancy which had occurred on
this occasion could not properly be called a resignation. Mr. PINKNEY
had never taken his seat, nor the requisite oath. He said that there was
no analogy between the Parliament of Great Britain and this House; the
mode of issuing the writs originally, and of filling up vacancies, is
essentially different. No part of the constitution prohibits a member
from resigning, and for convenience it ought to be concluded that he may
resign. The public interest may suffer extremely in cases of sickness or
embarrassments, which may prevent a member from attending. This argument
from the body's not existing to whom the resignation ought to be made,
will apply to the President of the United States, whose resignation is
expressly mentioned in the constitution. The objection urged from the
Executives of the States judging of vacancies, he conceived had no great
force, for Congress would finally judge in every case of election. It is
uncertain how the practice of the British Parliament originated.
_Blackstone_ says nothing of resignations. When a member wants to resign
in that Legislature, he gets appointed to some fictitious office which
disqualifies him from sitting in the House. He thought it best to
establish some precedent, rather than oblige members who may wish to
resign to have recourse to some familiar method, by accepting of some
appointment in the State which is incompatible with a seat.

Mr. MURRAY said he was in favor of accepting the report, both on account
of propriety and conveniency. Vacancies may happen from various
causes--by resignation, by death, or by expulsion--the Executive of the
State is the proper judge in the first case. He stated certain
differences between a resignation after a person has taken his seat, and
a resignation before that event. In the former case Congress will of
course give notice to the Executive of the State; in the latter, the
Executive alone can take cognizance of the resignation. He stated the
extreme inconveniency which would result from the ideas of the gentleman
from Virginia, as it would respect the State of Georgia. He then stated
several particulars to show that Mr. PINKNEY was not a member of the
House agreeably to the constitution, and therefore the House cannot
proceed with him as one. He said that we ought to be willing to derive
information from the experience of every country; but he conceived that
no precedents could be drawn that would apply in the present case from a
country which had none, to one which had a constitution that so clearly
defined and guarded the rights of the citizens. The custom which had
been mentioned as obtaining in that country, arose from a wish to
prevent a frequency of elections. From what had been offered by the
gentleman from South Carolina, and the ideas he had suggested, he hoped
the committee would be induced to accept the report.

Mr. WILLIAMSON said, that it appeared to him that the constitution
contemplates that a member may resign. He read the clause, which says
that no member of the Legislature shall accept of an office made _during
the time_ for which he was chosen--from hence he inferred that
resignations were clearly contemplated.

Mr. GERRY said that he had heard nothing to show that Mr. PINKNEY had
ever accepted of his appointment, and therefore it ought to have been
expressed that he had declined; but, granting he had resigned after
accepting his appointment, he asserted that nothing had been offered to
prove that resignations might not take place in one House as well as in
the other; and the constitution plainly expresses that a Senator may
resign. The House of Commons originated with the Kings, who formed that
body to control the Lords; and hence arose the prohibition against
resignations, as they would weaken the body, and the expense of a new
election would fall on the King. With respect to the Executive declaring
improper vacancies, he observed that Congress was invested with full
power to control the Executives of the States in respect to such
declarations.

Mr. SENEY observed upon a distinction made by Mr. GILES between a
resignation on the part of a Senator and a Member of the House, he
supposed a resignation in either would equally vacate a seat, and that
no difference did really exist.

Mr. SEDGWICK observed that, if a power of adjudication was vested in the
Executives of the States to determine on a vacancy in cases of
resignation, it would involve this consequence, that a power of judging
of vacancies in all possible cases would be the necessary result. He
thought the proposition involved the most serious effects with respect
to the privileges and independency of this House.

This subject was further discussed the next day, and ended in an
acceptation of the report of the committee, which was in favor of Mr.
MERCER's election.


MONDAY, December 5.

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill making appropriations for the support of Government, for the
year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two; and, after some time
spent therein,

_Ordered_, That the said bill, with amendments, be recommitted to Mr.
LAURANCE, Mr. BALDWIN, and Mr. ASHE.

The Speaker laid before the House a letter from the Secretary of the
Treasury, accompanying his report on the subject of manufactures, made
pursuant to an order of the House of the fifteenth of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety; which was read, and ordered to lie on
the table.

The Speaker laid before the House a letter from the Treasury of the
United States, accompanying his account of receipts and expenditures of
the public moneys between the first of July, and the thirtieth of
September, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one; which were read
and ordered to lie on the table.

Mr. BENSON laid on the table a resolution for the appointment of a
committee to join a committee of the Senate, to consider and report the
most eligible manner of carrying into effect a former resolution of
Congress respecting the erection of an Equestrian Statue, in honor of
General WASHINGTON.

_Appropriation Bill._

The House then, pursuant to the order of the day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole, and resumed the consideration of the
appropriation bill, Mr. MUHLENBERG in the chair.

In proceeding through the bill, the several items were separately
considered and agreed to. Some occasional remarks were made; but no
material debate took place. One amendment was proposed, by which the
bill is made to express the several purposes for which the moneys are
appropriated, instead of appropriating sums in gross, with a reference
to the Secretary's estimate, for particulars.

The committee having reported the bill and the amendment, the House
adopted the same, and recommitted the bill to the select committee, who
had originally framed it, with instructions to new-model it pursuant to
the sense of the House.

Mr. GERRY presented a resolution in lieu of one which he laid on the
table on Friday last, making it the duty of the Secretary of the
Treasury to report to the House, on the third Monday of every session,
an account of the receipts and expenditures of the public money
appropriated during the preceding session, so far as he shall then have
it in his power to state particulars; and if he be unable to give an
accurate statement of the whole, at the time appointed, he is to
complete it as soon afterwards as may be.


TUESDAY, December 6.

_Resolved_, That Mr. BENSON, Mr. GERRY, and Mr. SMITH, (of South
Carolina,) be appointed a committee on the part of this House, jointly,
with such committee as shall be appointed on the part of the Senate, to
consider and report to Congress the most eligible manner for carrying
into effect the resolution of the United States in Congress assembled,
of the seventh of August, 1783, directing that an Equestrian Statue of
General WASHINGTON should be erected.


MONDAY, December 12.

The following Message was received from the President of the United
States.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      It is with great concern that I communicate to you the
      information received from Major General St. Clair, of the
      misfortune which has befallen the troops under his command.

      Although the national loss is considerable, according to
      the scale of the event, yet it may be repaired without
      great difficulty, excepting as to the brave men who have
      fallen on the occasion, and who are a subject of public as
      well as private regret.

      A farther communication will shortly be made of all such
      matters as shall be necessary to enable the Legislature to
      judge of the future measures which it may be proper to
      pursue.

                                  GEORGE WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _December_ 12, 1791.


FRIDAY, December 16.

_The Post Office Bill._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House, on
the bill "for establishing the Post Office and Post Roads within the
United States."

      [The following is a condensed view of the arguments made on
      striking out the section which gives to members the
      privilege of franking.]

When the bill under consideration is once passed into a law, it is
presumable that no gentleman will ever ask a member to frank for him, as
he cannot grant the request consistently with his honor; the
apprehension entertained of the existence of abuses, and of their
increasing with the increase of numbers, would be an argument equally
valid against every law; for no law can be framed, as that the people
will not find means to evade it. But still the Legislature will have the
power of correcting the abuses, as soon as discovered, by passing new
laws to check them. The committee who drafted the bill, had before them
all the acts of the British Legislature, respecting the post office;
they saw the abuses and how they had been remedied; and with such light
to guide their steps, they had proceeded in the execution of their task.
The privilege of franking they had introduced into the bill, upon mature
considerations; to take it away would be leveling a deadly stroke at the
liberty of the press; the information conveyed by franks, may be
considered as the vital juices, and the channels of the post office as
the veins; and if these are stopped, the body must be destroyed; it is
treading on dangerous ground, to take any measures that may stop the
channels of public information, especially of that which relates to
matters in which the people are interested; to check the circulation
even of foreign intelligence may be dangerous; but it is highly so, to
deprive the people of information respecting the measures of the General
Government; nor ought the members to complain of being obliged to read
so many letters and petitions as come to their hands in consequence of
the exemption from postage. If any gentleman thought this a heavy task,
he ought to remember that it was only his duty, and a task which every
member had undertaken when he accepted a seat in the House.

The privilege of franking was granted to the members, not as a personal
advantage, (for in fact it proved rather a burden), but as a benefit to
their constituents, who, by means of it, derive information from those
who are best qualified to give it, as they are the persons chosen to
administer the General Government. The members also receive useful
information through the same channel. When the impost law and the excise
law were under consideration, many persons who were better acquainted
with the operation of such laws, transmitted to the House much valuable
information on those subjects; and to such information the House ought
ever to be open; as, on the other hand, the motives for adopting certain
measures, ought always to be explained to influential characters in the
different parts of the Union. Such conduct will produce the most
salutary effects in reconciling the people to the measures of
Government, when the principles upon which every law is framed, are
explained to them, as well by the correspondence of the members, as by
their debates, published in the newspapers. It is the duty of the
members to disperse the newspapers among those people who cannot,
perhaps, otherwise obtain them, under the protection of franks. Even
along the post roads, the common packets of newspapers are not safe from
depredation; but when once they get into the interior parts of the
country, there is hardly any chance of their escaping; whereas, under
the cover of a frank, they are sure to reach their destination in
safety.

If the privilege were confined, during the session, to letters sent from
and received at the seat of Government, and the members limited to
their own letters, and obliged to write the whole superscription, the
increase of the apprehended abuses would be prevented; if it were
further restricted, by limiting to those letters only what are sent to
or come from the State to which the member belongs, this would convince
the people, that the privilege was intended for the benefit, not of the
members, but of their constituents.

Further, it was observed, that every argument, which might be adduced in
favor of withdrawing the privilege from the members of Congress, might
be used with equal force in the cases of President, Vice President, and
every other public officer, mentioned in the same section. If the
allowance of six dollars per day was a reason for subjecting the members
to the payment of postage, every public officer ought also, on the same
principle, to pay for his letters, as they were all compensated with
equal liberality. If abuses were apprehended from the members, others
were as likely to introduce them as they; if an increase of revenue was
contemplated, the postage of all letters to and from the President, the
Vice President, the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury, of the
Department of War, &c., would contribute to that increase; but, on the
other hand, those gentlemen must have their compensations increased, if
their letters were to be taxed; for they could not be expected to pay
for them at their own expense. If the privilege can be guarded against
abuse, with respect to those officers, it can also be guarded in the
case of members of Congress.

The establishment of the post office is agreed to be for no other
purpose than the conveyance of information into every part of the Union;
and a greater portion of that had been conveyed into many of the
interior parts of the country, by the newspapers sent by the members of
the House, than could be conveyed by other means, excepting on the main
roads on which stages go. That information had proved highly serviceable
to the present Government; for wherever the newspapers had extended, or
even the correspondence of the members, no opposition has been made to
the laws; whereas, the contrary was experienced in those parts to which
the information had not penetrated; and even there, the opposition
ceased, as soon as the principles on which the laws had been passed,
were made known to the people.

As long as the privilege can be thus used for the general advantages of
the citizens, it ought not to be relinquished by the members merely
through fear of its being thought a personal privilege; it might be
confined to members actually attending the session; they might be
obliged to write the whole superscription, and even to add the date. In
short, the wisdom of the House, it was hoped, would prevent all the
evils apprehended from it, and retain the advantages.

The question being taken on the motion, for withdrawing the privilege
from the members, it passed in the negative; yeas 21, nays 35.


TUESDAY, December 20.

_Post Office Bill._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill for establishing the Post Office and Post Roads within the
United States.

Mr. WADSWORTH moved an amendment, to withdraw the privilege of franking
from the members of both Houses of Congress.

In support of this motion, it was said, that the grand security which
the people of the United States have in their Representatives is, that
those Representatives are subject to the same regulations as their
constituents. In the article of postage, this was not the case.
Congress, in this case, assume to themselves a privilege, which they
refuse to the people; they took money from their constituents, and paid
none themselves. The people viewed this privilege with a jealous eye,
and could not be pleased to see it enjoyed by Congress, whilst neither
the members of the State Assemblies, nor even the Governors were
indulged in it. Congress enjoys only chartered rights; and all rights
not expressly mentioned in the charter, are of course excluded. The
constitution is their charter; the Convention, who framed it, had, no
doubt, well considered the whole subject of privileges and accurately
defined all such as they wished the Legislative body should enjoy
distinct from their constituents. In the enumeration of those
privileges, there is not a syllable tending to exonerate them from their
share of the common burden of postage; they have no constitutional claim
to such an immunity, and if they assumed it they would increase the
burden on their constituents. The post office, if unable to maintain
itself, must derive its support from other sources of revenue. Already
the members of both Houses send and receive, during their session, as
many letters through the General Post Office as all the other
inhabitants of Philadelphia; those letters, if paid at the usual rates,
would amount to half the postage of the United States. The number and
bulk of the franked letters and packets excluded the newspapers from the
mail, and thus prevented the circulation of intelligence; if the evil
increased (and there was no probability of its being diminished, except
by the utter abolition of the privilege) it would eventually prove the
ruin of the post office. The example of Britain showed to what an
enormous height the abuse of such a privilege may be carried; and though
similar abuses may not as yet have taken place here, yet it could hardly
be doubted that many unnecessary letters were daily sent by the post,
which never would have been written if subject to postage; those letters
are not only unproductive, but an actual expense to the post office, as
the postmaster receives a certain percentage on these, as well as upon
other letters. The privilege of franking is moreover unequal in its
operation; while some members use it only for the purpose of
transmitting political information to their constituents, others,
absent perhaps during the whole session, use it for very different
purposes: to men in trade it was a considerable advantage, amounting
probably, in some instances, to a hundred dollars a year. It would be
better to take away the privilege entirely, and reduce the general rates
of postage one-half, or to allow the members, at the close of each
session, to make a charge for all letters on public business, from their
constituents, or to make them an allowance in gross to defray the
expense of postage; better, even, if necessary, to make an addition to
the compensation which the members receive for their services, if the
present one be found incompetent to their honorable support.

On the other hand, it was observed, that the privilege of franking was
not assumed by the members for their own private accommodation, but for
the benefit of their constituents, to transmit to them every necessary
information respecting the operations of the General Government, and to
receive from them such information as they might have to communicate.
Petitions are frequently enclosed to members; and if these were to be
subject to the payment of postage, the privilege of petitioning the
House, would be in a great measure destroyed. The diminution of revenue
which the post office might in some instances suffer from the privilege
of franking, ought not to be deemed a sufficient reason for abolishing
that privilege; since it is allowed, that the object contemplated in the
establishment was the general convenience, and an easy and speedy mode
of disseminating public and private intelligence. Revenue was but a
secondary consideration. Although the citizens who live at the seat of
Government, and have daily opportunities of learning from the newspapers
what public measures are going forward, may not be materially affected
by the abrogation of the privilege, yet the case would be widely
different with those who live at a distance, especially when fiscal
operations were on foot; those who are informed, will make a prey of
those who are ignorant, and destructive speculation will enrich the few,
at the expense of the many. In a government of opinion (which is the
Government of America) much greater reliance is to be placed on the
confidence of the people than upon any other circumstance: that
confidence can only be the result of the fullest information; but if the
privilege of franking were taken away, the avenues of information would
be, in a great measure, closed, for the members could not undertake, at
their own private expense, to transmit intelligence to every part of the
Union; yet the citizens have a right to expect information, not only of
the acts of Government, but also the principles upon which they were
grounded. The abuses of the privilege, that have prevailed in England,
do not prevail here; and its abolition would give general
dissatisfaction, particularly in the more distant parts of the Union,
where information would be subject to a very high tax, if circulated
through the post office, at the ordinary rates of postage. Of those
bundles of letters received and dispatched by members of Congress, many
(though far from being unnecessary, as had been said) would perhaps
never be written, if they were not to pass free of postage; and thus
that free communication of sentiment between the Representative and
constituent, which is so essential in a Government like this, would be
in a great measure cut off; and the post office would gain little or
nothing by it, as those packets of newspapers, bills, reports, &c.,
would either be sent by private hand, or not sent at all; even here an
inequality would prevail, as the people who live near the seat of
Government, and all along the main road, could, from the greater
frequency of opportunities, receive such packets with more ease and
regularity, whilst those in more remote situations could seldom or never
receive them, unless by the mail. The expense arising from the
percentage to the postmaster on the free letters, is but trifling, as in
such cases he receives no more for a packet of two ounces than for a
single letter; and as to the idea of allowing the members to make a
charge for their letters, this would be no better than receiving with
one hand and paying away with the other. If, however, it were found
absolutely necessary to take precautions against the abuses that were
apprehended, this might be done by limiting the number or weight of
letters that should go free by any one post, without entirely preventing
the interchange of sentiments between the Representative and his
constituents.

The committee then rose, without taking the question on the amendment.


THURSDAY, December 22.

_Election of President, &c._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on the
bill sent from the Senate, entitled "An act relative to the election of
a President and Vice President of the United States, and declaring the
officer who shall act as President, in case of vacancies in the offices
both of President and Vice President."

The bill was read by the Clerk. The first section being again read by
the Chairman,

Mr. TUCKER moved to amend this clause by striking out these words,
"except in cases in which an extraordinary election of President and
Vice President shall take place, as hereinafter specified." This motion
was agreed to.

Mr. SEDGWICK made some general observations on the great objects of the
bill, and adverting to the term proposed for the choice of Electors of
President and Vice President, observed that he had his doubts whether it
would not be best to give a longer time. He enlarged on the disagreeable
consequences which would probably ensue, in case there should not be a
choice by the Electors; as the matter must then be determined by the
House, voting according to the constitution, by States. He descanted on
the pernicious consequences which might result from the collision of
parties, and the working of passions in the breasts of men whose ardor
would probably be excited to the greatest degree on such an occasion;
every reasonable measure should be adopted to prevent the evils which he
deprecated; he therefore moved that the words "thirty days" should be
struck out, in order to give the people a longer time to give in their
votes for Electors.

Mr. WHITE objected to the motion. He conceived it was calculated to
produce the very mischiefs the gentleman appeared to deprecate. If it
had been possible, he could have wished that the Electors should meet
and give in their votes on the very day of their being chosen; he wished
as much as the gentleman to adopt measures to prevent the evils he
mentioned; but did not think the motion would conduce to that object; he
thought the time should rather be contracted than extended.

Mr. DAYTON also objected to the motion; he thought fourteen days would
be a more proper time; it was the design of the constitution, though it
is not expressed, that the President should not know the characters to
whom he is indebted for his election.

Mr. SEDGWICK observed, that the objections would be very proper was it
certainly known that the Electors would always agree in a choice; but
this he conceived, it was hardly possible should always be the case; and
what will then take place? The election devolves on this House, and the
Electors will then be known, and liable to all that intrigue and cabal
which has prevailed in other countries. He left it to the consideration
of the committee to determine on the immense importance of providing in
season against the evils of a contested election, in the case now before
them.

Mr. BALDWIN objected to the motion; but said if it was struck out, he
should then move to insert a clause which should assign different
periods according to the circumstances of the several States, so that
the Electors should meet as nearly as possible at the same time in all
the States.

Mr. NILES objected to the motion; and the question being put it was
negatived.

The clause which makes it the duty of the Executive of the several
States to cause the names of the Electors to be certified, was objected
to.

Mr. NILES observed that no person could be called upon to discharge any
duty on behalf of the United States, who had not accepted of an
appointment under their authority. He thought that this was opening the
door too wide, and involves a blending of the respective powers and
duties of each, which is not warranted by the constitution; and he
observed that he should be sorry that the Government of the United
States should attempt to exercise a power which they are not competent
to carry into execution. He moved that the clause should be struck out.

Mr. SEDGWICK observed that if Congress were not authorized to call on
the Executives of the several States, he could not conceive what
description of persons they were empowered to call upon.

Mr. NILES said he considered this section as degrading to the Executive
of the several States; and inquired, what is to be done in case those
Executives should refuse to comply with the requisition?

Mr. CLARK said, it appeared to him that the committee was creating
difficulties where none before existed. He observed that the choosing
these Electors was a privilege conferred on the people, and that this
was merely pointing out the mode of exercising this privilege; he
thought the clause stood very well and would create no uneasiness
whatever.

Mr. HILLHOUSE said, he considered the provision improper. It imposed a
duty on the Supreme Executives of the several States, which they might
or might not execute; and thus the necessary certificates may not be
made. He seconded the motion to strike out the clause, and proposed a
substitute making it the duty of the Electors to procure for themselves
the necessary certificates.

Mr. LIVERMORE spoke in favor of the clause; he did not consider it
either as an undue assumption of power, or degrading to the Executives
of the respective States.

Mr. BARNWELL said, a small addition to the clause would in his opinion
obviate every difficulty; the words he proposed to insert were--"or such
person as the Executive may appoint."

Mr. STURGES moved to strike out "Executive," and insert "the
Legislature."

Mr. J. SMITH said, it appeared to him that the proposed alteration would
amount to exactly the same thing; for the duty of giving the certificate
would eventually devolve on the Executive.

The motion for striking out the clause was negatived.

The ninth section provides, that in case of vacancies in the offices of
President and Vice President, the President of the Senate _pro tem._, or
the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall act as President.

Mr. WHITE moved the section should be struck out. He said the House had
formerly discussed the subject and could not agree; the first part of
the bill is necessary; this is not of immediate importance to be
attended to.

Mr. FITZSIMONS said, he supposed the question must be determined some
time or other, and he knew of no reason why it should not be decided at
this time; to strike out the clause would, in effect, be to declare that
the House could not agree.

Mr. WILLIAMSON was in favor of striking out.

Mr. LIVERMORE objected to the motion; he said no two subjects could
possibly be more intimately connected; and the provisions of the bill
are such as to render the intermission, during which this regency was
to take place, as short as possible; he hoped the clause would not be
stricken out.

Mr. WHITE added some further objections to the section; he said it was
distinct from the bill, and though a majority of the committee were in
favor of the characters nominated, yet he thought it would be best to
make it the object of another bill, and of an independent discussion.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, he hoped the section would not be struck out,
especially if there is a majority of the committee in favor of it. He
observed, that last session there was no decision in the case; he
conceived it necessary that the business should be now decided on; and
adverting to the particular characters named, he said they were as far
removed from any influence of the Executive as any persons that could be
possibly pointed out.

Mr. BARNWELL was in favor of going into a discussion of the subject at
this time. He said there was a large number of the present House who had
not heard the observations offered in the last Congress; he supposed the
present as proper a time to consider the subject as any that could
occur. If gentlemen who are opposed to the section will offer their
objections, he should be glad to hear them; if they were conclusive, he
should vote to strike out the section. If nothing was offered, he should
vote against the motion.

Mr. STURGES mentioned several objections to the section, which in his
opinion rendered it unconstitutional; he could not find that the Speaker
of the House, or President of the Senate _pro tem._ were officers of the
Government in the sense contemplated by the constitution. The
compensations of the President and Vice President are settled by the
House; the Speaker would have to decide on those compensations; this he
said rendered him evidently improper. He further observed that the
consequence would be caballing and electioneering in the choice of
Speaker.

Mr. WHITE said, the Speaker was not a permanent officer, if he could be
considered as one in any point of view; but he was of opinion, that he
was no more an officer of the Government than every other member of the
House.

The question for striking out the section was negatived.

Mr. STURGES then moved to strike out the words, "the President of the
Senate _pro tempore_, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives."

Mr. GILES stated the reasons which he conceived fully proved the
unconstitutionality of the clause. The characters referred to he did not
think were officers. If they had been considered as such, it is probable
they would have been designated in the constitution; the constitution
refers to some permanent officer to be created pursuant to the
provisions therein contained. These persons are not permanent; a
permanent officer was contemplated; the subject was not to be left to
any casuality, if it could possibly be prevented.

Mr. SEDGWICK said, he did not know what officer could with propriety be
said to be permanent; offices are held during good behavior in some
instances, and in others during pleasure; but it will be impossible to
say that any officer is a permanent officer, for the expression is very
extensive. He was surprised to hear the idea controverted, that the
Speaker of the House, or the President of the Senate _pro tem._, is not
an officer. In common parlance he was sure there was no difficulty in
the matter.

Mr. GERRY observed, that some gentleman had said the Speaker is not an
officer; but if he is not an officer, what is he? He then read a clause
from the constitution, which says that the House shall choose their
Speaker _and other officers_. He hoped, however, that the Speaker of the
House of Representatives would be struck out, in order to avoid blending
the Legislative and Executive branches together. He considered this
measure as a political stroke of the Senate; but he hoped that the House
would never consent to making their Speaker an amphibious animal. He
moved therefore that the words "Speaker of the House of Representatives"
should be struck out.

Mr. HILLHOUSE objected to any officer appointed by the Executive being
inserted. He said, if that should be the case, the appointments would in
most cases be made with reference to that object; and hence important
offices would often be filled with improper and incompetent persons.
Besides, it was taking away the choice from the people, and thus
violating the first principle of a free elective Government. The Senate
are appointed by the people, or their Representatives, and hence, in his
opinion, filling the vacancy would devolve with the greatest propriety
on that body.

Mr. WILLIAMSON was in favor of the motion for striking out both the
characters. He observed, that this extensive construction of the meaning
of the word officer, would render it proper to point out any person in
the United States, whether connected with the Government or not, as a
proper person to fill the vacancy contemplated.

Before taking the question upon the amendment, the committee rose.


TUESDAY, January 10.

A memorial of George Turner, one of the Judges in and over the territory
of the United States north-west of the Ohio, was presented to the House
and read, praying a revision of the ordinance for the government of the
said territory, and also an increase of compensation to the Judges
thereof. Referred to Mr. LIVERMORE, Mr. LAURANCE, Mr. WHITE, Mr.
WILLIAMSON, and Mr. SMITH, (of South Carolina); that they do examine the
matter thereof, and report the same, with their opinion thereupon, to
the House.

On a motion made and seconded,

      "That the Secretary of War be instructed to lay before this
      House an accurate statement of all ascertained balances of
      pay, which appear by the books of the United States to be
      due to the officers and soldiers of the late Army of the
      United States, and which still remain either unclaimed, or
      claimed and unpaid, together with the reasons for
      withholding payment from those who may have respectively
      entered claims therefor;"

_Ordered_, That the said motion be referred to Mr. WADSWORTH, Mr. GILES,
and Mr. SMITH, (of New Hampshire;) that they do examine the matter
thereof, and report the same, with their opinion thereupon, to the
House.

The House proceeded to fill up the remaining blanks in the bill to
establish the Post Office and Post Roads of the United States; which was
then read a third time and passed.

_Petition of Catharine Greene._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House, on the
Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the petition of Catharine
Greene, relict of the late General Greene.

The object of the petition is to obtain an indemnification from the
United States against certain engagements which were entered into by her
husband, the deceased Major General Nathaniel Greene, while commanding
officer in the Southern department; and for the circumstances on which
it is founded, refers to a representation of the 22d August, 1785, which
was then made by the said General Greene to Congress.

The petition is accompanied by a number of vouchers, arranged in
alphabetical order by the Secretary of the Treasury in his Report; from
all which he draws the following conclusion:

      "That strong and extraordinary motives of national
      gratitude for the very signal and important services
      rendered by General Greene to his country, must serve to
      give a keener sting to the regret, which ought ever to
      attend the necessity of a strict adherence to claims of
      public policy, in opposition to claims founded on useful
      acts of zeal for the public service, if no means of
      protecting from indigence and penury the family of that
      most meritorious officer shall, upon examination, be found
      admissible."

Mr. WAYNE rose and gave his reasons for supporting the petition, as
follows:

Mr. Chairman: It may not be improper to mention the motives that impel
me to wish a fortunate issue to the _claim_ now under consideration of
this committee, which I must also offer as an apology for the part I
have taken, or that I may eventually take, in support of the claim. From
my first interview with General Greene until the moment of his
dissolution, we always lived in the strictest habits of friendship and
confidence. He was an officer with whom I had participated in almost
every vicissitude of fortune, (in many a well-tried field,) from the
frozen waters of the North to the burning sands of the South. He was a
man whose virtues and talents I knew and revered; his noble soul would
have revolted at the idea of imposition. He never would have offered in
a _claim_ to Congress, but upon the purest principles of honor and
justice. I was a witness to the pressing necessity that _compelled_ him
to become the surety, for which indemnity is now claimed. He did what I
would have done, (as second in command,) had he been absent at that
trying crisis. The claim I _know_ to be just, and I am decidedly of
opinion that he was drawn into that security from the situation in which
he was placed by Congress, as Commander-in chief of the Southern
Department. Under these impressions, I beg leave to submit to the
consideration of this committee the resolutions now in my hand, and
doubt not of their concurrent support.

      "_Resolved, as the opinion of this Committee_, That the
      estate of the late Major General Nathaniel Greene ought to
      be indemnified for and on account of the engagements
      entered into by that General with certain persons in the
      State of South Carolina, for the purpose of obtaining
      supplies for the American Army, in the year 1783, and that
      ---- be granted to the Executors of the estate of the late
      Major General Nathaniel Greene, for that purpose.

      "_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to bring in a
      bill in conformity to the foregoing resolution."

Mr. BOUDINOT said, there was no greater friend to the memory of General
Greene than he was, nor any person more anxious to have justice done to
his widow and family; but he was apprehensive that the resolution
proposed by the worthy gentleman who had first brought forward this
subject was not drawn up in such a manner as to ensure it a passage
through both Houses of Congress. He wished, therefore, that it should be
so expressed as to prevent any tedious discussion, and at the same time
do ample justice. The Report of the Secretary of the Treasury puts the
subject on the best footing. The motives which led him to make the
contract were, first, the public good; and perhaps, secondly, to serve
his friend, Mr. Burnett, because he was his aide-de-camp, and he wished
to put him in the way of being established in business after the war;
but Mr. Burnett was never in any other way connected with General Greene
than as a young man brought up in the family, whom he wished to
patronize.

After a few other observations, Mr. BOUDINOT moved to strike out the
preamble of the resolution proposed by Mr. WAYNE, and to adopt words
nearly in substance as follows:

      "_Resolved_, That it is becoming the dignity of Congress to
      make compensation for the widow and orphans of the late
      Major General Greene, who so gloriously served his country;
      and that they be indemnified for the loss which his estate
      is likely to sustain by his having entered into certain
      bonds for supplying the Southern army with rations and
      clothing, at a time when they were threatening to
      disperse."

Mr. FINDLAY observed, that on the question as it is now stated, the
committee have a choice of three alternatives; the claim may be
rejected, a pension or gratuity may be granted to the amount, or the
claim of the petition may be granted as a matter of right, upon the
footing of its own merits by a special law, as all authorized claims
which Congress grant are given. Claims for which the standing laws are
competent, do not come before us. I am in favor of the last alternative.
I am against rejecting the petition; because, as the facts are stated in
the Report of the Secretary of the Treasury, General Greene putting
himself in this situation of risk was from the most public-spirited
motive; it was to support the public interest at a most important
crisis, when the well-being, if not the existence of the Southern army
was at stake, as well as the security of the inhabitants. If a
commander-in-chief of an army may be ruined in his private affairs by
making an unauthorized exertion to save his army or his country, the
precedent may be dangerous; it may teach commanders lessons of prudence,
which may have ruinous effects. It is true the necessity of the case
must be such as will justify the unauthorized measure: from the Report,
this appears to have been the case in the subject of the present debate.
From the whole state of the facts before us, General Greene appears not
to have had his own interest in view in this transaction, if the proof
of this only lay between Banks and him. The established character of
General Greene, not only as an officer, but as a man of integrity and
public spirit, certainly cannot sink when laid in the balance with the
secret insinuation of an unprincipled speculator. Such has been my own
opinion of General Greene's character, that I would certainly require
other proofs than this before I would even indulge suspicions: but it
does not rest upon this. We have Banks's own testimony to the contrary,
and his partner, and we know it would have been the interest of Banks &
Co. to have made the contrary appear: nay, we have such a cloud of
witnesses, all concurring to the same point, as appears sufficient to
remove doubts from the most scrupulous mind. Unauthorized accounts are
admitted in settlements between the United States and the individual
States, upon the principles of equity. I consider this as a case of the
same nature, and will vote for it agreeably to this precedent. I
consider granting the prayer of the petition in this manner, as an act
of justice, not only to his estate, but to the memory of his character.
But I object to granting the relief in the indirect way of a pension; it
is not so safe to the public, nor so honorable to the heirs of General
Greene. To the public it is highly dangerous as a precedent; it will
operate as an opening wedge to other claims without limitation. Few
indeed can have an unauthorized though just claim as commanders-in-chief
of an army reduced to such a dilemma as originated the present question;
but merit and distress are not confined to commanders alone; they are to
be found in every rank of citizens. The struggles during the late
revolution produced abundance of merit; we cannot look around in this
House, nor in any large collection of citizens, but our eye meets with
those who have claims of merit. We can scarcely be acquainted in any
neighborhood, but we must be acquainted with such as have been reduced
to distress by their meritorious exertions, either in the camp, in the
cabinet, or by granting supplies. How many who have aided the public
with their substance, have been obliged to part with the evidences of
their meritorious claims for a temporary relief. Many of the aged, many
widows and orphans, to my knowledge, labor in penury, and mourn in
secret, on the account of such meritorious aids not being recompensed
when they ought to have been; though this was owing to the public
misfortune, yet the merit and sufferings were not the less. I am very
sensible of the great merit of General Greene; it is so well known, and
so generally acknowledged, on all hands, as to render it improper for me
to enlarge thereon. But, superior as his merit was, if we grant a
pension or relief not founded on a just claim, merit of a lower order
must be also admitted: there is no distinguishing the shades. I have
heard of claims on the footing of merit brought before Congress,
supported by such arguments as would induce a stranger to think that
nearly all the merit of accomplishing the revolution was centred in the
claimant. If merit is to be rewarded by pensions, we shall soon have
claimants in abundance. In the exercise of supreme command, difficulties
often arise which render exertions necessary for which general rules
cannot be provided; these have been generally treated as objects of
indemnification. Many claims are now before Congress; they are various
in their nature, and no doubt a number of them will be admitted; but
from every view I have taken of the claim before us, I think the present
as strongly addresses our justice and sympathy as any of them.

Mr. WAYNE thought it necessary to make some observations on what had
fallen from the gentleman on his right, (Mr. BOUDINOT.) In order to
place this subject in a proper point of view, he begged leave to mention
certain circumstances previous to the evacuation of Charleston. Some of
the first characters in South Carolina obtained a flag from General
Greene, to meet a deputation of merchants and others under a flag from
the British lines. Those merchants were anxious to remain after the
army, for the purpose of disposing of their stock in trade, and wished
for a reasonable time to transact that business; this indulgence was
readily granted, for it was thought an object of consequence to retain
supplies for the use of the country as well as for the army; and they
were permitted to continue in the place for the space of _twelve months_
after the abandonment should take effect. Assurances were also given
them for the inviolable protection of their persons and property for
that period. Thus sanctioned, they were probably induced to speculate
upon such stores as the British army could spare, (for that army was
redundantly supplied,) whilst the Americans were experiencing almost
every possible distress for want of the common necessaries of life.
About this time hopes were entertained of the speedy appearance of a
superior marine force from the French West Indies, to that of the
British; and the operating army under my command was advanced to the
quarter-house, in a position to prevent the enemy from embarking with
impunity, and to protect the town and its inhabitants from depredation
and insult. This manoeuvre had the desired effect; it created a
jealousy in the British General for the safety of his rear, and General
Leslie was, in a manner, compelled to come into a convention, more
resembling a _capitulation_ than an _abandonment_, for he was under the
necessity to "agree not to commit any insult upon the inhabitants, or
depredation upon their property, or damage to the city, at or _after_
his embarkation." The word _after_ caused some demur; but it was
insisted upon and complied with, in consequence of the orders I had
previously received from General Greene; a measure which at once
afforded security to the inhabitants, and a flattering prospect of full
supplies, as well for the citizens as for the army.

The gentleman (Mr. BOUDINOT) says--How are we to distinguish between the
articles and necessaries that were actually made use of by the army, and
of the other goods purchased of the British merchants? This may be fully
answered and explained by mentioning this fact: that those merchants
took advantage of their situation, and would not dispose of any article
suitable for the army unless _their whole stock were purchased
together_; having but twelve months to dispose of their goods and
collect their debts. Nor could the necessary articles be obtained at the
point of the bayonet, as the merchants were protected by a compact made
under the sanction of a flag. Nor would they trust the contractor
_Banks_ with their property, unless General Greene became his security;
by which act, in their opinion, the _United States_ would be bound in
honor to fulfil a contract made by their commanding officer; nor did
General Greene come into the measure until compelled by dire necessity,
to prevent a mutiny and dissolution of the army. And such was the
exhausted situation of the country in the vicinity of Charleston, that
the Executive and the Legislature found it expedient to send a distance
into the country to obtain supplies for themselves and the refugee
families who were returning to the city after the evacuation: in fact,
we were under the necessity of taking part of these very provisions, to
prevent an instantaneous revolt.

But the gentleman (Mr. BOUDINOT) says that General Greene's private
friendship for Major Burnett, who had been his aide-de-camp, was a
peculiar inducement for his entering into that security, and that Major
Burnett had mortgaged an island to General Greene as a collateral
security. This, indeed, was an act of private friendship; but it was a
subsequent transaction, and noways connected with the former, nor is it
amongst the charges. This was a private purchase by Major Burnett from
Mr. John M'Queen, a gentleman well known in South Carolina; and it was
thought to be a very advantageous purchase for Major Burnett at the time
it was made, (although it has turned out otherwise,) but it was
necessary for him to obtain security, previous to receiving _titles_. He
applied to General Greene to become his security upon that occasion,
which was complied with; and in that act he certainly displayed a
superior degree of private friendship, and such as has already been
found extremely injurious to his family; but it is by no means connected
with the claim now under consideration.

The danger of establishing a precedent in future, unsupported by
previous authority obtained from Congress, is also mentioned as an
objection. Mr. Chairman, there never can be any danger of drawing this
circumstance into precedent; for the page of history never did before,
nor I believe ever will again, produce a similar precedent, _i. e._ an
army facing and surmounting every difficulty and danger through a long
and bloody contest, badly clothed and worse paid, and frequently
destitute of the common necessaries of life. Sir, it is for the honor of
General Greene that we contend; and I am warranted in asserting, that he
was not interested in the contract of Mr. Banks, otherwise than from the
pure and virtuous motives of serving and saving his country. I therefore
feel myself interested, and bound in honor to support and defend the
character of my departed friend, and to demand this claim as a matter of
_right_, and not of _grace_; and I have a confidence that the candor and
justice of this committee will induce them to adopt the principles of
the resolutions submitted to their consideration.

Mr. SUMTER.--With respect to the resolution as it now stands, I feel
myself obliged to oppose it. Nothing that has fallen from the gentleman
over the way (Mr. WAYNE) has convinced me that the measure is proper or
just. It is necessary to be cautious in the manner of discussing a
matter of so much delicacy. I rise, not to make any pointed objections
that can in any degree injure the reputation of the officer, whose
abilities I respect, or to hurt the feelings of his family or
connections. I suppose that no gentleman will decide in favor of the
resolution without examining the merits of the case. The committee will
have that information which they shall deem to be requisite on the
occasion. I am sorry to differ in opinion with the gentleman from
Georgia, and am therefore disposed to make sacrifices of my own feelings
of past injuries, and will not suffer them to warp my judgment, but will
endeavor to decide in conformity with the opinions of the people of the
State of South Carolina, and in particular of the district which I have
the honor to represent. In going into the investigation of this matter,
I will give my reasons why I do not think the country, although in
extreme distress, was in that deplorable situation which has been
represented; neither was its credit reduced so low but that relief might
have been obtained, and that so small an army might have been
accommodated, had a proper application been made in time to the
Government. The gentleman must therefore be mistaken in stating those
circumstances; for if the proper documents be examined, it will appear
that the army received very ample supplies from the same source, some
months previous to the contract made by Mr. Banks, which must have been
in November, or early in December, and previous to the evacuation of
Charleston. Whether it was better to adopt the means used by General
Greene, or those within the power of the Government, I shall not pretend
to determine; but I have no doubt that the Government possessed both the
means and the inclination to find supplies. The contract was first made
by Banks in November or December, and General Greene did not become the
guarantee until the April following; whether there were any reasons for
preferring this mode to that of an application to Government, will
perhaps appear in the course of the investigation.

Mr. Chairman, this contract has been considered to have operated rather
as a misfortune, although it may have afforded a temporary relief; it
was the occasion of much complaint, vexation, and distrust, rather than
of conciliation; and that this discontent ran through the army is within
the knowledge of several officers whose names could be mentioned. It is
therefore necessary to bring the matter into the full view of the
committee, and to have recourse to the files of the public offices,
before we agree to the resolution on the table. At the same time, it is
my sincere wish to render justice to the family of the deceased in every
reasonable accommodation; but it does not appear to me that the family
is reduced to that disagreeable situation which has been represented.
The large grants that have been made by the States of Georgia, North and
South Carolina, are still in the possession of the heirs of the
deceased, and I have been informed that a gentleman offered $30,000 for
that granted by North Carolina, so late as last summer; neither have I
heard that any distress has been levied upon any of these estates, or
that they are so much affected, in reality, but that the claims made
against them are rather of a nominal and visionary nature. But admitting
that General Greene was security for the United States, and that the
operation had been beneficial, (which I deny;) does it appear that
executions have been levied to any considerable amount, or to such an
extent as to justify the present application? To me it does not appear
this has been the case, neither do I believe that the estate has been
reduced in the manner represented; and, whilst I say it, I honestly and
sincerely hope it; under which impression, I can never accede to the
resolution on the table.

Mr. WADSWORTH.--The gentleman last up has said many things to me utterly
unintelligible, and others which directly militate with what has been
said by the gentleman from Georgia. He has, however, declared that no
real or supposed personal injury shall influence him in giving his
opinion or vote. I hope, sir, he will not now feel or resent those real
or supposed injuries. I do believe they are not real; and from my long
and intimate acquaintance with General Greene, I had good opportunity to
know him; a better man I never did know. That he had enemies is not to
be wondered at; the nature of his command to the southward was
important, critical, and difficult, and he might be constrained to do
things that necessity only would justify. If he has injured any man, he
has atoned for it; neither the tongue nor pen of malice have been able
to affix a stigma on his character. If I ever knew a man whose heart was
pure and without guile, it was General Greene. Yet he had enemies; no
man deserved them so little. More honest fame is due to no man. And if
his fortune is to be sacrificed, and his family beggared, it is a
consolation that his good name will last for ever. Being one of his
executors, I know something of his affairs; but it was with reluctance I
rose, as my attachments to him and concern for his family render it
extremely difficult for me to enter on the subject. The gentleman from
South Carolina has told us he is acquainted with the affairs of the
estates in the Carolinas, and has said they are without any executions
against them, the bonds on good credit, and the family in no danger of
poverty, &c. I can hardly allow, sir, that he is acquainted with the
affairs of General Greene, even in South Carolina and Georgia; but if he
is, I will ask him if he does not know that all the negroes from the
South Carolina estate are sold, and that the land is totally
unproductive? that Mr. Rutledge has prevented executions from taking the
Georgia estate by his personal interference? that all the estates in
Rhode Island and New Jersey are sold? and that the hope of the justice
we now ask for has delayed the sale of all the rest, to satisfy his
creditors--his Southern creditors?

The proofs and documents alluded to by the gentleman (Mr. SUMTER) have
been before Congress for several years, and the friends and executors of
General Greene have challenged his enemies, in every part of the Union,
to disprove them; and I hope no delay will now take place. The subject
is fully before Congress. I hope justice will be done to the widow and
orphans of the late General Greene, and that the investigation will now
be finished, his honest fame vindicated and established, and his family
saved from the ruin that awaits them.

Mr. HARTLEY, in support of Mr. WAYNE's motion, observed, that he had
paid some attention to the report and the documents referred to in it,
as well as the objections made to the resolutions under consideration.
Many of the objections, said he, have been answered by gentlemen who
were nearer to the scene of action than myself; I shall strive to
obviate others. The mode of conducting our affairs in South Carolina
does not seem to have been agreeable to the gentleman opposite to me
from that State, (Mr. SUMTER,) and he expresses his high disapprobation
of many parts of it. When I disagree with that gentleman, I do it with
great reluctance; for no one on this floor has a greater respect for him
than myself. In a hazardous and difficult situation, or in carrying on
war, or even in great political questions, the best friends may differ
in the mode of conducting them; and it has too frequently happened, that
such difference has tended to lessen the friendship which formerly
existed. Upon the whole, our arms to the southward were crowned with
success; we must presume the means generally used were right. If
supplies could have been furnished by the State of South Carolina, it is
a pity they were not granted. I say, it is possible General Greene might
have pursued a different mode to obtain clothing and provisions. He did
not. He was of opinion no other plans could have been successfully
followed but those which were adopted. The idea of his being a partner
with Banks & Co., seems to be given up by the opposition. The mere
insinuation of Mr. Banks and some others can have no influence against
such a cloud of evidence and documents. These are so strong for the
General, that they would work conviction on the greatest infidel. I
shall barely advert to a part of them, as mentioned in the report, and
on this head give a few observations of my own. And, first, the
application to the Legislature of South Carolina, in order to create a
competition: Had he been concerned as a partner, or intended to be so,
no competition through that channel would have been proposed. If he was
to be a partner, the more secret the transaction, the higher the
advantage. The bond of indemnity to General Greene, oaths of Banks and
Hunter, certificate from Major Forsyth, Nathaniel Pendleton's oath,
Charles C. Pinckney's oath, (now Governor of South Carolina,) and the
certificates of the two Chancellors of South Carolina, who were both
high in the Executive, when these transactions should have happened.
Besides, sir, if we consider how many partners there were concerned with
Banks in the different transactions, had General Greene been one of the
company, it must long since have been manifested to the world. The
secret could not have been kept; nor can we possibly think that General
Greene, who was undoubtedly a man of understanding, would have expressed
himself in the manner he has done, in the close of his letter from
Newport, dated the 24th of August, 1785, had he been a partner. He says
there, "Thus have I given your Excellency a short narration of the
origin and situation of this matter, and have only to add on this
subject, that I never held any commercial connection with the company,
other than what concerned the public, either directly or indirectly, or
ever received one farthing profit or emolument, or the promise of any
one from them; and my bond of indemnity expressly declares that I have
no interest, connection, or concern, in the debts for which I became
bound, all which I am willing to verify on oath." Would he have pledged
his honor, his reputation, had he been interested? No, it is impossible!
He would have been silent had he been a culprit, and not have challenged
the world, as the power of detection would have laid with so many, and
the shaft of envy always ready. I hope every man must be satisfied that
the General was no partner.

The great points of contest before the committee seem now to be--

1st. Did the General enter into these engagements out of personal regard
to individuals, without a view to the public interest?

2dly. Was not the good of the public his principal object?

3dly. Under all circumstances, should not his estate be indemnified?

As to the first, I cannot think that the General, out of mere personal
regard to individuals, without a view to the public good, would have
been bail. He had been esteemed a man of prudence, and was not a person
of large fortune. How would he embarrass his family and property in such
engagements? Who, under mere motives of friendship, would have done so?
The sum was too large; he had no interest. He got no goods or money for
himself. He might have had a favorable opinion of some of the company,
but his responsibility was become necessary with a view to the public
good.

As to the second, public good must have been his principal object. The
contracts before made would not have been carried into execution,
without the aid of the contract, for which the indemnity was made in
April, 1783. A great many articles were absolutely necessary to the
army; they were connected with others; the necessaries could not at that
critical period, or for the moment, be obtained elsewhere. The
merchants, as I understand, insisted upon two conditions before they
would deliver the goods: 1st, that all the goods should go together; 2d,
that the commanding officer should become security. There was a
necessity for an additional capital to furnish the means for supporting
the army; and as most of the goods were useful and necessary, the
residue might be disposed of to the best advantage, and the money
arising from them be applied to the payment of the debt. Public
necessity and the state of things would oblige the General to agree to
the first condition. The compliance with the second condition became a
necessary consequence. The General's letter from Newport, and General
Wayne's oath, Nathaniel Pendleton's oath, and other evidence, prove the
situation of the army. As to the third point, should not his estate be
indemnified? Through his zeal for the public good, he has unfortunately
involved his estate in difficulty. Whatever the conduct of the company
might be, the creditors were not to be affected either by the fraud or
failure of Banks and the purchasers. General Greene was liable. The
General, when he hears of misconduct, does all he can to save and
indemnify himself, and through him the United States. Securities were
taken in as ample a manner as they could he obtained from the
delinquents; and General Greene never wished to call upon the public,
until every other means failed. So late as the year 1785 he had still
hopes there would be no loss; but when he found the danger, a sense of
duty obliged him to come forward to save himself and family, to ask the
protection of the public to indemnify him from a debt that he had
contracted to save an army from mutiny and disbanding; to protect a
country which otherwise would have been exposed. Many exertions had he
to make to feed the hungry and cover the naked; were not these for the
public good, and shall his private property suffer? Shall his family be
reduced to beggary, be stripped of their all, to discharge what the
United States are in honor and in justice bound to pay?

Retrospective laws, to affect rights attacked, ought never to pass; but
laws have frequently been enacted to indemnify persons for a conduct,
though not strictly legal, yet founded on the special circumstances of
the case--the safety or honor of a nation or army, where the
constitutional authority could not come forward in time. Such was the
treaty or system formed by the Duke of Marlborough and the great De
Witt. The Dutch, instead of punishing their minister, approved the
measure; it eventually tended to the safety and honor of the allies. The
individual who undertakes risks for his country's good, a magnanimous
Government will always sanctify. We should consider the case upon
substantial principles, not according to the letter, not act as the
Lacedæmonians did to one of their leaders; they fined him for the
infringement of the letter of the law, yet for the same act rewarded the
hero with a garland. The fine here ruins the General's estate, and the
garland alone, I fear, in this country, will not give his children bread
or a becoming education.

In our late contest, the common maxims of old nations could not always
be adhered to. We were obliged to act according to emergencies. In the
case of General Greene, he seems to have intended for the best. He
helped to serve and save a country. His merit stands high indeed. I need
not repeat the number of his great and glorious actions, which mark him
the General and the hero. His name will be handed down with honor to
succeeding ages.

Under all circumstances, I think his estate should be indemnified. If
the committee do not like the whole of the resolution, let there be a
division, as proposed by one of the gentlemen from South Carolina;
though I should think we might safely vote for the whole of the
resolution, and let the bill make any other provisions which it may be
thought necessary.

Mr. LEE, Mr. BARNWELL, Mr. WAYNE, and Mr. BOURNE, R. I., spoke in favor
of agreeing to the resolutions, and Mr. MACON and Mr. STURGES against
the motion. Mr. SUMTER closed the debate in sundry remarks on extracts
from letters wrote by General Greene during the late war, inserted in
Gordon's History of the American Revolution, which extracts contain
unfavorable reflections on the militia of South Carolina, and the
patriotism of the inhabitants of that State. These reflections, Mr.
SUMTER said, were gross calumnies on, and misrepresentations of the
character of that people, which he said were invalidated by facts that
at that time took place, and by the general tenor of the conduct of
South Carolina throughout the whole course of the war.


MONDAY, January 23.

_Petition of Catharine Greene._

The order of the day being called for, on the report of the Secretary of
the Treasury on the petition of Catharine Greene, several members
objected to taking up this subject, being of a private nature, while
matters of the greatest public importance demand the immediate attention
of Congress. The question being taken, the motion for going into
Committee of the Whole was carried, 21 to 16; and Mr. LIVERMORE took the
chair.

After considerable debate, the question was put for agreeing to the
first resolution, in the following words:

      _Resolved_, as the opinion of this committee, That the
      estate of the late Major General Greene ought to be
      indemnified for the engagements entered into by that
      General, with certain persons in the State of South
      Carolina, for the purpose of obtaining supplies for the
      Army of the United States, under his command, in the year
      1783.

Which was negatived, 28 to 25.

The committee then rose, and the Chairman reported that the Committee of
the whole House had had under consideration a report of the Secretary of
the Treasury on the petition of Catharine Greene, and had come to no
resolution thereon.

Mr. MACON then moved that the Committee of the Whole should be
discharged from any further proceedings on the subject; which motion was
agreed to.

Mr. BOURNE then laid on the table a resolution for referring the
Secretary's Report, together with Mrs. Greene's petition, and the
vouchers accompanying it, to a select committee, with instruction to
inquire into the facts which rendered it necessary for General Greene to
become security to Banks & Co., and the nature, circumstances, and
amount of the original debt, and the obligation entered into by General
Greene for payment thereof; with an account of the moneys or collateral
security received by the obligees, or by General Greene in his lifetime,
or his representatives since his death, in part thereof; and the
eventual loss which his estate will sustain in consequence of the said
securities; and after examining all the circumstances and such further
evidence as may be offered relative to the transaction, to report their
opinion thereon to the House.


THURSDAY, January 26.

An engrossed bill to ascertain and regulate the claims to half-pay and
to invalid pensions was read the third time and passed.

_Protection of the Frontiers._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on the
bill for making further and more effectual provision for the Protection
of the Frontiers of the United States.

A motion being made to strike out the second section of the bill, which
contemplates the raising of three additional regiments of infantry and a
squadron of light dragoons, amounting in all to three thousand and forty
men, exclusive of commissioned officers--

It was urged in favor of the motion, that the Indian war, in which the
United States are at present involved, was, in its origin, as unjustly
undertaken as it has since been unwisely and unsuccessfully conducted;
that depredations had been committed by the whites as well as by the
Indians; and the whites were most probably the aggressors, as they
frequently made encroachments on the Indian lands, whereas the Indians
showed no inclination to obtain possession of our territory, or even to
make temporary invasions, until urged to it by a sense of their wrongs.
A proof of this unencroaching disposition on their part plainly appeared
in their conduct, after the victory they lately obtained over our
troops; for, when flushed with success, they might have swept the
country before them, and penetrated as far as Pittsburg, they contented
themselves with the advantage they had gained over their invaders, and
did not attempt to invade our territories in return, although there was
nowhere at hand a sufficient force to check their career.

The mode of treating the Indians in general was reprobated as unwise and
impolitic. The Indians are with difficulty to be reduced by the sword,
but may easily be gained by justice and moderation;[41] and, although
their cruelties are alleged as reasons for a different conduct, and the
sufferings of the white people pathetically deplored, these narratives,
it was said, are at best but _ex parte_ evidence--we hear nothing of the
sufferings of the Indians--but if Cornplanter's speech were read, it
would set the matter in a very different point of view, and furnish a
complete answer to all the charges of their accusers.

Peace, it was said, may be obtained from the Indian tribes at a much
less expense than would be necessary for the support of the war. To
persevere in hostilities would be wasting the public money to a very bad
purpose indeed; for, supposing our arms crowned with victory, what are
the advantages we may expect to reap from our success? We can only gain
possession of their lands--a possession that must long continue
unproductive of the smallest benefit, as we already possess land
sufficient--more, in fact, than we will be able to cultivate for a
century to come.

Instead of being ambitious to extend our boundaries, it would answer a
much better national purpose to check the roving disposition of the
frontier settlers, and prevent them from too suddenly extending
themselves to the Western waters. If kept closer together, and more
nearly connected with the old settlements, they would be more useful to
the community at large, and would not so frequently involve us in
unnecessary and expensive wars with the Indians; but if permitted to
rove at pleasure, they will keep the nation embroiled in perpetual
warfare as long as the Indians have a single acre of ground to rest
upon.

If the citizens of the United States were recalled within their proper
boundaries, there they might, for years to come, cultivate the soil in
peace, neither invaded nor invading. As the country progresses in
population, and our limits are found too narrow, it will then be soon
enough to contemplate a gradual extension of our frontier; but, in the
mean time, it is an idle profusion of blood and treasure to carry war
beyond our present line of forts. It is only exposing our arms to
disgrace, betraying our own weakness, and lessening the public
confidence in the General Government, to send forth armies to be
butchered in the forests, while we suffer the British to keep possession
of the posts within our territory.

As long as Britain is suffered to retain these posts, we can never hope
to succeed against the Indians; nor ought we to trace our late
misfortune to any other source than her still holding them in her
possession. Were they in our hands, the Indians could not carry on their
operations against us with the same degree of vigor as they now do; for
it is from those forts that they obtain their supplies of arms and
ammunition, with which they can be at all times plentifully furnished,
as long as things continue on their present footing.

Until those posts are in our possession, it will be in vain to send our
armies into the wilderness. A body of five thousand men, sent out
against the Indians, under the present circumstances, would be as
effectually defeated as the smaller ones have already been. In those
wilds, our troops have no friend at hand to furnish them with supplies,
or to give them intelligence of the approach and operations of the
enemy; whereas, the Indians, receiving both aid and information from
their friendly neighbors, can preconcert their plans, and choose,
according to their own convenience, the place and the hour of attack, as
they did before.

It was here observed, by an honorable gentleman on the other side of the
question, that we ought undoubtedly to get possession of those posts;
and that we might have long since obtained it, if we had only laid a
seasonable embargo on all the British shipping in our ports; though he
doubted whether it would at present be worth while to take such a step,
as the English have lost so great a portion of our carrying trade, in
consequence of the additional tonnage laid on their vessels.

In favor of the motion, it was further urged, that, supposing even the
war to have been originally undertaken with justice on our
side--supposing, also, that the national honor and interest called for a
continuance of hostilities--yet, as it was by no means either necessary
or prudent to invade the Indian territory, as this had been attempted in
two successive campaigns, and the event had, in both instances, been
such as to afford no very flattering prospect from a third expedition of
the same kind, it was thought much more advisable to content ourselves
with defending the frontier; and this might be done without making so
great an augmentation in the military establishment.

The only use of regular troops on the frontier is to garrison the forts,
and to have a standing force in the neighborhood to form a station, to
which the militia may resort either for protection or supplies; but as
to active service, the frontier militia and rangers were pronounced to
be by far preferable to the regular troops, as being more expert
woodsmen, and better habituated to the Indian mode of fighting. To
defend the forts, a small number of regulars would be sufficient. The
present establishment of two regiments would, if completed, be amply
adequate to the purpose, and, when assisted by such forces as might at
all times be collected on the frontier, would be able to repel every
inroad of the enemy.

Experience has proved that the sudden and desultory attacks of the
frontier militia and rangers are ever attended with better success than
the methodical operations of a regular force. The former are better
calculated for expedition and surprise, making unexpected sallies,
scouring the country in small bodies, harassing the Indians, and
intercepting their straggling parties, by whom their motions are
unobserved; whereas, when a body of regulars take the field, encumbered
with baggage and heavy artillery, the unavoidable slowness of their
movements affords the enemy an opportunity of watching all their
operations, collecting their whole force, and skulking in the woods
around them till they can seize the favorable moment to strike a sudden
blow, which they generally do with success, but which they could never
attempt if exposed every hour to the unforeseen attacks of our woodsmen,
who would keep their attention constantly engaged in all quarters, and
thus prevent them from uniting in large bodies.

It was further observed by some gentlemen, who even admitted the
propriety of invading the Indian territory, that, to effect this with
success, it was by no means necessary to make such an increase in the
military establishment as that contemplated in the bill. The miscarriage
of the former expeditions could not (they said) be alleged as a
sufficient reason; for it is well known that the former establishment
was far from being complete. The regulars intended for the service of
the last campaign were to have been above two thousand two hundred; the
President was, besides, empowered to raise two thousand five hundred
levies, in addition to the regulars; and these would, together, have
constituted an army of about four thousand seven hundred men. Had such a
body been employed, we might reasonably have expected much better
success against the Indians, whose numbers were so far inferior; the
whole force of the Wabash tribes not amounting to above eleven or twelve
hundred warriors, who never could keep the field for any length of time,
but must be soon obliged to disperse, without venturing an attack upon
an army of such superior strength.

Instead of this, our army consisted of only about twelve hundred men,
and of these not above four or five hundred were regular troops;
besides, had even this force been sufficient, if employed in season, the
delays that had taken place in the execution of the plan would alone
have been sufficient to defeat the intended purpose. During the winter,
the law was passed for raising the additional troops for carrying on the
war with greater vigor. The whole summer was spent in the business, and
the few men that we did enlist were not raised till late in the fall.
Collected at length at the head of the Ohio, they fruitlessly loitered
away their time, till they finally erected a monument to our eternal
disgrace and infamy.

Whatever troops are to be employed, ought to be raised with diligence
and despatch, if we wish to avoid a similar miscarriage in our next
attempt. The army ought not to enter the Indian country till their whole
force is complete. Difficulties, however, and delay, equal to those of
last year, may be expected in enlisting the men; and we shall have the
officers in pay a considerable time without any soldiers. Perhaps the
former pay of the troops was too low, and proper effective men were
unwilling to accept of it; if so, let it be raised, let the men be well
clothed and fed, and they will more readily engage in the service.
Probably, also, the term of three years was an objection with many, who
would otherwise have joined our standard. If enlisted only for six
months, the ranks will be sooner filled; and this ought to have
considerable weight with those who advocate the augmentation of the
military establishment, as they cannot but know that, if we set about
enlisting the number of men contemplated in the bill, and in the manner
there prescribed, they cannot be raised time enough to render any
service in the next campaign.

The information contained in the report on the table was not, it was
said, to be implicitly relied on. That report was made by a man who had
not personally visited the frontier. Others, who had been on the spot,
were of opinion that, if two thousand levies had been raised last year,
they would have been sufficient, not only for the defence of the
frontier, but even for any offensive operations that might have been
thought necessary. Such troops, collected in the vicinity, are more
competent to the undertaking than the troops now in contemplation. No
complaint had been made of their conduct. Whenever they were tried, they
behaved as well as the regulars, and, in the action under General St.
Clair, they gave equal proofs of their valor.

It was further urged, that the frontier militia are not only equal, but
infinitely superior to any regular troops whatever, for the defence of
the borders, and that they are, in fact, the only force that can be
effectually employed in expeditions against the hostile Indians, whose
mode of fighting is familiar to them, and does not strike them with that
degree of terror with which it inspires those men who enlist on the
regular establishment. These latter being collected in the heart of
populous cities, where the face of an Indian is seldom seen, hardly know
whether the Indian and his horse are not the same animal. And when they
approach the enemy, at the very first shout, even before he is in view,
they are terrified at the idea of savage barbarity, which they have ever
been taught to reflect on with horror, and, being incapable of
resistance, they commit their safety to flight. To prove the superiority
of the militia, gentlemen need only contrast the despatch and success of
the expedition conducted by General Scott, with the delays, disgrace,
and mortification, which attended that under General St. Clair, and
consider the difference of the expense on those two occasions.

The expense of such an army as the bill contemplates is an object well
worthy of serious consideration, especially at the present moment, when
there is scarcely a dollar in the Treasury. Gentlemen would also do well
to advert to the progress of this business, and consider where they were
likely to stop, if they went on at the present rate. At first, only a
single regiment had been raised, and the expense was about $100,000; a
second was afterwards added, which swelled the expense to about
$300,000; and now a standing force of 5,168 men is contemplated, at an
annual expense of above a million and a quarter of dollars. Can this be
justified in the present state of our finances, when it is well known
that the Secretary of the Treasury, having been requested by the members
from a particular State to build a light-house on a part of their coast,
declined the undertaking, and alleged the want of funds as the reason?

Our resources, however, might be made to answer for the support of such
a force as that which was intended for the service of the preceding
year, and there would be little complaint or dissatisfaction among the
people. Very few murmurings were heard against the former establishment;
but such a one as is now contemplated will be thought extravagant, will
breed discontent among the citizens of the United States, and perhaps
afford our neighbors in Canada an opportunity to take advantage of our
divided situation, and involve us in a war more dangerous than the
former which separated us from Great Britain.

Apprehensions, it is said, are entertained that the object contemplated
in raising these additional troops is not so much to punish and coerce
the Indians, as to have a standing regular force equal to what the
British have on this continent. This is said to amount to about six
thousand men, including those in Canada. But it is to be remarked, that
the British nation has not above _one thousand_ men within the limits of
the United States; and yet, with this handful of troops, they not only
keep the Indians in awe, but even, in opposition to the wishes of the
United States, retain possession of those posts which should have been
ceded to us pursuant to the terms of the treaty. Why, then, is it
necessary, for the purpose of establishing posts and garrisoning them,
to increase the standing force to so large a number as that contemplated
in the clause under consideration? During our late arduous struggle for
liberty, when we had to cope with the most powerful nation under heaven,
the commander-in-chief had never at any one time above ten thousand men
under his own immediate command; and if, with so small a force, we were
able to effect so glorious a revolution, there can be no necessity of
going such lengths at present, for the sake of establishing a military
character. It is strange policy, indeed, to raise five or six thousand
men to oppose a handful of Indian banditti, whose utmost amount does
not, from the documents on the table, appear to exceed twelve hundred.

We are preparing to squander away money by millions; and no one, except
those who are in the secrets of the Cabinet, knows for what reason the
war has been thus carried on for three years. But what funds are to
defray the increased expense of maintaining such a force as is now
contemplated? The excise is both unpopular and unproductive. The impost
duties have been raised as high as is consistent with prudence. To
increase them, would be but to open a door for smuggling, and thus
diminish their productiveness. And if those sources of revenue fail--if
our finances be thus exhausted in unnecessary wars--we shall be unable
to satisfy, the public creditors, unless recourse be had to new taxes,
the consequence of which may, with just reason, be deplored; whereas, if
we but keep our expenses within bounds--if we nurse our finances--we
shall be respectable among the nations of the earth, nor will any nation
dare to insult us, or be able to do it with impunity.

During the course of these observations, an honorable gentleman asked,
whether this was a day set apart for rhetorical flourishes, as the
galleries were open, and he saw the short-hand writers stationed at
their different posts?

At an early stage of the debate, an honorable gentleman had suggested,
that, instead of passing a law for raising at all events the additional
regiments, which, for his part, he did not think necessary, the House,
if they finally determined the present establishment to be insufficient,
would perhaps do better to appropriate a certain sum of money, to enable
the Executive to call in such additional aid as circumstances may
require.

To this it was objected, that it is the duty of the Representatives of
the people, in all appropriations of the public money, to make them for
certain specific purposes. To act otherwise on the present occasion
would be setting a precedent that might, in its consequences, prove
highly injurious; for, although the greatest confidence may safely be
reposed in the virtue and integrity of him who now fills the
Presidential chair, it is impossible to foresee what use may hereafter
be made of the precedent by his successors, or how far it may be
carried.

Against the motion for striking out, and in favor of the proposed
augmentation of the military establishment, it was urged: That, as to
the justice of the war carried on against the Indian tribes, that was a
question which could not admit of a doubt in the mind of any man who
would allow that self-preservation and indispensable necessity are
sufficient causes to justify a nation in taking up arms. If the present
war be not in every respect justifiable, then there never was, nor ever
will be, a just war. It was originally undertaken, and since carried on,
not for the sake of conquest, but to defend our fellow-citizens, our
friends, our dearest connections, who are daily exposed, in the frontier
settlements, to all the rage of savage barbarity, to which they, with
their wives and children, must soon fall victims, unless we speedily fly
to their assistance; and, although there are some people who utterly
deny the justice of any war whatever, this doctrine, however fine in
theory, will hardly ever obtain in practice; for, is it to be imagined,
that any set of men are of such a passive disposition as calmly to look
on whilst their friends and relations are butchered before their eyes,
and to refuse giving them every assistance in their power?

The murders and depredations which have for years past been repeatedly
committed by the savages, loudly call for redress. From various
documents of unquestionable authority, now in the hands of the Secretary
of War, signed and attested by the Executive and Legislature of
Kentucky, by the District Judge, and the Captains of the militia, it
appears, that, from the year 1783 to 1790, there have been, of the
inhabitants of that District, or of emigrants on their way thither, no
less than fifteen hundred persons either massacred by the savages, or
dragged into captivity, two thousand horses taken away, and other
property plundered or destroyed to the amount of fifty thousand dollars.
And there is good reason to suppose that on the other frontiers of
Virginia and Pennsylvania the number of persons murdered or taken
prisoners during the above-mentioned period would furnish a list of one
thousand or fifteen hundred more.

The white people, it is true, have sometimes committed depredations on
the Indians; but the instances have been rare (the honorable gentleman
who spoke did not recollect above one or two) of their making unjust
attacks upon the savages; nor did they, on those occasions, commence
hostilities against them till exasperated by the strongest provocations
that could possibly stimulate the human heart. This circumstance may be
justly allowed as some palliation of the offence. Even in these
instances, however, a few individuals only were concerned; and, when the
affair came to the knowledge of the State, ample reparation was made to
the injured party. The General Government, too, had shown an equal
disposition to do justice to the Indian tribes. Witness the affair of
the Cherokees; for, as soon as Congress had heard their complaints of an
encroachment made on them by some of the people from the frontier of the
Carolinas, immediate orders were issued for obliging the intruders to
evacuate the Indian territory.

But, notwithstanding the disposition that prevails, as well in the
Legislatures of those States whose frontiers are most exposed, as in the
General Government, to cultivate peace and amity with the neighboring
Indians, that desirable object is become utterly unattainable in the
present posture of affairs. The frontier Indians have killed a number of
whites; the whites, in their turn, have made retaliation. Both parties
are in the highest degree exasperated against each other, and likely to
continue so, in spite of every endeavor that can be made to effect a
reconciliation. With minds thus irritated, it is vain to hope for peace,
as long as they continue in each other's neighborhood. It is therefore
necessary to form a strong barrier, to keep them asunder, unless,
indeed, the advocates for a cessation of hostilities would oblige the
frontier settlers to abandon their lands. But by what new-invented rule
of right should the inhabitants of Kentucky, and the other frontier
settlers, be laid under a greater obligation than any other citizens of
the United States to relinquish a property legally acquired by their
purchase? Were it even proposed to pacify the savages, by purchasing
the lands anew, such a measure would answer no other purpose than that
of procuring a temporary peace, which would soon again be interrupted by
a war that would reproduce the necessity of again having recourse to the
same expedient. We should have to purchase the lands again and again,
without end. By thus squandering the public money, year after year, we
should swell the national debt to an amount that we cannot possibly
foresee. Better at once to make a vigorous effort, to act in a manner
becoming the national dignity, and to maintain our ground by war, since
we cannot obtain a durable or an honorable peace.

Attempts have, at various times, been made to effect treaties of peace
with the Indian tribes with whom we are now at war; and, although these
efforts have constantly proved ineffectual, they yet show, that neither
the United States nor the State of Virginia were backward on their part
to adopt conciliatory measures, and to do away that animosity which had
commenced on the part of the savages at an early period of the late war
with Great Britain, and had continued to break out at intervals ever
since. In the years, 1783, '84, '85, '87, '88, and '90, offers of peace
were made to them. On the last-mentioned occasion, when a treaty was
proposed at the Miami village, the Indians at first refused to treat.
They next required thirty days to deliberate; and, in the interim, the
inhabitants of Kentucky were expressly prohibited by the President of
the United States from carrying on any offensive operations against
them; yet, notwithstanding this forbearance on the part of the whites,
no less than one hundred and twenty persons were killed or captured by
the savages, and several prisoners roasted alive, during that short
period, at the expiration of which, the Indians refused to give any
answer at all.

On another occasion, the Indians, not content with rejecting our offers
of peace, proceeded even so far as to insult us, by telling us we have
lands within the British posts, and asking us why we did not go and take
possession of them? Will it be said that we are unable to do it? Is this
language to be used within the United States? No! We _are_ able,
abundantly able to do it, whenever we please; and if we would but
retrench our expenses in some instances, which might well admit of a
reduction, our ability would still increase; our finances are not quite
so insufficient as some gentlemen seem to imagine, nor so easily
deranged. We are still able to prove that the boasted efficiency of the
General Government is something more than an empty name--we can yet
raise both men and money sufficient to defend the nation from either
injury or insult.

It is now too late to inquire whether the war was originally undertaken
on the principles of justice or not. We are actually involved in it, and
cannot recede, without exposing numbers of innocent persons to be
butchered by the enemy; for, though we should determine to discontinue
the war, can it he said that the savages will also agree to a cessation
of hostilities? It is well known that they are averse to peace; and even
the warmest advocate of pacific measures must therefore allow that the
war is a war of necessity, and must be supported. We cannot, without
impeachment both to our justice and our humanity, abandon our
fellow-citizens on the frontier to the rage of their savage enemies. And
although the excise may be somewhat unpopular, although money may still
be wanted; what is the excise? what is money, when put in competition
with the lives of our friends and brethren?

A sufficient force must be raised for their defence; and the only
question now to be considered is, what that force shall be? Experience
has proved, that the force employed in the last campaign was inadequate.
It is true the establishment was not complete; but who will venture to
assert that, if it had been complete, it would have been sufficient for
the intended purpose? Are gentlemen who assert this so well acquainted
with the circumstances of the enemy, as to be able to give an accurate
statement of the amount of their forces on the frontier? There are
stronger opinions in favor of an augmentation of the army than can be
adduced against it--opinions given by men of judgment and experience,
who have themselves been on the spot, and are well acquainted with the
situation of affairs in that quarter. These gentlemen, who must be
allowed to be competent judges, are decidedly of opinion that the
present establishment, though completed to the last man, will not
furnish an adequate force to carry on the war with effect; and that it
will be a hopeless attempt to open another campaign, with less than
about five thousand regular troops, the number contemplated in the bill.

Nor ought that number to be deemed extravagant, under an idea that we
have only a contemptible handful of banditti to contend with. Their
numbers were, last year, from authentic documents, stated at about
twelve hundred warriors, from twenty-three different tribes: such was
the opposition then contemplated; but it is impossible to ascertain what
accessions of strength they have since received, or even what force they
had engaged in the late unfortunate action, as the very men who were in
the engagement do not pretend to form any just or accurate estimate of
the number of their assailants; but there is good reason to suppose that
they had previously entered into an association with various tribes,
that have not as yet come within our knowledge. The bows and arrows used
against our troops on that occasion, afford a convincing proof that they
had foes to encounter from distant nations, as yet unacquainted with the
use of fire-arms. Nor does the account of the bows and arrows depend,
for its authenticity, on newspaper evidence alone; gentlemen of
unquestionable veracity, who were personally engaged in the action,
have declared that they had themselves noticed the arrows flying.

When we consider the warlike disposition of the Indians in general, and
the alacrity with which the victors are ever sure to be joined by
numerous allies, we have every reason to expect a much more formidable
opposition in the next campaign. It is well known that the savages place
all their glory in deeds of war; and that, among them, a young man
cannot make his appearance in company till he has signalized his valor
by some martial achievement. When, to this powerful incentive, a new
stimulus is added by the trophies obtained in the late action, it is
presumable that numbers will crowd to their standard; and it strongly
behooves us to prepare in time for a much more vigorous effort than any
we have yet made against them.

The objections drawn from the increased expense, must entirely vanish
from before the eyes of any man who looks forward to the consequences of
one more unsuccessful campaign. Such a disaster would eventually involve
the nation in much greater expense than that which is now made the
ground of opposition. Better, therefore, at once to make a vigorous and
effectual exertion to bring the matter to a final issue, than to
continue gradually draining the Treasury, by dragging on the war, and
renewing hostilities from year to year.

If we wish to bring the war to a speedy and a happy conclusion, and to
secure a permanent peace to the inhabitants on the frontier, we must
employ such troops and adopt such measures as appear best calculated to
ensure success. If we delay our determination until the force of the
enemy be ascertained, we can make no provision at all; for the nature
and circumstances of the case preclude us from the very possibility of
obtaining a knowledge of their strength and numbers. And are we,
meanwhile, to remain inactive and irresolute, and make no efforts to
repel their intended attacks? No! Whatever their numbers may be,
prudence calls aloud for provision of some kind. And if experience is to
have any weight with us, the example of the French and of the British
points out the true mode of securing our frontier, and rendering it
invulnerable to an Indian foe. Let us occupy posts in the vicinity of
the enemy, let them be properly garrisoned and well provided, and the
business is done.

These will afford an opportunity of trading with the friendly tribes,
and will prevent all intercourse between the whites and the Indians,
except under proper regulations. Should hostilities be meditated by any
tribes who are not in amity with us, early intelligence of their
movements can be obtained; their marauding parties may either be beaten
off on their approach, or intercepted on their return; opportunities may
be taken of separately attacking the hostile tribes; their old men,
their squaws, their children, will be exposed a great part of the year,
whilst the others are out hunting. In short, if fear, hope, interest,
can be supposed to have any influence on the Indians, this mode of
defence must be allowed to be preferable to any other, as giving the
fullest scope to the operation of all those motives.

A different mode has long been pursued in Virginia, and adopted by the
inhabitants of Kentucky, but its success has not been such as to offer
any inducement to the General Government to follow the same plan.
Rangers have there been employed for a number of years to scour the
frontiers; and those rangers, too, were expert woodsmen, perfectly
inured to the Indian mode of warfare; yet, notwithstanding their utmost
vigilance, these savages still found means to commit all the murders and
depredations already enumerated. It is true, however, that a frontier
militia man, trained up in the woods, may be, in many respects,
preferable to a regular soldier, who has not the same knowledge of the
country, and of the mode of fighting; but with equal experience, (and
proper men possessed of that experience, may be enlisted on the
establishment,) regular troops will be found infinitely superior to any
militia upon earth.

Every man who has ever seen militia in the field, cannot but know that a
very trifling disaster, or a slight cause of discontent, is sufficient
to make them disband, and forget all subordination, so far as even to
neglect the means of self-defence; whereas regular troops, under proper
discipline, and acting with greater steadiness and concert, are much
more to be depended on, especially when the object of attack is distant,
and great fatigue is to be undergone. The militia, in whatever mode they
may be called out, will hardly furnish men of the proper description; if
large pay be offered, the temptation will equally prevail upon those who
are unfit for the service as it will upon good, effective men; besides,
some of the States have no militia laws; and, even in those States which
have such laws, they are gone into disuse; no dependence can therefore
be placed on militia under any laws now existing. There is, indeed, a
general militia law now before the House: but if it ever passes, it
certainly cannot be passed in due season to answer the purpose of
providing for the immediate defence of the frontier. Regular troops must
be raised, or nothing effectual can be done; and if to avoid the expense
we refuse the only aid that may prove of any real service, we render
ourselves responsible for the consequences of this parsimonious policy,
which may be attended with the ruin and destruction of our
fellow-citizens in the Western country.

The Cornplanter's speech was again mentioned and called for; but, as it
had been confidentially communicated by the President, an objection was
made to having it read, without clearing the galleries. Whereupon,

An honorable member rose, and mentioned his having read it in one of the
public newspapers in the State of New Jersey.

To this it was answered, that if any gentleman had the newspaper to
produce, the speech might be publicly read from that; otherwise,
although it might be very proper that the speech itself should be read,
yet, as it had been confidentially received from the Executive, there
would be a manifest trespass on propriety and decorum in having it read
with open galleries; it was therefore wished that the galleries might be
cleared.

The Parliamentary etiquette requiring that this should be done by the
House, and not by a committee, the committee rose for the purpose; and,

The Speaker having resumed the chair, the motion for clearing the
galleries was renewed.

An objection was here started by an honorable gentleman in favor of the
augmentation, who said that, as some gentlemen had spoken on the popular
side of the question, whilst the galleries had been open, it was unfair
to preclude those of opposite sentiments from an opportunity of
answering their arguments in the same public manner, and proving to the
people the justice and necessity of the war.

The motion, however, was persisted in, and the galleries were
cleared.[42]

[The speakers in this day's debate were Messrs. WAYNE, GOODHUE,
BOUDINOT, LIVERMORE, STEELE, PARKER, BOURNE, (Rhode Island,) WHITE, and
MOORE. Mr. WHITE and Mr. MOORE opposed the motion; they were in favor of
the augmentation proposed in the bill. The other gentlemen were in favor
of striking out the clause.]


FRIDAY, January 27.

_Protection of the Frontiers._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill for making further and more effectual provision for the
protection of the frontiers of the United States.

Mr. MERCER rose and addressed the Chair as follows:

Mr. Chairman: I originally opposed the reference of this subject to the
Secretary of the Treasury, on principles supported by the constitution,
by the theory of free government, and from practical observation on the
progress of our own, and I believe the result now before us will fully
exemplify every evil predicted.

Let any man examine this bill, and compare it with the terms of the
original reference. Let it then be asked, whether the submission to
devise ways and means to provide for the defence of the Western
frontier, authorized the plans proposed by the Treasury Department, that
we are now giving sanction to? Did it authorize a perpetual tax,
irrepealable by the whole Legislature, without a breach of faith,
according to received doctrine? At least, so far placing the
purse-strings in the hands of the Executive, who may refuse an assent to
the repeal; in the power of the Senate also, and consequently beyond the
reach of the Representatives of the people, who alone are deputized by,
and may be recalled by the great mass of society, and to whom the
constitution expressly confines the power of originating money bills.
Have we, in truth, originated this money bill? Do we ever originate any
money bill? If a reference, such as made to the Secretary, was proposed
to the Senate, who are a branch of the Legislature, nearly of equal
importance with ourselves, would it not be held a breach of the
constitution? Were they to propose such a plan as this to us, would it
not be received with indignation? Why so little jealousy of the
Executive Department, separated by the constitution with so much care
from us? Of the Treasury Department, too, which is considered in other
countries as possessing and exercising the means of corruption? It is in
my judgment a direct infraction of the letter and spirit of the
constitution, of the principles of free government, and I have heard no
attempt to defend it, but on the ground of pitiful evasion, more
dishonorable to ourselves and dangerous to the public, than an open
violation, that would rouse their resentment and ensure opposition.

But did the submission of a provision to defend the frontier authorize a
system for the encouragement of manufactures, thereby placing the
occupations and productive labor of our citizens under the direction of
Government, and rendering the living of the artist and subsistence of
the farmer, so far equally dependent on and subservient to the views of
Administration? Did it authorize an entire provision for the public
debt, past, present, and to come? Did it authorize a plan for supplying
former deficiencies, which it is admitted do not exist? Lastly, did it
authorize an extensive increase of the Sinking Fund, which we are
informed is one of the principal objects? It would be an affront to
common sense to answer one of these queries in the affirmative--it
authorized none of them. And yet these are all its offspring; these are
the great objects it produced. It is true there are in the bill two or
three little clauses that were authorized, and which relate to the
submission, and which might well have escaped my attention, and would
probably never attract the observation of the public, but for the
title--a bill for the protection of the frontiers. By these clauses five
hundred and twenty-three thousand dollars of the whole moneys to be for
ever raised from its perpetual revenue, are appropriated for this year's
campaign. After that sum is expended, we must, even the next year, look
out for new taxes, and upon the same principles, as long as the Indian
war continues (and by the enlistments it is not contemplated to be of
very short duration) new taxes must be provided, for the residue of
these taxes are by this bill appropriated to other purposes, for ever,
after five hundred and twenty-three thousand dollars are paid. This
appropriation is unalterable even by the whole Legislature, unless by a
breach of public faith, or providing other equal revenue. Should every
year's Indian war, and every national disaster excuse Government for
laying a perpetual tax, equal to the increased annual demand, it will be
selling us defeats at a very high price; and if Government are paid so
well, they may be tempted to repeat the tragical representation.

But what is the reflection that naturally arises from a contemplation of
this bill. That Administration will not even permit us to defend the
helpless women and children of the frontier from the brutal ferocity of
a savage foe, but on condition that the Representatives surrender up for
ever the sacred trust of the constitution, and place in the power and
under the control of the Executive and Senate, a perpetual tax. Unless
they throw the power of regulating the labor and industry of their
fellow-citizens into the hands of Government, and into a mean dependence
on Administration; and unless they furnish a large sum of money, under
the denomination of a Sinking Fund, for the purposes of speculation, in
order to raise and lower the price of stocks at pleasure, or as may suit
the views and interest of the band of favorites that are in the secret.

Hard and oppressive conditions! Was this the object of the reference to
the Secretary? It was not the avowed one, nor could it have been
suspected, from a simple proposition to devise ways and means to defend
the frontier. A mighty fabric has been erected on this slight
foundation, to hurry us into its adoption. We have been officially, I
suppose, informed that the money for the War Department is almost
expended; that the preparations for the Western expedition must stop,
unless we pass the bill immediately; and thus, with the tomahawk
suspended over our heads, we must give up to Administration the dearest
interests of the people, and sacrifice the most sacred rights of the
constitution.


MONDAY, January 30.

_Protection of the Frontiers._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill making farther and more effectual provision for the protection
of the frontiers of the United States; and, after some time spent
therein, the Chairman reported that the committee had again had the said
bill under consideration, and made several amendments thereto; when the
same being read, some were agreed to, and others disagreed to.

And then the said bill being before the House, a motion was made, and
the question being put to amend the same, by striking out the second
section thereof, in the words following:

      "_And be it further enacted_, That there shall be raised
      three additional regiments of infantry, each of which,
      exclusively of the commissioned officers, shall consist of
      nine hundred and twelve non-commissioned officers,
      privates, and musicians:"

It passed in the negative--yeas 18, nays 34, as follows:


      YEAS.--John Baptist Ashe, Elias Boudinot, Shearjashub
      Bourne, Benjamin Bourne, Nicholas Gilman, Benjamin Goodhue,
      William Barry Grove, Samuel Livermore, Nathaniel Macon,
      Nathaniel Niles, Josiah Parker, Israel Smith, John Steele,
      Thomas Sumter, George Thatcher, Artemas Ward, Hugh
      Williamson, and Francis Willis.

      NAYS.--Fisher Ames, Abraham Baldwin, Robert Barnwell,
      Egbert Benson, John Brown, Jonathan Dayton, William
      Findlay, Thomas Fitzsimons, William B. Giles, Andrew Gregg,
      Thomas Hartley, Daniel Huger, Philip Key, Aaron Kitchell,
      John W. Kittera, John Laurance, Amasa Learned, James
      Madison, Andrew Moore, Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg,
      William Vans Murray, John Page, Cornelius C. Schoonmaker,
      Joshua Seney, William Smith, Samuel Sterrett, Jonathan
      Sturges, Peter Sylvester, Thomas Tredwell, Thomas Tudor
      Tucker, Abraham Venable, Jeremiah Wadsworth, Anthony Wayne,
      and Alexander White.

The farther consideration of the said bill was then postponed until
to-morrow.


TUESDAY, January 31.

The Speaker laid before the House a letter from the Secretary of War,
covering his report on the petitions of James Swaine, Abraham Springer,
Timothy Mountford, sundry seamen, Samuel Wail, for himself and servant,
John Carnaghan, James Shields, Henry Skinner, and William Loring; which
were read, and ordered to lie on the table.

_Protection of the Frontiers._

The House resumed the consideration of the bill for making farther and
more effectual provision for the protection of the frontiers of the
United States; and the same being further amended, was

_Ordered_, To be engrossed, and read the third time to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, February 1.

Mr. PAGE, from the committee to whom was referred the petition of John
Churchman, made a report; which was read, and ordered to lie on the
table.

_Protection of the Frontiers._

An engrossed bill for making farther and more effectual provision for
the protection of the frontiers of the United States, was read the
third time, and the blanks therein filled up; and on the question that
the said bill do pass,

It was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 29, nays 19.


FRIDAY, February 3.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate recede from
their amendments, disagreed to by this House, to the bill to establish
Post Offices and Post Roads within the United States, and do agree to
the amendments proposed by the House to their amendment to the said
bill.

_The Cod Fisheries._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on the
bill sent from the Senate, entitled, "An act for the encouragement of
the Bank and other Cod Fisheries, and for the regulation and government
of the fishermen employed therein."

The first section being read as follows:

      "_Be it enacted, &c._, That the bounty, now allowed upon
      the exportation of dried fish of the fisheries of the
      United States, shall cease on all dried fish exported after
      the tenth day of June next; and in lieu thereof, and for
      the more immediate encouragement of the said fisheries,
      there shall be afterwards paid, on the last day of December
      annually, to the owner of every vessel or his agent, by the
      collector of the district where such vessel may belong,
      that shall be qualified agreeably to law, for carrying on
      the Bank and other cod fisheries, and that shall actually
      have been employed therein at sea, for the term of four
      months at least, of the fishing season next preceding
      (which season is accounted to be from the last day of
      February, to the last day of November in every year) for
      each and every ton of such vessel's burden, according to
      her admeasurement, as licensed or enrolled; if of twenty
      tons and not exceeding thirty tons, one and a half dollars,
      and if above thirty tons, two and a half dollars, of which
      bounty three-eighth parts shall accrue and belong to the
      owner of such fishing vessel, and the other five-eighths
      thereof shall be divided by him, his agent or lawful
      representative, to and among the several fishermen who
      shall have been employed in such vessel, during the season
      aforesaid, or a part thereof, as the case may be, in such
      proportions as the fish they shall respectively have taken
      may bear to the whole quantity of fish taken on board such
      vessel during such season. _Provided_, That the bounty, to
      be allowed, and paid on any vessel for one season, shall
      not exceed one hundred and seventy dollars."

Mr. GILES expressed some doubt respecting the principle of the bill; and
for the purpose of collecting the sense of the committee on the subject,
he thought the most effectual means would be a motion to amend the bill,
by striking out the whole section. He accordingly made the motion,
observing at the same time, that he could not positively assert, whether
the reasons which determined him against the principle of the bill, were
well founded or not; that, in matters where a local preference is given,
it is necessary to accommodate; and he would be happy if his objections
could be removed. The present section of the bill appears to contain a
direct bounty on occupations; and if that be its object, it is the first
attempt as yet made by this Government to exercise such authority; and
its constitutionality struck him in a doubtful point of view; for in no
part of the constitution could he, in express terms, find a power given
to Congress to grant bounties on occupations: the power is neither
directly granted, nor (by any reasonable construction that he could
give) annexed to any other power specified in the constitution. It might
perhaps be brought in under a mode of construction already adopted by
the House, viz: that of "ways and ends," by which any power whatever
might be equally implied; but he wished ever to see some connection
between a specified power, and the means adopted for carrying it into
execution. There is a great difference between giving encouragement, and
granting a direct bounty. Congress have a right to regulate commerce;
and any advantage thereby resulting to a particular occupation connected
with commerce, comes within that authority; but when a bounty is
proposed to a particular employment or occupation, this is stepping
beyond the circle of commerce; and such a measure will affect the whole
manufacturing and agricultural system. In all cases, the revenue, to be
employed in this bounty, is drawn from all the sources of revenue in the
United States, and confined to a particular object. He was averse to
bounties in almost every shape, as derogations from the common right;
and he thought there would be no great difficulty in proving, that a
government is both unjust and oppressive in establishing exclusive
rights, monopolies, &c., without some very substantial merit in the
persons to whom they are granted; although even in that case, the
propriety of such grants is still questionable. Under a just and equal
government, every individual is entitled to protection in the enjoyment
of the whole product of his labor, except such portion of it as is
necessary to enable Government to protect the rest; this is given only
in consideration of the protection offered. In every bounty, exclusive
right, or monopoly, Government violates the stipulation on her part;
for, by such a regulation, the product of one man's labor is transferred
to the use and enjoyment of another. The exercise of such a right on the
part of Government can be justified on no other principle, than that the
whole product of the labor of every individual is the real property of
Government, and may be distributed among the several parts of the
community by governmental discretion; such a supposition would directly
involve the idea that every individual in the community is merely a
slave and bondman to Government, who, although he may labor, is not to
expect protection in the product of his labor. An authority given to any
government to exercise such a principle, would lead to a complete system
of tyranny.

He entertained fewer doubts, respecting the principle, as it regards
political economy. All occupations that stand in need of bounties,
instead of increasing the real wealth of a country, rather tend to
lessen it; the real wealth of every country consisting in the active
product of useful labor employed in it. It is therefore bad policy to
encourage any occupation that would diminish, instead of increasing the
aggregate wealth of the community; and if an occupation is really
productive, and augments the general wealth, bounties are unnecessary
for its support; for when it reimburses the capital employed, and yields
a profit besides, it may be said to support itself. When it fails in
these points, any forced advantage that is given to it by the
Government, only tends to decrease the wealth of the country. The
subject, however, might be considered in a more favorable point of view:
and that is, whether the provision be essential to the defence of the
United States, and whether the bounties proposed in the bill were more
than equivalent to the portion of defence that would be procured by
them. The bill does not (in his opinion) contain that kind of
encouragement, which is essential to the national defence. Any man who
takes a view of this country, must be convinced that its real support
rises from the land, and not from the sea; and the opposite mistake must
have arisen merely from a servile imitation of the conduct of Great
Britain: the inhabitants of this country heretofore thought favorably of
her Government, and the Revolution has not yet altered their former
ideas respecting it. But the circumstances of the two countries will, on
examination, be found widely different; Britain, surrounded by the sea
on every side, finds a navy necessary to support her commerce; whilst
America, possessed of an immense territory, and having yet ample room to
cultivate that territory, has no occasion to contend by sea with any
European power: her strength and her resources are all to be found
within the United States; and if she but attends to her internal
resources, the object of national defence will be much better answered.

Mr. G. next proceeded to consider whether that portion of the national
defence which might be derived from the fisheries, would not be
purchased at too high a price. Although the apparent intention of the
bill is only to convert the present existing drawbacks into a bounty;
yet the drawbacks being allowed only to the actual exportation of the
fish, and the bounty being granted on the tonnage of the fishing
vessels, there can be no comparative value between the drawback and the
bounty; they have no necessary relation to each other, and the latter
may exceed the former, or the former exceed the latter. He had made a
calculation, and upon the most favorable principles, grounded on the
Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State.
Here he produced a calculation, tending to show that the proposed bounty
on the tonnage of the fishing vessels, would considerably exceed the
amount of the present drawbacks. From a comparison between the bounty,
and the number of sailors employed in the fisheries, he showed what an
expense each man would be to the United States; and, after other
remarks, observed, that even Great Britain, whose whole national support
and defence depends on her navy, had found, that the men employed in the
fisheries, though so necessary for that defence, had cost her too much;
that America, whose consequence, as a nation, does not depend on a navy,
ought to take a lesson from the experience of Britain: that he did not
wish to enter into a competition with Britain and France, in supplying
the different markets with fish; that, as those nations are able to hold
out greater encouragement to their fishermen, than we can to ours, we
would, by such a competition, only exhaust the Treasury of the United
States to no purpose; and upon this principle alone, he thought there
was some reason to doubt the policy of the measure proposed in the
section under consideration, which therefore he hoped the committee
would agree to strike out, unless his objection could be obviated.

Mr. MURRAY observed, that in order to demonstrate the propriety of the
measure, it would be incumbent on the friends of the bill, first, to
prove that the fishery trade is in a state of decay, that the stock
employed in it does not yield the ordinary profits, so as to justify the
merchants in embarking their capital in this branch of trade: that there
is a system of defence in contemplation, which the circumstances of the
country call for, and which this trade is calculated to furnish; that
other branches of trade, which do not stand in need of encouragement,
are not equally capable of furnishing seamen for the purpose: that this
particular object so peculiarly claims the attention and encouragement
of the United States, as to leave far behind every consideration of the
manufacturing interest, the agricultural, &c. All this he thought
necessary for gentlemen to prove, and to show some very strong necessity
for encouraging one particular class of men, in preference to all
others.

Mr. GOODHUE.--It happens that the fisheries of the United States are
almost entirely confined to the State of Massachusetts; and they furnish
a considerable, a principal portion of our export trade. As we are a
part of the United States, the United States in general are interested
in the prosperity of that branch of business, so far at least as it
contributes to the national defence: it furnishes a copious nursery of
hardy seamen, and offers a never-failing source of protection to the
commerce of the United States. If we engage in a war with any European
power, those seamen will be excluded from their ordinary employment, and
must have recourse to privateering. During the late war with Great
Britain, we annoyed the enemy more in that line than in all others; and
had it not been for privateering, it would often have been impossible to
keep together our armies, who frequently, in the hour of need, were
supplied by the privateers with ammunition and clothing, of which they
were wholly destitute. All that we wish to obtain by this bill is, that
we may not be burdened with duties. An opinion has been entertained,
that no drawbacks ought to be allowed on the re-exportation of articles
imported from foreign countries; but if this opinion were to obtain in
practice, and no drawbacks were to be admitted, we must confine our
importation to articles for our own consumption. The drawback allowed by
the existing law, on the exportation of salt fish, was calculated to be
only equal to the duty beforehand paid on the quantity of salt used in
curing the fish; but the fishermen complain that, as the act now stands,
they are wholly excluded from any participation in the benefit, which
centres entirely in the coffers of the merchants. The object of the
present bill is, only to repay the same money into the hands of those
persons who are immediately concerned in catching the fish; and there
can no reasonable objection be made to such a transfer of the drawback,
as Government will not lose a single dollar by the change. The gentleman
from Virginia (Mr. GILES) talks of the unconstitutionality of granting
bounties; but no bounty is required. We only ask, in another mode, the
usual drawback for the salt used on the fish. If we can make it appear
that the bill does not contemplate any greater sums to be drawn from the
Treasury, than are already allowed, it is to be hoped that no further
opposition will be made to the measure; and that this is really the
case, can be proved by documents from the Treasury office. Here he read
a statement and calculation to prove his assertion; and to show that the
United States will probably pay one thousand dollars per annum less in
the proposed bounties on the tonnage of the fishing vessels, than they
would in the drawbacks on the exportation of the fish. The fishermen, he
continued, are now under no control; and in consequence of this want of
a proper restraint, they often take whims into their heads and quit the
vessels during the fishing season. To prevent the inconveniences of this
practice, the bill contemplates their exclusion from the bounty, unless
they enter into such contracts and regulations, as may be found
necessary for the proper and successful conducting of the business,
which, from our advantageous situation, would be entirely in our hands,
if we did not meet with such opposition and discouragement from foreign
nations, whose bounties to their own fishermen, together with the duties
laid upon our fish, would, to persons less advantageously situated than
us, amount almost to a total prohibition.

In the Report from the Secretary of State, a drawback is contemplated of
the duties on all foreign articles, used by the seamen employed in the
fishing trade, such as coffee, rum, &c.; but we ask it on the salt
alone; nor is it asked as a bounty, but merely as a transfer from the
hand of the merchant to that of the fishermen.

Mr. WHITE had no objection to give the trade a proper degree of
encouragement; but he did not relish the idea of granting bounties; if
any gentleman would prepare an amendment, so as to make them drawbacks
in fact, as well as in words, he would consent to the measure.

Mr. AMES, after some introductory observations, adverted to the
necessity of fixing some point in which both sides would agree.
Disputes, he said, could not be terminated--or, more properly, they
could not be managed at all, if some first principles were not conceded.
The parties would want weapons for the controversy.

Law is in some countries the yoke of government, which bends or breaks
the necks of the people; but, thank Heaven, in this country, it is a
man's shield--his coat of mail--his castle of safety. It is more than
his defence: it is his weapon to punish those who invade his rights--it
is the instrument which assists--it is the price that rewards his
industry.

If I say that fishermen have equal rights with other men, every
gentleman feels in his own bosom a principle of assent. If I say that no
man shall pay a tax on sending his property out of the country, the
constitution will confirm it; for the constitution says, _no duty shall
be laid on exports_. If I say, that on exporting dried fish, the
exporter is entitled to drawback the duty paid on the salt, I say no
more than the law of the land has confirmed. Plain and short as these
principles are, they include the whole controversy. For I consider the
law allowing the drawback as the right of the fishery, the defects of
that law as the wrong suffered, and the bill before us as the remedy.
The defects of the law are many and grievous. Supposing 340,000 quintals
exported----

    The salt duty is                               $42,744
    The drawback is only                            34,000
                                                  --------
    Loss to the fishery                              8,744

    Whereas Government pays $45,900, at
    13-1/2 cents, including charges, which are
    3-1/2 cents on a quintal: which is beyond
    what the fishery receives                       11,900
                                                  --------
    Being a clear loss to the Government of          3,156

So that, though the whole is intended for the benefit of the fishery,
about one-fourth of what is paid is not so applied: there is a heavy
loss both to Government and the fishery. Even what is paid on the export
is nearly lost money; the bounty is not paid till the exportation, nor
then, till six months have elapsed; whereas the duty on salt is paid
before the fish is taken: it is paid to the exporter, not to the
fisherman. The bounty is so indirect, that the poor fisherman loses
sight of it. It is paid to such persons, in such places, and at such
periods, as to disappoint its good effects; passing through so many
hands, and paying so many profits to each, it is almost absorbed. The
encouragement, too, is greatest in successful years, when least needed;
and is least in bad fishing seasons, when it is most needed. It is a
very perplexed, embarrassing regulation to the officers of Government
and to the exporter; hence the great charge: and, with all this charge
and trouble, it is liable to many frauds. Four hundred miles of coast,
little towns, no officer. All these defects the bill remedies; and,
besides, gives the money on condition that certain regulations are
submitted to, which are worth almost as much as the money.

The bill is defended on three grounds. First, it will promote the
national wealth; second, the national safety; third, justice requires
it: the last is fully relied on.

To show that the fishery will increase the wealth of the nation, it
cannot be improper to mention its great value. The export before the war
brought more than a million of dollars into this country; probably it is
not less at present, and no small part in gold and silver. It is
computed that thirty thousand persons, including four thousand seamen,
subsist by it. Many say, very composedly, if it will not maintain
itself, let it fall. But we should not only lose the annual million of
dollars which it brings us; an immense capital would be lost. The
fishing towns are built on the naked rocks, or barren sands, on the side
of the sea. Those spots, however, where trade would sicken and
die--which husbandry scorns to till--and which nature seems to have
devoted to eternal barrenness, are selected by industry to work miracles
on. Houses, stores, and wharves, are erected, and a vast property
created, all depending on this business. Before you think it a light
thing to consign them to ruin, see if you can compute what they cost; if
they outrun your figures, then confess that it would be bad economy, as
well as bad policy, to suffer rival nations to ruin our fishery. The
regulations of foreign nations tend to bring this ruin about. France and
England equally endeavor, in the language of the Secretary of State, to
mount their marine on the destruction of our fishery. The fishers at
Newfoundland are allowed liberal bounties by the English Government;
and, in the French West Indies, we meet bounties on their fish and
duties on our own, and these amount to the price of the fish. From the
English islands we are quite shut out; yet such is the force of our
natural advantages, that we have not yielded to these rivals. The
Secretary of State has made these statements in his Report.

The more fish we catch, the cheaper; the English fish will need a
greater bounty: whereas if we should yield, the English would probably
need no bounty at all; they would have the monopoly. For example;
suppose the English can fish at two dollars the quintal--we catch so
much that we sell at one dollar and two-thirds: the loss to them is
one-third of a dollar on each quintal. They must have that sum as a
bounty. Whereas, if we increase our fishery, a greater and a greater
bounty is needed by foreign nations. The contest so painfully sustained
by them must be yielded at last, and we shall enjoy alone an immense
fund of wealth to the nation, which nature has made ours; and though
foreigners disturb the possession, we shall finally enjoy it peaceably
and exclusively. If the lands of Kentucky are invaded, you drive off the
invader; and so you ought. Why not protect this property as well? These
opinions are supported by no common authority. The State of
Massachusetts having represented the discouragements of the fishery, the
subject has received the sanction of the Secretary of State; he confirms
the facts stated in the petition; he says it is too poor a business to
pay any thing to Government.

Yet, instead of asking bounties, or a remission of the duties on the
articles consumed, we ask nothing but to give us our own money back,
which you received under an engagement to pay it back, in case the
article should be exported. If nothing was in view, therefore, but to
promote national wealth, it seems plain that this branch ought to be
protected and preserved; because, under all the discouragements it
suffers, it increases, and every year more and more enriches the
country, and promises to become an inexhaustible fund of wealth.

Another view has been taken of the subject, which is drawn from the
naval protection afforded, in time of war, by a fishery. Our coasting
and foreign trade are increasing rapidly; but the richer our trade
becomes, the better prize to the enemy: so far from protecting us, it
would be the very thing that would tempt him to go to war with us. As
the rice and the tobacco planter cheerfully pay for armies, and turn out
in the militia to protect their property on shore, they cannot be so
much deceived as to wish to have it left unprotected when it is afloat;
especially when it is known that this protection, though more effectual
than the whole revenue expended on a navy could procure, will not cost a
farthing; on the contrary, it will enrich while it protects the nation.
The coasters and other seamen, in the event of a war, would be doubly in
demand, and could neither protect themselves nor annoy the enemy to any
considerable degree; but the fishermen, thrown out of business by a war,
would be instantly in action. They would, as they formerly did, embark
in privateers; having nothing to lose, and every thing to hope, they
would not dishonor their former fame. Their mode of life makes them
expert and hardy seamen. Nothing can be more adventurous. They cast
anchor on the banks, three hundred leagues from land, and with a great
length of cable ride out the storms of winter. If the gale proves too
strong they often sink at their anchors, and are food for fish which
they came to take: for ever wet, the sea almost becomes their element.
Cold and labor in that region of frost, brace their bodies, and they
become as hardy as the bears on the islands of ice: their skill and
spirit are not inferior: familiar with danger, they despise it. If I
were to recite their exploits, the theme would find every American heart
already glowing with the recollection of them; it would kindle more
enthusiasm than the subject has need of. My view is only to appeal to
facts, to evince the importance of the fishery as a means of naval
protection. It is proper to pass over Bunker's Hill, though memorable by
the valor of a regiment of fishermen; nor is it necessary to mention,
further, that five hundred fishermen fought at Trenton.

It is known, that the privateers manned by fishermen, in want of every
thing, not excepting arms, which they depended on taking from their
enemies, brought into port warlike stores of every kind, as well as
every kind of merchandise sufficient for the army and country: the war
could not have been carried on without them. Among other exploits almost
beyond belief, one instance is worth relating: these people, in a
privateer of sixteen guns, and one hundred and fifty men, in one cruise
took more than twenty ships, with upwards of two hundred guns, and
nearly four hundred men. The privateers from a single district of
Massachusetts, where the fishery is chiefly seated, took more than two
thousand vessels, being one third of the British merchant vessels, and
brought in near one thousand two hundred. A hundred sail of privateers,
manned by fishermen, would scour every sea in case of a war.

The first question is, how much does Government receive by the duty on
the salt used in curing the fish which is exported? The quantity of fish
must be known. Several ways of information are to be explored. The
Secretary of State supposes the fish of 1790 to be 354,276 quintals. A
Treasury return of fish exported from August 20, 1789, to September 30,
1790, which is thirteen and one-third months, is 378,721 quintals. For a
year, equal to 340,849 quintals.

Foreign dried fish imported from August 15, 1789, to August, 1790, 3,701
quintals; five per cent. drawback thereon is only three hundred and ten
dollars, at one dollar and sixty-six cents per quintal. Mr. GILES is
mistaken in supposing that foreign fish deducts $16,000 from our
estimate. Return of fish in seven months, from May 30, to December,
1790, exported, all fish of the United States, 197,278 quintals: which,
for a year, is 338,184 quintals. The medium may be fairly taken for the
time past at 340,000 quintals a year.

Six gentlemen of Marblehead certify, that 5,043 hogsheads, or 40,344
bushels of salt, were used on 38,497-1/2 quintals; which, for 340,000
quintals, gives 356,200 bushels. The duty, at twelve cents, is $42,744,
which Government receives. But the charge to the United States, is, at
thirteen and a half cents per quintal

                                              $45,900
Whereof the fishery receives ten cents
on each quintal exported                       34,000
                                               ------
Charges as the law stands                      11,900

Further, this is but an estimate made up from what the last year proved.
The next may be very different, and probably it will be. If more money
should be demanded than $44,000, we must not be accused of misleading
Congress. But in that case an increase would be made by law; for the
more fish is exported, the more thirteen and a half cents must be paid;
so that the bill creates no burden in that way. But the increase of the
export of fish will probably operate in favor of Government. For it is
known that the economy, skill, and activity of the fishery are making
progress. Its success has progressed. The more fish to a vessel, the
cheaper the allowance on the tonnage. Therefore, the tonnage of vessels
will not increase in a ratio with the increase of the fish.

The very objections prove this. For they deem the encouragement too
great. But any encouragement must have the effect.

The difference of the agreements for distributing the fish according to
the present practice, or by this bill, makes a great one in the quantity
taken. The bill reforms the practice in this point. Marblehead vessels
take less than those from Beverly. The former throw the fish into a
common stock, which is afterwards divided upon a plan very unfriendly to
exertion. A man works for the whole--perhaps twelve hours, and they take
about eight hundred quintals to a vessel. But in Beverly, the exertion
is as great as can be made; eighteen hours a day, because each man has
what he catches, and they catch eleven hundred quintals.

Marblehead seamen sailing from other towns, and dividing as last
mentioned, which the bill establishes, seldom fail to catch two or three
hundred quintals more than vessels and men from Marblehead on the first
plan. Accordingly, I assert on good authority, that the increase in
Marblehead only may be computed at fifteen thousand quintals, merely in
consequence of the reform by the bill. The best informed persons whom I
have consulted, entertain no doubt that the export, in case the bill
should pass, would not be less than four hundred thousand quintals,
probably more; but at four hundred thousand quintals, it would add seven
thousand two hundred dollars more to the salt duty; a sum more than
equal to any estimate of the actual tonnage, or any probable increase of
it

                                 $42,744
                                   7,200
                                  ------
Salt duty on 400,000 quintals     49,944

Other facts confirm the theory, that skill and exertion are increasing
in this business.

In 1775, 25,000 tons, 4,405 seaman. Fish sold for $1,071,000. In 1790,
three-fourths of the seamen and three-fourths of the tonnage take as
much fish. It is owing to this that our fishery stood the competition
with foreign nations.

Finally, the average in future may be relied on not to be less than
350,000 quintals.

Salt duty on which               $43,944
Bounties                          44,000
                                  ------
Wanted                                56

The calculations first made will answer the purpose,

340,000 quintals pay salt duty   $42,744
Tonnage bounty                    44,000
                                  ------
Wanted                             1,256

This is the mighty defect. Observe the authentic return of the export of
fish may be, and we can almost prove it to be, below the future export.
Whereas, to banish all doubt, we go to the top of the scale for the
tonnage, we take what we know to be the utmost. This we might have
represented more favorably if we had chosen to conceal any thing. But
even this will answer our purpose.

For two hundred tons are wanting in the estimate of the bounties, being
nineteen thousand eight hundred, not twenty thousand, which will take
off one-third of the deficient sum.

The tonnage over sixty-eight, which receives nothing, is not mentioned;
and which probably is not less than another third.

The boats under five tons, though trifling, are to be noticed--they
receive nothing.

But, above all, the chances of non-compliance with the regulations are
in favor of the remainder of the twelve hundred and fifty-six dollars
being stopped. Boats may not get twelve quintals to the ton, or vessels
may have their voyages broken up, and not stay four months on the
fishing ground; in either case they would receive nothing. Take all
these together, is it not to be doubted that twelve hundred and
fifty-six dollars will remain of the forty-four thousand in the
Treasury?

But these are trifles which I cannot believe gentlemen are anxious
about.

For the event cannot be reduced to a certainty. What quantity of fish
will be exported, no man can tell now. But as Government may receive
more than it will pay, the chance may turn the other way, and it may
have to pay a few hundred dollars more than it will have received. We
have seen that the chance is most in favor of Government. But one chance
must balance the other. This answer is sincerely relied on as a good
one.

I barely mention that the wear of cordage, cables, sails, and anchors,
is very great. These articles, on being imported, pay duties. So that it
is probable the extra duty paid by the fishery on their extra
consumption, will overbalance any little sums supposed to exceed in the
bounty.

It has been asked, as if some cunning was detected, why if the money
received in the Treasury to pay the drawbacks is equal to the proposed
bounties, a further appropriation should be made? This cunning question
admits of several very simple answers.

The bill being for seven years, the average product is the proper sum to
be calculated. But the three first years may fall short of the bounties,
say two thousand dollars a year, which is six thousand dollars.

The four last may exceed two thousand dollars, say eight thousand
dollars.

Shall a poor fisherman wait for the whole, or if he takes his part
according to the money in the Treasury--for a twenty-fourth part of the
bounty on his vessel, from 1792 to 1795?

2d. This delay would happen after a bad year, the very time when he
would most need prompt pay.

3d. But fish taken this year will not be exported till December next.
Therefore the money will not be stopped by the drawback as the law
stands, till six months after.

A substitute has been proposed for the clause, to appropriate the
drawback only.

This is absolutely improper. For the ten cents allowed as drawback is
but a part of the duty paid on salt. It is not easy to see any reason
why a part stopped at the Treasury should be equal to the whole paid
there long before. The drawback falls near nine thousand dollars short
of the salt duty received by the Government. The expense of the drawback
would be very heavy and useless.

Nor may gentlemen apprehend that Government, by paying next December,
will advance money to the fishery. The salt duty will have been paid,
and Government will have the use of the money many months before the
fishermen will have a right to call for the bounties.

It is left to the candor of the gentlemen who have urged this objection,
whether a better or further answer is desired.

After having laboriously gone through the estimate of the probable
export of fish, it will not be necessary to be equally minute as to the
quantity or kind of vessels which are to receive the bounty.

The estimate we believe to be very high. That it is high enough, we
suppose very probable from the estimate of the Secretary of State, which
is only nineteen thousand one hundred and eighty-five tons.

This mode of paying the bounty on the tonnage is very simple and safe.
The measurement is already made and costs nothing; and as it was made to
pay a duty on tonnage, we are very sure that Government will not be
cheated by an over-measure. The mode of paying the drawback, as the law
now stands, is expensive, perplexed and embarrassing; liable to frauds
and delays.

This intricate and disgusting detail of calculations was necessary to
satisfy the committee that each of the three grounds of defence on which
the bill rests, is tenable.

Instead of impoverishing the nation by scattering the treasures of the
whole to benefit a part, it appears that we are preserving a mine of
treasure. In point of naval protection, we can scarcely estimate the
fishery too highly. It is always ready, always equal to the object; it
is almost the only sufficient source of security by sea. Our navigation
is certainly a precious interest of the country. But no part of our
navigation can vie with the fishery in respect to the protection it
affords. There is no point which regards our national wealth or national
safety, in respect to which it seems practicable to do so much with so
little.

We rely on the evidence before you, that the public will not sustain the
charge of a dollar. Those ought not to doubt the evidence who cannot
invalidate it. If then the fishermen ask you to restore only their own
money, will you deny them? Will you return to every other person
exporting dutied goods the money he has paid, and will you refuse the
poor fisherman?

If there must be an instance of the kind, will you single out for this
oppressive partiality, that branch which is described by the Secretary
of State as too poor even to bear its own part of the common burden;
that branch which nevertheless has borne the neglect of our nation, and
the persecution of foreign prohibitions and duties; a branch which,
though we have received much and expect more, both of money and
services, urges no claims but such as common justice has sanctioned?

Mr. GERRY having moved to strike out the words "bounty allowed" in order
to insert _allowance made_, by way of accommodation,

Mr. MURRAY observed, that the question was, whether a bounty should be
given for the encouragement of the fishery: the amendment proposed by
the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. GERRY) did not alter the
principle--it was still "_the old cocked hat_" on the one hand, and on
the other, "_the cocked old hat_:" the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
FITZSIMONS) had asserted, that Congress have a right to alter the
drawbacks, and allow them in any other mode, by which the citizens may
receive back their own money; but this is not a case of that nature; for
the bill says, "in case the moneys appropriated (_for the payment of the
duties_) shall be inadequate, the deficiency shall be supplied from the
Treasury;" here the Treasury is pledged for the payment of the bounties;
and the question is, not on the principle of changing the drawback, but
the giving encouragement to a particular branch, at the expense of the
community at large.

Mr. BARNWELL observed, that those who are best acquainted with the
fisheries, look on the proposed mode of encouragement as the best; and
that they ought to be allowed to use the gifts of the public in the most
advantageous manner: that, if he were himself concerned in the
cultivation of any particular commodity, for the encouragement of which
a sum were granted, he would be much surprised to meet a refusal, in
case he should come forward and propose some more effectual mode of
applying that grant: that even if the bounties should happen to exceed
the drawbacks, by eight or ten thousand dollars, the number of seamen to
be maintained would be well worth that sum: that whenever the two Houses
of Congress and the President of the United States are of opinion that
the general welfare will be promoted by raising any sum of money, they
have undoubted right to raise it, provided that the taxes be uniform;
that although it may not at present be an object of great consequence to
America to become a maritime power, yet it is of some importance to have
constantly at hand a nursery of seamen, to furnish our merchants with
the means of transporting their commodities across the sea; that,
whatever allowance or bounty is granted upon any particular commodity,
must ever be paid by the whole, for the advantage of a part, whether it
be upon cotton to the Southward, upon fish to the Eastward, or upon
other commodities to the Middle States; that if the people cannot have
so much confidence in their Representatives, as to trust them with the
power of granting bounties, the Government must be a very paltry one
indeed. The object of the bill was only to allow to the fishermen, in
the manner that would be most beneficial to them, the same sum that
would otherwise be allowed. If, however, from time and experience, it
should appear that this bounty proved an imposition on Government, he
would not hesitate to revoke it.

Mr. GERRY.--The State of Massachusetts asks nothing more than equal
justice. We do not come forward to request favors from the United
States, we only wish that the same system which is applied to other
parts of the Union, may be applied to us. But, in examining this
question, we wish that gentlemen would not make distinctions which will
not admit of a difference.

The proposed allowance has been called a bounty on occupation, and is
said to be very different from that encouragement, which is the
incidental result of a general commercial system; but in reality it is
no bounty: a bounty is a grant, made without any consideration whatever,
as an equivalent; and I have no idea of a bounty, which admits of
receiving from the person, on whom it is conferred, the amount of what
is granted. We have imposed a duty on salt, and thereby draw a certain
sum of money from the fishermen; the drawback is, in all instances, the
amount of the money received; this is all we ask; and we ask it for a
set of men who are as well entitled to the regard of Government as any
other class of citizens.

It has been supposed, that the allowance made to the fishermen, will
amount to a greater sum than the drawback on the exportation of the
fish; but I think it has been clearly shown that this will not be the
case: on the contrary, it is presumable, that the drawback on the fish
would on the whole exceed the sum which is proposed to be allowed to the
fishermen; sometimes it might be more, sometimes less. The calculation
is made on general principles; and it is impossible to calculate to a
single cent: the quantity of salt to be expended on the fish, cannot be
minutely ascertained; but this was not heretofore considered as a
sufficient reason why Congress should refuse to allow the drawback; they
allowed it, though in a different shape. It is now proposed to make a
further commutation: gentlemen call this a bounty on occupation; but is
there any proposition made for paying to the fishermen, or other persons
concerned in the fishery, any sums which we have not previously received
from them? If this were the case, it would indeed be a bounty; but if we
beforehand receive from them as much as the allowance amounts to, there
is no bounty granted at all.

If, however, it really was a bounty on occupation, it would after all be
only an indulgence similar to what has been granted to the landed and
agricultural interest. We have laid on hemp a duty of fifty-four cents
per hundredweight; and on beer, ale, and porter, five cents per gallon.
Now, I ask gentlemen, whether the professed design of those duties was
to raise a revenue, or to prevent the importation of those articles?
They were laid for no other purpose, than to prevent foreigners from
importing them, and thereby to encourage our own manufactures; and was
not that encouragement a bounty to the persons concerned in producing
such articles in this country? If the duties had not been laid, the
importer could sell much cheaper than he now can; and the landed
interest would be under a necessity of selling cheaper in proportion. If
those prohibitory duties operate as a bounty in favor of raising hemp,
and of brewing beer, ale, and porter, I ask, whether, if a bounty were
proposed on every quintal of fish, it might not, with the same
propriety, be granted? If we have not a right to grant a bounty in the
one case, we have as little right to grant it in the other.

A calculation has been offered to show that the proposed allowance will
exceed the amount of the present drawbacks, by ten thousand dollars a
year; but that calculation has been proved to be erroneous. Suppose,
however, that this was the fact, what comparison is there between such a
tax on the citizens of the United States, and the tax borne by the
citizens of Massachusetts, for the defence of the Western frontier? A
commercial war is waged against the American fisheries, by foreign
nations, who lay heavy duties on the American fish, and apply the
produce of those duties in bounties to their own fishermen; and their
fisheries being less extensive than ours, the duty thus imposed on our
fish, and bestowed in bounties to their vessels, operate in a twofold
proportion to the discouragement of our fishermen, and the encouragement
of theirs.

I wish to know on what principle gentlemen can expect, that the citizens
of Massachusetts should contribute two hundred thousand dollars, or
perhaps a greater sum, for the protection of the Western frontier
against the Indians, when no contribution is made to support the
commerce of Massachusetts, which, without this support, will be as
effectually ruined, as if their vessels were captured by an enemy. The
principle is carried farther with respect to the protection of the
frontier: we have voted large sums as presents to the savages, to keep
them friends to the frontier settlers; there is, however, no clause in
the constitution that will authorize a measure of this kind: it is true,
indeed, we have a power to regulate trade and commerce with the Indian
tribes; but does that give us a power to render the United States
tributary to the savages? and if we make them such grants every year, do
we not in fact become tributary to them?

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. GILES) says that although this plan of
encouraging the fisheries may be wise policy in Britain, as being on all
sides surrounded by the sea, yet the United States will not equally find
their account in pursuing the same plan. The State of Virginia is, in
point of exposure from the sea, very differently circumstanced from the
State of Massachusetts: _we_ have a vast extent of country four hundred
and fifty miles of sea-coast, exposed; the citizens of all the towns
along the coast are obliged to pursue marine occupations and I hope the
gentleman does not wish that the country should be depopulated, and the
inhabitants driven off to settle the Western territory.

The State of Virginia is very happily circumstanced with respect to a
marine war: should such an event take place, that State is pretty secure
from depredations; but when we consider how much the inhabitants of
Massachusetts are exposed in a case of that kind, we ought to look
forward, and make some provision for their defence: they have as good a
right to expect that Government will make some arrangements for their
protection, as that they shall be obliged to contribute for the defence
of the Western frontier.

But their commerce, it seems, must not be supported! Taxes however must
be laid; and those taxes applied to encourage the former, and to bribe
the Indians into peace! Is this fair? Is this pursuing a liberal system
of politics? Will this reconcile the minds of our people to the General
Government? If so reasonable a proposition be neglected by the House, it
will convince the citizens of that State, that it is the object of
Government to destroy their commerce, and to make them entirely
dependent on the agricultural interest.

Here Mr. GERRY read a statement, to show the diminution of the revenue
in consequence of the failure of the fisheries; and added,

To support the fisheries, is to support the revenue: by that staple, the
citizens of Massachusetts are enabled to pay the revenue that is
expected from them; and, by an attempt to save ten thousand dollars,
Government will probably sacrifice a hundred thousand; and besides, lose
the confidence of the citizens of that State.

The only question now is, whether this be a direct bounty, or simply a
commutation of the allowance already granted by Congress? If the latter
be the case, I can see no reason why we should refuse our assent to a
proposition, which is only calculated to do justice to the people
concerned, and to give encouragement to a very important branch in the
United States; especially as the proposition will even have a tendency
to increase the revenue.

Mr. WILLIAMSON.--It has been urged with great propriety, in favor of the
bill now submitted to our consideration, that the operation of our laws
should in all cases tend to encourage useful industry; that while we are
giving back the duties on all other foreign goods which are exported,
it would be unjust and cruel to refuse a full drawback of the duties on
salt which may be exported, especially when the circumstances of its
exportation are attended with an increase of riches and strength to the
nation. Impressed as I am with the force of these arguments, and
desirous as I am to protect and encourage the native seamen of America,
by all prudent, practicable, and constitutional means, I shall
nevertheless find it my duty to vote for striking out the first section
of the bill, because it proposes to give a bounty for the encouragement
of the vessels employed in the fisheries.

We have been told that the name is improper; that it is simply a
drawback of the duty upon salt; and gentlemen have produced a very
ingenious calculation, by which they attempt to prove, that in some
years it may happen that the whole duty on the salt will not be repaid;
but they admit that in some years the drawback or bounty will exceed the
duty. It is certainly their opinion--and in this we are perfectly
agreed--that the money to be paid will be more than that received, else
there had been no use for so large an appropriation. We shall not
trouble the committee with calculations on this subject. It is conceded,
that the encouragement to be given, probably will exceed the full
drawback of the duty on salt. In other words, a douceur or a proper
bounty is to be given: let us call it one thousand dollars per annum. Is
it within the powers of this Congress to grant bounties? I think not;
and on this single position I would rest the argument.

In the constitution of this Government there are two or three remarkable
provisions, which seem to be in point. It is provided, that direct taxes
shall be apportioned among the several States according to their
respective numbers. It is also provided, that all duties, imposts, and
excises, shall be uniform throughout the United States; and it is
provided, that no preference shall be given, by any regulation of
commerce or revenue, to the ports of one State over those of another.
The clear and obvious intention of the articles mentioned was, that
Congress might not have the power of imposing unequal burdens; that it
might not be in their power to gratify one part of the Union by
oppressing another. It appeared possible, and not very improbable, that
the time might come, when, by greater cohesion, by more unanimity, by
more address, the Representatives of one part of the Union might attempt
to impose unequal taxes, or to relieve their constituents at the expense
of other people. To prevent the possibility of such a combination, the
articles that I have mentioned were inserted in the constitution.
Suppose a poll-tax should be attempted; suppose it should be enacted
that every poll in the Eastern States shall pay a tax of half a dollar,
and every poll in the Southern States should pay a tax of one dollar. Do
you think we should pay the tax? No certainly. We should plead the
constitution, and tell you that the law was impotent and void.

But we have been told, that Congress may give bounties for useful
purposes; that is to say, they may give bounties for all imaginable
purposes; because the same majority that votes the bounty will not fail
to call the purpose a good one. Establish the doctrine of bounties, and
let us see what may follow. Uniform taxes are laid to raise money, and
that money is distributed--not uniformly; the whole of it may be given
to the people in one end of the Union. Could we say, in such a case,
that the tax had been uniform? I think not. There is certainly a
majority in this House who think that the nation would be stronger and
more independent, if all our labor was performed by free men. This
object might be promoted by a bounty. Let a poll-tax be laid, according
to the constitution, of one dollar per poll: in this case, sixty cents
must be paid for each slave; and the number of slaves being 680,186,
their tax would amount to $334,911. To encourage the labor of citizens,
let Congress then give an annual bounty of one dollar to every free man
who is a mechanic, or who labors in the field. We might be told that the
bounty was small, and the object was good; but the measure would be most
oppressive, for it would be a clear tax of rather more than three
hundred thousand dollars on the Southern States.

Perhaps the case I have put is too strong--Congress can never do a thing
that is so palpably unjust--but this, sir, is the very mark at which the
theory of bounties seems to point. The certain operation of that measure
is the oppression of the Southern States, by superior numbers in the
Northern interest. This was to be feared at the formation of this
Government, and you find many articles in the constitution, besides
those I have quoted, which were certainly intended to guard us against
the dangerous bias of interest, and the power of numbers. Wherefore was
it provided that no duty should be laid on exports? Was it not to defend
the great staples of the Southern States--tobacco, rice, and
indigo--from the operation of unequal regulations of commerce, or
unequal indirect taxes, as another article had defended us from unequal
direct taxes?

I do not hazard much in saying, that the present constitution had never
been adopted without those preliminary guards in it. Establish the
general doctrine of bounties, and all the provisions I have mentioned
become useless. They vanish into air, and like the baseless fabric of a
vision, leave not a trace behind. The common defence and general
welfare, in the hands of a good politician, may supersede every part of
our constitution, and leave us in the hands of time and chance.
Manufactures, in general, are useful to the nation; they promote the
public good and general welfare. How many of them are springing up in
the Northern States? Let them be properly supported by bounties, and you
will find no occasion for unequal taxes. The tax may be equal in the
beginning--it will be sufficiently unequal in the end.

We are told, that a nursery of seamen may be of great use to the nation,
and the bounty proposed is a very small one. These, sir, are the reasons
why I have marked this as a dangerous bill; the most dangerous
innovations are made under these circumstances. To begin with a great
bounty would be imprudent, and to give a small bounty for a doubtful
purpose, might deserve a worse epithet. Half a million of dollars per
annum would have been too much for a beginning, and perhaps a bounty on
the use of sleighs, though they are convenient for travelling in winter;
or a bounty on stone fences, though they are durable, would not at this
time be prudent. The object of the bounty, and the amount of it, are
equally to be disregarded in the present case; we are simply to consider
whether bounties may safely be given under the present constitution. For
myself, I would rather begin with a bounty of one million per annum than
one thousand. I wish that my constituents may know whether they are to
put any confidence in that paper called the constitution.

You will suffer me to say, that the Southern States have much to fear
from the progress of this Government, unless your strength is governed
by prudence. The operation of the funding system has translated at least
two millions of dollars from the Southern States, that is to say, from
Georgia, the Carolinas, and Virginia, to the Northern States. The
interest of that sum, when it shall be six per cent., will be $120,000;
but the quota of those States is at least one-third of the whole; whence
it follows, that they must pay forty thousand dollars every year, in the
form of interest to the Northern States. This, it seems, is not
sufficient, and other measures are to be adopted for draining the
Southern States. Bounties to promote the general welfare are already
brought forward. We shall not hear of a bounty for raising rice, or
preparing naval stores. If that was the question, the general welfare
would not have such prominent features. Unless the Southern States are
protected by the constitution, their valuable staples, and their
visionary wealth, must occasion their destruction. Three short years has
this Government existed--it is not three years--but we have already
given serious alarms to many of our fellow-citizens. Establish the
doctrine of bounties, set aside that part of the constitution which
requires equal taxes and demands similar distributions, destroy this
barrier, and it is not a few fishermen that will enter, claiming ten or
twelve thousand dollars, but all manner of persons--people of every
trade and occupation--may enter at the breach, until they have eaten up
the bread of our children.

Perhaps I have viewed this project in too serious a light; but if I am
particularly solicitous on the subject of finance, that we do not even
seem to depart from the spirit of the constitution, it is because I wish
that the Union may be perpetual. The several States are now pretty well
relieved from their debts, and our fellow-citizens in the Southern
States have very little interest in the national funds; press them a
little with unequal taxes, and the remedy is plain.

While I would shun bounties, as leading to dangerous measures, I am not
inattentive to every argument that has been advanced by the honorable
member who first rose in defence of the bill. That gentleman tells us,
that more than a bushel of salt is used in curing a quintal of fish. If
this fact be established, the former act should be amended, by giving a
greater drawback. He says the drawback, as it is now paid to the
merchant, does not operate so as to encourage the seamen, who have most
need of such assistance. This is very probable, and the parties may be
relieved by dividing the drawback in the very manner that is proposed by
the bill. If it is true that the proposed bounties will not exceed the
average of the drawback that should be paid on salt, why do they contend
about names, unless they are solicitous about the precedent? If our
object is to encourage industry, and to increase our commerce, by
sending fish to a foreign market, we must adhere to the drawback; for,
according to the terms of the bill, the bounty is to be paid, though
every fish that is caught should be consumed in the country; in which
case we should be paying a visionary drawback, when nothing was
exported. According to the terms of the bill, there is no proportion
between the labor and the reward, so far as the bank fishery is
concerned; the bounty in all cases being the same.

Having exercised your patience in objecting to this new system of
bounties, and having hinted on some objections to the general operations
of the bill, so far as industry and enterprise may be desired, I shall,
in a few words, submit the outline of a plan that seems to comprehend
all the useful parts of the bill, without any speculation upon bounties.

If the drawback on dried fish exported, is not equal to the duty on the
salt used in curing such fish, let the drawback be increased to eleven
cents or twelve cents, as the case may be. Let us suppose that the
drawback for the next year will be equal to the drawback on the last
year; and let that sum of money, being the expected drawback, be divided
between the seamen and owners, according to the terms of the bill. The
accounts must be made up annually. If the drawback exceeds the allowance
that had been made, the difference will be considered as advanced to the
fishery, and the allowance for the next year must be somewhat reduced,
according to the actual amount of the drawback. If the fishermen are
more fortunate or more active, and the exports are increased, the
allowance for the next year must be raised. The rule being fixed by law,
all that remains, being pure calculation, may be done from year to year
by the Executive. Every important object of this bill, that has been
presented to our view, may be obtained by safe and constitutional steps.
Why should a man take a dangerous and a doubtful path, when a safe one
presents itself? If nothing more is desired than to regulate and protect
the fishery, the bill may be altered and accommodated to that purpose.
If the theory of bounties is to be established, by which the Southern
States must suffer while others gain, the bill informs us what we are to
expect.

The committee now rose, without taking any question.


MONDAY, February 6.

A member from Maryland, to wit, JOHN FRANCIS MERCER, returned to serve
in the room of WILLIAM PINKNEY, resigned, appeared, and took his seat in
the House.

A petition of the tanners of the town of Newark, in the State of New
Jersey, was presented to the House and read, stating the inconveniences
they suffer from the erection of mills for the purpose of grinding
tanners' bark for exportation, and praying that Congress will adopt such
measures for their relief as may appear just and right. Ordered to lie
on the table.

_The Cod Fisheries._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill sent from the Senate, entitled "An act for the encouragement of
the Bank and other Cod Fisheries, and for the regulation and government
of the fishermen employed therein."

Mr. GOODHUE.--The gentleman last up (Mr. WILLIAMSON) says, that an
appropriation of money being made by the bill now before us, and the
Treasury standing pledged for the payment, therefore a direct bounty is
granted. At present, we pay in drawbacks about $45,000; but we cannot
say that this sum will be adequate to the payment of the drawbacks next
year; for, if a greater quantity of fish be taken, a greater sum, of
course, must be allowed; and, as the sum depends entirely on the
quantity of fish, it is impossible to ascertain beforehand the precise
amount. There is not, however, in the whole bill, any thing of a bounty
except the bare name. The gentleman allows that we may commute the
present drawbacks, and give them to the fisherman instead of the
merchant; but it is impossible to do this with safety in any other mode
than that pointed out in the bill. Shall we leave it to the fisherman,
to be determined by his oath? This would not be advisable.

The plan proposed is a much less exceptionable one. It is founded on a
calculation that a certain quantity of tonnage is employed in taking a
certain quantity of fish. On this calculation the allowance is
apportioned to the tonnage. If gentlemen think the allowance too high,
let the sum be reduced; but let it not be stigmatized as a bounty. It is
no such thing. The word "bounty" is an unfortunate expression, and I
wish it were entirely out of the bill.

Mr. LIVERMORE.--The bill now under consideration has two important
objects in view. The one is, to give encouragement to our fishermen,
and, by that encouragement, to increase their numbers; the other is to
govern those fishermen by certain laws, by which they will be kept under
due restraint. Both these objects are of great importance to such
persons as choose to employ their capitals in the fishery business. And
I believe it will not be disputed that the business itself is of
considerable importance to the United States, insomuch as it affords a
certain proportion of remittance or exportation to foreign countries,
and does not impoverish the country, but enriches it by the addition of
so much wealth drawn from the sea.

It is the object of those gentlemen who favor the bill that the
fishermen should have some encouragement, not given to them at the
expense of the United States, but directed to them out of what was in
the former law called a drawback of the duty on salt. The calculation,
as I understand it, has been made as nearly as possible to give that
drawback, not to the merchants who export the fish, but to the fishermen
who take it, in order to increase that description of men, without whose
assistance it is vain to expect any benefit from the fisheries; for, if
the merchants at present engaged in that branch possessed the whole
capital of the United States, yet, if they cannot get fishermen, they
cannot carry on the fishery. This is done by a particular class of men,
who must be not only expert seamen, but also accustomed to taking the
fish and curing it. If these men cannot be had, the capital cannot be
employed, and those who undertake the business cannot carry it on, or
reap any profit from it.

Whilst the drawback is payable only to the merchant who exports the
fish, it is impossible to convince the fishermen that they reap from it
any advantage whatever; or, if the more discerning among them do
perceive any advantage in it, the others who are not so clear-sighted
cannot discern it, and are therefore not disposed to undertake the
business. It is, however, of considerable importance to the merchants
that the fisherman should receive a proper encouragement, even if they
were obliged to allow him a bounty out of their own pocket.

The government of the fishermen, after their engagement in this
business, is also necessary to be provided for; otherwise, frequent
instances may occur among that class of men of quitting one vessel to
embark on board another, or of shipping themselves for a foreign voyage,
before the expiration of the fishing season. In the latter case, the
vessel lies useless on the owner's hands, and he, together with the
whole expense of the outfit, loses all his prospects of future gain.

The two objects here mentioned are fully provided for in the bill.
Still, however, it is objected to. But what is the objection? It is,
that the word "_bounty_" is twice used in this clause. Let us now see
what advantage will result from striking out this obnoxious "_bounty_."
None at all. The bill says it shall cease; and have gentlemen any
objection to the bounty's ceasing? Since the bounty is to cease by this
bill, what advantage in striking it out? The sense would still remain
the same; and I do not know why we should make a law expressly to strike
out the word "bounty," but to strike out the bounty itself.

It is strange to me that any gentleman, whether he is for giving a great
bounty or no bounty at all, should quarrel with this unfortunate word.
There is, indeed, one part of the section which I will readily consent
to strike out, and I believe every other gentleman who is in favor of
the bill will consent to it likewise; and that is the clause which
provides that the bounty to be allowed and paid on every vessel for one
season, shall not exceed one hundred and seventy dollars. If, when the
vote is taken on the section, there does not appear a majority of the
House in favor of striking out the whole, we may then move for striking
out the _proviso_, if it be offensive to any gentleman. If it be not
offensive, it may remain.

If gentlemen are disputing only because the word "_bounty_" is in the
bill, they may be perfectly relieved from their uneasiness on that
score; for the bill expressly says, "that the bounty now allowed upon
the exportation of dried fish of the fisheries of the United States
shall cease, and in lieu thereof," a different kind of encouragement is
to be given. Here is no reason to dispute about a word. If gentlemen are
disposed to consent to the principle of the bill, that the drawback of
the duties on salt shall be commuted for a certain sum, to encourage the
fishermen, they will vote in favor of the bill; if not, they will vote
against it. But it is impossible for me to conceive why any gentleman
under heaven should be against it. It is only fixing, for the merchants
engaged in this branch, a clear and equitable ratio for distributing
among the fishermen that encouragement which they think necessary in
order to attach those people to the business, and to prevent them from
going to other occupations on land. The bill is an important one, and
will increase that branch of business, which is very useful to the
community. It does not lay a farthing of bounty or duty on any other
persons than those who are immediately concerned in it. It will serve
them, and will not injure any body.

Mr. LAURANCE said, from examining the section, he conceived it
contemplated no more than what the merchant is entitled to by existing
laws. The merchant is now entitled to the drawback; but it is found by
experience that the effect has not been to produce that encouragement to
the fishermen which was expected; and he presumed the way was perfectly
clear to give a new direction to the drawback, and this is all that is
aimed at in the bill. He supposed that the clause had no necessary
connection with the question which had been started respecting the right
of the Government to grant bounties; but, since the question has been
brought forward, it may be proper to consider it. In discussing the
question, he inquired, What has Congress already done? Have we not laid
extra duties on various articles, expressly for the purpose of
encouraging various branches of our own manufactures? These duties are
_bounties_ to all intents and purposes, and are founded on the idea only
of their conducing to the _general interest_. Similar objections to
those now advanced were not made to these duties. They were advocated,
some of them, by gentlemen from the Southward. He traced the effects of
these duties, and showed that they operated fully as indirect bounties.

Mr. L. then adverted particularly to the constitution, and observed that
it contains _general_ principles and powers only. These powers depend on
_particular_ laws for their operation; and on this idea, he contended
that the powers of the Government must, in various circumstances, extend
to the granting bounties. He instanced, in case of a war with a foreign
power, will any gentleman say that the General Government has not a
power to grant a bounty on arms, ammunition, &c., should the general
welfare require it? The general welfare is inseparably connected with
any object or pursuit which in its effects adds to the riches of the
country. He conceived that the argument was given up by gentlemen in
opposition to the bill, when they admit of encouragement to the
fishermen in any possible modification of it. He then adverted
particularly to the fisheries, stated the number of men employed, the
tons of shipping necessary to export the fish taken, and inferred the
sound policy of encouraging so important a branch of business.

Gentlemen say that we do not want a navy. Grant it; but can they say
that we shall never have a war with any European power? May not the time
arrive when the protection to the commerce of this country, derived from
this source, may be of the utmost necessity to its existence? Adverting
to Mr. WILLIAMSON's objection from the unequal operation of bounties,
and who had referred to the article of the constitution which says that
taxes shall be equal in all the States, Mr. L. observed, that this
article in the constitution could only respect the _rates_ of the
duties, and that the _same_ duties should be paid in Virginia that are
paid in New York--at the Northward as at the Southward. It surely could
not mean that every individual should pay exactly the same sum in every
part of the Union. This was a provision that no law could possible
contemplate.

He concluded by a summary recapitulation of his arguments, and saying he
hoped the section would be retained.

Mr. MADISON.--In the conflict I feel between my disposition on one hand
to afford every constitutional encouragement to the fisheries, and my
dislike, on the other, of the consequences apprehended from some clauses
of the bill, I should have forborne to enter into this discussion, if I
had not found, that over and above such arguments as appear to be
natural and pertinent to the subject, others have been introduced which
are, in my judgment, contrary to the true meaning, and even strike at
the characteristic principles of the existing constitution. Let me
premise, however, to the remarks which I shall briefly offer, on the
doctrine maintained by these gentlemen, that I make a material
distinction, in the present case, between an allowance as a mere
commutation and modification of a drawback, and an allowance in the
nature of a real and positive bounty. I make a distinction also, as a
subject of fair consideration at least, between a bounty granted under
the particular terms in the constitution, "a power to regulate trade,"
and one granted under the indefinite terms which have been cited as
authority on this occasion. I think, however, that the term "bounty," is
in every point of view improper as it is here applied, not only because
it may be offensive to some, and in the opinion of others carries a
dangerous implication, but also because it does not express the true
intention of the bill, as avowed and advocated by its patrons
themselves. For if, in the allowance, nothing more is proposed than a
mere reimbursement of the sum advanced, it is only paying a debt; and
when we pay a debt, we ought not to claim the merit of granting a
bounty.

It is supposed by some gentlemen, that Congress have authority not only
to grant bounties in the sense here used, merely as a commutation for
drawbacks, but even to grant them under a power by virtue of which they
may do any thing which they may think conducive to the "general
welfare." This, sir, in my mind, raises the important and fundamental
question, whether the general terms which had been cited, are to be
considered as a sort of caption or general description of the specified
powers, and as having no further meaning, and giving no further power
than what is found in that specification; or as an abstract and
indefinite delegation of power extending to all cases whatever; to all
such, at least, as will admit the application of money, which is giving
as much latitude as any government could well desire.

I, sir, have always conceived--I believe those who proposed the
constitution conceived, and it is still more fully known, and more
material to observe that those who ratified the constitution
conceived--that this is not an indefinite Government, deriving its
powers from the general terms prefixed to the specified powers, but a
limited Government, tied down to the specified powers which explain and
define the general terms. The gentlemen who contend for a contrary
doctrine are surely not aware of the consequences which flow from it,
and which they must either admit or give up their doctrine.

It will follow, in the first place, that if the terms be taken in the
broad sense they maintain, the particular powers afterwards so carefully
and distinctly enumerated would be without any meaning, and must go for
nothing. It would be absurd to say, first, that Congress may do what
they please, and then that they may do this or that particular thing;
after giving Congress power to raise money, and apply it to all purposes
which they may pronounce necessary to the general welfare, it would be
absurd, to say the least, to superadd a power to raise armies, to
provide fleets, &c. In fact, the meaning of the general terms in
question must either be sought in the subsequent enumeration which
limits and details them, or they convert the Government from one
limited, as hitherto supposed, to the enumerated powers, into a
Government without any limits at all.

It is to be recollected, that the terms "common defence and general
welfare," as here used, are not novel terms, first introduced into this
constitution. They are terms familiar in their construction, and well
known to the people of America. They are repeatedly found in the old
Articles of Confederation, where, although they are susceptible of as
great latitude as can be given them by the context here, it was never
supposed or pretended that they conveyed any such power as is now
assigned to them. On the contrary, it was always considered as clear and
certain, that the old Congress was limited to the enumerated powers, and
that the enumeration limited and explained the general terms. I ask the
gentlemen themselves, whether it ever was supposed or suspected that the
old Congress could give away the moneys of the States in bounties, to
encourage agriculture, or for any other purpose they pleased? If such a
power had been possessed by that body, it would have been much less
impotent, or have borne a very different character from that universally
ascribed to it.

The novel idea now annexed to these terms, and never before entertained
by the friends or enemies of the Government, will have a further
consequence, which cannot have been taken into the view of the
gentlemen. Their construction would not only give Congress the complete
Legislative power I have stated--it would do more--it would supersede
all the restrictions understood at present to lie on their power with
respect to the Judiciary. It would put it in the power of Congress to
establish courts throughout the United States, with cognizance of suits
between citizen and citizen, and in all cases whatsoever. This, sir,
seems to be demonstrable; for if the clause in question really
authorizes Congress to do whatever they think fit, provided it be for
the general welfare, of which they are to judge, and money can be
applied to it, Congress must have power to create and support a
Judiciary Establishment, with a jurisdiction extending to all cases
favorable, in their opinion, to the general welfare, in the same manner
as they have power to pass laws and apply money, providing in any other
way for the general welfare. I shall be reminded, perhaps, that
according to the terms of the constitution, the Judicial Power is to
extend to certain cases only, not to all cases. But this circumstance
can have no effect in the argument, it being presupposed by the
gentlemen that the specification of certain objects does not limit the
import of general terms. Taking these terms as an abstract and
indefinite grant of power, they comprise all the objects of Legislative
regulation, as well such as fall under the Judiciary article in the
constitution, as those falling immediately under the Legislative
article; and if the partial enumeration of objects in the Legislative
article does not, as these gentlemen contend, limit the general power,
neither will it be limited by the partial enumeration of objects in the
Judiciary article.

There are consequences, sir, still more extensive, which, as they follow
clearly from the doctrine combated, must either be admitted, or the
doctrine must be given up. If Congress can apply money indefinitely to
the general welfare, and are the sole and supreme judges of the general
welfare, they may take the care of religion into their own hands; they
may establish teachers in every State, county, and parish, and pay them
out of the public Treasury; they may take into their own hands the
education of children, establishing in like manner schools throughout
the Union; they may undertake the regulation of all roads, other than
post roads. In short, every thing, from the highest object of State
legislation, down to the most minute object of police, would be thrown
under the power of Congress; for every object I have mentioned would
admit the application of money, and might be called, if Congress
pleased, provisions for the general welfare.

The language held in various discussions of this House, is a proof that
the doctrine in question was never entertained by this body. Arguments,
wherever the subject would permit, have constantly been drawn from the
peculiar nature of this Government, as limited to certain enumerated
powers, instead of extending, like other Governments, to all cases not
particularly excepted. In a very late instance--I mean the debate on the
Representation bill--it must be remembered, that an argument much urged,
particularly by a gentleman from Massachusetts, against the ratio of one
for thirty thousand, was, that this Government was unlike the State
Governments, which had an indefinite variety of objects within their
power; that it had a small number of objects only to attend to, and
therefore that a smaller number of Representatives would be sufficient
to administer it.

Several arguments have been advanced to show, that because, in the
regulation of trade, indirect and eventual encouragement is given to
manufactures, therefore Congress have power to give money in direct
bounties, or to grant it in any other way that would answer the same
purpose. But surely, sir, there is a great and obvious difference, which
it cannot be necessary to enlarge upon. A duty laid on imported
implements of husbandry, would, in its operation, be an indirect tax on
exported produce; but will any one say, that by virtue of a mere power
to lay duties on imports, Congress might go directly to the produce or
implements of agriculture, or to the articles exported? It is true,
duties on exports are expressly prohibited; but if there were no article
forbidding them, a power directly to tax exports could never be deduced
from a power to tax imports, although such a power might directly and
incidentally affect exports.

In short, sir, without going further into the subject, which I should
not have here touched on at all but for the reasons already mentioned, I
venture to declare it as my opinion, that were the power of Congress to
be established in the latitude contended for, it would subvert the very
foundation, and transmute the very nature of the limited Government
established by the people of America; and what inferences might be
drawn, or what consequences ensue from such a step, it is incumbent on
us all well to consider.

With respect to the question before the House, for striking out the
clause, it is immaterial whether it be struck out, or so amended as to
rest on the avowed principle of a commutation for the drawback; but as a
clause has been drawn up by my colleague, in order to be substituted, I
shall concur in a vote for striking out, reserving to myself a freedom
to be governed in my final vote by the modification which may prevail.

Mr. BOURNE, of Massachusetts--

Mr. Chairman: I think little can be added after so full a discussion of
the subject before you. The object of the first section in this bill is
intended for the relief of the fishermen and their owners. They complain
that the law now in force was meant for their benefit, by granting a
drawback on the fish exported; this they find by experience is not the
case, for they say, that neither the fishermen who catch the fish, nor
the importer of the salt, receive the drawback; and I rather suppose,
sir, it is the case. The owners of the greater part of the fishing
vessels are not merchants, neither do they import the salt they consume;
but when the fish they take are cured for market, they are sold at the
market price; and it frequently happens that those persons who purchase
the fish are not the exporters of them, or the importers of the salt,
but a third person, who purchases with a prospect of selling them at a
profit, is the exporter; and when it so happens, neither the fisherman
who catches the fish, nor the importer of the salt, receives any benefit
from the drawback, unless the purchaser (the third person) give a
greater price in contemplation of the drawback, which I think is not to
be supposed.

Is it worthy the attention of Government that the cod fishery should be
preserved? It appears to me that it is. When we consider the labor and
assiduity bestowed on this object by our Ministers, at the settlement of
peace between us and Great Britain, and the care then taken to secure
this privilege, as appears by the treaty--[here Mr. B. read that part of
the treaty which secures to us the fishery, he then proceeded]--and
consider the struggle made to deprive us of this inestimable branch of
commerce, I cannot suppose that any one would, at this day, voluntarily
relinquish it, and suffer Great Britain to monopolize this branch, and
supply the Mediterranean, French, and other markets. Great Britain, at
present, enjoys a sufficient portion of this commerce, while France is
confined to the narrow limits of St. Peters and Miquelon. If we
relinquish this branch of the cod fishery, what is left us? Our whale
fishery is nearly at an end, and unless Government speedily interpose,
by granting relief, we shall totally lose it. Does not the British
Government wish to deprive us of this branch also? Have not letters of
agents been sent to the island of Nantucket, as well as New Bedford,
where this branch of business is principally prosecuted, inviting the
whale fishermen to remove, and offering them permanent settlements at
Milford-Haven, at the expense of their Government? This must be viewed
as a great encouragement, in addition to their bounties on oil, to a
class of poor men employed in that business. If the cod fishery is
relinquished, the fishermen have only to remove to the opposite shore of
Nova Scotia, where they will find encouragement fully adequate to their
services--of all which they are not unapprised. By encouraging this
class of men, your revenue will be increased; for in return for the fish
exported, you will receive sugar, coffee, cocoa, indigo, molasses,
pimento, cotton, dye-woods, rum, wine, salt, fruit, and other articles
subject to duty, and consumed in the country. And again, your Treasury
will receive an excess by the provision in this bill; for I presume the
greater proportion of vessels employed in this business are from twenty
to forty tons; the town of Marblehead, perhaps, has principally large
ones. Suppose, then, a vessel of thirty tons obtains, in a season, six
hundred quintals of fish? (a very moderate voyage indeed,) her tonnage
is seventy-five dollars; the drawback on exportation would be
seventy-eight dollars; so that your Treasury retains three dollars gain
by this bill, which would be a loss on the drawback.

Mr. Chairman, I think, upon the whole, that granting the encouragement
to the fishermen and their owners, held out in the bill, would prove
very beneficial to the United States; I hope, therefore, the section
before you will not be struck out.

At this point, the committee rose, and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, February 7.

_Ordered_, That the petitions of the tanners of the town of Newark, in
the State of New Jersey, which was presented yesterday, be referred to
Mr. BOUDINOT, Mr. WHITE, Mr. THATCHER, Mr. BOURNE, of Rhode Island, and
Mr. NILES; that they do examine the matter thereof, and report the same,
with their opinion thereupon, to the House.

Mr. BENSON, from the committee appointed, presented a bill for an
apportionment of Representatives among the several States, according to
the first enumeration, and making provision for another enumeration, and
apportionment of Representatives thereon, to compose the House of
Representatives after the third day of March, 1797; which was received
and read the first time.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Secretary of the
Treasury, accompanying his report stating the amount of the
subscriptions to the loans proposed by the act making provision for the
public debt, as well in the debts of the respective States as in the
domestic debt of the United States, and of the parts which remain
unsubscribed, together with such measures as are, in his opinion,
expedient to be taken on the subject, pursuant to an order of this House
of the 1st of November last; which were read, and ordered to be
committed to a Committee of the whole House on Monday next.


_The Fishery Bill_

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House on
the bill sent from the Senate, entitled "An act for the encouragement of
the Bank and other Cod Fisheries, and for the regulation and government
of the fishermen employed therein."

Mr. PAGE said no man in this House was more heartily disposed to
encourage the fisheries of the United States than he was; nor could any
one more sincerely wish to encourage the bold, active, and enterprising
adventurers in that branch of our commerce to persevere in it, than he
did; being sensible of the importance of their traffic in peace, and of
their defence of their country and annoyance of their enemies in war.
But, sir, (said Mr. P.,) I much doubt whether Congress can give that
encouragement to the fisheries to which they are entitled, and which
policy would lead the General Government to give, were it not restricted
by the constitution. I consider, sir, the constitution as intended to
remedy the defects of the Confederation to a certain degree; so far only
as would secure the independence and general welfare of the Confederated
States, without endangering the sovereignty and independence of the
individual States. Congress, therefore, was authorized to pay the debts
of the Union, and to regulate commerce, partly for that purpose, and
partly to prevent improper and dangerous commercial combinations,
jealousies, and altercations between the States. But Congress was not
intrusted with any regulation of exports which could admit of an
interposition which might be dictated by partiality; nor was Congress
permitted to lay any tax which could by any possibility operate
unequally on the States in general. It is said, indeed, that, if a
drawback be not allowed on the salt used in salting fish, there will be,
in fact, a duty on the exportation of the fish. But to this I think it
may be replied, that the constitution guards the exports of each State
against the possibility of a _partial_ restriction by Congress, or even
by the States themselves; that Congress cannot lay a duty on the
exportation of rice, indigo, tobacco, &c., or any other article exported
from any Sta