Produced by Curtis Weyant, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
(This file was produced from scans of public domain works
at the University of Michigan's Making of America
collection.)







ABRIDGMENT OF THE DEBATES OF CONGRESS,

FROM 1789 TO 1856.

FROM GALES AND SEATON'S ANNALS OF CONGRESS; FROM THEIR REGISTER OF
DEBATES; AND FROM THE OFFICIAL REPORTED DEBATES, BY JOHN C. RIVES.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF THE THIRTY YEARS' VIEW.

VOL II.

NEW YORK:
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
448 AND 445 BROADWAY.
LONDON: 16 LITTLE BRITAIN.
1861.

ENTERED according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court
for the Southern District of New York.




FOURTH CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, DECEMBER 5, 1796.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, December 5, 1796.

PRESENT:

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the
Senate.

JOHN LANGDON and SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire.

BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from Massachusetts.

WILLIAM BRADFORD, from Rhode Island.

JAMES HILLHOUSE and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

ELIJAH PAINE, and ISAAC TICHENOR, from Vermont.

JOHN RUTHERFORD and RICHARD STOCKTON, from New Jersey.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.

HENRY LATIMER, from Delaware.

HUMPHREY MARSHALL, from Kentucky.

WILLIAM COCKE, from Tennessee.

JACOB READ, from South Carolina.

JAMES GUNN, from Georgia.

The number of Senators present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, they adjourned to 11 o'clock to-morrow morning.


TUESDAY, December 6.

ALEXANDER MARTIN, from the State of North Carolina, and WILLIAM BLOUNT,
from the State of Tennessee, severally attended.

The VICE PRESIDENT communicated a letter from PIERCE BUTLER, notifying
the resignation of his seat in the Senate, which was read.

The credentials of the after-named Senators were severally read:--Of
BENJAMIN GOODHUE, appointed a Senator by the State of Massachusetts, in
place of GEORGE CABOT, resigned; of ISAAC TICHENOR, appointed a Senator
by the State of Vermont, in place of MOSES ROBINSON, resigned; of JAMES
HILLHOUSE, appointed a Senator by the State of Connecticut in place of
OLIVER ELLSWORTH, whose seat is become vacant; of URIAH TRACY, appointed
a Senator by the State of Connecticut, in place of JONATHAN TRUMBULL,
resigned; of JOHN LAURANCE, appointed a Senator by the State of New
York, in place of RUFUS KING, whose seat is become vacant; of RICHARD
STOCKTON, appointed a Senator by the State of New Jersey, in place of
FREDERICK FRELINGHUYSEN, resigned; also, of WILLIAM BLOUNT and WILLIAM
COCKE, appointed Senators by the State of Tennessee;--and, the oath
required by law being respectively administered to them, they took their
seats in the Senate.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of the House of Representatives is assembled, and ready to
proceed to business.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, and acquaint him that a quorum of the Senate is assembled.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and ready to proceed to business.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they have appointed a joint committee, on their part, together with such
committee as the Senate may appoint, to wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, and notify him that a quorum of the two Houses is
assembled, and ready to receive any communications that he may be
pleased to make to them.

_Resolved_, That the Senate concur in the above resolution, and that
Messrs. READ and LIVERMORE be the joint committee on the part of the
Senate.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives
therewith.

Mr. READ reported, from the joint committee appointed for that purpose,
that they had waited on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and had
notified him that a quorum of the two Houses of Congress are assembled,
and that the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES acquainted the committee
that he would meet the two Houses in the Representatives' Chamber, at
twelve o'clock to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, December 7.

JOHN HENRY, from the State of Maryland, attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they are now ready to meet the Senate in the Chamber of that House, to
receive such communications as the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall
be pleased to make to them.

Whereupon, the Senate repaired to the Chamber of the House of
Representatives, for the purpose above expressed.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and a copy of the Speech of
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, this day addressed to both Houses of
Congress, was read. [For which, see the proceedings in the House of
Representatives of December 7, _post._]

_Ordered_, That Messrs. READ, TRACY, and BINGHAM, be a committee to
report the draft of an Address to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in
answer to his Speech this day to both Houses of Congress.

It was further ordered that the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, this day communicated to both Houses, be printed for the use of
the Senate.

_Resolved_, That each Senator be supplied, during the present session,
with copies of three such newspapers printed in any of the States as he
may choose, provided that the same are furnished at the rate of the
usual annual charge for such papers.


THURSDAY, December 8.

JOHN LAURANCE, from the State of New York, attended, and, the oath
required by law being administered to him, he took his seat in the
Senate.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. STOCKTON, READ, and BINGHAM, be a committee to
inquire whether any, and what, regulations are proper to be made, on the
subject of the resignation of a Senator of the United States.


FRIDAY, December 9.

TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH, from the State of North Carolina, attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they have resolved that two Chaplains be appointed to Congress for the
present session--one by each House--who shall interchange weekly; in
which they desire the concurrence of the Senate.

Whereupon, the Senate

_Resolved_, That they do concur therein, and that the Right Reverend
Bishop WHITE be Chaplain on the part of the Senate.

Mr. READ, from the committee appointed for the purpose, reported the
draft of an Address to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in answer to
his Speech to both Houses of Congress, at the opening of the session;
which was read.

On motion that it be printed for the use of the Senate, it passed in the
negative.

On motion, it was agreed to consider the report in paragraphs; and,
after debate, a motion was made for recommitment, which passed in the
negative; and, having agreed to amend the report, the further
consideration thereof was postponed.


SATURDAY, December 10.

_Address to the President._

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee in
answer to the Address of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to both
Houses of Congress; and, after further amendments, it was unanimously
adopted, as follows:

      We thank you, sir, for your faithful and detailed exposure
      of the existing situation of our country; and we sincerely
      join in sentiments of gratitude to an overruling Providence
      for the distinguished share of public prosperity and
      private happiness which the people of the United States so
      peculiarly enjoy.

      We are fully sensible of the advantages that have resulted
      from the adoption of measures (which you have successfully
      carried into effect) to preserve peace, cultivate
      friendship, and promote civilization, amongst the Indian
      tribes on the Western frontiers; feelings of humanity, and
      the most solid political interests, equally encourage the
      continuance of this system.

      We observe, with pleasure, that the delivery of the
      military posts, lately occupied by the British forces,
      within the territory of the United States, was made with
      cordiality and promptitude, as soon as circumstances would
      admit; and that the other provisions of our treaties with
      Great Britain and Spain, that were objects of eventual
      arrangement, are about being carried into effect, with
      entire harmony and good faith.

      The unfortunate but unavoidable difficulties that opposed a
      timely compliance with the terms of the Algerine Treaty,
      are much to be lamented; as they may occasion a temporary
      suspension of the advantages to be derived from a solid
      peace with that power, and a perfect security from its
      predatory warfare; at the same time, the lively impressions
      that affected the public mind on the redemption of our
      captive fellow-citizens, afford the most laudable incentive
      to our exertions to remove the remaining obstacles.

      We perfectly coincide with you in opinion, that the
      importance of our commerce demands a naval force for its
      protection against foreign insult and depredation, and our
      solicitude to attain that object will be always
      proportionate to its magnitude.

      The necessity of accelerating the establishment of certain
      useful manufactures, by the intervention of the Legislative
      aid and protection, and the encouragement due to
      agriculture by the creation of Boards, (composed of
      intelligent individuals,) to patronize this primary pursuit
      of society, are subjects which will readily engage our most
      serious attention.

      A National University may be converted to the most useful
      purposes; the science of legislation being so essentially
      dependent on the endowments of the mind, the public
      interests must receive effectual aid from the general
      diffusion of knowledge; and the United States will assume a
      more dignified station among the nations of the earth, by
      the successful cultivation of the higher branches of
      literature.

      A Military Academy may be likewise rendered equally
      important. To aid and direct the physical force of the
      nation, by cherishing a military spirit, enforcing a proper
      sense of discipline, and inculcating a scientific system
      of tactics, is consonant to the soundest maxims of public
      policy. Connected with, and supported by such an
      establishment, a well regulated militia, constituting the
      natural defence of the country, would prove the most
      effectual, as well as economical, preservative of peace.

      We cannot but consider, with serious apprehensions, the
      inadequate compensations of the public officers, especially
      of those in the more important stations. It is not only a
      violation of the spirit of a public contract, but is an
      evil so extensive in its operation, and so destructive in
      its consequences, that we trust it will receive the most
      pointed Legislative attention.

      We sincerely lament that, whilst the conduct of the United
      Sates has been uniformly impressed with the character of
      equity, moderation, and love of peace, in the maintenance
      of all their foreign relationships, our trade should be so
      harassed by the cruisers and agents of the Republic of
      France, throughout the extensive departments of the West
      Indies.

      Whilst we are confident that no cause of complaint exists
      that could authorize an interruption of our tranquillity or
      disengage that Republic from the bonds of amity, cemented
      by the faith of treaties, we cannot but express our deepest
      regrets that official communications have been made to you,
      indicating a more serious disturbance of our commerce.
      Although we cherish the expectation that a sense of
      justice, and a consideration of our mutual interests, will
      moderate their councils, we are not unmindful of the
      situation in which events may place us, nor unprepared to
      adopt that system of conduct, which, compatible with the
      dignity of a respectable nation, necessity may compel us to
      pursue.

      We cordially acquiesce in the reflection, that the United
      States, under the operation of the Federal Government, have
      experienced a most rapid aggrandizement and prosperity, as
      well political as commercial.

      Whilst contemplating the causes that produce this
      auspicious result, we must acknowledge the excellence of
      the constitutional system, and the wisdom of the
      Legislative provisions; but we should be deficient in
      gratitude and justice did we not attribute a great portion
      of these advantages to the virtue, firmness, and talents of
      your Administration--which have been conspicuously
      displayed in the most trying times, and on the most
      critical occasions. It is, therefore, with the sincerest
      regret that we now receive an official notification of your
      intentions to retire from the public employment of your
      country.

      When we review the various scenes of your public life, so
      long and so successfully devoted to the most arduous
      services, civil and military, as well during the struggles
      of the American Revolution, as the convulsive periods of a
      recent date; we cannot look forward to your retirement
      without our warmest affections and most anxious regards
      accompanying you, and without mingling with our
      fellow-citizens at large in the sincerest wishes for your
      personal happiness that sensibility and attachment can
      express.

      The most effectual consolation that can offer for the loss
      we are about to sustain, arises from the animating
      reflection, that the influence of your example will extend
      to your successors, and the United States thus continue to
      enjoy an able, upright, and energetic Administration.

                          JOHN ADAMS,
                          _Vice President of the United States,
                          and President of the Senate._

_Ordered_, That the committee who prepared the Address, wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and desire him to acquaint the Senate at
what time and place it will be most convenient for him that it should be
presented.

Mr. READ reported from the committee, that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and that he would receive the Address of
the Senate on Monday next, at twelve o'clock, at his own house.
Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That the Senate will, on Monday next, at twelve o'clock,
wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES accordingly.


MONDAY, December 12.

THEODORE FOSTER, from the State of Rhode Island; JOHN BROWN, from the
State of Kentucky; and HENRY TAZEWELL, from the State of Virginia,
severally attended.

_Address to the President._

Agreeably to the resolution of the 10th instant, the Senate waited on
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and the VICE PRESIDENT, in their
name, presented the Address then agreed to.

To which the PRESIDENT made the following reply:

      GENTLEMEN: It affords me great satisfaction to find in your
      Address a concurrence in sentiment with me on the various
      topics which I presented for your information and
      deliberation; and that the latter will receive from you an
      attention proportioned to their respective importance.

      For the notice you take of my public services, civil and
      military, and your kind wishes for my personal happiness, I
      beg you to accept my cordial thanks. Those services, and
      greater, had I possessed ability to render them, were due
      to the unanimous calls of my country, and its approbation
      is my abundant reward.

      When contemplating the period of my retirement, I saw
      virtuous and enlightened men, among whom I relied on the
      discernment and patriotism of my fellow-citizens to make
      the proper choice of a successor; men who would require no
      influential example to ensure to the United States "an
      able, upright, and energetic Administration." To such men I
      shall cheerfully yield the palm of genius and talents to
      serve our common country; but, at the same time, I hope I
      may be indulged in expressing the consoling reflection,
      (which consciousness suggests,) and to bear it with me to
      my grave, that none can serve it with purer intentions than
      I have done, or with a more disinterested zeal.

                          G. WASHINGTON.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and then adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, December 21.

THEODORE SEDGWICK, appointed a Senator by the State of Massachusetts, in
place of CALEB STRONG, resigned, attended, produced his credentials, and
the oath required by law being administered to him, he took his seat in
the Senate.


TUESDAY, December 27.

JOHN EAGER HOWARD, appointed a Senator by the State of Maryland, in
place of RICHARD POTTS, resigned, produced his credentials, and the oath
required by law being administered, he took his seat in the Senate.

JOSIAH TATTNALL, from the State of Georgia, attended.


WEDNESDAY, December 28.

JAMES ROSS, from the State of Pennsylvania, attended.


WEDNESDAY, January 11, 1797.

JOHN VINING, from the State of Delaware, attended.


THURSDAY, January 12.

AARON BURR, from the State of New York, and STEVENS THOMSON MASON, from
the State of Virginia, attended.


FRIDAY, January 27.

JOHN HUNTER, appointed a Senator by the State of South Carolina, in
place of PIERCE BUTLER, resigned, attended, produced his credentials,
and the oath required by law, being administered to him, he took his
seat in the Senate.


THURSDAY, February 2.

MR. SEDGWICK reported, from the joint committee appointed on the part of
the Senate, on the subject of the election of PRESIDENT and VICE
PRESIDENT, that, in their opinion, the following resolution ought to be
adopted, viz:

      "That the two Houses shall assemble in the Chamber of the
      House of Representatives on Wednesday next, at twelve
      o'clock; that one person be appointed a teller on the part
      of the Senate, to make a list of the votes as they shall be
      declared: That the result shall be delivered to the
      President of the Senate, who shall announce the state of
      the vote and the persons elected, to the two Houses
      assembled as aforesaid; which shall be deemed a declaration
      of the persons elected President and Vice President, and,
      together with a list of votes, be entered on the journals
      of the two Houses."


WEDNESDAY, February 8.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they are ready to meet the Senate in the Chamber of that House,
agreeably to the report of the joint committee, to attend the opening
and examining the votes of the Electors for PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES, as the constitution provides.

The two Houses of Congress accordingly assembled in the Representatives'
Chamber, and the certificates of the Electors of sixteen States were, by
the VICE PRESIDENT, opened and delivered to the tellers, appointed for
the purpose, who, having examined and ascertained the number of votes,
presented a list thereof to the VICE PRESIDENT, which was read as
follows:

      For John Adams, 71 votes; for Thomas Jefferson, 68; for
      Thomas Pinckney, 59; for Aaron Burr, 30; for Samuel Adams,
      15; for Oliver Ellsworth, 11; for George Clinton, 7; for
      John Jay, 5; for James Iredell 2; for George Washington, 2;
      for John Henry, 2; for Samuel Johnson, 2; for Charles
      Cotesworth Pinckney, 1;

Whereupon the VICE PRESIDENT addressed the two Houses of Congress as
follows:

      In obedience to the Constitution and law of the United
      States, and to the commands of both Houses of Congress,
      expressed in their resolution passed in the present
      session, I now declare that

      JOHN ADAMS is elected President of the United States, for
      four years, to commence with the fourth day of March next;
      and that

      THOMAS JEFFERSON is elected Vice President of the United
      States, for four years, to commence with the fourth day of
      March next. And may the Sovereign of the Universe, the
      ordainer of civil government on earth, for the preservation
      of liberty, justice, and peace among men, enable both to
      discharge the duties of these offices conformably to the
      Constitution of the United States, with conscientious
      diligence, punctuality, and perseverance.

The VICE PRESIDENT then delivered the votes of the Electors to the
Secretary of the Senate, the two Houses of Congress separated, and the
Senate returned to their own Chamber, and soon after adjourned.


THURSDAY, February 9.

The VICE PRESIDENT laid before the Senate the following communication:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      In consequence of the declaration made yesterday in the
      Chamber of the House of Representatives of the election of
      a President and Vice President of the United States, the
      record of which has just now been read from your journal by
      your Secretary, I have judged it proper to give notice
      that, on the 4th of March next at 12 o'clock I propose, to
      attend again in the Chamber of the House of
      Representatives, in order to take the oath prescribed by
      the Constitution of the United States to be taken by the
      President, to be administered by the Chief Justice or such
      other Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States as
      can most conveniently attend; and, in case none of those
      Judges can attend, by the Judge of the District of
      Pennsylvania, before such Senators and Representatives of
      the United States as may find it convenient to honor the
      transaction with their presence.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary carry an attested copy of this
communication to the House of Representatives.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. SEDGWICK, TAZEWELL, and READ, be a joint
committee, with such committee as may be appointed on the part of the
House of Representatives, to consider whether any, and if any, what
measures ought to be adopted for the further accommodation of the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, for the term commencing on the 4th day
of March next.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary desire the concurrence of the House of
Representatives in the appointment of a joint committee on their part.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they have agreed to the report of the joint committee appointed to
ascertain and report a mode of examining the votes for PRESIDENT and
VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and of notifying the persons
elected of their election.

Mr. SEDGWICK, from the joint committee to whom it was referred to join
such committee as might be appointed by the House of Representatives to
ascertain and report a mode of examining the votes for PRESIDENT and
VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and of notifying the persons
elected of their election, reported that, having further concurred with
the committee appointed by the House of Representatives, that, in their
opinion, the following resolution ought to be adopted by the Senate:

      "_Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Senate be directed
      to give, by letter, to the Vice President elect, a
      notification of his election."

On motion, it was agreed to insert the PRESIDENT of the Senate instead
of the Secretary; and,

On motion, it was agreed to reconsider the resolution, and to recommit
the report from the joint committee.

Mr. SEDGWICK reported, from the joint committee last mentioned, that the
committee on the part of the House of Representatives considered
themselves discharged from their commission.

_Resolved_, That the Senate disagree to the report of the joint
committee on the mode of notifying the VICE PRESIDENT elect of his
election; and that a committee be appointed on the part of the Senate,
to confer with such committee as may be appointed on the part of the
House of Representatives, on the report of the joint committee above
mentioned; and that Messrs. SEDGWICK, LAURANCE and READ, be the managers
at the conference on the part of the Senate.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives
therewith.

On motion, that it be

      "_Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Senate be directed,
      and he is hereby directed, to lay before the President of
      the United States a copy of the journal of yesterday,
      relative to the opening and counting of votes for President
      and Vice President of the United States, and the
      declaration of the President of the Senate thereon; and,
      also, to present to the President of the United States a
      copy of the notification given by the President elect of
      the time, place, and manner, of qualifying to execute the
      duties of his office."

_Ordered_, That the motion lie until to-morrow for consideration.


FRIDAY, February 10.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the motion made yesterday, that
the Secretary of the Senate wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
and notify him of the election of PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, to commence with the 4th day of March next.

On motion, to insert "a committee" in place of "the Secretary," it
passed in the negative. And the motion being amended, was adopted as
follows:

_Ordered_, That the Secretary of the Senate lay before the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES a copy of the journal of the 8th instant, relative to
the opening and counting the votes for PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, and the declaration of the PRESIDENT of the Senate
consequent thereon; and, also a copy of the notification given by the
PRESIDENT elect of the time, place, and manner of qualifying to execute
the duties of his office.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they agree to the report of the joint committee appointed by the two
Houses to confer on a proper mode of notifying the VICE PRESIDENT elect
of his election.

Mr. SEDGWICK, from the committee of conference above mentioned, reported
that the following resolution should be adopted by the House of
Representatives:

      "_Resolved_, That the notification of the election of the
      Vice President elect be made by such person and in such
      manner as the Senate may direct."

On motion, that it be

      "_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
      requested to communicate (in such manner as he shall judge
      most proper) to the person elected Vice President of the
      United States, for the term of four years, to commence 4th
      day of March next, information of his said election:"

It passed in the negative.

_Ordered_, That the resolution this day agreed to by the House of
Representatives, relative to the notification of the election of the
VICE PRESIDENT elect, be referred to Messrs. MASON, HILLHOUSE, and
SEDGWICK, to consider and report thereon to the Senate.

Mr. MASON reported, from the committee last appointed; and, the report
being read, was amended and adopted as follows:

_Resolved_, That the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES be requested to
cause to be transmitted to THOMAS JEFFERSON, Esq., of Virginia, VICE
PRESIDENT elect of the United States, notification of his election to
that office; and that the PRESIDENT of the Senate do make out and sign a
certificate in the words following:

      Be it known, that the Senate and House of Representatives
      of the United States of America, being convened in the city
      of Philadelphia, on the second Wednesday in February, in
      the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
      ninety-seven, the underwritten Vice President of the United
      States and President of the Senate did, in the presence of
      the said Senate and House of Representatives, open all the
      certificates and count all the votes of the Electors for a
      President and for a Vice President; by which it appears
      that THOMAS JEFFERSON, Esquire, was duly elected, agreeably
      to the constitution, Vice President of the United States of
      America.

      "In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal,
      this 10th day of February, 1797."

_Ordered_, That the Secretary lay this resolution before the PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.


MONDAY, February 13.

On request, the VICE PRESIDENT was excused from further attendance in
the Senate after Wednesday next.


WEDNESDAY, February 15.

      _Withdrawal of the Vice-President, (now President elect of
      the United States,) and his Valedictory to the Senate._

After the consideration of the Executive business, a motion was made
that the Senate now adjourn; when the VICE-PRESIDENT addressed them as
follows:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      If, in the general apprehension of an intention to retire
      in that most eminent citizen, to whom all eyes had been
      directed, and all hearts attracted, as the centre of our
      Union, for so long a period, the public opinion had
      exhibited any clear indication of another, in whom our
      fellow-citizens could have generally united, as soon as I
      read that excellent Address, which announced the necessity
      of deliberation in the choice of a President, I should have
      imitated the example of a character with which I have
      co-operated, though in less conspicuous and important
      stations, and maintained an uninterrupted friendship for
      two and twenty years. But, as a number of characters
      appeared to stand in the general estimation so nearly on a
      level, as to render it difficult to conjecture on which the
      majority would fall; considering the relation in which I
      stood to the people of America, I thought it most
      respectful to them, and most conducive to the tranquillity
      of the public mind, to resign myself, with others, a silent
      spectator of the general deliberation, and a passive
      subject of public discussions.

      Deeply penetrated with gratitude to my countrymen in
      general, for their long continued kindness to me, and for
      that steady and affecting confidence, with which those who
      have most intimately known me, from early life, have, on so
      many great occasions, intrusted to me the care of their
      dearest interests; since a majority of their Electors,
      though a very small one, have declared in my favor, and
      since, in a Republican Government, the majority, though
      ever so small, must of necessity decide, I have determined,
      at every hazard of a high but just responsibility, though
      with much anxiety and diffidence, once more to engage in
      their service. Their confidence, which has been the chief
      consolation of my life, is too precious and sacred a
      deposit ever to be considered lightly; as it has been
      founded only on the qualities of the heart, it never has
      been, it never can be, deceived, betrayed, or forfeited by
      me.

      It is with reluctance, and with all those emotions of
      gratitude and affection, which a long experience of your
      goodness ought to inspire, that I now retire from my seat
      in this House, and take my leave of the members of the
      Senate.

      I ought not to declare, for the last time, your
      adjournment, before I have presented to every Senator
      present, and to every citizen who has ever been a Senator
      of the United States, my thanks, for the candor and favor
      invariably received from them all. It is a recollection of
      which nothing can ever deprive me, and it will be a source
      of comfort to me, through the remainder of my life, that
      as, on the one hand, in a government constituted like ours,
      I have for eight years held the second situation under the
      Constitution of the United States, in perfect and
      uninterrupted harmony with the first, without envy in one,
      or jealousy in the other; so, on the other hand, I have
      never had the smallest misunderstanding with any member of
      the Senate. In all the abstruse questions, difficult
      conjectures, dangerous emergencies, and animated debates,
      upon the great interests of our country, which have so
      often and so deeply impressed all our minds, and interested
      the strongest feelings of the heart, I have experienced a
      uniform politeness and respect from every quarter of the
      House. When questions of no less importance than difficulty
      have produced a difference of sentiment, (and difference of
      opinion will always be found in free assemblies of men, and
      probably the greatest diversities upon the greatest
      questions,) when the Senators have been equally divided,
      and my opinion has been demanded according to the
      constitution, I have constantly found, in that moiety of
      the Senators from whose judgment I have been obliged to
      dissent, a disposition to allow me the same freedom of
      deliberation, and independence of judgment, which they
      asserted for themselves.

      Within these walls, for a course of years, I have been an
      admiring witness of a succession of information, eloquence,
      patriotism, and independence, which, as they would have
      done honor to any Senate in any age, afford a consolatory
      hope, (if the Legislatures of the States are equally
      careful in their future selections, which there is no
      reason to distrust,) that no council more permanent than
      this, as a branch of the Legislature, will be necessary, to
      defend the rights, liberties, and properties of the people,
      and to protect the Constitution of the United States, as
      well as the constitutions and rights of the individual
      States, against errors of judgment, irregularities of the
      passions, or other encroachments of human infirmity, or
      more reprehensible enterprise, in the Executive on one
      hand, or the more immediate representatives of the people
      on the other.

      These considerations will all conspire to animate me in my
      future course, with a confident reliance, that as far as my
      conduct shall be uniformly measured by the Constitution of
      the United States, and faithfully directed to the public
      good, I shall be supported by the Senate, as well as by the
      House of Representatives, and the people at large; and on
      no other conditions ought any support at all to be expected
      or desired.

      With cordial wishes for your honor, health, and happiness,
      and fervent prayers for a continuation of the virtues,
      liberties, prosperity, and peace, of our beloved country, I
      avail myself of your leave of absence for the remainder of
      the session.


THURSDAY, February 16.

The VICE-PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a
PRESIDENT _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides, and the
honorable WILLIAM BINGHAM was duly elected.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, and notify him of the election of the Honorable WILLIAM BINGHAM,
to be PRESIDENT of the Senate _pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary notify the House of Representatives of
this election.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That Messrs. SEDGWICK, BURR, and TRACY, be a committee to
prepare and report the draft of an answer to the Address delivered
yesterday to the Senate, by the VICE PRESIDENT of the United States.


TUESDAY, February 21.

The bill to accommodate the PRESIDENT was read the third time; and,
being further amended,

On motion that it be _Resolved_, That this bill pass, it was decided in
the affirmative--yeas 28, nays 3, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Bloodworth, Blount, Bradford,
      Brown, Foster, Goodhue, Gunn, Henry, Hillhouse, Howard,
      Langdon, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Marshall, Martin,
      Pain, Read, Ross, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tattnall,
      Tazewell, Tichenor, Tracy, and Vining.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Cocke, Hunter, and Mason.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass; that it be engrossed; and
that the title thereof be, "An act to accommodate the PRESIDENT."

Mr. SEDGWICK reported from the committee appointed for the purpose, the
draft of an answer to the Address of the VICE PRESIDENT of the United
States, on his retiring from the Senate; which was read.

On motion, that it be printed for the use of the Senate, it was
disagreed to.

_Ordered_, That the report lie for consideration.


WEDNESDAY, February 22.

The Senate took into consideration the report of the committee, in
answer to the Address of the VICE PRESIDENT of the United States, on his
retiring from the Senate.

On motion to recommit the report, it passed in the negative: and the
report being amended, was adopted, as follows:

      SIR: The Senate of the United States would be unjust to
      their own feelings, and deficient in the performance of a
      duty their relation to the Government of their country
      imposes, should they fail to express their regard for your
      person, and their respect for your character, in answer to
      the Address you presented to them, on your leaving a
      station which you have so long and so honorably filled as
      their President.

      The motives you have been pleased to disclose which induced
      you not to withdraw from the public service, at a time when
      your experience, talents, and virtues, were peculiarly
      desirable, are as honorable for yourself, as, from our
      confidence in you, sir, we trust the result will be
      beneficial to our beloved country.

      When you retired from your dignified seat in this House,
      and took your leave of the members of the Senate, we felt
      all those emotions of gratitude and affection, which our
      knowledge and experience of your abilities and undeviating
      impartiality ought to inspire; and we should, with painful
      reluctance, endure the separation, but for the consoling
      reflection, that the same qualities which have rendered you
      useful, as the President of this branch of the Legislature,
      will enable you to be still more so, in the exalted station
      to which you have been called.

      From you, sir, in whom your country have for a long period
      placed a steady confidence, which has never been betrayed
      or forfeited, and to whom they have on so many occasions
      intrusted the care of their dearest interests, which have
      never been abused; from you, who, holding the second
      situation under the Constitution of the United States, have
      lived in uninterrupted harmony with him who has held the
      first; from you we receive, with much satisfaction, the
      declaration which you are pleased to make of the opinion
      you entertain of the character of the present Senators, and
      of that of those citizens who have been heretofore
      Senators. This declaration, were other motives wanting,
      would afford them an incentive to a virtuous perseverance
      in the line of conduct which has been honored with your
      approbation.

      In your future course, we entertain no doubt that your
      official conduct will be measured by the constitution, and
      directed to the public good; you have, therefore, a right
      to entertain a confident reliance, that you will be
      supported, as well by the people at large as by their
      constituted authorities.

      We cordially reciprocate the wishes which you express for
      our honor, health, and happiness; we join with yours our
      fervent prayers for the continuation of the virtues and
      liberties of our fellow-citizens, for the public prosperity
      and peace; and for you we implore the best reward of
      virtuous deeds--the grateful approbation of your
      constituents, and the smiles of Heaven.

                          WILLIAM BINGHAM,
                          _President of the Senate pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the committee who drafted the Address wait on the VICE
PRESIDENT, with the Answer of the Senate.


THURSDAY, February 23.

Mr. SEDGWICK reported, from the committee, that, agreeably to order,
they had waited on the VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, with the
answer to his Address, on retiring from the Senate--to which the VICE
PRESIDENT was pleased to make the following Reply:

      An Address so respectful and affectionate as this, from
      gentlemen of such experience and established character in
      public affairs, high stations in the Government of their
      country, and great consideration, in their several States,
      as Senators of the United States, will do me great honor,
      and afford me a firm support, wherever it shall be known,
      both at home and abroad. Their generous approbation of my
      conduct, in general, and liberal testimony to the
      undeviating impartiality of it, in my peculiar relation to
      their body, a character which, in every scene and
      employment of life, I should wish above all others to
      cultivate and merit, has a tendency to soften asperities,
      and conciliate animosities, wherever such may unhappily
      exist; an effect at all times to be desired, and in the
      present situation of our country, ardently to be promoted
      by all good citizens.

      I pray the Senate to accept my sincere thanks.

                          JOHN ADAMS.


WEDNESDAY, March 1.

_Executive Veto on the Army Bill._

The PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES having stated his objections to the
bill, entitled "An act to alter and amend an act, entitled 'an act to
ascertain and fix the Military Establishment of the United States,'" the
House of Representatives proceeded to consider the objections to the
said bill, and have resolved that it do not pass.




SPECIAL SESSION


SATURDAY, March 4.

_Installation of Thomas Jefferson as Vice President of the United States
and President of the Senate, and inauguration of John Adams as President
of the United States._

      _To the Vice President and Senators of the United States
      respectively_:

      SIR: It appearing to be proper that the Senate of the
      United States should be convened on Saturday, the fourth of
      March instant, you are desired to attend in the Chamber of
      the Senate, on that day at ten o'clock in the forenoon, to
      receive any communications which the President of the
      United States may then lay before you touching their
      interests.
                          G. WASHINGTON.

      March 1, 1797.

In conformity with the summons from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
above recited, the Senate accordingly assembled in their Chamber.

PRESENT:

THOMAS JEFFERSON, Vice President of the United States and President of
the Senate.

JOHN LANGDON and SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire.

THEODORE SEDGWICK and BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from Massachusetts.

THEODORE FOSTER, from Rhode Island.

JAMES HILLHOUSE and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

ELIJAH PAYNE and ISAAC TICHENOR, from Vermont.

JOHN LAURANCE, from New York.

RICHARD STOCKTON, from New Jersey.

JAMES ROSS and WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.

JOHN VINING and HENRY LATIMER, from Delaware.

JOHN HENRY and JOHN E. HOWARD, from Maryland.

HENRY TAZEWELL and STEVENS T. MASON, from Virginia.

JOHN BROWN and HUMPHREY MARSHALL, from Kentucky.

ALEXANDER MARTIN and TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH, from North Carolina.

WILLIAM BLOUNT, from Tennessee.

JACOB READ, from South Carolina.

JAMES GUNN and JOSIAH TATTNALL, from Georgia.

Mr. BINGHAM administered the oath of office to the VICE PRESIDENT, who
took the chair, and the credentials of the following members were read.

Of Mr. FOSTER, Mr. GOODHUE, Mr. HILLHOUSE, Mr. HOWARD, Mr. LATIMER, Mr.
MASON, Mr. ROSS, and Mr. TICHENOR.

And the oath of office being severally administered to them by the VICE
PRESIDENT, they took their seats in the Senate.

The VICE PRESIDENT then addressed the Senate as follows:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      Entering on the duties of the office to which I am called,
      I feel it incumbent on me to apologize to this honorable
      House for the insufficient manner in which I fear they may
      be discharged. At an earlier period of my life, and through
      some considerable portion of it, I have been a member of
      Legislative bodies, and not altogether inattentive to the
      forms of their proceedings; but much time has elapsed since
      that; other duties have occupied my mind, and, in a great
      degree, it has lost its familiarity with this subject. I
      fear that the House will have but too frequent occasion to
      perceive the truth of this acknowledgment. If a diligent
      attention, however, will enable me to fulfil the functions
      now assigned me, I may promise that diligence and attention
      shall be sedulously employed. For one portion of my duty, I
      shall engage with more confidence, because it will depend
      on my will and not my capacity. The rules which are to
      govern the proceedings of this House, so far as they shall
      depend on me for their application, shall be applied with
      the most rigorous and inflexible impartiality, regarding
      neither persons, their views, nor principles, and seeing
      only the abstract proposition subject to my decision. If,
      in forming that decision, I concur with some and differ
      from others, as must of necessity happen, I shall rely on
      the liberality and candor of those from whom I differ, to
      believe, that I do it on pure motives.

      I might here proceed, and with the greatest truth, to
      declare my zealous attachment to the Constitution of the
      United States, that I consider the union of these States as
      the first of blessings and as the first of duties the
      preservation of that constitution which secures it; but I
      suppose these declarations not pertinent to the occasion of
      entering into an office whose primary business is merely to
      preside over the forms of this House, and no one more
      sincerely prays that no accident may call me to the higher
      and more important functions which the constitution
      eventually devolves on this office. These have been justly
      confided to the eminent character which has preceded me
      here, whose talents and integrity have been known and
      revered by me through a long course of years, have been the
      foundation of a cordial and uninterrupted friendship
      between us, and I devoutly pray he may be long preserved
      for the government, the happiness, and prosperity, of our
      common country.[1]

On motion, it was agreed to repair to the Chamber of the House of
Representatives to attend the administration of the oath of office to
JOHN ADAMS, President of the United States; which the Senate accordingly
did; and, being seated, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES (attended by
the Heads of Departments, the Marshal of the District and his officers)
came into the Chamber of the House of Representatives and took his seat
in the chair usually occupied by the SPEAKER. The VICE PRESIDENT and
Secretary of the Senate were seated in advance, inclining to the right
of the PRESIDENT, the late SPEAKER of the House of Representatives and
Clerk on the left, and the Justices of the Supreme Court were seated
round a table in front of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. The late
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, the great and good WASHINGTON,[2] took a
seat, as a private citizen, a little in front of the seats assigned for
the Senate, which were on the south side of the House, the foreign
Ministers and members of the House of Representatives took their usual
seats--a great concourse of both sexes being present. After a short
pause, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES arose, and communicated the
following Address:

      "When it was first perceived, in early times, that no
      middle course for America remained, between unlimited
      submission to a foreign Legislature, and a total
      independence of its claims, men of reflection were less
      apprehensive of danger, from the formidable power of fleets
      and armies they must determine to resist, than from those
      contests and dissensions, which would certainly arise
      concerning the forms of government to be instituted over
      the whole and over the parts of this extensive country.
      Relying, however, on the purity of their intentions, the
      justice of their cause, and the integrity and intelligence
      of the people, under an overruling Providence, which had so
      signally protected this country from the first, the
      Representatives of this nation, then consisting of little
      more than half its present number, not only broke to pieces
      the chains which were forging, and the rod of iron that was
      lifted up, but frankly cut asunder the ties which had bound
      them, and launched into an ocean of uncertainty.

      "The zeal and ardor of the people, during the Revolutionary
      war, supplying the place of government, commanded a degree
      of order, sufficient at least for the preservation of
      society. The Confederation, which was early felt to be
      necessary, was prepared from the models of the Batavian and
      Helvetic Confederacies, the only examples which remain,
      with any detail and precision, in history, and certainly
      the only ones which the people at large had ever
      considered. But, reflecting on the striking difference, in
      many particulars, between this country and those where a
      courier may go from the seat of Government to the frontier
      in a single day, it was then certainly foreseen by some who
      assisted in Congress at the formation of it, that it could
      not be durable.

      "Negligence of its regulations, inattention to its
      recommendations, if not disobedience to its authority, not
      only in individuals but in States, soon appeared, with
      their melancholy consequences: universal languor;
      jealousies and rivalries of States; decline of navigation
      and commerce; discouragement of necessary manufactures;
      universal fall in the value of lands and their produce;
      contempt of public and private faith; loss of consideration
      and credit with foreign nations; and, at length, in
      discontents, animosities, combinations, partial
      conventions, and insurrection, threatening some great
      national calamity.

      "In this dangerous crisis, the people of America were not
      abandoned by their usual good sense, presence of mind,
      resolution, or integrity. Measures were pursued to concert
      a plan, to form a more perfect union, establish justice,
      ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common
      defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the
      blessings of liberty. The public disquisitions,
      discussions, and deliberations, issued in the present happy
      constitution of Government.

      "Employed in the service of my country abroad, during the
      whole course of these transactions, I first saw the
      Constitution of the United States in a foreign country.
      Irritated by no literary altercation, animated by no public
      debate, heated by no party animosity, I read it with great
      satisfaction, as a result of good heads, prompted by good
      hearts; as an experiment, better adapted to the genius,
      character, situation, and relations, of this nation and
      country, than any which had ever been proposed or
      suggested. In its general principles and great outlines, it
      was conformable to such a system of government as I had
      ever most esteemed, and in some States, my own native State
      in particular, had contributed to establish. Claiming a
      right of suffrage, in common with my fellow-citizens, in
      the adoption or rejection of a constitution which was to
      rule me and my posterity, as well as them and theirs, I did
      not hesitate to express my approbation of it, on all
      occasions, in public and in private. It was not then, nor
      has been since, any objection to it, in my mind, that the
      Executive and Senate were not more permanent. Nor have I
      ever entertained a thought of promoting any alteration in
      it, but such as the people themselves, in the course of
      their experience, should see and feel to be necessary or
      expedient, and by their Representatives in Congress and the
      State Legislatures, according to the constitution itself,
      adopt and ordain.

      "Returning to the bosom of my country, after a painful
      separation from it, for ten years, I had the honor to be
      elected to a station under the new order of things, and I
      have repeatedly laid myself under the most serious
      obligations to support the constitution. The operation of
      it has equalled the most sanguine expectations of its
      friends, and from an habitual attention to it, satisfaction
      in its administration and delight in its effects upon the
      peace, order, prosperity, and happiness of the nation, I
      have acquired an habitual attachment to it, and veneration
      for it.

      "What other form of government, indeed, can so well deserve
      our esteem and love?

      "There may be little solidity in an ancient idea that
      congregations of men into cities and nations are the most
      pleasing objects in the sight of superior intelligences:
      but this is very certain, that, to a benevolent human mind,
      there can be no spectacle presented by any nation more
      pleasing, more noble, majestic, or august, than an assembly
      like that which has so often been seen in this and the
      other chamber of Congress, of a Government, in which the
      Executive authority, as well as that of all the branches of
      the Legislature, are exercised by citizens selected, at
      regular periods, by their neighbors, to make and execute
      laws for the general good. Can any thing essential, any
      thing more than mere ornament and decoration, be added to
      this by robes and diamonds? Can authority be more amiable
      and respectable, when it descends from accidents, or
      institutions established in remote antiquity, than when it
      springs fresh from the hearts and judgments of an honest
      and enlightened people? For, it is the people only that are
      represented: it is their power and majesty that are
      reflected, and only for their good, in every legitimate
      Government, under whatever form it may appear. The
      existence of such a Government as ours, for any length of
      time, is a full proof of a general dissemination of
      knowledge and virtue throughout the whole body of the
      people. And what object or consideration more pleasing than
      this can be presented to the human mind? If national pride
      is ever justifiable or excusable, it is when it springs,
      not from power or riches, grandeur or glory, but from
      conviction of national innocence, information, and
      benevolence.

      "In the midst of these pleasing ideas, we should be
      unfaithful to ourselves, if we should ever lose sight of
      the danger to our liberties, if any thing partial or
      extraneous should infect the purity of our free, fair,
      virtuous, and independent elections. If an election is to
      be determined by a majority of a single vote, and that can
      be procured by a party, through artifice or corruption, the
      Government may be the choice of a party, for its own ends,
      not of the nation for the national good. If that solitary
      suffrage can be obtained by foreign nations, by flattery or
      menaces, by fraud or violence by terror, intrigue, or
      venality, the Government may not be the choice of the
      American people, but of foreign nations. It may be foreign
      nations who govern us, and not we the people who govern
      ourselves. And candid men will acknowledge, that, in such
      cases, choice would have little advantage to boast of, over
      lot or chance.

      "Such is the amiable and interesting system of Government
      (and such are some of the abuses to which it may be
      exposed) which the people of America have exhibited to the
      admiration and anxiety of the wise and virtuous of all
      nations, for eight years, under the administration of a
      citizen, who, by a long course of great actions, regulated
      by prudence, justice, temperance, and fortitude, conducting
      a people, inspired with the same virtues, and animated with
      the same ardent patriotism and love of liberty, to
      independence and peace, to increasing wealth and unexampled
      prosperity, has merited the gratitude of his
      fellow-citizens, commanded the highest praises of foreign
      nations, and secured immortal glory with posterity.

      "In that retirement which is his voluntary choice, may he
      long live to enjoy the delicious recollection of his
      services, the gratitude of mankind, the happy fruits of
      them to himself and the world, which are daily increasing,
      and that splendid prospect of the future fortunes of this
      country, which is opening from year to year. His name may
      be still a rampart, and the knowledge that he still lives a
      bulwark, against all open or secret enemies of his
      country's peace. His example has been recommended to the
      imitation of his successors, by both Houses of Congress,
      and by the voice of the Legislatures and the people
      throughout the nation.

      "On this subject it might become me better to be silent, or
      to speak with diffidence; but as something may be expected,
      the occasion, I hope, will be admitted as an apology, if I
      venture to say, that if a preference upon principle, of a
      free Republican Government, formed upon long and serious
      reflection, after a diligent and impartial inquiry after
      truth; if an attachment to the Constitution of the United
      States, and a conscientious determination to support it,
      until it shall be altered by the judgments and wishes of
      the people, expressed in the mode prescribed in it; if a
      respectful attention to the constitutions of the individual
      States, and a constant caution and delicacy towards the
      State Government; if an equal and impartial regard to the
      rights, interest, honor, and happiness, of all the States
      in the Union, without preference or regard to a Northern or
      Southern, an Eastern or Western position, their various
      political opinions on unessential points, or their personal
      attachments; if a love of virtuous men of all parties and
      denominations; if a love of science and letters, and a wish
      to patronize every rational effort to encourage schools,
      colleges, universities, academies, and every institution
      for propagating knowledge, virtue, and religion, among all
      classes of the people, not only for their benign influence
      on the happiness of life in all its stages and classes, and
      of society in all its forms, but as the only means of
      preserving our constitution from its natural enemies, the
      spirit of sophistry, the spirit of party, the spirit of
      intrigue, the profligacy of corruption, and the pestilence
      of foreign influence, which is the angel of destruction to
      elective governments; if a love of equal laws, of justice,
      and humanity, in the interior administration; if an
      inclination to improve agriculture, commerce, and
      manufactures, for necessity, convenience, and defence; if a
      spirit of equity and humanity towards the aboriginal
      nations of America, and a disposition to meliorate their
      condition, by inclining them to be more friendly to us, and
      our citizens to be more friendly to them; if an inflexible
      determination to maintain peace and inviolable faith with
      all nations, and that system of neutrality and impartiality
      among the belligerent powers of Europe, which has been
      adopted by this Government, and so solemnly sanctioned by
      both Houses of Congress, and applauded by the Legislatures
      of the States and the public opinion, until it shall be
      otherwise ordained by Congress; if a personal esteem for
      the French nation, formed in a residence of seven years,
      chiefly among them, and a sincere desire to preserve the
      friendship which has been so much for the honor and
      interest of both nations; if, while the conscious honor and
      integrity of the people of America, and the internal
      sentiment of their own power and energies must be
      preserved, an earnest endeavor to investigate every just
      cause, and remove every colorable pretence of complaint; if
      an intention to pursue, by amicable negotiation, a
      reparation for the injuries that have been committed on the
      commerce of our fellow-citizens by whatever nation, and, if
      success cannot be obtained, to lay the facts before the
      Legislature, that they may consider what further measures
      the honor and interest of the Government and its
      constituents demand; if a resolution to do justice, as far
      as may depend upon me, at all times and to all nations, and
      maintain peace, friendship, and benevolence, with all the
      world; if an unshaken confidence in the honor, spirit, and
      resources of the American people, on which I have so often
      hazarded my all, and never been deceived; if elevated ideas
      of the high destinies of this country, and of my own duties
      towards it, founded on a knowledge of the moral principles
      and intellectual improvements of the people, deeply
      engraven on my mind in early life, and not obscured, but
      exalted by experience and age; and with humble reverence, I
      feel it to be my duty to add, if a veneration for the
      religion of a people who profess and call themselves
      Christians, and a fixed resolution to consider a decent
      respect for Christianity among the best recommendations for
      the public service, can enable me, in any degree, to comply
      with your wishes, it shall be my strenuous endeavor, that
      this sagacious injunction of the two Houses shall not be
      without effect.

      "With this great example before me, with the sense and
      spirit, the faith and honor, the duty and interest, of the
      same American people, pledged to support the Constitution
      of the United States, I entertain no doubt of its
      continuance in all its energy, and my mind is prepared,
      without hesitation, to lay myself under the most solemn
      obligations to support it to the utmost of my power.

      "And may that Being who is supreme over all, the Patron of
      Order, the Fountain of Justice, and the Protector, in all
      ages of the world, of virtuous liberty, continue his
      blessing upon this nation and its Government, and give it
      all possible success and duration, consistent with the ends
      of His Providence."

The oath of office was then administered to him by the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court of the United States, the Associate Justices
attending. After which, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES retired, and
the Senate repaired to their own Chamber.

On motion,

_Ordered_, That Messrs. LANGDON and SEDGWICK be a committee to wait on
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and notify him that the Senate is
assembled, and ready to adjourn unless he may have any communications to
make to them.

Mr. LANGDON reported, from the committee, that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, who replied, that he had no
communication to make to the Senate, except his good wishes for their
health and prosperity, and a happy meeting with their families and
friends.

The Senate then adjourned without day.




FOURTH CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, December 5, 1796.

This being the day appointed by the constitution for the annual meeting
of Congress, in the House of Representatives, the following named
members appeared and took their seats, viz:

_From New Hampshire._--ABIEL FOSTER, NICHOLAS GILMAN, JOHN S. SHERBURNE,
and JEREMIAH SMITH.

_From Massachusetts._--FISHER AMES, THEOPHILUS BRADBURY, HENRY DEARBORN,
DWIGHT FOSTER, NATHANIEL FREEMAN, Jr., SAMUEL LYMAN, WILLIAM LYMAN, JOHN
READ, GEORGE THATCHER, JOSEPH B. VARNUM, and PELEG WADSWORTH.

_From Rhode Island._--FRANCIS MALBONE.

_From Connecticut._--JOSHUA COIT, CHAUNCEY GOODRICH, ROGER GRISWOLD,
NATHANIEL SMITH, and ZEPHANIAH SWIFT.

_From New York._--THEODORUS BAILEY, WILLIAM COOPER, EZEKIEL GILBERT,
HENRY GLENN, JONATHAN N. HAVENS, JOHN E. VAN ALLEN, PHILIP VAN
CORTLANDT, and JOHN WILLIAMS.

_From New Jersey._--JONATHAN DAYTON, AARON KITCHELL, and ISAAC SMITH.

_From Pennsylvania._--ALBERT GALLATIN, SAMUEL MACLAY, FREDERICK AUGUSTUS
MUHLENBERG, JOHN RICHARDS, SAMUEL SITGREAVES, and JOHN SWANWICK.

_From Delaware._--JOHN PATTON.

_From Maryland._--GEORGE DENT, WILLIAM HINDMAN, and RICHARD SPRIGG, Jr.

_From Virginia._--JOHN CLOPTON, ISAAC COLES, GEORGE JACKSON, JAMES
MADISON, ANTHONY NEW, and ROBERT RUTHERFORD.

_From Kentucky._--CHRISTOPHER GREENUP.

_From North Carolina._--THOMAS BLOUNT and MATTHEW LOCKE.

_From South Carolina._--WILLIAM SMITH.

_From Georgia._--ABRAHAM BALDWIN.

The following new members appeared, produced their credentials, were
qualified, and took their seats, viz:

_From Tennessee._--ANDREW JACKSON.

_From Maryland._--WILLIAM CRAIK, in place of JEREMIAH CRABB, resigned.

_From Connecticut._--JAMES DAVENPORT, in place of JAMES HILLHOUSE,
appointed a Senator of the United States.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Governor of
Pennsylvania, with the return of the election of GEORGE EGE, to serve as
a member of the House in place of DANIEL HEISTER, resigned.

A quorum, consisting of a majority of the whole number, being present,
it was ordered that the Clerk wait on the Senate, to inform them that
this House was ready to proceed to business; but it appeared that the
Senate had not been able to form a quorum by one member, and had
adjourned.

Mr. WILLIAM SMITH presented a petition from Thomas Lloyd, proposing to
take, in short-hand, and publish the Debates of Congress at $1,000 per
session salary. The expense of printing, &c. he estimated at $540, for
which he would furnish the House with five hundred copies of that work;
engaging to use every possible precaution, and pay prompt attention.

Mr. S. referred to the unfavorable reception of a proposal of this
nature at the last session, and supposed this would not be more
successful; however, he moved that it be referred to a committee.

The motion was agreed to, and Mr. W. SMITH, Mr. GALLATIN, and Mr. SWIFT,
were appointed to examine the petition, and report thereon to the House.


TUESDAY, December 6.

Several other members, to wit: from Vermont, ISRAEL SMITH; from New
Jersey, MARK THOMPSON; from Pennsylvania, RICHARD THOMAS; from Virginia,
CARTER B. HARRISON, JOHN HEATH, and ABRAHAM VENABLE; and from North
Carolina, JESSE FRANKLIN, WILLIAM BARRY GROVE, JAMES HOLLAND, and
NATHANIEL MACON, appeared, and took their seats in the House.

The SPEAKER observed, that, as there were several returns of new
elections of members to serve in this session, it was proper that,
pursuant to a rule of the House, a Committee of Elections be appointed.

A committee was accordingly appointed, of Mr. VENABLE, Mr. SWIFT, Mr.
DENT, Mr. DEARBORN, Mr. BLOUNT, Mr. MUHLENBERG, and Mr. A. FOSTER.

Mr. MACON moved that a Committee of Revisal and Unfinished Business of
last session be appointed, pursuant to the Standing Rules and Orders of
the House, observing that, as the session would be but short, it would
be necessary to be early in the appointment of committees.

Whereon Mr. GILMAN, Mr. R. SPRIGG, Jr., and Mr. MACON were appointed.

Notice was received that a quorum of the Senate was formed.

On motion, it was, therefore, resolved, that a committee of three
members be appointed to wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in
conjunction with a committee from the Senate, to inform him that a
quorum of both Houses was assembled, and ready to receive any
communications that he may please to make. Mr. AMES, Mr. MADISON, and
Mr. SITGREAVES, were accordingly appointed.

A message was received from the Senate informing the House that they had
formed a quorum: whereupon the Clerk went to the Senate with the
resolution of this House. The Secretary soon after returned, informing
the House that the Senate had concurred in the resolution, and formed a
committee for that purpose.

Mr. AMES, from the committee appointed for that purpose, reported that
the committee had waited on the PRESIDENT, who was pleased to signify to
them that he would make a communication to both Houses of Congress
to-morrow, at 12 o'clock, in the Representatives' Chamber.


WEDNESDAY, December 7.

Another member, to wit, SAMUEL SEWALL, from Massachusetts, in place of
BENJAMIN GOODHUE, appointed a Senator of the United States, appeared,
produced his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat.

A message was sent to the Senate, informing them that this House was
ready, agreeably to appointment, to receive communications from the
PRESIDENT; whereon the Senate attended, and took their seats. At 12
o'clock the PRESIDENT attended, and, after taking his seat, rose and
delivered the following Address:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives_:

      In recurring to the internal situation of our country,
      since I had last the pleasure to address you, I find ample
      reason for a renewed expression of that gratitude to the
      Ruler of the Universe, which a continued series of
      prosperity, has so often and so justly called forth.

      To an active external commerce, the protection of a Naval
      force is indispensable: this is manifest with regard to
      wars in which a State is itself a party. But besides this,
      it is in our own experience, that the most sincere
      neutrality is not a sufficient guard against the
      depredations of nations at war. To secure respect to a
      neutral flag, requires a Naval force, organized and ready
      to vindicate it from insult or aggression. This may even
      prevent the necessity of going to war, by discouraging
      belligerent powers from committing such violations of the
      rights of the neutral party as may, first or last, leave no
      other option. From the best information I have been able to
      obtain, it would seem as if our trade to the Mediterranean,
      without a protecting force, will always be insecure, and
      our citizens exposed to the calamities from which numbers
      of them have but just been relieved.

      These considerations invite the United States to look to
      the means, and to set about the gradual creation of a Navy.
      The increasing progress of their navigation promises them,
      at no distant period, the requisite supply of seamen; and
      their means in other respects favor the undertaking. It is
      an encouragement likewise that their particular situation
      will give weight and influence to a moderate Naval force in
      their hands. Will it not, then, be advisable to begin,
      without delay, to provide and lay up the materials for the
      building and equipping of ships of war, and to proceed in
      the work by degrees, in proportion as our resources shall
      render it practicable without inconvenience; so that a
      future war of Europe may not find our commerce in the same
      unprotected state in which it was found by the present?

      Congress have repeatedly, and not without success, directed
      their attention to the encouragement of manufactures. The
      object is of too much consequence not to ensure a
      continuance of their efforts in every way which shall
      appear eligible. As a general rule, manufactures on public
      account are inexpedient. But where the state of things in a
      country leaves but little hope that certain branches of
      manufacture will for a great length of time obtain, when
      these are of a nature essential to the furnishing and
      equipping of the public force in time of war; are not
      establishments for procuring them on public account, _to
      the extent of the ordinary demand for the public service_,
      recommended by strong considerations of national policy, as
      an exception to the general rule? Ought our country to
      remain in such cases dependent on foreign supply,
      precarious, because liable to be interrupted? If the
      necessary articles should in this mode cost more in time of
      peace, will not the security and independence thence
      arising form an ample compensation? Establishments of this
      sort, commensurate only with the calls of the public
      service in time of peace, will, in time of war, easily be
      extended in proportion to the exigencies of the Government,
      and may even, perhaps, be made to yield a surplus for the
      supply of our citizens at large, so as to mitigate the
      privations from the interruption of their trade. If
      adopted, the plan ought to exclude all those branches which
      are already, or likely soon to be established in the
      country, in order that there may be no danger of
      interference with pursuits of individual industry.

      It will not be doubted that with reference either to
      individual or national welfare, agriculture is of primary
      importance. In proportion as nations advance in population,
      and other circumstances of maturity, this truth becomes
      more apparent, and renders the cultivation of the soil more
      and more an object of public patronage. Institutions for
      promoting it grow up, supported by the public purse; and to
      what object can it be dedicated with greater propriety?
      Among the means which have been employed to this end, none
      have been attended with greater success than the
      establishment of Boards, composed of proper characters,
      charged with collecting and diffusing information, and
      enabled by premiums, and small pecuniary aids, to encourage
      and assist a spirit of discovery and improvement. This
      species of establishment contributes doubly to the increase
      of improvement, by stimulating to enterprise and
      experiment, and by drawing to a common centre the results
      every where of individual skill and observation, and
      spreading them thence over the whole nation. Experience
      accordingly has shown that they are very cheap instruments
      of immense national benefits.

      I have heretofore proposed to the consideration of Congress
      the expediency of establishing a National University, and
      also a Military Academy. The desirableness of both these
      institutions has so constantly increased with every new
      view I have taken of the subject, that I cannot omit the
      opportunity of once for all recalling your attention to
      them.

      The Assembly to which I address myself is too enlightened
      not to be fully sensible how much a flourishing state of
      the arts and sciences contributes to national prosperity
      and reputation. True it is that our country, much to its
      honor, contains many seminaries of learning highly
      respectable and useful; but the funds upon which they rest
      are too narrow to command the ablest professors in the
      different departments of liberal knowledge for the
      institution contemplated, though they would be excellent
      auxiliaries.

      Amongst the motives to such an institution the assimilation
      of the principles, opinions, and manners of our countrymen,
      by the common education of a portion of our youth from
      every quarter, well deserves attention. The more
      homogeneous our citizens can be made in these particulars,
      the greater will be our prospect of permanent union; and a
      primary object of such a national institution should be the
      education of our youth in the science of Government. In a
      Republic, what species of knowledge can be equally
      important? and what duty more pressing on its Legislature,
      than to patronize a plan for communicating it to those who
      are to be the future guardians of the liberties of the
      country?

      The institution of a Military Academy is also recommended
      by cogent reasons. However pacific the general policy of a
      nation may be, it ought never to be without an adequate
      stock of military knowledge for emergencies. The first
      would impair the energy of its character, and both would
      hazard its safety, or expose it to greater evils when war
      could not be avoided: besides, that war might often not
      depend upon its own choice. In proportion as the observance
      of pacific maxims might exempt a nation from the necessity
      of practising the rules of the military art, ought to be
      its care in preserving and transmitting by proper
      establishments the knowledge of that art. Whatever argument
      may be drawn from particular examples, superficially
      viewed, a thorough examination of the subject will evince
      that the art of war is at once comprehensive and
      complicated; that it demands much previous study; and that
      the possession of it, in its most improved and perfect
      state, is always of great moment to the security of a
      nation. This, therefore, ought to be a serious care of
      every Government; and for this purpose an Academy, where a
      regular course of instruction is given, is an obvious
      expedient, which different nations have successfully
      employed.

      The compensations to the officers of the United States in
      various instances, and in none more than in respect to the
      most important stations, appear to call for Legislative
      revision. The consequences of a defective provision are of
      serious import to the Government.

      If private wealth is to supply the defect of public
      retribution, it will greatly contract the sphere within
      which the selection of character for office is to be made,
      and will proportionally diminish the probability of a
      choice of men, able, as well as upright. Besides, that it
      would be repugnant to the vital principles of our
      Government virtually to exclude from public trusts,
      talents, and virtue, unless accompanied by wealth.

      While in our external relations some serious inconveniences
      and embarrassments have been overcome, and others lessened,
      it is with much pain and deep regret I mention that
      circumstances of a very unwelcome nature have lately
      occurred. Our trade has suffered, and is suffering,
      extensive injuries in the West Indies, from the cruisers
      and agents of the French Republic; and communications have
      been received from its Minister here which indicate the
      danger of a further disturbance of our commerce, by its
      authority, and which are, in other respects, far from
      agreeable.

      It has been my constant, sincere, and ardent wish, in
      conformity with that of our nation, to maintain cordial
      harmony and a perfectly friendly understanding with that
      Republic. This wish remains unabated; and I shall persevere
      in the endeavor to fulfil it to the utmost extent of what
      shall be consistent with a just and indispensable regard to
      the rights and honor of our country; nor will I easily
      cease to cherish the expectation that a spirit of justice,
      candor, and friendship on the part of the Republic will
      eventually ensure success.

      My solicitude to see the Militia of the United States
      placed on an efficient establishment has been so often and
      so ardently expressed that I shall but barely recall the
      subject to your view on the present occasion; at the same
      time that I shall submit to your inquiry, whether our
      harbors are yet sufficiently secured.

      The situation in which I now stand, for the last time, in
      the midst of the Representatives of the people of the
      United States, naturally recalls the period when the
      administration of the present form of government commenced;
      and I cannot omit the occasion to congratulate you and my
      country on the success of the experiment; nor to repeat my
      fervent supplications to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe
      and Sovereign Arbiter of Nations, that His providential
      care may still be extended to the United States; that the
      virtue and happiness of the people may be preserved; and
      that the Government which they have instituted for the
      protection of their liberties may be perpetual.

                          G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _December 7, 1796_.

When the PRESIDENT had concluded his Address, he presented copies of it
to the PRESIDENT of the Senate and the SPEAKER of the House of
Representatives. The PRESIDENT and the Senate then withdrew, and the
SPEAKER took the Chair. The Address was again read by the Clerk, and on
motion, committed to a Committee of the whole House to-morrow.


THURSDAY, December 8.

JAMES GILLESPIE, from North Carolina, appeared, and took his seat in the
House.

A new member, to wit, GEORGE EGE, from Pennsylvania, in place of DANIEL
HEISTER, resigned, appeared, produced his credentials, was qualified,
and took his seat.

_Address to the President._

On the motion of Mr. W. SMITH, the House went into a Committee of the
Whole on the PRESIDENT's Address, according to the order of the day. The
Speech was read by the Clerk.

Mr. D. FOSTER moved the following resolution: |

      "_Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      a respectful Address ought to be presented from the House
      of Representatives, to the President of the United States,
      in answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress, at the
      commencement of the session, containing assurances that
      this House will take into consideration the many important
      matters recommended to their attention."

Which was unanimously agreed to, and Mr. AMES, Mr. BALDWIN, Mr. MADISON,
Mr. SITGREAVES, and Mr. W. SMITH were appointed a committee to draw up
the Address. The committee rose, and the resolution was adopted by the
House.


FRIDAY, December 9.

DAVID BARD, from Pennsylvania, JOSIAH PARKER, from Virginia, and NATHAN
BRYAN, from North Carolina, appeared and took their seats in the House.

_Address to the President._

The SPEAKER said, that it had been usual for the House to come to some
order on the PRESIDENT's Address, which was to refer it to a Committee
of the Whole on the state of the Union. On which Mr. WILLIAMS moved,
that it be committed to a Committee of the Whole on the state of the
Union, which was done accordingly.

Mr. BAYLEY moved, that a Committee of Commerce and Manufactures be
appointed, when Mr. WILLIAM SMITH, Mr. SEWALL, Mr. COIT, Mr. PARKER, Mr.
BLOUNT, and Mr. DENT, were named for that committee.

Mr. BAYLEY then moved, that when this House adjourn, it adjourn till
Monday at eleven o'clock.

[The reason stated during the last session for the House not meeting to
do business on Saturdays was, that the standing committees were
numerous, besides many special committees for different purposes, whose
business was frequently very important and troublesome, it was therefore
necessary that Saturday be allowed for the committees to sit, else
business would be much protracted, and become too burdensome on
gentlemen in committees.]


MONDAY, December 12.

Several other members, to wit: from New York, EDWARD LIVINGSTON; from
Pennsylvania, ANDREW GREGG; from Maryland, GABRIEL CHRISTIE; from
Virginia, WILLIAM B. GILES, ANDREW MOORE, and JOHN NICHOLAS; and from
South Carolina, ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER, appeared, and took their seats in
the House.


TUESDAY, December 13.

Two other members, to wit, THOMAS CLAIBORNE and JOHN PAGE, from
Virginia, appeared and took their seats in the House.

A new member, viz: WILLIAM STRUDWICK, from North Carolina, in place of
ABSALOM TATOM resigned, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat.

_Address to the President._

Mr. W. SMITH then moved for the order of the day on the report of the
committee in answer to the PRESIDENT's Address.

Mr. GILES said, that as the printed copy of the answer was but just laid
before the House, he hoped the gentleman would not insist on his motion,
as he declared he had not had time to read it; he would therefore move
that it be deferred till to-morrow.

Mr. PARKER seconded the motion. He said he was not able to judge whether
the answer would meet his approbation or not; he wished time to be given
for the consideration of it.

Mr. W. SMITH said he knew no instance in which the answer to the
PRESIDENT's Address had been laid over, and he thought it ought to be
despatched with all possible speed.

Mr. HEATH said, he hoped his colleague would not insist on his motion
for letting it lie over till to-morrow; he thought it could as well be
acted on to-day.

Mr. AMES observed, that it would look very awkward to let it lie over
till to-morrow, as it was very unusual, if not unprecedented, so to do;
he thought gentlemen might make up their minds about it if laid on the
table about an hour; they could, in the mean time, despatch other
business, which would come before them.

Mr. GILES said, he had experienced extreme inconvenience from gentlemen
pressing for a subject before it had been matured in the minds of
members; he thought it would be extremely improper and unusual, and in
its consequences disagreeable, to go into the subject before gentlemen
had time to reflect on it.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, that the more expeditious the House were on the
answer to the PRESIDENT's Address the greater the effect of it would be.
He hoped, therefore, that there would be no delay. He had in
recollection a Message which was received from the PRESIDENT respecting
the Colors of the French Republic, at the last session. Those very
gentlemen who now wished a delay, then thought that, to let the subject
lie over, would lose its principal effect, although several of the
members wished it to lie over, and but for one day. Surely we have as
much respect for the PRESIDENT as we have for the French Republic. He
really hoped the business would not lie over.

Mr. W. LYMAN hoped gentlemen did not look upon this answer to the
PRESIDENT's Address as merely complimentary. He declared he took it up
in a very different light; he viewed it as of the most extensive
consequence; it related to the subjects recommended to the notice of the
House by the PRESIDENT, which might relate to the alteration of the
laws, and, perhaps, to the forming new laws; and could gentlemen have
time to form their minds on such an important part of their business? He
had only seen the report this morning, and hoped he should have time to
consider it before it passed through the House.

The SPEAKER said, that the subject before the House now was, whether the
unfinished business should be postponed in order to make room for a
Committee of the Whole to sit on the report of the committee on the
answer?

Mr. PARKER observed, that he could not say whether he approved or
disapproved of the answer before the House. He had not read the report;
he therefore hoped that the unfinished business would be taken up and
this postponed: he thought it was too important to be hastened. He
wished gentlemen to be very careful how they committed themselves at a
juncture so critical, and on business so momentous. We had just been
told by the PRESIDENT that we did not stand well with the French nation;
and the Senate, in their answer, had accorded with his observations on
that subject. [Mr. P. was here informed that the business of the Senate
ought not to be introduced here.[3]] He therefore hoped a day might be
allowed to take the subject into consideration.

Mr. WILLIAMS said, he had searched and could find no precedent in the
journal to encourage a delay of this business. He found that when a
report was made by the committee on such an occasion, it was usual to be
taken up by a Committee of the whole House; and if gentlemen disagreed
on the subject, it should be recommitted to the same committee who
formed it, to make such alterations whereby it may meet more general
approbation, or be amended by the House and passed. He hoped no new
precedent would be made.

The SPEAKER again observed, that the question was on postponing the
unfinished business to take up this report.

Mr. W. SMITH said, that if this business was delayed, it ought to be for
substantial reasons. The principal reason gentlemen had urged was, that
they had not had time to acquaint themselves with the answer. How, then,
he asked, could they make their observations on it as they had done? The
committee had, he thought, drafted it in such general terms that it
could not be generally disapproved. There are but two parts in which he
thought there would be differences of opinion, viz: that which related
to the French Republic, and that which complimented the PRESIDENT for
his services. As to the first, he thought it so expressed as to need no
delay in the answer. With respect to the latter, he hoped no gentleman
would refuse to pay a due regard to the PRESIDENT's services.

The SPEAKER again informed the House what was the question.

Mr. W. SMITH said, we ought not now to reflect on any thing we may judge
has not been done as we could wish. Could we refuse a tribute of respect
to a man who had served his country so much? He thought a delay at
present would have a very unpleasant appearance. He hoped we should go
into this business immediately, agreeably to the former practice of the
House on similar occasions. The unfinished business was yesterday
postponed for want of proper information, and he thought the same reason
was yet in force with respect to it. He hoped nothing would impede this
business, lest it should appear like a want of respect in us. He hoped
to see a unanimous vote in favor of a respectful answer to the Chief
Magistrate, whose services we ought zealously to acknowledge.

Mr. GILBERT saw no reason to depart from a practice which had been
usual; he therefore hoped the report might come under consideration
to-day. He thought if it laid on the table an hour or an hour and a
half, gentlemen could then be prepared to consider it.

The SPEAKER again put the House in mind of the question.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, if the business was pressed too precipitately,
gentlemen may be sensible of their error when it was too late. Many bad
consequences might attend hastening the subject before it was well
matured. He could see no reason why the business should be precipitated
upon the House--a proper delay would not show any want of respect to the
PRESIDENT, as some gentlemen think. Would it be more respectful that an
answer should be sent by this House, which, for want of time, had not
been sufficiently considered? Certainly not. Far more so will it appear
that after mature deliberation the members are unanimous in their
answer. I therefore think the object of respect which the gentleman from
North Carolina has in view will be completely answered by the delay.

Gentlemen talk about precedent. I am ashamed to hear them. There may be
no precedent on the subject. But are we always to act by precedent?
There is scarcely a circumstance occurs in this House but what is
different from any that was before it. The PRESIDENT's Addresses to this
House are always different. They relate to the circumstances of things
that are, have been, and may be. Then, to talk of precedents where
things cannot be alike, is to trammel men down by rules which would be
injurious in the issue.

The Message of the PRESIDENT respecting the French Colors had been
referred to. If gentlemen were then wrong, is that a reason why they
should continue to act wrong? But this circumstance materially differs
from that. That was merely an expression of sentiment, which could at
once be determined, but this of sentiment, accompanied with deep and
solemn reflection--it is so interwoven with the politics of the country
as to require great circumspection. I hope gentlemen will not go into it
until they are properly prepared. I wish to pay all possible respect to
the Chief Magistrate, and cannot prove it better than by a sincere
desire for an unanimous vote to the answer, which is only to be obtained
by proper deliberation; and thus let him depart from his office with
credit, and the enjoyment of our best wishes in his retirement.

The question for postponing the unfinished business to take up this
report was then put and negatived--43 to 31.


WEDNESDAY, December 14.

THOMAS HENDERSON, from New Jersey, and THOMAS HARTLEY, from
Pennsylvania, appeared and took their seats in the House.

_Reporting of the Debates._

Mr. W. SMITH moved for the order of the day on the petitions of Thomas
Lloyd and Thomas Carpenter, whereupon the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole, when, having read the report of the committee to
whom it was referred,

Mr. MACON wished some gentleman who was in that committee, would be so
good as to inform the House what would be the probable expense, and for
what reason the House should go into the business. He thought the
expense altogether unnecessary, whatever it may be.

If the debates of this House were to be printed, and four or five copies
given to each member, they would employ all the mails of the United
States. He also adverted to the attempt at the last session to introduce
a stenographer into the House, which failed.

Mr. SMITH informed the gentleman that Mr. Lloyd's estimate of the
expenses is, that he will supply the House with his reports at the rate
of three cents per half sheet. His calculation is that he can supply the
members at the expense of about $1,600 for the session. With respect to
the gentleman's reference to last session, this was materially different
from that: that motion was to make the person an officer of this House,
and at an expense much greater. He thought this attempt would be of
great use to the House. Regular and accurate information of the debates
in the House would be a very desirable thing; he therefore hoped the
resolution would prove agreeable to the House.

Mr. WILLIAMS said, that the House need not go into unnecessary expense:
the members were now furnished, morning and evening, with newspapers,
which contained the debates; then why should the House wish for more? If
one person in particular has the sale of his debates to this House,
will it not destroy the advantages any other can derive from it? We
ought not to encourage an undertaking of this kind, but let us encourage
any gentleman to come here and take down the debates. Last year they
were taken down very accurately and dispersed throughout the Union.

By passing this resolution you will destroy the use of the privilege to
any other than the person favored by this House. Why give one a
privilege more than another? He observed, it had been common to give
gentlemen the privilege to come into the House and take down the
debates, which had been, last year, delivered time enough to give
satisfaction to the members.

Mr. THATCHER said, he should wish for information from the committee how
many persons there were to publish debates, as he understood there were
several, and the members were to supply themselves from whom they
pleased. He should likewise wish for information, how many each member
was to have to amount to the value of $1,600.

Mr. W. SMITH said, there had been petitions received from only two
persons--Thomas Lloyd and Thomas Carpenter. They intended, each of them,
to publish the debates. There might be others; he knew not. There was no
intention of giving any one a preference--gentlemen could subscribe for
that they approved of most. At the calculation of Mr. Lloyd the members
would have five copies each for the $1,600.

Mr. W. LYMAN said, the question was, whether the House would incur the
expense of $1,600 to supply the members with copies or not? He thought
there was no need of the expense. If the House do not think proper to
furnish the members, they can supply themselves. A publication of them
is going on at present, and many gentlemen had subscribed to it already.

Mr. DEARBORN did not think that $1,600 thus laid out would be expended
to the best possible advantage. From the number of persons which we see
here daily taking down debates, he thought we might expect to see a good
report of the occurrences in the House. There was a book going about for
subscriptions, which appeared to be well encouraged; he saw many of the
members' names in it. He thought that, by a plan like that, the reports
may be as accurately taken as we may have any reason to expect if the
House incurs this expense.

Mr. NICHOLAS observed, that members were now served with three
newspapers. He thought to vote for this resolution on account of
obtaining a more full and complete report than was to be had in the
newspapers; thus it would supersede the necessity of taking so many
papers. He thought this plan more useful to the members, and generally
of more advantage to their constituents, as they could disperse those
debates where otherwise they would not be seen.

Mr. THATCHER said, if the object of the motion was to supersede the
receiving of newspapers, he certainly should vote against it. He did
not consider the main reason why members were served with the newspapers
was, that they may obtain the debates. No. He thought it more important,
in their stations, that they should know the occurrences of the day from
the various parts of the United States as well as from foreign nations.
Though he might favor an undertaking of this kind, yet he would give
preference to a newspaper, if they were to have the one without the
other.

Mr. HEATH did not wish that the members, being furnished with debates
agreeably to the motion, should supersede the receiving of newspapers,
yet he should vote for it. Gentlemen had said the debates were taken
more correctly last session than before, yet he had heard a whisper
which was going from North to South, that our debates are not
represented impartially. He wished the House and the people to be
furnished with a true report; such a thing would be very useful:
however, he did not wish to encourage a monopoly to those two persons.
No. He would wish to give an equal chance to all who choose to come and
take them. Shall we repress truth? I hope not; but disseminate it as
much as possible. Last session, when I was, under the act of God's
providence, prevented from attending the House, a member sent for a
gentleman from Virginia, who was to act as stenographer, with whom the
House and a printer in this city were to combine. Warm debates ensued on
the propriety of the measure, and the gentleman returned home after the
motion was negatived. I hope gentlemen will not grudge 1,600 dollars
towards the support of truth. What we see now in the newspapers is taken
from the memory, and not by a stenographer. The people will thank you
that you have taken means to investigate truth. If any gentleman can
point out a better mode to obtain this object, I hope he will do it that
it may be adopted; till then I shall support the resolution.

Mr. SHERBURNE did not think, with the gentleman last up, that the
interest of the country was concerned; the only thing they were
concerned in was the payment of the money. The printing of this work did
not depend on the motion of this House. Whether the House adopt it or
not, the book will be published. It is a matter of private interest; a
speculation in the adventurer, like other publications. The question, he
conceived, meant only this: Should the members be supplied with these
pamphlets at the expense of the public, or should they put their hands
in their own pockets and pay for them individually? He thought the House
had no greater reasons to supply the members with this work than other
publications; they might as well be furnished with the works of _Peter
Porcupine_, or the _Rights of Man_, at the public expense.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the gentleman was mistaken with respect to the work
going on, whether supported by the House or not. It was true as it
respected the work proposed by Mr. Carpenter; but, with respect to Mr.
Lloyd, he declared he could not undertake it, except the House would
subscribe for five copies for each member.

Mr. SWANWICK considered the question to be to this effect: whether the
debates be under the sanction of the House or not? A gentleman had said,
it will be a great service to the public to have a correct statement of
the debates. I think the most likely way to obtain it correctly is to
let it rest on the footing of private industry. We have a work, entitled
_The Senator_, in circulation. I have no doubt but the publisher will
find good account in the undertaking. Why should the House trouble
itself to sanction any particular work? Gentlemen would then have enough
to do every morning in putting the debates to rights before they were
published, as they would be pledged to the accuracy of the reports. I
never heard that, in the British House of Commons or Lords, such a
motion was ever made, nor have I ever heard of such in any other
country; then why should we give our sanction and incur a responsibility
for the accuracy of it. He said he should vote against the motion, but
would encourage such a work while it rested on the footing of private
adventure.

Mr. THATCHER said, he differed much from the gentleman last up, as it
respected the responsibility of the House on such a publication. He
thought it might as well be said, that because there had been a
resolution for the Clerk to furnish the members of this House with three
newspapers, the House was responsible for the truth of what those
newspapers contained; if it was so, he should erase his name from his
supply of them, as he thought, in general, they contained more lies than
truth. Two considerations might recommend the resolution. It would
encourage the undertaking, and also add to the stock of public
information: on either of these, he would give it his assent. Soon after
he came into the city, a paper was handed him with proposals for a
publication of this kind (_The Senator_). He, with pleasure, subscribed
to its support; as to general information, that was given already by
newspapers, and though each member was to be supplied with five copies,
yet very few would fall into hands where the newspapers did not reach.
The work would go forward at any rate. If he thought the work depended
on the motion, he should rejoice to give his vote toward its aid. On the
question being put, only nineteen gentlemen voted in favor of the
resolution; it was therefore negatived.

The committee then rose, and the House took up the resolution.

Mr. THATCHER observed, the question was put while he was inattentive: he
wished it to lie over till to-morrow.

Mr. GILES wished to indulge the gentleman in his desire.

Mr. THATCHER then moved for the vote of the House, whether the report of
the Committee of the Whole be postponed. Twenty-four members only
appearing for the postponement, it was negatived.

The question was then put, whether the House agreed to the report of the
Committee of the Whole and disagreed with the report of the select
committee; which appeared in the affirmative. The motion was therefore
lost.

_Address to the President._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
Answer to the PRESIDENT's Address; when the Answer reported by the
select committee was read by the Clerk, and then in paragraphs by the
Chairman, which is as follows:

      SIR: The House of Representatives have attended to your
      communication respecting the state of our country, with all
      the sensibility that the contemplation of the subject and a
      sense of duty can inspire.

      We are gratified by the information that measures
      calculated to ensure a continuance of the friendship of the
      Indians, and to maintain the tranquillity of the _interior_
      frontier, have been adopted; and we indulge the hope that
      these, by impressing the Indian tribes with more correct
      conceptions of the justice, as well as power of the United
      States, will be attended with success.

      While we notice, with satisfaction, the steps that you have
      taken in pursuance of the late treaties with several
      foreign nations, the liberation of our citizens who were
      prisoners at Algiers is a subject of peculiar felicitation.
      We shall cheerfully co-operate in any further measures that
      shall appear, on consideration, to be requisite.

      We have ever concurred with you in the most sincere and
      uniform disposition to preserve our neutral relations
      inviolate; and it is, of course, with anxiety and deep
      regret we hear that any interruption of our harmony with
      the French Republic has occurred; for we feel with you and
      with our constituents the cordial and unabated wish to
      maintain a perfectly friendly understanding with that
      nation. Your endeavors to fulfil that wish, (_and by all
      honorable means to preserve peace, and to restore that
      harmony and affection which have heretofore so happily
      subsisted between the French Republic and the United
      States_,) cannot fail, therefore, to interest our
      attention. And while we participate in the full reliance
      you have expressed on the patriotism, self-respect, and
      fortitude of our countrymen, we cherish the pleasing hope
      that a _mutual_ spirit of justice and moderation _on the
      part of the Republic_ will ensure the success of your
      perseverance.

      The various subjects of your communication will,
      respectively, meet with the attention that is due to their
      importance.

      When we advert to the internal situation of the United
      States, we deem it equally natural and becoming to compare
      the tranquil prosperity of the citizens with the period
      immediately antecedent to the operation of the Government,
      and to contrast it with the calamities in which the state
      of war still involves several of the European nations, as
      the reflections deduced from both tend to justify, as well
      as to excite, a warmer admiration of our free constitution,
      and to exalt our minds to a more fervent and grateful sense
      of piety towards Almighty God for the beneficence of His
      providence, by which its administration has been hitherto
      so remarkably distinguished.

      And while we entertain a grateful conviction that your
      wise, firm, and patriotic Administration has been signally
      conducive to the success of the present form of Government,
      we cannot forbear to express the deep sensations of regret
      with which we contemplate your intended retirement from
      office.

      As no other suitable occasion may occur, we cannot suffer
      the present to pass without attempting to disclose some of
      the emotions which it cannot fail to awaken.

      The gratitude and admiration of your countrymen are still
      drawn to the recollection of those resplendent virtues and
      talents which were so eminently instrumental to the
      achievement of the Revolution, and of which that glorious
      event will ever be the memorial. Your obedience to the
      voice of duty and your country, when you quitted
      reluctantly a second time the retreat you had chosen, and
      first accepted the Presidency, afforded a new proof of the
      devotedness of your zeal in its service, and an earnest of
      the patriotism and success which have characterized your
      Administration. As the grateful confidence of the citizens
      in the virtues of their Chief Magistrate has essentially
      contributed to that success, we persuade ourselves that the
      millions whom we represent participate with us in the
      anxious solicitude of the present occasion.

      Yet we cannot be unmindful that your moderation and
      magnanimity, twice displayed by retiring from your exalted
      stations, afford examples no less rare and instructive to
      mankind than valuable to a Republic.

      Although we are sensible that this event, of itself,
      completes the lustre of a character already conspicuously
      unrivalled by the coincidence of virtue, talents, success,
      and public estimation, yet we conceive that we owe it to
      you, sir, and still more emphatically to ourselves and to
      our nation (of the language of whose hearts we presume to
      think ourselves at this moment the faithful interpreters)
      to express the sentiments with which it is contemplated.

      The spectacle of a whole nation, the freest and most
      enlightened in the world, offering by its Representatives
      the tribute of unfeigned approbation to its first citizen,
      however novel and interesting it may be, derives all its
      lustre--a lustre which accident or enthusiasm could not
      bestow, and which adulation would tarnish--from the
      transcendent merit of which it is the voluntary testimony.

      May you long enjoy that liberty which is so dear to you,
      and to which your name will ever be so dear. May your own
      virtues and a nation's prayers obtain the happiest sunshine
      for the decline of your days and the choicest of future
      blessings. For your country's sake--for the sake of
      Republican liberty--it is our earnest wish that your
      example may be the guide of your successors; and thus,
      after being the ornament and safeguard of the present age,
      become the patrimony of our descendants.

Mr. VENABLE observed, on a paragraph wherein it speaks of the
"tranquillity of the interior frontier," he did not know what was the
meaning of the expression: he moved to insert "Western frontier" in its
stead.

Mr. AMES observed that the words of the report are in the PRESIDENT's
Speech; however, he thought the amendment a good one. It then passed.

In the fourth paragraph are these words: "Your endeavors to fulfil that
wish cannot fail, therefore, to interest our attention." At the word
"wish," Mr. GILES proposed to insert these words: "and by all honorable
means to preserve peace, and restore that harmony and affection which
have heretofore so happily subsisted between the French Republic and
this country;" and strike out the words that follow "wish" in that
paragraph. He said, his reasons for moving this amendment were to avoid
its consequences. He really wished the report entirely recommitted, as
there were many objectionable parts in it. He had been very seriously
impressed with the consequences that would result from a war with the
French Republic. When I reflect, said Mr. G., on the calamities of war
in general, I shudder at the thought; but, to conceive of the danger of
a French war in particular, it cuts me still closer. When I think what
many gentlemen in mercantile situations now feel, and the dreadful stop
put to commerce, I feel the most sincere desire to cultivate harmony and
good understanding. I see redoubled motives to show the world that we
are in favor of a preservation of peace and harmony.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he should not object to the amendment; but he thought
it only an amplification of a sentiment just before expressed. He did
not see any advantage in the sentiment as dilated, nor could he see any
injury which could accrue from it. He hoped every gentleman in the House
wished as sincerely for the preservation of peace as that gentleman did.

Mr. AMES wished to know of the gentleman from Virginia, whether he meant
to strike out the latter part of this paragraph; if he did, he would
object to it.

Mr. GILES said, he did not mean to strike out any more of this
paragraph.

Mr. AMES wished it not to be struck out. By the amendment to strike out,
we show the dependence we place on the power and protection of the
French. While we declare ourselves weak by the act, we lose the recourse
to our own patriotism, and fly, acknowledging an offence never
committed, to the French for peace. He hoped the gentleman would be
candid upon this occasion.

Mr. GILES said, he only wished this House to express their most sincere
and unequivocal desire in favor of peace, and not merely to leave it to
the PRESIDENT. He said, he had spoken upon this occasion as he always
had done on this floor. He always had, and he hoped always should state
his opinions upon every subject with plainness and candor.

The amendment passed unanimously.

Mr. GILES then proposed an amendment to the latter part of the same
paragraph which would make it read thus: "We cherish the pleasing hope
that a spirit of mutual justice and moderation will ensure the success
of your perseverance." The amendment was to insert the word "mutual." He
thought we ought to display a spirit of justice and moderation as well
as the French. This amendment, he thought, would soften the expression,
and, acting with that spirit of justice and moderation, accomplish a
reconciliation. The amendment was adopted.

On the Chairman's reading the last paragraph except one in the report,
which reads thus: "The spectacle of a whole nation, the _freest and most
enlightened in the world_," Mr. PARKER moved to strike out the words in
italic. Although, said he, I wish to believe that we are the freest
people, and the most enlightened people in the world, it is enough that
we think ourselves so; it is not becoming in us to make the declaration
to the world; and if we are not so, it is still worse for us to suppose
ourselves what we are not.

Mr. HARPER said he had a motion of amendment in his hand which would
supersede the necessity of the last made, which, if in order, he would
propose: it was to insert words more simple. He thought the more simple,
the more agreeable to the public ear. His amendment, he thought, would
add to the elegance and conciseness of the expression. He did not
disapprove of the Address as it now stood, but he thought it might be
amended. This, he said, would add to the dignity, as well as to the
simplicity of the expression. He thought it would be improper to give
too much scope to feeling: amplitude of expression frequently weakens an
idea.

Mr. GILES said he saw many objectionable parts in the amendments
proposed by the gentleman just sat down. He wished to strike out two
paragraphs more than Mr. HARPER had proposed; indeed, he wished the
whole to be recommitted, that it might be formed more congenial to the
wishes of the House in general, and not less agreeable to the person to
be addressed.

Mr. SMITH observed, that as the answer had been read by paragraphs
nearly to the close, he thought it very much out of order to return to
parts so distant.

The Chairman said that no paragraph on which an amendment had been made
could be returned to; but where no amendment had been made, it was quite
consistent with order to propose any one gentlemen may think proper.

Mr. W. SMITH opposed striking out any paragraph. It was, he said, the
last occasion we should have to address that great man, who had done so
much service to his country. The warmth of expression in the answer was
only an evidence of the gratitude of this House for his character. When
we reflect on the glowing language used at the time when he accepted of
the office of PRESIDENT, and at his re-election to that office, why,
asked he, ought not the language of this House to be as full of respect
and gratitude now as then? particularly when we consider the addresses
now flowing in from all parts of the country. I object to the manner of
gentlemen's amendments as proposed, to strike out all in a mass. If the
sentiments were agreeable to the minds of the House, why waste our time
to alter mere expressions while the sentiment is preserved? No doubt
every gentleman's manner of expression differed, while their general
ideas might be the same. He hoped mere form of expression would not
cause its recommitment.

Mr. GILES did not object to a respectful and complimentary Address being
sent to the PRESIDENT, yet he thought we ought not to carry our
expressions out of the bounds of moderation; he hoped we should adhere
to truth. He objected to some of the expressions in those paragraphs,
for which reason he moved to have the paragraphs struck out, in order to
be amended by the committee. He wished to act as respectful to the
PRESIDENT as any gentleman, but he observed many parts of the Address
which were objectionable. It is unnatural and unbecoming in us to exult
in our superior happiness, light, or wisdom. It is not at all necessary
that we should exult in our advantages, and thus reflect on the unhappy
situation of nations in their troubles; it is insulting to them. If we
are thus happy it is well for us; it is necessary that we should enjoy
our happiness, but not boast of it to all the world, and insult their
unhappy situation.

As to those parts of the Address which speak of the wisdom and firmness
of the PRESIDENT, he must object to them. On reflection, he could see a
want of wisdom and firmness in the Administration for the last six
years. I may be singular in my ideas, said he, but I believe our
Administration has been neither wise nor firm. I believe, sir, a want of
wisdom and firmness has brought this country into the present alarming
situation. If after such a view of the Administration, I was to come
into this House and show the contrary by a quiet acquiescence, gentlemen
would think me a very inconsistent character. If we take a view of our
foreign relations, we shall see no reason to exult in the wisdom or
firmness of our Administration. He thought nothing so much as a want of
that wisdom and firmness had brought us to the critical situation in
which we now stand.

If it had been the will of gentlemen to have been satisfied with placing
the PRESIDENT in the highest possible point of respect amongst men, the
vote of the House would have been unanimous, but the proposal of such
adulation could never expect success. If we take a view into our
internal situation, and behold the ruined state of public and private
credit, less now than perhaps at any former period however, he never
could recollect it so deranged. If we survey this city, what a shameful
scene it alone exhibits, owing, as he supposed, to the immense quantity
of paper issued. Surely this could afford no ground for admiration of
the Administration that caused it.

I must acknowledge, said Mr. GILES, that I am one of those who do not
think so much of the PRESIDENT as some others do. When the PRESIDENT
retires from his present station, I wish him to enjoy all possible
happiness. I wish him to retire, and that this was the moment of his
retirement. He thought the Government of the United States could go on
very well without him; and he thought he would enjoy more happiness in
his retirement than he possibly could in his present situation. What
calamities would attend the United States, and how short the duration of
its Independence, if one man alone can be found to fill that capacity!
He thought there were thousands of citizens in the United States able to
fill that high office, and he doubted not that many may be found whose
talents would enable them to fill it with credit and advantage. Although
much had been said, and that by many people, about his intended
retirement, yet he must acknowledge he felt no uncomfortable sensations
about it; he must express his own feelings, he was perfectly easy in
prospect of the event. He wished the PRESIDENT as much happiness as any
man. He declared he did not regret his retreat; he wished him quietly at
his seat at Mount Vernon; he thought he would enjoy more happiness there
than in public life. It will be very extraordinary if gentlemen, whose
names in the yeas and nays are found in opposition to certain prominent
measures of the Administration, should come forward and approve those
measures: this we could not expect. He retained an opinion he had always
seen reason to support, and no influence under Heaven should prevent him
expressing his established sentiments; and he thought the same opinions
would soon meet general concurrence. He hoped gentlemen would compliment
the PRESIDENT privately, as individuals; at the same time, he hoped such
adulation would never pervade that House.

I must make some observation, said Mr. G., on the last paragraph but
one, where we call ourselves "the freest and most enlightened nation in
the world:" indeed, the whole of that paragraph is objectionable; I
disapprove the whole of it. If I am free, if I am happy, if I am
enlightened more than others, I wish not to proclaim it on the house
top; if we are free, it is not prudent to declare it; if enlightened, it
is not our duty in this House to trumpet it to the world; it is no
Legislative concern. If gentlemen will examine the paragraph, [referring
to that contained in the parenthesis,] it seems to prove that the
gentleman who drew it up was going into the field of adulation; which
would tarnish a private character. I do think this kind of affection the
PRESIDENT gains nothing from. The many long Addresses we hear of, add
nothing to the lustre of his character. In the honor we may attempt to
give to others we may hurt ourselves. This may prove a self-destroyer;
by relying too much on administration, we may rely too little on our own
strength.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, that whatever division of the question gentlemen
would propose, was indifferent to him; the words of the answer were
perfectly congenial with his wishes, and he was prepared to give his
opposition to any of the amendments proposed. On mature deliberation,
there was not a sentiment in the report but he highly approved. He could
not see any thing unnatural or unbecoming in drawing just comparisons of
our situation with that of our neighbors; this is the only way we can
form a just view of our own happiness. It is a very necessary way to
come to a right knowledge of our own situation by comparing it with that
of other nations. He would not reproach another people because they are
not so happy as we are; but he thought drawing simple comparisons in the
way of the report was no reproach. He was not against bringing the
comparison down to private life, as the gentleman from Virginia had
done; he should think it wrong in a man to exult over his neighbor who
was distressed or ignorant, because himself was wealthy or wise. Yet he
saw no impropriety in his own family of speaking of their happiness and
advantages, compared with that of others; it would awaken in them a
grateful sense of their superior enjoyments, while it pointed out the
faults and follies of others, only in order that those he had the care
of may learn to avoid them: thus while our happiness is pointed out, the
miseries of nations involved in distress are delineated to serve as
beacons for the United States to steer clear of. He did not, with the
gentleman from Virginia, in any degree, doubt of the wisdom or firmness
of the Administration of America. In the language of the Address, he
entertained a very high opinion of it, "a grateful conviction that the
wise, firm, and patriotic Administration of the PRESIDENT had been
signally conducive to the success of the present form of Government."
Such language as this is the only reward which can be given by a
grateful people for labors so eminently useful as those of the PRESIDENT
had been. This was not his sentiment merely, it was the sentiment of the
people of America. Every public body were conveying their sentiments of
gratitude throughout the whole extent of the Union. Why then should this
House affect a singularity, when our silence on these points would only
convey reproach instead of respect. If these sentiments were true, why
not express them? But if, on the contrary, what the gentleman asserted,
that the Administration of the PRESIDENT had been neither wise, firm,
nor patriotic, then he would concur with the motion for striking out;
but he was not convinced of the truth of this assertion; and while this
is not proved, he should vote against the motion.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he could not agree with the motion of the gentleman
from South Carolina, (Mr. HARPER,) because his motion was for
substituting other words in the place of those in the report, without
any reason whatever. If the gentleman, by altering the phraseology, can
make the sentiment any better, by all means let it be done: but if the
sentiment is not to be changed, why alter it merely to substitute other
words? On the whole, Mr. S. observed, that he did not see the answer
could in any degree be reproached. There are no sentiments in it but
what are justifiable on the ground of truth; they are free from
adulation. It is such an expression of national regret and gratitude as
the circumstance calls for; a regret at the retirement of a faithful and
patriotic Chief Magistrate from office. A regret and gratitude which he
believed to be the sentiment of Americans.

Mr. SWANWICK began by observing that there were points in the Address in
which all gentlemen seemed to agree, while on other parts they cannot
agree. We all agree in our desire to pay the PRESIDENT every possible
mark of respect; but we very materially disagree wherein a comparison is
drawn between this and foreign nations. If we are happy and other
nations are not so, it is but well for us; but he thought it would be
much more prudent in us to let other nations discover it, and not make a
boast of it ourselves. It is very likely that those nations whom we
commiserate may think themselves as happy as we are: they may feel
offended to hear of our comparisons. If we refer to the British
Chancellor of the Exchequer in his speeches, he would tell us that is
the happiest and most prosperous nation upon earth. How then can we
commiserate with it as an unfortunate country? If, again, we look to
France, that country which we have pointed out as full of wretchedness
and distress, yet we hear them boast of their superiority of light and
freedom, and we have reason to believe not without foundation. A
gentleman had talked about the flourishing state of our agriculture, and
asserted that our late commercial calamities were not proofs of our want
of prosperity, which the gentleman compared to specks in the sun. That
gentleman speaks as though he lived at a distance. Has he heard of no
commercial distresses, when violations so unprecedented have of late
occurred? One merchant has to look for his property at Halifax, another
at Bermuda, another at Cape Françoise, another at Gonaives, &c.; all
agree that they have suffered, and that by the war. These are distresses
gentlemen would not like to feel themselves. Mr. S. said he had felt for
these occurrences. We are not exempt from troubles: probably we may have
suffered as much as other nations who are involved in the war. It is a
question whether France has been distressed at all by the war. She has
collected gold and silver in immense quantities by her conquests,
together with the most valuable stores of the productions of the arts;
as statues, paintings, and manuscripts of inestimable worth; and at sea
has taken far more in value than she has lost: besides, her armies are
subsisting on the requisitions her victories obtain. And has England
gained nothing by the war? If we hearken to Mr. Pitt, we may believe
they are very great gainers. Surely the islands in the West and East
Indies, Ceylon, and the Cape of Good Hope, the key to the East Indies,
are advantages gained; besides the quantity of shipping taken from our
merchants. Mr. S. thought if we were to compare, we should find those
nations had gained by the war, while we had lost; and of course there
was no reason for us to boast of our advantages.

Mr. W. SMITH next rose, and observed that gentlemen wished to compliment
the PRESIDENT, but took away every point on which encomium could be
grounded. One denies the prosperity of the country, another the free and
enlightened state of the country, and another refuses the PRESIDENT the
epithet of wise and patriotic.

Mr. GILES here rose to explain. If he was meant, he must think the
gentleman was wrong in his application. He said he had never harbored a
suspicion of the good intentions of the PRESIDENT, nor did he deny his
patriotism; but the wisdom and firmness of his Administration he had
doubted. He thought him a good meaning man, but often misled.

Mr. SMITH again rose, and said, he must confess himself at a loss for
that refinement to discover between the wisdom and patriotism of the
PRESIDENT, and that of his Administration. It was moved to strike out
this acknowledgment of wisdom and firmness. What were we to substitute
as complimentary to him in its place? The first paragraph proposed to be
struck out related to our speaking of the tranquillity of this country,
compared to nations involved in war. Could this give offence, because we
feel pleasure in being at peace? It was only congratulating our own
constituents on the happiness we enjoy. To appreciate the value of
peace, it was necessary to compare it with a state of war. It was the
wisdom of this country to keep from war, and other nations hold it up as
exemplary in us. The gentleman himself has declared his wish for the
preservation of peace; and though he admires it, and nations admire it
in us, yet we are not to compare our state with nations involved in the
calamities of war, in order to estimate our enjoyments. The words of
this Address are not a communication to a foreign minister, it is a
congratulation to our own Chief Magistrate of the blessings he, in
common with us, enjoys. Mr. S. hoped the words would not be struck out.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker), said, that he did not rise to accept the
challenge given by the gentleman who spoke last from South Carolina, and
to point out a nation more free and enlightened than ours; nor did he
mean to contest the fact of ours being the freest and most enlightened
in the world, as declared in the reported Address, but he was
nevertheless of opinion that it did not become them to make that
declaration, and thus to extol themselves by a comparison with, and at
the expense of all others. Although those words were in his view
objectionable, he was far from assenting to the motion for striking out
the seven or eight last clauses of the Address. The question of order
having been decided, Mr. D. said he would remind the committee, that if
they wished to retain, or even to amend, any section or sentence of all
that was proposed to be struck out, they ought to give their negatives
to this motion, as the only means of accomplishing their purpose. It was
sufficient, therefore, for those who were opposed to the question for
striking out the whole, to show that any part included within it ought
to be preserved. Not unnecessarily to waste time, by lengthening the
debate, he would take the clause first in order, and confine his remarks
to that alone. This part of the Address had certainly not been read, or
had been misunderstood and misrepresented by the member from
Pennsylvania.

Mr. AMES said, if gentlemen meant to agree to strike out the whole as
proposed, in order to adopt those words substituted by the gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER), he must observe that he thought this
would be as far from giving satisfaction to others, who, it appeared,
wanted no substitute. He, therefore, hoped that kind of influence would
not prevail on this occasion. The gentleman who made the motion did it
to accommodate matters, and not because he himself objected to the
answer reported.

It is well known that a committee of five members, opposite in
sentiment, was appointed to prepare a respectful Address in answer to
the PRESIDENT's Speech. [Here the original instructions were read.] As
it was the duty of the committee to prepare a respectful Address, it
cannot be matter of surprise, although it may of disapprobation with
some, that the committee did their duty, and have taken notice of the
several matters recommended to the House in that Speech. Respecting the
particular notice they have taken, it might have been thought that some
difficulty would occur. He said he need not observe, that the committee
had reason to imagine that the form of the report would be agreeable to
the House, as they were unanimous; although there had been in the
wording some little difference of opinion, yet all agreed substantially
in the Address, from a conviction of the delicacy of the subject. For
that reason, if that only, unless the sentiments in the report of the
Address should be found inconsistent with truth, he hoped no substitute
of a form of words merely would prevail, as it would no longer be that
agreed to in the committee, nor could come under their consideration
equal to the printed report. He therefore trusted that when the
committee came to the question, whether to strike out or not, gentlemen
would be guided by no other motive to vote for striking out, than an
impropriety in the sentiments through an evident want of truth in them;
and if such cannot be discovered, why strike out the expressions?

It had been observed by some gentleman, that the cry of foreign
influence is in the country. He did not see such a thing exist. He would
not be rudely explicit as to the foundation there was for such a cry;
but when it was once raised, the people would judge whether it was fact
or not. He could not tell how this influence was produced, but the world
would draw a view how far we were under foreign influence. Mr. A. here
alluded to the influence which foreign agents wished to have over the
minds of the people of this country, in order to support a factious
spirit, probably to the appeal lately made to the people. He also
alluded to a circumstance when the Imperial Envoy, M. Palm, in 1727, at
London, published a rescript, complaining of the conduct of that Court;
the spirit of the nation rose, and discord was sown. In consequence of
which the Parliament petitioned the King to send the Envoy out of the
country for meddling with the concerns of their nation. That is the
nation which we call corrupted. Yet a similar affair has occurred here,
and it is not to be reprobated; we are not to complain of it, nor even
hear it, according to this doctrine. Independence is afraid of injuries,
and almost of insults. We must forbear to exult in our peace, our light,
our freedom, lest we should give offence to other nations who are not
so. This may be the high tone of independence in the views of some
people, but I must confess it is not so in mine; but it is probable
those people may be wiser than I am, and their views extend farther.
Foreign influence exists, and is disgraceful indeed, when we dare admire
our own constitution, nor adore God for giving us to feel its happy
effects. He thought, respecting the recent complaints of the French
Minister, that there was not even a pretext for the accusation.

It had been observed by a gentleman, that the PRESIDENT, no doubt, is a
very honest man, and a patriot, but he did not think him a wise man.

Mr. GILES here rose to explain. He said that, in his assertions, he
meant not to reflect on his private character. He referred to his
Administration. No doubt but the gentleman possessed both.

Mr. AMES said, he considered well what the gentleman had said. As a
private man, his integrity and goodness cannot be doubted; but in his
Administration--here we are to stop short; not a word about that; it
won't bear looking into; it has been neither firm nor wise. If the
House, in their Address to him, were to say, we think you a very honest,
well-designing man, but you have been led astray, sometimes to act
treacherously, and even dishonest in your Administration--we think you a
peaceful man, and though much iniquity may have been practised in your
Government, yet we think you are not in fault; on the whole, sir, we
wish you snugly in Virginia. Such sentiments as these I do not like. Is
this an Address or an insult? Is this the mark of respect we ought to
show to the first man in the nation? Mr. A. observed, that he did not
agree with the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. SMITH), who said, that
the President would carry daggers in his heart with him into his retreat
from public life, if we refuse him our testimony of gratitude. No, he
bears in his breast a testimony of his purity of motive; a conscious
rectitude, while in public life, which daggers could not pierce. He
would retire with a good conscience; perhaps it would be said this was
adulation, but let it be remembered this was truth; this was not
flattery; let gentlemen deny this; let them prove that this is not the
will of their constituents. The country would judge our opinions when we
come to give our yeas or nays; then the real friends of that man would
be known.

The gentleman wishes him back to Virginia, was glad he designed to go;
he did not regret his resignation. His name will appear in that opinion.
The whole of the PRESIDENT's life would stamp his character. His
country, and the admiring world knew it; and history keeps his fame, and
will continue to keep it. We may be singular in our opinions of him, but
that will not make his character with the world the less illustrious. We
now are to accept of his resignation without a tribute of respect. We
are not to speak of him as either wise or firm. We can only say he is an
honest man: this would scarcely be singular; many a man is honest
without any other good qualifications. What circle would gentlemen fix
the committee in to amend this Address, if they are not to give scope to
these sentiments? Better appoint no committee at all. If we address the
PRESIDENT at all, I hope it will be respectfully, for loth respect is
insult in disguise. I hope we shall not alter the original draft of the
Address, but agree according to our former intentions to present a
respectful and cordial Address.

Mr. SWANWICK rose to explain to those parts of the observations of some
gentlemen who had lately spoken (Mr. DAYTON and Mr. AMES) on that part
of the paragraph, which speaks of our gratitude to Providence. He should
be sorry if such an idea was entertained from any thing he had observed.
It was not that part of the paragraph, but the part where we are
contrasted with other nations, that he objected to principally.
Although, he must observe, it was not spoken in a style common to
devotion, to tell Providence how wise and enlightened we were. It does
not boast of our philanthropy, to say how much wiser and better we are
than other nations. He thought the gentleman's reference to a clergyman
very curious. It would not be right in us to say to God, we thank thee,
we are wiser or more enlightened than others! If we are so, let us
rejoice in it, and not offend others by our boasting. Gentlemen say, we
are happier than though we were at war; are we at peace? No: we are
involved in the worst of wars. Witness our spoliations from Algerine,
English, and French cruisers, from some of which he himself had suffered
materially. The PRESIDENT does not think we are at peace: he recommends
a navy as the only efficient security to our commerce. How could that
little island (England) command such influence in foreign dominions? It
is by her navy. We cannot boast of such power. While we think ourselves
much happier and stronger than others, others think us more diminutive;
let us not boast. He feared that the revenues of this country would
suffer materially through the great stagnation of commerce. He did not
think they would be as productive as formerly. He feared it was too
generally known, that this was not a time of very great prosperity. As
he did not, for one, feel the prosperous situation of the country, he
could not consent to violate his feelings by speaking contrary to them.
The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. AMES) last session, spoke with
great eloquence and at great length of the horror of war; which he
considered as inevitable if the British Treaty (then the subject of
debate) was not carried into effect.

Mr. CHRISTIE moved for the committee to rise. The House divided on the
motion; 43 members appeared against it, 31 only in favor of it. It was
lost.

Mr. GILES rose and observed that he should not have troubled the
committee with any further observations, but his ideas had been
misrepresented; although he endeavored to prevent a possibility of
misconstruction, yet it seems he had not been able to accomplish his
wish. It was not wonderful, he said, that the PRESIDENT's popularity
should be introduced into the debate when it had been so long in
question. It had been too commonly done, he thought, but he hoped the
influence of it would not be very great. As to the unanimity of the
committee who drew up the Address, he cared very little about it; he
should be extremely sorry to see it have any influence on the members of
that House.

Gentlemen have said, that if we take out the expressions of our sense of
the wisdom and firmness of the Administration of the PRESIDENT, they
cannot find any ground on which to compliment him; if so, he for one
would not be willing to present an Address at all. But his views were
quite different; he thought it could be effectually done without
adulation. He could not consent to acknowledge the wisdom and firmness
of his Administration. Gentlemen had inquired for instances in evidence
of this assertion. He said, that without seeking for more instances,
that of the British Treaty was a standing proof in support of the
assertion. Though many gentlemen believe nothing has been done injurious
to the United States through that treaty, yet I acknowledge I see very
great danger; we are not now in that state of security which could be
wished. It is well known that the operation of the British Treaty is the
groundwork of all the recent complaints of the French Government. It may
be said that many of the complaints of the French Minister originated
from actions previous to the British Treaty. It may be so, but that was
the means of calling forth complaints which, perhaps, would otherwise
never have been made; else why did not this calamity befall us before?
It certainly may be ascribed to that instrument. Gentlemen may talk as
they please about the law of nations; but the law of nations is, that a
neutral nation shall not do any thing to benefit one belligerent power
to the injury of another. Mr. G. said, he thought matters carried a
serious aspect, and he very much disapproved of the declaration of a
gentleman (Mr. AMES) who says, now is the time of danger; we are on the
eve of a war with France, now let us boldly assert our rights. At the
time the British Treaty was debating on, that gentleman was overcome
with the prospect of a war; he then depicted it in horrible forms; but
now how different his language! He now seems not afraid to embrace all
its horrors, and was zealously calling out for the nation to support the
Administration. Why did we not hear this when the British spoliated on
our commerce! If we are upon the eve of a war with France, as the
gentleman supposes, it will be disastrous to this country; we have
reason to deplore it; it will be calamitous indeed. France has more
power to injure this country than any nation besides, and none we can
injure less. What an influence can she command over our commerce? She
can exclude us from our own ports; spoil our trade with Great Britain,
and from her own extensive country; she can shut us out from the East
Indies, as well as the West Indies; ruin our trade in the Mediterranean,
which, owing to the late conquests of the French, may be rendered very
flourishing and important to us; and by her alliance, offensive and
defensive, with Spain, we not only have another enemy, but lose our late
advantages in the navigation of the Mississippi. Suppose, by the
influence of her politics, the doctrine of liberty and equality were to
be preached on the other side of the Alleghany mountains, what numerous
enemies may they breed in our own country? France can wound us most, and
we have the least reason to provoke her. It would be policy in her to go
to war with us; by ruining our trade with England, she could give a
violent wound to her enemy; yet that gentleman says, now is the time to
assert our rights, now we are in danger. The war-whoop and the hatchet,
of which the gentleman spoke so feelingly last session, is no longer in
his thoughts. If this was the only reason he had, it would be enough to
influence his vote against an acknowledgment of the wisdom and firmness
that has dictated our Administration.

Mr. WILLIAMS rose and said, he was sorry to trouble the committee at
such a late hour, but he could not be satisfied with giving a silent
vote on an occasion when the PRESIDENT's popularity was doubted. He
thought members ought to speak the will of the people they represent. He
could assert that it was not merely his own opinion he spoke, but that
of his constituents, when he voted for the Address as reported. He was
sorry to hear the gentleman last up speak in the style he had done,
although he owned it was not altogether new to him. The gentleman
wished the first clause to be struck out. Mr. W. thought it was the duty
of every pious man to thank God for the benefits he enjoys. And shall
not we, as a nation, thank him for keeping us from a state of war?
Gentlemen's ideas were to strike the whole out in a mass; but he hoped
they would not be gratified. Mr. W. said, he was very sorry to hear the
gentleman speak against the wisdom and firmness of the PRESIDENT, which
assertion seemed to have its foundation in the Treaty concluded with
Great Britain. He would ask the gentleman whether that act of ours
should have any influence on our situation with France? Wherein have we
differed from the compact made with France by our treaty made with that
country? We surely had a right to treat with Great Britain, else we
could not be an independent nation; and France will not deny this. In
1778, the Ambassador of France informed the British Court that his
nation had entered into a treaty with the United States, and at the same
time informed them that great attention had been paid by the contracting
parties not to stipulate any exclusive advantage in favor of the French
nation, and that there was reserved, on the part of the United States,
the liberty of treating with any nation whatsoever upon the same footing
of equality and reciprocity. But the gentleman (Mr. GILES) says, we
ought not to give an advantage to an enemy. Mr. W. said, that no
advantage was given to Britain, but, on the contrary, the article
complained of must be of advantage to France; it is an encouragement for
American vessels to go to their ports; it insures them against loss, if
they are interrupted in their voyage. It had been said that it would be
to the interest of France to go to war with us; if they consider it so,
all that gentleman can say will not prevent it. When we reflect on a
Treaty entered into on this principle with Great Britain, should France
complain?


THURSDAY, December 15.

_Address to the President._

The House, according to the order of the day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the answer to the PRESIDENT's Address, Mr.
MUHLENBERG in the chair.

The question before the committee was Mr. GILES' motion for striking
out.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he sincerely wished that such an answer might be
agreed to, as would give a general satisfaction. He hoped some mode
would be adopted to unite the wishes of every gentleman; his
disposition, he said, led him to vote for the paragraph; he thought
himself at liberty so to do, as he was satisfied the Administration had
been, in many instances, wise and firm. He thought it improper that such
debate should take place at the present time. He could see no
inconvenience that could arise from voting for the Address. The words on
which most stress had been laid, were those expressive of the wisdom
and firmness of the PRESIDENT's administration. He declared he thought
it had much contributed to the success of this country; and if success
had attended his measures, there could be nothing inconsistent in their
acknowledging it; which was all the compliment necessary to give
satisfaction.

Mr. RUTHERFORD.--My colleague has in a great measure anticipated my
sentiments on this occasion. I am sorry for the mistaken zeal the
gentlemen of the committee should have shown for the PRESIDENT, by
introducing expressions into the Address so exceptionable, and which
should be subject to such an uncomfortable exposure of that character.

I was able yesterday only to attend a part of the debate, through
indisposition, but what I did stay to hear, hurt me very much. I heard
gentlemen speak ill of the common parent of our country, whom we all
revere; and was a slip, but one criminal slip, to rob the PRESIDENT of
his good name? We have seen the goodness of the heart of that man, and
with satisfaction. We have seen him wrestling with his own feelings to
continue in the important and weighty business of Government; we have
seen him contending with two great rival nations, and yet preserved
peace. When he had made a slip, the people of America have stepped
forward to assist him, and dropped the generous tear, sensible that to
err is human, and that we are all liable to do wrong. I am sure that my
colleagues and every one in the House hold the character and virtue of
that man in high esteem. I am sorry to see that division of sentiment
which has taken place; it would make the world believe that we wish to
rob him of those qualifications. It is the justice and duty of this
House to do that man, that patriot, all the honor they can, whilst it is
the interest of this nation to hold in view those great points with
generous satisfaction, and good wishes to the man who has stepped
forward, and not in vain, to the support of our Republic in the war, and
under Divine assistance was made our deliverer. And now for gentlemen to
come here and speak of the troubles of the country, ascribing all our
adversity to him, it is like applying cold water where the strongest
energy is necessary. Again I would repeat, that if that man, our common
parent, has committed errors, it is no more than we all may do--it is
the general lot of all. If there have been faults in the Administration,
I do not think they lie at his door, but at his counsellors'; he has had
bad counsellors; his advisers are to blame, and not him. I never saw how
he could have done otherwise than he did. And now, sir, said Mr. R., it
is our duty to bear those great actions and generous sentiments in our
view, that, on his retirement from his public station, we may render him
all the respect due to his character. Nor would I less remember our
situation with France, that great and generous Republic, under whom we
owe our liberty. Let us not give offence to her, but by every mark of
gratitude and respect, act a part consistent with a just sense of our
peaceable intention. Let us act with the greatest circumspection and
deliberation.

Mr. LIVINGSTON was sorry the answer was not drafted so as to avoid this
debate. He said it was his sincere desire and hope that the candor of
gentlemen who advocated the Address in its present form, and those who
wished it amended, would so combine as to make it agreeable to all. He
said he intended to oppose the amendments which had been proposed,
although he did not see the Address every way right; with a view to
reconcile parties, when the present motion was disposed of, he should
move to strike out some words, in order to insert others. He could not,
like some gentlemen, draw consolation from the misfortunes of other
nations; their distresses were rather matter of regret; nor did he see a
propriety, as another gentleman had done, of likening our affairs with
those of the members of a family; but, even if it would bear, he could
not see that tranquillity in this family as was expressed. His only
objection, he said, to the paragraph in question, was the words
"tranquil prosperity." He believed the United States did not enjoy that
tranquil prosperity; on the contrary, he thought this was a time of
great calamity in the country, and he thought that it was owing,
principally, to the measures of the Government. There were other clauses
in the Address, he said, he should, when they came to be considered,
make objections to, and he thought they could be all easily removed by
motions suitable; however, he said there were many sentiments in the
Address in which he heartily concurred. He should vote against the
striking out the eight clauses in question, as he thought such
amendments could be proposed as would make the Address meet his hearty
concurrence, and he believed give general satisfaction.

Mr. GILES' motion was then put, to strike out those clauses, and
negatived.

Mr. PARKER renewed the motion he made yesterday, to strike out the words
"freest and most enlightened in the world."

Mr. AMES hoped that the motion to strike out would not prevail; for,
without being over tenacious on the subject, he must give a preference
to the copy of the report which was printed; the members had the
advantage of weighing it in their minds, which they would lose by
adopting the substitute; besides, he thought the ideas were so crowded
in that proposed, as to render it heavy; he hoped the reported Address
would be agreed to.

Mr. HARPER's motion was then put and negatived. Twenty-five members only
voting for the motion.

Mr. PARKER again moved to strike out "freest and most enlightened," &c.

Mr. W. SMITH said yesterday, in the discussion on the subject, gentlemen
had assigned for their reason to strike out those words that other
nations would be offended at us. It was usual, he said, for nations to
applaud themselves, and he thought it could give no offence to any. He
did not hear gentlemen mention what nation was meant. He presumed the
only nation that could be alluded to was the French Republic. If,
however, it can be proved that they have used similar language, he
supposed it would give gentlemen some ease as to this particular. In
looking over some papers, he had seen several bombastical expressions in
a note of Barthelemy, a report to the Convention of Laviere, and of
Cambaceres, in the name of the three committees. In one are these words,
"a Government so powerful as the French." In another, he calls it "the
most enlightened in the civilized world." In another, "the first in the
universe." He hoped that while that nation could use expressions like
these, the gentlemen of this House would not think the expressions
referred to would give offence to that or any other nation.

Mr. PARKER said, when he made the motion he did not refer to any
particular nation; he had neither France nor England in view; he did not
wish to see us contrast our political situation with that of any other
country. His objections to the words, he said, arose from our making the
declaration ourselves. Our Government, he acknowledged, was free; it was
the best, in his opinion, any where. He wished to believe the people as
enlightened as any other; he believed they were, and if they were not,
they had only themselves to blame; but however enlightened or free we
were, in his opinion, we were not the proper organs to declare it;
however enlightened we might be, he thought the last four years
Administration had convinced many, as well as himself, that the
Administration was not the most enlightened; if they had, they would not
have suffered such shameful spoliations on our commerce, and shameful
acts of cruelty to our seamen. He said the two little monarchies of
Denmark and Sweden, neither of which, in point of extent, can be
compared with the United States, more (to use the comparison of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania yesterday) than a speck is to the sun; nor
are they either of them in population nearly equal to the United States;
and although they are surrounded by the greatest warlike powers in a
belligerent state, yet they have preserved their neutrality inviolate;
their ships have not been wantonly seized, nor have their seamen been
torn from their ships, or whipped at the gang-way of British
ships-of-war, or been shot by their press-gangs. To mention the
instances of British cruelty towards our seamen in every instance that
could be adduced, would take up time unnecessarily; one alone, that
recently happened, I shall relate:

The brother of a member of this House (Mr. FRANKLIN, of N. C.) was
impressed on board a British ship-of-war in the West Indies; he was
unacquainted with seamanship, having only made a passage from North
Carolina to the Islands; being awkward and not being a seaman, he was
discharged. The same evening, a press-gang of the same ship fell in
with him and made him a prisoner; in attempting to make his escape, he
was shot at. The ball was aimed at his body; it was not winged with
death, but the young man was wounded in the hand.

Mr. AMES said, if any man were to call himself more free and enlightened
than his fellows, it would be considered as arrogant self-praise. His
very declaration would prove that he wanted sense as well as modesty,
but a nation might be called so, by a citizen of that nation, without
impropriety; because, in doing so, he bestows no praise of superiority
on himself; he may be in fact, and may be sensible that he is less
enlightened than the wise of other nations. This sort of national
eulogium may, no doubt, be fostered by vanity, and grounded in mistake;
it is sometimes just, it is certainly common, and not always either
ridiculous or offensive. It did not say that France or England had not
been remarkable for enlightened men; their literati are more numerous
and distinguished than our own. The character, with respect to this
country, he said, was strictly true. Our countrymen, almost universally,
possess some property and some pretensions of learning--two distinctions
so remarkably in their favor, as to vindicate the expression objected
to. But go through France, Germany, and most countries of Europe, and it
will be found that, out of fifty millions of people, not more than two
or three had any pretensions to knowledge, the rest being, comparatively
with Americans, ignorant. In France, which contains twenty-five millions
of people, only one was calculated to be in any respect enlightened,
and, perhaps, under the old system, there was not a greater proportion
possessed property; whilst in America, out of four millions of people,
scarcely any part of them could be classed upon the same ground with the
rabble of Europe. That class called vulgar, canaille, rabble, so
numerous there, does not exist here as a class, though our towns have
many individuals of it. Look at the lazzaroni of Naples; there are
twenty thousand or more houseless people, wretched, and in want! He
asked whether, where men wanted every thing, and were in proportion of
29 to 1, it was possible they could be trusted with power? Wanting
wisdom and morals, how would they use it? It was, therefore, that the
iron-hand of despotism was called in by the few who had any thing, to
preserve any kind of control over the many. This evil, as it truly was,
and which he did not propose to commend, rendered true liberty hopeless.
In America, out of four millions of people, the proportion which cannot
read and write, and who, having nothing, are interested in plunder and
confusion, and disposed for both, is small. In the Southern States, he
knew there were people well-informed; he disclaimed all design of
invidious comparison; the members from the South would be more capable
of doing justice to their constituents, but in the Eastern States he was
more particularly conversant, and knew the people in them could
generally read and write, and were well-informed as to public affairs.
In such a country, liberty is likely to be permanent. They are
enlightened enough to be free. It is possible to plant it in such a
soil, and reasonable to hope that it will take root and flourish long,
as we see it does. But can liberty, such as we understand and enjoy,
exist in societies where the few only have property, and the many are
both ignorant and licentious?

Mr. CHRISTIE wished to make an amendment to the paragraph, which he
thought would answer the end equally as well as striking it out; if
agreeable to the gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. PARKER,) he would move to
put the word "among" after the word "freest," which would read "the
freest and _among_ the most enlightened." He could not say we were the
most enlightened, but he did think us the most free; not that he was
afraid of offending any nation, but he thought this a more consistent
declaration.

Mr. SWANWICK said, nobody doubted but we were free and enlightened, but
he thought their declaration was no evidence of the truth of it. He
thought the last amendment very good, but it would be still better if
the gentleman would put the word "among" a little further back, so as to
read "among the freest and most enlightened." A pacific disposition
could not be proved by any thing so well as treating others with respect
as well as ourselves; we may not be exclusively free or enlightened. He
hoped it would be thus altered.

Mr. CHRISTIE thought we were the freest people in the world; he,
therefore, could not agree to the amendment last proposed.

Mr. COIT could not say with the gentleman last up, that we were the
freest, but he was very willing to agree with the amendment of a
gentleman, that we were among the freest and most enlightened; he
thought the first amendment much improved by this; he said it removed
great part of the difficulty from the minds of many gentlemen; however,
he hoped no unnecessary time would be taken up with such trifles.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, that some of the observations which had
been brought into the present debate, were of too delicate a nature to
be commented upon or even repeated; he should not, therefore, follow the
gentleman who spoke last, in his inquiry, how far this country was
exposed to be annoyed by France in the possible, though happily not
probable, event of a rupture with France?

As to the words "freest and most enlightened," which were more
immediately the subject of discussion, he did not object against them on
the ground of fact, but he considered the expression as resolving itself
into a question of decorum and delicacy, the rules of which appeared to
him to be violated, in their ascribing to themselves such a superlative
preference, however true, in a comparison with every other people. The
amendment of the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CHRISTIE) very much
softened the terms and rendered them more palatable.

Mr. KITCHELL thought we had given a very good proof that we are not the
most enlightened people in the world, by this discussion; and if we
declare to the world that we are, that declaration will be a still more
glaring proof. It appeared to him quite unnecessary; he thought it
spending a great deal of time to no purpose; it was not important enough
for that waste of time, when the session was to be so short; he
therefore wished the question to be put.

Mr. SITGREAVES agreed that a very useless and improper latitude had been
assumed in the discussion, and he thought that a few moments would not
be misspent in recalling the attention of the committee to the real
question before them. The assertion that we are the freest and most
enlightened nation in the world was found fault with, and while some
gentlemen moved to strike it out altogether, others proposed to qualify
it in different ways. Mr. S. believed that, in any modification of the
expression, the criticism was, in itself, extremely unimportant; and if,
as some gentlemen had treated it, it was a mere question of decorum, he
should feel perfectly indifferent whether it was rejected or retained.
But when he heard one member deny that we are the most free, and another
that we are enlightened; and most especially when he heard that the
expression was contended to be improper in relation to the acts and the
administration of the Government, he confessed it did appear to him to
be of some consequence not to part with the expression, lest, by doing
so, the House should give countenance to these objections. For his own
part, he believed the proposition to be true; he conceived the word
"enlightened," as applicable to political illumination; and not to our
rank in arts, sciences, or literature; and he considered the sentence as
equivalent to an assertion that we enjoy the most enlightened system of
political freedom extant. In this view of it, he thought it literally
true; and, if true, he could not discern the indecorum of declaring so
on the present occasion. He was strongly impressed with the propriety of
the idea which he had suggested yesterday, that this should be
considered as an act of intercourse purely domestic, an expression of
self-gratulation on our superior happiness, which, by the forms of
society, ought not to be noticed by any other nation. We may be deemed,
without too bold a figure, to be speaking in soliloquy; and to listen to
what we say would be no better than eavesdropping: the indecorum would
rest with those who overhear us, and not with ourselves. It could not be
denied that such a belief of the superiority of our political situation
ought to be cherished among us. If we did not believe it, we should take
shame to ourselves, because our Government is the work of our own hands.
If the belief that we are free and enlightened is valuable, the
expression of it is also valuable, because it tends to preserve us so;
it is a sentiment which we cannot dwell upon too much.

But, he contended, the propriety of this or any other expression could
not be justly estimated by considering it in the abstract--it ought to
be viewed in its application and use. We are about to lose the services
of the PRESIDENT, who is admitted on all hands to have been a useful and
patriotic officer. The House of Representatives are desirous that he
should take with him to his honorable retirement the only reward which
the nature and spirit of our political institutions admit of--the
approbation of his country. It will surely be admitted that we ought to
give to the expression of this approbation all the value of which it is
susceptible; and it is obvious, from the slightest perusal of this
paragraph in the Address, that the words in question give to it all its
force and energy, and that without them, it would be an unmeaning
compliment. The spectacle of a nation, neither free nor enlightened,
offering to its first Magistrate the tribute of approbation and
applause, would neither be "novel nor interesting," since the days of
history are stained with numberless instances of prostituted praise and
courtly adulation; but when it is the voluntary homage of a free and
enlightened people, offered with sincerity to an illustrious
fellow-citizen, it is truly a precious reward for patriotic labors.
Those who object to this expression, therefore, ought to move to strike
out the whole paragraph. To reject the words would totally defeat the
intended compliment; to qualify them would spoil it. Mr. S., therefore,
wished to retain them as they were reported.

Mr. THATCHER said, he did not think the object of the present question
of much consequence, nor did he care much about it; however, he would
wish to see the members more unanimous on the subject; he would,
therefore, propose an amendment, which he thought would have some
tendency towards it, which was to leave out the superlative, and let the
passage read, "The spectacle of a free and enlightened nation."

Mr. HENDERSON commended the ingenuity of the last motion, as he thought
it would more concentrate the ideas of the members. He would vote for
it.

Mr. CHRISTIE's motion was then put, and negatived.

Mr. THATCHER's motion was put, and passed in the affirmative.

Mr. LIVINGSTON then moved to strike out the words from the next
paragraph, "Wise, firm, and patriotic Administration," and insert in
their place, "Your wisdom, firmness, and patriotism has been." He could
not say that all the acts of the Administration had been wise and firm;
but he would say, that he believed the wisdom, firmness, and patriotism
of the PRESIDENT had been signally conducive to the success of the
present form of government. He was willing to give him every mark of
respect possible, but he believed some of his public acts of late
rendered the present motion necessary.

Mr. W. SMITH opposed the amendment, as he thought the gentleman who
proposed it conceived the words to imply more than was meant by
them--they are not meant to include every act of the Executive. He
thought that the Administration in general had been wise, firm, and
patriotic; that the wisdom and firmness of the PRESIDENT had been
conducive to the success of the present form of government. Had not the
words been put in the reported Address, he thought it would not have
been of consequence whether they were ever inserted; but the difference
is very great. Now they are inserted, they are made public, and, to
erase them now, and substitute words in any manner deficient in
sentiment to them, would be to carry censure and not respect. That the
Administration of that valuable man had been wise and conducive to the
good of this country, will not admit of a doubt; and for us to rob him
of that honor which is his due, would be insult. And any thing short of
the words in the Address he thought would not carry a proper mark of
respect.

Mr. GILES observed, that he thought the Administration had been very
deficient in wisdom. Many gentlemen, he said, were very particularly
opposed to the British Treaty and to the great emission of transferable
paper. Could it then be supposed these gentlemen could, in this
instance, so change their opinion? The gentleman last up had said, that
because the words were in the reported Address they ought not to be
struck out. He thought that the House had now as much power to act as
though the committee had made no report. He thought they ought not in
any way to be influenced by the report of the select committee, but act
as though they had to form the Address themselves. He believed that the
PRESIDENT possessed both wisdom and firmness. He was willing to
compliment the PRESIDENT as much as possible in his personal character,
but he could not think it applicable to his Administration. He thought
the amendment proposed would meet his concurrence, and he hoped it would
be agreed to.

Mr. GILBERT hoped and presumed that the motion of his colleague would
not obtain. He understood that the House addressed the PRESIDENT in
answer to his Speech, always as a public man, and not in his private
capacity. How extraordinary, then, will it appear in this House to refer
only to his private conduct! It is, in substance, complimenting him as a
private man, while the very words reprobate him in his public station.
We are now to address him as PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. We may tell
him of his wisdom and his firmness, but what of all that unless we
connect it with his Administration?

Mr. ISAAC SMITH.--The sin of ingratitude is worse than the sin of
witchcraft; and we shall damn ourselves to everlasting fame if we
withhold the mighty tribute due to the excellent man whom we pretend to
address. Posterity, throughout all future generations, will cry out
shame on us. Our sons will blush that their fathers were his foes. If
excess were possible on this occasion, it would be a glorious fault, and
worth a dozen of little, sneaking, frigid virtues. I abhor a grudging
bankrupt payment, where the debtor is much more benefited than the
creditor. The gentleman from Virginia misrepresents his own
constituents--I am sure he does all the rest of the Union. On the
present occasion we ought not to consult our own little feelings and
sensibilities. We should speak with the heart and in the voice of
millions, and then we should speak warm and loud. What! "Damn with faint
praise:" and suppress or freeze the warm, energetic, grateful sensations
of almost every honest heart from Maine to Tennessee! I will not do it!
Every line shall burn! This is a left-handed way of adoring the people.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, the motion then before them was of great
importance, and every man who thought favorably of the PRESIDENT's
Administration should there make a stand. For, if the words were struck
out, it would convey an idea to the world that it was the opinion of
that House that the Administration of the PRESIDENT had neither been
wise nor patriotic. Gentlemen might very well concur in the Address in
its present form, who did not think that every single act of the
PRESIDENT had been wise and firm, since it was his Administration in
general which was referred to, and not each individual act. He hoped,
therefore, the amendment offered would be decidedly opposed, and that
the words proposed to be struck out would be retained.

Mr. GALLATIN thought the words objected to were conceived to mean more
than they really did mean by gentlemen who supported the present motion;
nor could he conceive how the words "firmness and patriotism," proposed
to be inserted, could apply to any thing but the public character of the
PRESIDENT. On the first view of the Address, Mr. G. said, he thought
with the gentlemen from New York and Virginia, and it was not without
considerable hesitation that he brought himself to agree to this part of
the Address. He found, however, on further examination, that they did
not go so far as he at first thought they did. Had they approved of
every measure of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, he should have
voted against them. But, in the first place, he would observe, that his
Administration did not include Legislative acts; so that whatever evils
had arisen from the funding or banking systems were not to be charged to
the PRESIDENT. They did not mean to pay compliments to themselves but to
the PRESIDENT: therefore, the words in question related only to the
Administration of the PRESIDENT alone, and not to those officers of
State which had been supposed by some gentlemen. The first question was,
then, whether that Administration had been marked with wisdom, firmness,
and patriotism? And, he would briefly say, so far as related to the
internal situation of the country, it had borne these marks. He did not
recollect any instance where he could say here was any want of wisdom,
or there of firmness or patriotism. If they proceeded to foreign
affairs, a great number of members were found (he for one) who wished
that certain acts had not taken place; and, if he thought, in giving
approbation to this Address, he was approving of these measures, he
would certainly vote against it. But, as the gentlemen from South
Carolina and New Jersey (Mr. SMITH and the SPEAKER) had observed, as the
approbation went to the Administration in toto, it had respect to no
particular act. Nor did he believe the literal sense of the words would
apply to the business of the late treaty. [He read the words.] The most
clear meaning of these words related to the present Government and
constitution; and the word "success" could apply to those parts of the
Administration only which had had time to be matured. He did not believe
that at the present period it could be said that the Treaty with Great
Britain had been successful, and, therefore, could not be included
within the meaning of the expression. Not meaning to pledge an
approbation of that act, and not conceiving that the sentence could have
such a meaning, he would vote against the proposed amendment, and for
the original.

The question was put on the amendment and negatived. The committee then
rose, reported the Address with the amendments, when the House took them
up, and having gone through them--

On the question being about to be put on the answer as amended, Mr.
BLOUNT wished the yeas and nays might be taken, that posterity might see
that he did not consent to the Address.

The main question being put, it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas
67, nays 12, as follows:

      YEAS.--Fisher Ames, Theodorus Bailey, Abraham Baldwin,
      David Bard, Theophilus Bradbury, Nathan Bryan, Gabriel
      Christie, Thomas Claiborne, John Clopton, Joshua Coit,
      William Cooper, William Craik, James Davenport, Henry
      Dearborn, George Dent, George Ege, Abiel Foster, Dwight
      Foster, Jesse Franklin, Nathaniel Freeman, jr., Albert
      Gallatin, Ezekiel Gilbert, James Gillespie, Nicholas
      Gilman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, Andrew Gregg, Roger
      Griswold, William B. Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper, Carter
      B. Harrison, Thomas Hartley, Jonathan N. Havens, John
      Heath, Thomas Henderson, William Hindman, George Jackson,
      Aaron Kitchell, Samuel Lyman, James Madison, Francis
      Malbone, Andrew Moore, Frederick A. Muhlenberg, John
      Nicholas, John Page, Josiah Parker, John Patton, John Read,
      John Richards, Samuel Sewall, John S. Sherburne, Samuel
      Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Israel Smith, Isaac Smith,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., William Strudwick, John
      Swanwick, Zephaniah Swift, George Thatcher, Mark Thompson,
      John E. Van Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum,
      Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Thomas Blount, Isaac Coles, William B. Giles,
      Christopher Greenup, James Holland, Andrew Jackson, Edward
      Livingston, Matthew Locke, William Lyman, Samuel Maclay,
      Nathaniel Macon, and Abraham Venable.

_Resolved_, That the SPEAKER, attended by the House, do present the said
Address; and that Mr. AMES, Mr. MADISON, and Mr. SITGREAVES, be a
committee to wait on the PRESIDENT to know when and where it will be
convenient for him to receive the same.


FRIDAY, December 16.

Mr. AMES, from the committee appointed to wait on the PRESIDENT to know
when and where he would receive the answer of this House to his Address,
reported that he had appointed to receive it at his house this day at
two o'clock.

_Address to the President._

The SPEAKER informed the House that the hour was nearly at hand, which
the PRESIDENT had appointed for receiving the Address of the House, in
answer to his Speech. The members, in a body, accordingly waited upon
the PRESIDENT, at his house; and the SPEAKER pronounced the following
Address:

      "SIR: The House of Representatives have attended to your
      communication respecting the state of our country, with all
      the sensibility that the contemplation of the subject and a
      sense of duty can inspire.

      "We are gratified by the information, that measures
      calculated to ensure a continuance of the friendship of the
      Indians, and to maintain the tranquillity of the Western
      frontier, have been adopted; and we indulge the hope that
      these, by impressing the Indian tribes with more correct
      conceptions of the justice, as well as power of the United
      States, will be attended with success.

      "While we notice, with satisfaction, the steps that you
      have taken, in pursuance of the late treaties with several
      foreign nations, the liberation of our citizens, who were
      prisoners at Algiers, is a subject of peculiar
      felicitation. We shall cheerfully co-operate in any further
      measures that shall appear, on consideration, to be
      requisite.

      "We have ever concurred with you in the most sincere and
      uniform disposition to preserve our neutral relations
      inviolate; and it is, of course, with anxiety and deep
      regret we hear that any interruption of our harmony with
      the French Republic has occurred; for we feel with you, and
      with our constituents, the cordial and unabated wish to
      maintain a perfectly friendly understanding with that
      nation. Your endeavors to fulfil that wish, and by all
      honorable means to preserve peace and to restore that
      harmony and affection, which have heretofore so happily
      subsisted between the French Republic and the United
      States, cannot fail, therefore, to interest our attention.
      And while we participate in the full reliance you have
      expressed on the patriotism, self-respect, and fortitude of
      our countrymen, we cherish the pleasing hope that a mutual
      spirit of justice and moderation will ensure the success of
      your perseverance.

      "The various subjects of your communication will,
      respectively, meet with the attention that is due to their
      importance.

      "When we advert to the internal situation of the United
      States, we deem it equally natural and becoming to compare
      the present period with that immediately antecedent to the
      operation of the Government, and to contrast it with the
      calamities in which the state of war still involves several
      of the European nations, as the reflections deduced from
      both tend to justify as well as to excite a warmer
      admiration of our free constitution, and to exalt our minds
      to a more fervent and grateful sense of piety towards
      Almighty God for the beneficence of His providence, by
      which its Administration has been hitherto so remarkably
      distinguished.

      "And while we entertain a grateful conviction that your
      wise, firm, and patriotic Administration has been signally
      conducive to the success of the present form of government,
      we cannot forbear to express the deep sensations of regret
      with which we contemplate your intended retirement from
      office.

      "As no other suitable occasion may occur, we cannot suffer
      the present to pass without attempting to disclose some of
      the emotions which it cannot fail to awaken.

      "The gratitude and admiration of your countrymen are still
      drawn to the recollection of those resplendent virtues and
      talents which were so eminently instrumental to the
      achievement of the Revolution, and of which that glorious
      event will ever be the memorial. Your obedience to the
      voice of duty and your country, when you quitted
      reluctantly, a second time, the retreat you had chosen, and
      first accepted the Presidency, afforded a new proof of the
      devotedness of your zeal in its service, and an earnest of
      the patriotism and success which have characterized your
      Administration. As the grateful confidence of the citizens
      in the virtues of their Chief Magistrate has essentially
      contributed to that success, we persuade ourselves that the
      millions whom we represent, participate with us in the
      anxious solicitude of the present occasion.

      "Yet we cannot be unmindful that your moderation and
      magnanimity, twice displayed by retiring from your exalted
      stations, afford examples no less rare and instructive to
      mankind, than valuable to a Republic.

      "Although we are sensible that this event, of itself,
      completes the lustre of a character already conspicuously
      unrivalled by the coincidence of virtue, talents, success,
      and public estimation; yet we conceive we owe it to you,
      sir, and still more emphatically to ourselves and to our
      nation, (of the language of whose hearts we presume to
      think ourselves at this moment the faithful interpreters,)
      to express the sentiments with which it is contemplated.

      "The spectacle of a free and enlightened nation offering,
      by its Representatives, the tribute of unfeigned
      approbation to its first citizen, however novel and
      interesting it may be, derives all its lustre (a lustre
      which accident or enthusiasm could not bestow, and which
      adulation would tarnish) from the transcendent merit of
      which it is the voluntary testimony.

      "May you long enjoy that liberty which is so dear to you,
      and to which your name will ever be so dear; may your own
      virtues and a nation's prayers obtain the happiest sunshine
      for the decline of your days and the choicest of future
      blessings. For our country's sake, for the sake of
      Republican liberty, it is our earnest wish that your
      example may be the guide of your successors; and thus,
      after being the ornament and safeguard of the present age,
      become the patrimony of our descendants."

To which the PRESIDENT made the following Reply:

      "GENTLEMEN: To a citizen whose views were unambitious, who
      preferred the shade and tranquillity of private life, to
      the splendor and solicitude of elevated stations, and whom
      the voice of duty and his country could alone have drawn
      from his chosen retreat, no reward for his public services
      can be so grateful as public approbation, accompanied by a
      consciousness that to render those services useful to that
      country has been his single aim: and when this approbation
      is expressed by the Representatives of a free and enlighted
      nation, the reward will admit of no addition. Receive,
      gentlemen, my sincere and affectionate thanks for this
      signal testimony that my services have been acceptable and
      useful to my country. The strong confidence of my
      fellow-citizens, while it animated all my actions, ensured
      their zealous co-operation, which rendered those services
      successful. The virtue and wisdom of my successors, joined
      with the patriotism and intelligence of the citizens who
      compose the other branches of Government, I firmly trust,
      will lead them to the adoption of measures which, by the
      beneficence of Providence, will give stability to our
      system of Government, add to its success, and secure to
      ourselves and to posterity that liberty which is to all of
      us so dear.

      "While I acknowledge, with pleasure, the sincere and
      uniform disposition of the House of Representatives to
      preserve our neutral relations inviolate, and, with them,
      deeply regret any degree of interruption of our good
      understanding with the French Republic, I beg you,
      gentlemen, to rest assured that my endeavors will be
      earnest and unceasing, by all honorable means, to preserve
      peace, and to restore that harmony and affection which have
      heretofore so happily subsisted between our two nations;
      and with you, I cherish the pleasing hope that a mutual
      spirit of justice and moderation will crown those endeavors
      with success.

      "I shall cheerfully concur in the beneficial measures which
      your deliberations shall mature on the various subjects
      demanding your attention. And while directing your labors
      to advance the real interests of our country, you receive
      its blessings; with perfect sincerity my individual wishes
      will be offered for your present and future felicity.

                          "G. WASHINGTON."

The members then returned to the House, and having resumed their places,
the SPEAKER presented a copy of the PRESIDENT's Answer to the Clerk;
which he read.


MONDAY, December 19.

JOHN HATHORN, from New York, and JOHN MILLEDGE, from Georgia, appeared
and took their seats.

A new member, to wit, ELISHA R. POTTER, from Rhode Island, in the place
of BENJAMIN BOURNE, resigned, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat in the House.


MONDAY, December 26.

_National University._

Mr. HARPER moved the order of the day, for the House to go into a
committee on the establishment of a National University. The House
accordingly formed itself into a committee--Mr. COIT in the chair.

When the report was read, Mr. MACON said there was the word
"appropriation" in the report. He did not recollect any having been made
for that purpose. He wished to know what was meant?

Mr. CRAIK said, authority was given for the PRESIDENT to appropriate
about twenty acres of land for the erection of this building; this he
supposed to be what was meant.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, that some time or other the institution of a Seminary
in this District may be of use, but at present, and in the manner
contemplated in this report, it would not do. If carried into effect
thus, it will sometime need an appropriation. We are now, said Mr. N.,
going into the subject, but we know not to what lengths it may carry us;
we do not know where it will end. He did not think the time had arrived
to incorporate a company for building a National University. It would be
taking money from those districts of country which can do for
themselves, and would receive no benefit from this institution. It would
be inconvenient and inconsistent for people living at a considerable
distance to send their children to this University; besides, he thought,
the further children are from home, by being less under the eye of their
parents, the more their morals would be injured. If it be a National
University, it must be for the use of the nation. It will then be
necessary to open funds for the purpose of its support. It is
recommended by the PRESIDENT, it is true; but this is no argument why we
should precipitate the business: it is the last time he will have an
opportunity to address this House, and it being an object he should like
to see encouraged when it was practicable, he took that opportunity to
express it. We are not now in a situation to forward its establishment.
It may be done at some time, but Mr. N. thought it would be many years
first. That district of country would be many years before it could
encourage the hope of such a plan prospering. He thought gentlemen from
other parts of the Union would not say they wanted it for their youth.
He thought if the House once entered into the subject, the
responsibility would fall on it to keep up the institution.

Mr. HARPER said, it did not appear to him that the gentleman last up had
attended sufficiently to this report, for he seemed to be much mistaken
as to its principle. There was nothing in it that contemplated pledging
the United States to find funds for its support; nor was it the object
of the report to establish a National University. He agreed with the
gentleman, that we were not arrived at a period for such an institution.
But gentlemen would see that the object of the commissioners was not to
establish a National University or obtain money from the United States,
but their direct object was, to be incorporated, so as to be enabled to
receive such legacies and donations as may be presented to the
institution, and hold it in trust for that purpose. The PRESIDENT had
already given nineteen acres of land, and signified his intention to
give fifty shares in the Potomac canal whenever there was proper
authority to receive endowments. It appears that there is no authority
at present. The memorial goes no further than to authorize them to
receive such benefactions as may be made, and hold them in trust. How
far, then, this went towards involving this House in its support, he
should leave the good sense of gentlemen to judge. Mr. H. thought the
amount of this memorial could not have any evil tendency, but it may
have a good one; for which reason he hoped it would be agreed to.

Mr. BALDWIN did not know any thing, according to his present views,
which could be injurious in the report. At present it seemed favorable
to him. He had two principal ideas in his mind, which made it appear so;
if neither of which was cleared up otherwise, he should vote for it. The
first thing he should ask was, Is such a thing desirable? And then, Is
there a Seminary so near the spot contemplated, as to make it hostile in
this House to encourage this University? He believed there was none that
this will injure, but that an establishment like this would be very
agreeable in that District. If it was desirable, who could undertake it,
who encourage it, like this House? They could not do it themselves. If,
then, the step is a proper one, it can never be too soon to commence it,
although it may be many years before it may be wanted. The objection may
be, that it would be wrong to incorporate a Literary Society; but we
have frequent instances of incorporation, and nothing can prove it
improper, since no pecuniary aid is required, no grant of money is
asked. If it was, I should, like the gentleman before me, (Mr.
NICHOLAS,) disapprove of it, but not now seeing reason to object, I
shall vote for the report.

Mr. CRAIK.--After the caution the committee had observed in forming
their report, to prevent objections, I am sorry they should be charged
with things they do not in the least merit. If the report contemplated
the raising a fund for the support of this institution from the United
States, there might have been some ground for gentlemen's objections;
but, as there is not the most distant view of such a thing, I am
surprised to hear it objected to. I did not expect it from that
gentleman, (Mr. NICHOLAS.) I did not expect to hear him say, that
institutions of this kind were not wanted there; it might have come
better from gentlemen residing in more distant parts of the United
States.

If this subject was now before the House, sir, I should not be against
proving, at this time, that it is the duty of the United States to
establish a University, and that the sooner it was done the better. But,
as this is not the case, as we are only asked to permit its
encouragement, by allowing these people to receive benefactions, how can
we refuse? Shall we shut the door against individual benevolence? There
are appropriations already made to this institution. There is a fund now
of fifty shares in the canal, which is now valuable and increasing in
value daily. I think the situation for this purpose very good; and the
probable increase of the city of Washington will induce many persons to
benevolence for this purpose. I know of no situation more central, and
believe there is no place of the kind in its neighborhood; and from an
established knowledge it would be a very useful and desirable
institution, shall vote for it.

Mr. W. LYMAN.--As far as I can understand, the land which is now to be
appropriated for this University is the property of the United States.
Does not this look as though the United States are to patronize and
support the establishment? If we take this step, I shall very much
wonder if our next is not to be called upon to produce money. I do not
expect much from the liberality of individuals; and can it be expected
that people from the remote parts of the United States will send their
children to this Seminary? Surely not; and consequently their money will
be lost. It will be a natural source of discontent to them to pay their
money merely for others to obtain the advantage. It may be very good for
people thereabout, but remote parts cannot derive the least advantage
from the institution. We are going quite too fast into this business,
without attending to probable consequences.

I think it would have been more proper, if these people had only wanted
this power, for them to have applied to the State Legislature of
Maryland; it would be more to their interest and duty to encourage a
Seminary if one is wanted in that place. They have sufficient power
vested in them to encourage all such laudable undertakings. For us to
encourage this would be to do injury, instead of having a number of
schools planted in various parts, they are now all to centre in one; and
the people are to neglect all to support this one; as others would
become very weak.

I flatter myself to have as liberal sentiments on such institutions as
other gentlemen, but I do sincerely think small academies are as useful
as this institution for a University. The large institutions are
generally out of the reach of people in general, and of the middling
class in particular. These small academies have produced many eminent
literary characters in the country. If it should be necessary at any
time to form a Seminary for the use of that District, Congress would not
refuse its encouragement; but to draw money for a National University I
hope they never will agree. But gentlemen say this is not asked; true it
is not at this time, but there is that in the principle that will most
certainly lead to it.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, if it should ever be the policy of the
United States to establish a National University, he was of opinion this
was an improper time for making the decision. He did not believe the
committee who made the report meant to do more than had been stated; but
the effect, he said, would be what he predicted; this measure would be
looked upon as an entering wedge, and they should hereafter be told they
must go through with it. If gentlemen were prepared to sanction an
institution of this kind they would of course do it; he was not prepared
to vote for the measure, but should give it his negative.

Mr. NICHOLAS said he had not been convinced by the observations of
gentlemen who had spoken in favor of this report that all the mischiefs
would not follow this measure which he before predicted. He inquired
into the purpose of establishing a National University. The PRESIDENT
had said (and the commissioners after him) it was to establish a
uniformity of principles and manners throughout the Union. This, he
believed, could not be effected by any institution. If, said he, you
incorporate men to build a University, are you not pledging yourselves
to make up any deficiency? and, as the building must be commensurate
with the object, they would have an enormous empty house continually
calling upon them for contributions to its support. Whatever moderation
had been observed in framing this report, Mr. N. said it was like many
others which came before them: it was so covered as not to show half the
mischiefs which would attend it. If a plan of education was wanted for
that District, let members from that part of the country say so, and he
would be ready to afford them every necessary assistance; but he would
not think of going into the scheme of a National University.

The district of country from whence it came might stand in great need of
seminaries of learning, as had been hinted by the gentleman from
Maryland, (Mr. CRAIK,) but their ignorance must continue until they were
sensible of their want of instruction. He believed there was no Federal
quality in knowledge, and no Federal aid was necessary to the spreading
of it. Every district of country was competent to provide for the
education of its own citizens, and he should not give his countenance to
the national plan proposed, because the expense would be enormous, and
because he did not think it would be attended with any good effect, but
with much evil.

If a University is wanted for the use of that District, or any other
part, Mr. N. said he would give it all the encouragement possible, but
he could not agree to go to such great lengths--lengths which were not
yet explored.

Mr. R. SPRIGG considered the report before them as of a very harmless
nature. The PRESIDENT, he said, had appropriated land upon which to
erect the University in question. They were not called upon to sanction
that appropriation. His power to give it was full and ample. The thing
was done, and he had promised a future donation. The apprehensions of
the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. NICHOLAS) seemed to arise from his
conceiving they were about to sanction a National University, such as
had been recommended by the PRESIDENT. If this were the case, although
the Representative of that District, he should not give his vote in
support of the measure. On the contrary, he said, they were called upon
merely to authorize proper persons to receive donations for a
University. What sort of institution this should be, would be for the
future consideration of Congress. Mr. S. said he should always be ready
to give his support to every measure which had a tendency to spread
knowledge throughout the United States, as he believed the progress of
knowledge and liberty would accompany each other. The gentleman from
Virginia seemed to think this institution would only benefit a small
circle. He did not think the State of Maryland would be much benefited
by it, as they had already two good universities; but he thought it
doing no more than justice to the owners of property in the Federal City
that this institution should be encouraged. What was asked of them would
not commit them at all for any thing further, and it would be a mean of
turning the attention of the people to the support of an institution of
this kind. For these reasons, he hoped the House would agree to the
report.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said he had thought, like the gentleman last up, that
there was nothing in it but what was perfectly harmless, until,
recurring to the law for establishing the permanent seat of Government,
that something more might be intended than the eye could at first
discover. Mr. L. said, he turned the thing a variety of ways in his
mind, and could not account for some of its obscurities. If nothing was
intended but a mere incorporation, why not apply to the State that could
incorporate such a body? Something further seemed to be intended: public
patronage was wanted to support this institution. They were called upon,
at a moment's notice, to give their encouragement to this National
Institution. It is true, they were called upon from very respectable
authority. They were not called upon to appropriate the public funds to
this purpose; but how far the commissioners are justifiable in laying
out public lands for that purpose, he knew not. He had not the law
itself at hand, but he was doubtful about the just disposal of it, if in
this manner. This land was for public use. The use of this land was to
erect buildings on for the benefit of Congress; and if these
commissioners had power to appropriate it for building a National
University on, they had the same power to give it or make use of it for
any other purpose. Such institutions are not public, but private
concerns.

This, said Mr. L., I view as the effects of the resolution, were it to
be adopted; but I would not be thought as in the least reflecting on the
motives of the gentleman who brought it forward. I believe it will
operate (as a gentleman has justly said) as an "entering-wedge;" and at
some future time we shall be told, we must go on--now we have encouraged
its institution, we must support it. We shall hear more about it at a
future day. Gentlemen tell you, sir, that nothing is intended, but
merely to permit its institution. Why cannot they obtain this power
which is asked of us of the State where it is wanted? The laws there
will permit it, and, most likely, it could be obtained. If this report
is agreed to, the time will arrive when this institution will pretend to
a just claim on this House for its support; and the reasons they will
then urge will have a force which will not be easily repelled.

Mr. MADISON said he was very far from considering, with some gentlemen,
that this is a question of right or policy. These ideas are not
comprehended in the present question. It is not whether Congress ought
to interpose in behalf of this institution or not; it is whether
Congress will encourage an establishment which is to be supported
entirely independent of them. He did not consider it would ask a single
farthing from us, nor that it would pledge Congress to endow the
establishment with any support. The State of Virginia thought proper,
during the war, to present the PRESIDENT with fifty shares in the
Potomac canal, in consideration of his services, which he refused
accepting for his own use. He has now offered to give it to this
Seminary.[4] Some other individuals have likewise destined part of their
land for its support, and other benefactions may be expected. The amount
of this motion before the committee is whether we will grant power and
security to persons to receive such donations in trust for the
institution? He conceived it only in this simple point of view, and he
thought if it was worthy of patronage, it ought to be from the United
States.

The gentleman from New York (Mr. LIVINGSTON) seems to say it is not
necessary for Congress to interpose, as the laws of Maryland allow that
Legislature power to do it, and they are the most proper. Congress has
the sole jurisdiction over that District: it is not with the power of
that Legislature. Their power in that District could only operate by
virtue of a grant from the United States; although it is necessary,
until that District becomes the permanent seat of Government, the laws
of Maryland should be in force there. This being the situation, the
commissioners applied to Congress to give them the power to receive
benefactions.

Another thing which gentlemen had objected to, is its being called a
National University. The report does not call it so; it calls it "A
University in the District of Columbia;" which, he thought, was
materially different. Congress may form regulations for institutions
which may be very good, and yet, not be viewed as national institutions.
It was in this qualified light (for he wished not to consider it a
burden on the nation) he meant to vote for the report.

Mr. SPRIGGS said it had been inquired why the Legislature of Maryland
could not have granted the commissioners what they now pray for? He
answered that they could make no law for that District which should
extend beyond the time at which the seat of Government was to be removed
there. He mentioned some instances that had taken place while he was a
member of that Legislature. This, he said, accounted for the application
of the commissioners to Congress.

On motion, the committee rose, and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, December 27.

DEMPSEY BURGES, from North Carolina, appeared, and took his seat.

_National University._

The order of the day was called for on the report of the committee to
whom was referred the memorial of the commissioners of the Federal City,
and that part of the PRESIDENT's Speech, which referred to the
establishment of a National University. The House accordingly resolved
itself into a Committee of the Whole on that subject, when the
resolution, reported by the select committee, having been read, no
gentleman rising on the subject, the Chairman inquired if the committee
were ready for the question, and on being answered in the affirmative,
the question was put and negatived by a great majority.

The committee rose, and the Chairman reported their disagreement with
the select committee.

The House then took up the subject.

Mr. MURRAY rose, expressing his great surprise at the unexpected
decision on the question in the committee. He was very much surprised to
see the committee so changed, no opposition, and yet the report so
quickly negatived; surely gentlemen must have mistaken the question. It
is matter of regret such an important subject should have so little
consideration. The language of the report is perfectly moderate and
just. The gentleman from Virginia, yesterday, gave us to understand that
this institution was to draw its support from the National Treasury; but
on examining the report I can find no such idea held out or intended;
and also he told us this was a National University. The gentleman's
observations are grounded in mistake, or it was effected by an
imagination of evils, of which there could not be the most distant
apprehension. If we refer to the memorial of the commissioners we shall
see they ask no money from Congress; they only ask you to erect a number
of gentlemen into a corporate capacity to enable them to receive
donations from those who are well disposed towards instituting a useful
Seminary in that District; this is no more than they have a right to
expect from Congress, and is the duty of Congress to grant. Yet the
determination of the Committee of the whole House has been carried
against this very desirable and reasonable request. I would again repeat
that the language of the memorial is only to enable them to support a
seminary of learning in that place, and not a single shilling is asked
from the nation. They only want a medium to act upon--an act of
incorporation.

The PRESIDENT has generously signified his intention to make a valuable
benefaction, not less than £5000 sterling, and the wise and good in all
parts of the United States would probably follow his example,
particularly in that neighborhood, if Congress would put them in a way
to receive it; a building would then be begun and some advances made
towards the execution of the institution, in proportion to the fund.
Instead of allowing this to be the case, every possible view has been
given unfavorable to the plan, and every possible supposition formed,
though without grounds, which could tend to blast it. The ideas of
gentlemen have been inferred that a large empty house would arise;--that
it would draw from the United States funds for its support. It may be
possible, but it is no way probable. Is it not more probable that these
gentlemen, knowing they cannot expect national support, will keep
themselves within the bounds of their funds, if they mean to carry on
the institution? Certainly this seems most consistent with the wisdom
and prudence of men in that capacity. Nothing is asked of the public in
the report of the select committee:--nothing they have a right to ask. I
therefore hope, as the request is perfectly reasonable, gentlemen will
not be too hasty to oppose such a measure without due consideration.

Mr. CRAIK.--I must confess I feel as much surprised as my colleague on
the decision which has just been given in the Committee of the Whole.
Some gentlemen who opposed the report yesterday conceived there was some
secret poison lurking within it--some dangerous principle not to be
discovered on its face, which would some time produce baneful
influences--this has been insinuated though not directly said. If so it
must come there by accident, or of itself, which those gentlemen must
allow if they will give themselves the trouble to examine the true
principle of it, and give it a just decision. When we examine the
materials of which this report has been formed, viz: the PRESIDENT's
communication on this subject in his Speech, and the memorial of the
commissioners;--we should be led by those gentlemen to believe, that
this, which is the groundwork of the report, is connected to convey
something which may extend further than it seems to carry its object;
this perhaps is the secret poison hinted at. Were I in the situation of
the PRESIDENT, I am free to confess, had I studied my own feelings and
the great use of the institution, I should have recommended it. It has
been justly said, that the PRESIDENT, from the impulsive importance of
it, has taken this opportunity--this last opportunity to recommend it.
He has recommended it with earnestness; which gives an additional proof
of his sincere regard for the welfare of his country. I hope this will
not be conceived in favor of the idea suggested. The commissioners
seemed to have anticipated the objections which have been made to a
National University, and have purposely avoided inserting it in their
memorial. They have cherished similar ideas which I have, of the
eligibility of such an institution, but foreseeing that plan would not
be approved, they have relinquished that, and only requested
incorporation to enable them to act in trust for the institution. They
do not call upon this House to put their hand into the Public Treasury;
they seem to have possessed somewhat of the prophetic, to see the
necessity of forming their memorial so little objectionable; and yet
there is supposed to be danger in this simple request.

Gentlemen have supposed a responsibility, a peculiar obligation to
support it, would be attached to the United States, were they to give
this privilege. As well might it be said that Congress, by allowing a
bridge to be built, or a road to be cut, would incur the expense, or if
it could not otherwise be done for want of money in the applicants,
would be engaged to do it for them at the national expense. If there are
objections of force in one instance they will apply to the other. If
this is denied it proves that District to be wretched outcasts, being
denied a request the most reasonable, natural, and just that can be
contemplated. Many of the objections urged, indeed most of them, against
the admission of this report, do not go so much to the exclusion of the
measure, as to the danger of Legislative interference. Gentlemen say, if
we move in it--if we put our hands at all to it, we pledge ourselves to
effect it. If this is the situation with the people of Columbia, the
year 1800 will be a woful year to them; this is an unhappy presage of
the jurisdiction to be exercised on that country. If it is inexpedient
for that District to have a Seminary of Learning, let gentlemen who
could state it with truth, come forward and say so. If the objections of
gentlemen are not grounded on the danger of this House pledging itself
to support the institution nor on the inexpediency of such a thing in
that District, I am at a loss, for my soul, to conceive on what ground
their objections are formed. I was surprised yesterday to hear the
opposition come from the quarter it did; and am equally surprised to
find such an opposition now. In my view there is a very great want of
Seminaries of Learning in that District.

If we take a view on the south side of the Potomac, for a considerable
extent of country, there is no institution to answer any desirable
purpose. There is the greatest probability of a rapid increase in the
population. Is it not reasonable, then, that an institution of this kind
should be established in that place? And if reasonable at all, are we to
wait till the period arrives when the country is thickly inhabited
before we commence a building and project the plan? I have long thought
that in this young country such a thing was necessary. It should be now
begun, to grow up with its growth and strengthen with its strength. We
should now lay the corner-stone--the foundation to build upon. Though
such a Seminary cannot be established now, it may fifty years hence; and
it can never be too soon to commence a good institution. We are not
called upon to travel into the fields of speculation for the purpose of
finding funds to support this plan; there are funds which present
themselves to view. We only want a grant to secure the benefactions in
prospect. The PRESIDENT has employed a handsome benefaction for this
purpose; and I much wonder that gentlemen from that part of the Union
should oppose measures that would only encourage its reception. When I
take a view of the extent of country which lies much in want of a
Seminary, I feel surprised that such measures towards its growth should
be denied.

If there are any gentlemen here who oppose the advancement and growth of
that District which they have taken under their wing, they should come
forward and declare it; we then should have ground to account for their
conduct. If we are determined to deny these people common justice, we
dispirit them. There is no circumstance which can occur that will tend
so much to discourage the growth of that State; if we forbear to do them
this justice, we exclude them looking up for those common rights which
could be enjoyed in any other Territory of the United States. I hope
this House will never deny to that people, rising into existence, this
small privilege. Is it a strange thing, I would ask gentlemen, for a
State to grant charters? I answer, no. And for this State to be denied
this privilege only to secure a fund for such an excellent institution,
I believe is quite a novel idea. I hope if there are any doubts on this
subject, they will lie over for future consideration; and I hope we
shall be careful not to damp the attempts of that people by a conduct
which could not be refused by any State in the Union; and that Congress
should refuse it without assigning a sufficient reason is unprecedented.
I hope it will lie over for future consideration, and not be refused so
quickly.

It was moved that the subject should lie over until the second Monday in
January.

The question for postponement was put and carried--ayes 37, noes 36.


WEDNESDAY, December 28.

_Relief to Savannah._

Mr. W. SMITH wished the House to resolve itself into a Committee of the
Whole on the resolution, which he had the other day laid upon the table,
proposing to afford some relief to the sufferers by the late fire at
Savannah. For his part, he said, he could see no reasonable objection
which could be made to so benevolent a proposition. A gentleman in the
House had got a plan of the ruins of the city; it was, indeed, a most
distressful scene. There had never occurred so calamitous an event of
the kind in the United States, or which had so strong a claim upon the
General Government for relief. He said they had granted assistance to
the sufferers by fire at St. Domingo; and surely if it were justifiable
to grant relief to foreigners in distress, it was at least equally so
when the objects were our own citizens. If gentlemen had objections to
the measure, he wished they would state them. The sum with which he
should think of filling up the blank would not be such as to materially
affect our finances.

Mr. MILLEDGE said, if the unfortunate had any claim upon the Government
for relief, none could have greater than the citizens of Savannah. Few
houses, he said, were remaining of that city, and those few were the
least valuable. Not a public building, not a place of public worship, or
of public justice--all was a wide waste of ruin and desolation, such as
scarcely could be conceived, and as it were impossible to describe. He
hoped some relief would be afforded to distress so unexampled.

Mr. COOPER said, it was a very unpleasant thing to come forward to
oppose a measure of this sort; but, when they looked into different
parts of the Union, and saw the losses which had been sustained at New
York, Charleston, &c., it would appear only reasonable that, if relief
was afforded in one case, it ought to be extended to another; and, if
this resolution were agreed to, he should certainly move to have some
relief afforded to New York. He hoped, however, the business would not
be proceeded with. If the principle were a good one, it would bear going
through with; but it would be seen this would, on the contrary, prove a
dangerous one. What they did to-day, he said, should bear repeating
to-morrow. If they were to make good losses by fire, there would be no
occasion for insurance companies, nor any inducement to build with brick
in preference to wood. He felt as much as others for the distresses of
the people of Savannah, but was of opinion it was not a proper business
for the interference of that House.

Mr. W. SMITH agreed with the gentleman last up that this would be
considered as a precedent; he agreed that they ought not to do that
to-day which ought not to be done to-morrow. It might be brought forward
as a principle upon which we should be bound to relieve New York or
Charleston; but the question is, whether this is not a distinct case?
This is a case awfully distinguishable from all others; and if a case
like the present will not be often found, this House are certainly not
bound to grant relief in others, though in this. He trusted such a case
would not be again found to solicit relief. Charleston, he said, had
experienced a great calamity by fire, but had not asked relief of that
House; and it was probable if it had it would not have been granted,
because its distresses are not so great. In a distressing situation like
that now before us aid can be afforded by the many towards alleviating
the distresses of the few. Hence arises the advantages from public
contributions; and would that House, he asked, refuse their assistance?
It would not be felt by the public purse. It has been said, to adopt
this resolution would have a dangerous tendency, inasmuch as it would
encourage a neglect of insurance. But the evil has come; the unfortunate
circumstance has occurred; four-fifths of that unfortunate city has been
destroyed, and their distress is great. Such a circumstance may not
again happen for a century. The amazing value of £500,000 sterling
damages is done; and shall we refuse to give a trifle to assist, with
others, towards removing the present distressed situation of some of the
unfortunate inhabitants? I trust not. It is not asked of the House to
indemnify the loss of these sufferers. No, sir; it is only asked that
the General Government should give the trifling sum of fifteen or twenty
thousand dollars to afford these people some relief.

The question was then put for the House to resolve itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the subject, and lost--yeas 38, nays 39.

It was then moved that the committee be discharged from the further
consideration of the subject.

Mr. W. LYMAN hoped the business would not be disposed of without going
into a Committee of the Whole. He thought more respect was due to the
feelings of the sufferers than to dispose of the subject without
discussion. He hoped the committee would not, therefore, be discharged.

Mr. HARTLEY trusted the committee would not be discharged. He believed
the destruction of Lisbon by an earthquake did not occasion greater
mischiefs than the late fire had done to Savannah. The Legislature of
Pennsylvania, which had no greater power than the General Government to
afford relief to these sufferers, had given $15,000. Indeed, he thought
it more the province of the General Government than of State Governments
to afford relief in such cases.

Shall we, said he, treat the citizens of Savannah with more disrespect
than the people of St. Domingo? This House then gave $10,000 or more for
the relief of those people, and shall we not now have liberty to discuss
the subject, whether to give or not to our own citizens? Although, he
said, he would not wish to draw a precedent from English transactions,
yet he would observe that their generous benevolence to the unfortunate
sufferers by the earthquake at Lisbon, though only commercially
acquainted was worth imitation, to whom they gave £100,000. Mr. H. was
sorry gentlemen should endeavor to prevent this by bringing in the
calamities in New York and Charleston. Those were only personal losses;
this was a general conflagration, a catastrophe unprecedented; and he
hoped, for the sake of humanity and national honor, this House would
never withhold relief.

Mr. SPRIGG hoped the committee would not be discharged, but that they
would go into the business at an early day. He said, he had not made up
his mind how far they had power to afford relief in a case like the
present. There was an instance in the relief afforded to the daughters
of the Count de Grasse, as well as that given to the sufferers at St.
Domingo. He wished for further time to make inquiry on the subject. If
there were not insuperable objections to the measure, he hoped relief
would be afforded.

Mr. HARPER acknowledged that it was sound policy in Government to keep a
strict eye over its Treasury; but this watchfulness ought not to go to
the rejection of all claims, however just and proper. He thought the
tenaciousness of approaching the Treasury was carried too far in the
present instance. He would ask, what was the use of society if it were
not to lessen the evils of such calamities as the present, by spreading
them over the whole community, instead of suffering them to fall upon
the heads of a few individuals? He thought it the duty of Government to
alleviate such peculiar distress as the present. It was said this would
prove a dangerous precedent, and prevent necessary provisions against
fire. If they were about to make good the whole of the £500,000
destroyed, there might be some ground for the alarm; but when fifteen or
twenty thousand dollars only were contemplated to be given, no great
danger could surely be apprehended. The fires at New York, Baltimore,
and Charleston, had been mentioned; but what were the means of Savannah
when compared with New York? Not as one to twenty. New York was rich
enough to bear her loss, but this could not be said of Savannah, all the
inhabitants of which were reduced to poverty and distress. They could
not, therefore, get relief from their fellow-citizens; and to whom could
they look for protection and relief with so much propriety as to the
General Government? When compared to Charleston, the loss of Savannah
was of ten times the magnitude as that experienced by it. The loss of
Charleston was alleviated by a subscription of $30,000 from its own
citizens, besides the handsome contributions which were made in other
parts of the Union; but there was no property left in Georgia to afford
relief to the sufferers. Suppose, said Mr. H., we were to give thirty
thousand dollars towards this loss, what would it be when divided among
the whole Union? And yet it would be enough to draw down countless
blessings upon us from these objects of distress. He hoped, therefore,
the committee would not be discharged. It was a case of peculiar and
almost unprecedented affliction, such as he hoped would not again occur;
and a decision in their favor would be applauded by every man, woman,
and child in the Union.

The question was then taken for going into a Committee of the Whole on
the subject, and carried by a considerable majority, there being 45
votes for it.

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole,
when

Mr. W. SMITH said, he did not propose to fill up the blank at that time.
If the resolution was agreed to, the sum could be put in when the bill
came into the House. He himself should not think of proposing to fill
the blank with more than 15,000 dollars. This, it was true, was but a
small sum, but it would afford relief to the poorer class of sufferers,
and others could not expect to receive the amount of their losses. He
should move that the committee might rise and report the resolution.

Mr. HARTLEY called for the reading of the act allowing relief to the
sufferers by fire at St. Domingo. [It was read. It allowed 15,000
dollars for their relief, which sum was to be charged to the French
Republic, and if not allowed in six months, the relief was to be stopped
after that time.]

Mr. MACON wished the act allowing a sum of money to the daughters of
Count de Grasse to be read also. He did not think either of them in
point. The sufferings of the people of Savannah were doubtless very
great; no one could help feeling for them. But he wished gentlemen to
put their finger upon that part of the constitution which gave that
House power to afford them relief. Many other towns had suffered very
considerably by fire. He believed he knew one that had suffered more
than Savannah in proportion to its size: he alluded to Lexington in
Virginia, as every house in the place was burnt. If the United States
were to become underwriters to the whole Union, where must the line be
drawn when their assistance might be claimed? Was it when three-fourths
or four-fifths of a town was destroyed, or what other proportion?
Insurance offices were the proper securities against fire. If the
Government were to come forward in one instance, it must come forward in
all, since every sufferer's claim stood upon the same footing. The sum
which had been given to the sufferers at St. Domingo was to be charged
to the French Republic, and that given to Count de Grasse's daughters
was in consideration of their father's services. But New York had as
great right to come forward and expect relief as Savannah. He felt for
the sufferers in all these cases, but he felt as tenderly for the
constitution; he had examined it, and it did not authorize any such
grant. He should, therefore, be very unwilling to act contrary to it.

Mr. RUTHERFORD said, he felt a great deal of force on what gentlemen had
said. There were two circumstances which were perfectly conclusive in
his mind. He saw it our duty to grant relief from humanity and from
policy. Savannah was a city of a minor, helpless State; it was a very
young State, yet it was a part of the Union, and as such, was as much
entitled to protection as any State under such a direct misfortune; and
it became Congress to alleviate their great distress. They have lost
much; they have, many of them, lost their all. To say we will not assist
to relieve, when almost every State in the Union is putting their
shoulders to support these people's burden, is wrong. The State of
Pennsylvania has done itself immortal honor in the relief it has
afforded, and shall we not help to support this part of the family in
their distress? This State is a branch of the great family of the Union;
it would be, in my idea, extremely inconsistent to neglect them. He
hoped the motion would be adopted, and he hoped it would never be said
that the General Government refused to provide help in such a poignant
distress occurring in one of its principal towns.

Mr. HARTLEY said, that the gentleman from North Carolina (Mr. MACON) had
voted against both of the bills which had been referred to. He knew no
difference between the Constitution of the United States and that of
Pennsylvania, yet a vote in their House had been carried unanimously. He
thought the law for the relief of the sufferers of St. Domingo perfectly
in point; for, notwithstanding what was said about negotiation, the
distress of those people had consumed all the money before the six
months were expired. If ever there was a case in which they could grant
relief, this was one. The losses at New York and Charleston would bear
no comparison with that of Savannah; they were rich and flourishing
places, whilst Savannah was a small city of a new State, and the
sufferers generally poor. He hoped, therefore, the resolution would be
agreed to.

Mr. MOORE said, the laws which had been adduced as precedents were not
in point; for the one sum we were to have credit with the French
Republic, and the other was in consideration of past services. The
distress of the people of Savannah was not an object of legislation;
every individual citizen could, if he pleased, show his individual
humanity by subscribing to their relief; but it was not constitutional
for them to afford relief from the Treasury. If, however, the principle
was adopted, it should be general. Every sufferer had an equal claim.
Lexington, in Virginia, contained only one hundred houses, and all
except two had been destroyed by fire. He should therefore move to add
Lexington to Savannah in the resolution before them; though he would
observe, as he did not approve of the principle, he should vote against
them both.

Mr. VENABLE did not see the difference between the two cases which was
so distinguishable to the gentleman last up. Because Savannah was a
commercial city, its distress, according to that gentleman, was
indescribable, but when a like scene was exhibited in a small town, it
was no longer an object which touched his feelings. His humanity went no
where but where commerce was to be found. He asked whether the United
States might not as well lose revenue in the first instance, as put
money into the people's pockets to pay it with? Humanity was the same
every where. A person who lost his all in a village, felt the misfortune
as heavily as he who had a like loss in a city, and perhaps more so,
since the citizen would have a better opportunity by means of commerce
of retrieving his loss. He was against the general principle, as he
believed, if acted upon, it would bring such claims upon the Treasury as
it would not be able to answer.

Mr. MURRAY thought the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. VENABLE) carried his
idea of relief too far. He had no idea that that House, or any
Legislature, could undertake to make good individual misfortunes. He was
of opinion that the lines which separated individual from national
cases, were very observable; the one was happening every day, the other
seldom occurred. When a large town is burnt down, and that town is an
important Southern frontier town, it is surely a national calamity, and
has a claim upon the humanity of the country. It was true, the claim was
not of such a nature as to be brought into a Court of Justice, but it
was a calamity in which the whole nation sympathized. It was not only a
claim upon the humanity of the nation, but also upon its policy, as, by
restoring it to its former situation, it would be able to bear its
wonted part in contributing to the revenue of the country, and would
continue to carry population, arts, and wealth to that distant part of
the Union. In case of war, Savannah was a most important place. It was
necessary the Union should have a town in that situation, and he could
not consider any money which might now be advanced as given away, but as
lent to that town, which might enable it, in a few years, to resume its
former situation, whilst the withholding of it might prevent its ever
rising from its present ruins.

Mr. KITCHELL was opposed to the amendment and to the resolution itself.
He had doubts if even they were to give the citizens 15,000 dollars, as
was proposed by the gentleman from South Carolina, whether they should
not, instead of service, be doing them an injury; because, if the
General Government were only to give this sum, the State Legislatures
would proportion their donations accordingly, and probably give much
less than they would otherwise have done, if they had not had this
example before them. He had doubts as to the constitutionality of the
measure; he thought the constitution did not authorize them to make such
use of public money; however, he thought it might be a very flexible
instrument; it would bend to every situation, and every situation to
that. He thought, in this instance, if we grant money, while we attempt
to serve, we shall eventually injure. As to what the gentleman from
Virginia says of Lexington, Mr. K. thought it had been fully relieved;
however he should vote against both propositions.

Mr. PAGE said, that he was sorry that his colleague had made this
amendment, as he had done it with a view to defeat the original
resolution. If humanity alone were to direct his vote upon this
question, and if the amendment had been proposed more early and singly,
he might have voted for it. But that not being the case, it, as well as
motives of general policy, influenced him in favor of the original
motion. He had reasons which could not apply to the amendment. He should
vote against it. He was bound by order to confine himself to the single
question before the committee. This is, Shall the amendment be received
or not? He declared it as his opinion that the case of Lexington ought
not to be connected with that of Savannah, which had been, as stated by
the member from South Carolina, materially different. He was restrained
by order from entering into the merits of the original resolution, but
he thought that he had a right to hint at the motive of policy which
would apply to the resolution, and not to the amendment. This was, that
Savannah being an important place, it would be wise and politic to
prevent its revival from being owing to any other aid than that of the
General Government of the United States. It ought not to be under
obligations to individuals, or single States, and much less to a foreign
power.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped the amendment would not prevail. If the loss of the
people at Lexington had been greater than they could support, they would
doubtless have applied to the Legislature of Virginia, but he had not
heard of any such application having been made. He agreed with the
gentleman last up, that the General Government ought to relieve
distresses of this kind.

Mr. MURRAY inquired when the fire happened at Lexington?

Mr. MOORE answered, about nine months ago. He thought it was the duty of
the United States first to pay the claims which were made upon them by
distressed soldiers and others for past services, who were denied
justice because they had passed an act of limitation. If they were to
act from generosity, he said that generosity ought to be extended
universally. It was a new doctrine that because a sufferer by fire did
not live in a commercial city he was not equally entitled to relief with
the inhabitants of a city, and that though such persons were called upon
to contribute to the losses of others, they could have no redress for
their own. This seemed as if favorite spots were to be selected upon
which special favor was to be shown. He was opposed to all such
humanity.

Mr. CLAIBORNE was against the amendment, but he hoped the resolution
would be agreed to. He was sorry any gentleman should propose an
amendment like this, purposely to defeat a motion which would tend to
relieve such sufferers as those of Georgia must be. He was not certain
whether he could vote upon constitutional grounds or not. It was a sharp
conflict between humanity to that suffering country and the
constitution. If any case could be admissible, he thought this could; it
ought to be remembered, that that part of the Union has suffered much.
Georgia was a slaughter-pen during the war, besides being continually
harassed by the hostile Indians. He thought 15,000 dollars would not be
ill-spent, as from motives of policy it would be of more advantage to
the United States from the quick return the revenue would gain. Indeed,
if constitutional, he hoped the sum would be made more than proposed.
These are your fellow-citizens who are suffering, and if not speedily
relieved, the whole interest will be involved. If in order, he would
vote that the committee rise, to enable him and, perhaps, many others,
to consult whether relief could be constitutionally granted? He said he
felt a great propensity to do it.

The question was put on the amendment and negatived--there being only 26
in favor of it.

Mr. BALDWIN said, he had doubted whether to make any observations on
this motion; not that he was insensible to the calamitous situation
which had been the cause of it, but from an apprehension that it might
be thought he was too strongly affected by it. Though it might be
disagreeable to one to give his judgment and urge his opinions, when his
own relation to the question was different from that of others, yet some
of the reflections might not be useless to those who were to determine
it. He was sure it was not a want of disposition to relieve the unhappy
sufferers that had or would draw forth an observation on this occasion,
but merely doubts as to the powers of the Federal Government in money
matters. The use of a written constitution, and of that provision in it
which declared that no money should be drawn from the Treasury but under
appropriations made by law, was very manifest from the caution which it
gave in the expenditure of public money and in laying burdens on the
people; yet he believed it impossible to obtain absolute directions from
it in every case. The objection is, that Congress is empowered to raise
money only to pay the debts and to provide for the common defence, and
the other purposes, exactly as specified in the 8th section. The
objection has often been made, but many laws have passed not exactly
specified in that section. He mentioned the private acts before alluded
to, the law for establishing light-houses, to aid navigation in the
improvement of harbors, beacons, buoys, and public piers, establishing
trading-houses with the Indians, and some others, to show that though
the constitution was very useful in giving general directions, yet it
was not capable of being administered under so rigorous and mechanical a
construction as had been sometimes contended for.

Mr. GILES said, if the present resolution passed it would make them
answerable for all future losses by fire. The small sum of $15,000 was
not of any consequence when compared with the establishment of a
principle of that House acting upon generosity. He believed that
neither the money nor humanity, but the establishment of the principle,
was the thing aimed at. The unanimity with which a resolution had passed
the Pennsylvania Legislature, was a proof that they believed they had
the power to pass such a law. It was said the General Government
possessed the authority. The gentleman from Georgia had said that
"affairs of men" made it necessary to depart from the strict
constitutional power. For his part, he did not think they ought to
attend to what "the affairs of men" or what generosity and humanity
required, but what the constitution and their duty required.

The authority of that House, he said, was specified, beyond which they
ought not to go. This was a principle not within the constitution, but
opposed to it.

There had, he said, been several cases introduced. That of the sufferers
of St. Domingo was not a case in point. They looked for a reimbursement
of the money. He believed it had been repaid. And when the daughters of
the Count de Grasse had $4,000 given them, it was thought to be
necessary to introduce their father's services as a consideration. His
feelings, he said, were not less alive to the calls of humanity than
those of other gentlemen; but, by granting the money required, they
should go beyond their powers, and do more real injury than good.

Mr. CLAIBORNE said, the more he heard, the more he found himself in
favor of the resolution. By the discussion it had undergone, he was
inclined to think it was, perhaps, reconcilable with the constitution;
perhaps it was, he said, for he was not certain. The annual revenue, he
said, of that place, was seventy thousand dollars to the United States,
besides the great consideration of it as a frontier town. He had
compared the advantages and disadvantages with respect to its relief in
his own mind, and thought it would be highly consistent with policy to
grant relief. It was a place which had been in great distress, and had
great struggles with enemies in times past. Can it be possible to
suppose that we have not power to assist in erecting that place again,
and putting it upon a footing to do good to the United States by a
return of her revenue? Certainly not. Would the committee be willing
that Savannah should be erased from the revenue? Are they willing to let
it rest, and lose it? This is impossible. Then, surely, it becomes
policy to give aid towards its re-erection. Unless the people do receive
some aid, it will be a long time before seventy thousand dollars will be
again produced from the revenue of that place.

The committee then rose and reported their disagreement, when the House
took it up.

The question was then taken, and the yeas and nays demanded, "that the
House do agree with the Committee of the whole House in their
disagreement to the motion," and resolved in the affirmative--yeas 55,
nays 24, as follows:

      YEAS.--Theodorus Bailey, David Bard, Thomas Blount,
      Theophilus Bradbury, Richard Brent, Samuel J. Cabell,
      Gabriel Christie, John Clopton, Joshua Coit, Isaac Coles,
      James Davenport, George Dent, Abiel Foster, Jesse Franklin,
      Nathaniel Freeman, jr., Ezekiel Gilbert, William B. Giles,
      James Gillespie, Nicholas Gilman, Chauncey Goodrich,
      Christopher Greenup, Roger Griswold, William B. Grove,
      Carter B. Harrison, John Hathorn, Jonathan N. Havens, James
      Holland, Andrew Jackson, George Jackson, Aaron Kitchell,
      John Wilkes Kittera, Edward Livingston, Samuel Lyman,
      William Lyman, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel Macon, Andrew
      Moore, Anthony New, John Nicholas, Josiah Parker, Francis
      Preston, John Read, Samuel Sewall, Nathaniel Smith, Israel
      Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., William Strudwick, John
      Swanwick, Zephaniah Swift, Richard Thomas, Philip Van
      Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, Peleg
      Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, Dempsey Burges, Thomas Claiborne,
      William Craik, George Ege, Dwight Foster, Henry Glenn,
      Andrew Gregg, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley,
      William Hindman, Francis Malbone, John Milledge, Frederick
      A. Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray, John Page, Elisha R.
      Potter, John Richards, Robert Rutherford, John S.
      Sherburne, Samuel Sitgreaves, Jeremiah Smith, Isaac Smith,
      and William Smith.


THURSDAY, December 29.

GEORGE HANCOCK, from Virginia, appeared, and took his seat.

_Canadian Refugees._

Mr. WILLIAMS moved for the order of the day, that the House resolve
itself into a committee on the reports of committees to whom were
referred the petitions of sundry refugees from Canada and Nova Scotia.

The first resolution read from the last report of the select committee
on this subject, was in these words:

      "_Resolved_, That the prayer of the Petitioners, Joseph
      Green and others, from Canada, praying a bounty in lands
      and other pay, for services rendered in the late war with
      Great Britain, ought not to be granted."

This resolution was agreed to. The second was thus:

      "_Resolved_, That a tract of land, not exceeding ----
      acres, be laid off north-west of the Ohio River, beginning
      at the mouth of the Great Miami, and extending down the
      Ohio, not exceeding three times the breadth in length, be
      immediately appropriated to compensate the refugees from
      the British provinces of Canada and Nova Scotia, pursuant
      to the resolves of Congress of the 23d of April, 1783, and
      the 13th April, 1785."

Mr. WILLIAMS hoped the situation of the land would not be mentioned in
the resolution; there were many circumstances that would render it
unnecessary and improper.

Mr. HARTLEY wished to know where the land was to be, because the value
of the land in different places was various; he thought they ought to
have land: he would not be thought to object to the resolution.

Mr. VENABLE did not think it necessary to mention at this time what land
should be appropriated for this purpose. A bill would be introduced in a
few days, it could then be determined. If there were objections to
appropriate the land mentioned, he hoped gentlemen would then propose a
spot that would suit every conveniency better. These people, he said,
ought to be satisfied: it was time they were.

Mr. DAYTON said, that the Chairman of the committee said there was no
land near Lake Erie of that description belonging to the United States;
he wished to know what foundation the assertion had?

Mr. GREENUP said, the committee had made what inquiry they could on the
subject, of persons well informed, who told them there was no land
belonging to the United States of that description.

Mr. SITGREAVES would vote for striking out the clause as it stood, not
from any knowledge he had on the justice of the claims, but, if just,
satisfaction should be given. The committee had not reported as to the
value of land necessary to be given; the value of land was proportioned
to its different qualities and location; he thought it would be as well
for these people, to give them military land warrants, and let them
locate by lot: this had heretofore been the method, and he thought it
would be as advantageous to them as any, and avoid many difficulties
with respect to the grant.

Mr. MACON hoped the question would be divided; he liked the proposition
of the gentleman last up, to strike out, and insert the words proposed;
he therefore would wish the committee to rise, and report progress; or,
if the House do not adopt the substitute, he hoped it would be
recommitted.

Mr. DAYTON moved to strike out the words relative to location, and
substitute the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That provision ought to be made by law for
      granting donations of land to Canadian and Nova Scotia
      refugees, in conformity to the resolves of Congress of the
      23d of April, 1783, and the 13th of April, 1785."

This resolution was adopted.

The third was--

      "_Resolved_, That five hundred acres of land be granted to
      each refugee from Canada and Nova Scotia."

This resolution was attended with three explanatory restrictions. It
passed, and the Chairman read the first of these rules, which was, "that
the applicant shall make proof, before some Court of record, of his
actual residence in one of the provinces aforesaid, previous to the ----
day of ----."

Mr. GREENUP supposed this was meant merely as the outlines of a plan to
be completed when the bill was brought in; at this time it was necessary
that instruction should be given to the committee that they may bring in
a bill consistent with the will of the House.

Mr. DAYTON objected to this, and the two following clauses. He objected
also to the resolution for an indiscriminate grant of five hundred acres
of land to each refugee. Some of these people would be found to deserve
more and some less, in proportion to their exertion and sufferings. Some
might have lost large property, or have had large families. If Mr.
DAYTON had observed what the committee were doing, he would have
objected to the passing of that clause. He likewise opposed the present
one. This clause and the remaining two were negatived.

The Committee of the Whole then rose. The Chairman reported progress.
The House took up the report. The first resolution and the second, as
altered in the committee, were agreed to.

The question on the third resolution was then put.

Mr. MACON thought that it would be exceedingly improper to grant an
equal quantity to each; it ought to be entirely circumstantial.

Mr. GREENUP was of the same opinion; he said some of these people had
suffered more than others. The circumstances of some were such that they
were in irons, in close confinement twelve or fourteen months, many of
them had the warrant signed for their execution, and a variety of
cruelties were exercised: these distresses required consideration.

Mr. BALDWIN hoped it would be struck out; the House should not go into
particulars of the quantity to be given, or the circumstances of the
persons; he had seen great difficulty attending these specifications. He
did not like this loose way of doing business; they need not open land
offices for that purpose; some way would be found out to give the people
satisfaction.

Mr. WILLIAMS hoped the committee would not be restricted.

The question on the third resolution was then put, and lost.

A committee was then appointed of Messrs. GILMAN, WILLIAMS, and GREENUP,
with instructions to bring in a bill pursuant to the resolutions as
amended.


_Kidnapping Negroes._

Mr. SWANWICK called the order of the day on a report of the Committee of
Commerce and Manufactures, made the last session, on a memorial from the
State of Delaware, respecting the kidnapping of negroes and mulattoes.
The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the subject.

Mr. SWANWICK said, that there was a mischievous practice in use of
carrying these people away from the place of their residence, by masters
of vessels, and selling them in other parts. The plan of the committee
was to get instructions from the House to bring in a bill making it
necessary for every master of a vessel to have a certificate of the
number and situation of any negroes or mulattoes he may have on board.
He hoped the measure would not at all be opposed, as it only prevented
thefts in this case.

Mr. COIT wished to know whether it was necessary for the United States
to intermeddle with this? He wished the report had been more
satisfactory, and stated the principles upon which it was formed with
more precision. The evil, he doubted not, existed, but the law might
create a greater evil than that it was intended to cure. It appeared to
him that the laws in the several States were fully adequate to the
subject without further provision; he was not ready to give a vote on it
either way at present.

Mr. SWANWICK said, the report was grounded on an application from the
Legislature of Delaware. [Mr. S. here read the memorial from that State
to Congress.] The practice, he said, was very injurious and dangerous to
that State, and he hoped a remedy would be attempted, as it was in the
power of Congress to provide one by this method; some of the States had
made an attempt to remedy this evil, but their laws were broken with
impunity. If the resolution of the committee passed, he should move that
the committee bring in a bill in pursuance thereto.

Mr. SWANWICK said, the laws of the different States forbade the stealing
of negroes; but they had no remedy that would take effect out of their
own State: and although each had effect in their own State, yet they had
no power on the water. The intention of the present measure was to
oblige masters of vessels, when they cleared out of any ports in the
Delaware, when they took any negro or mulatto on board, to have a
certificate of their being free. The situation of the State of Delaware,
communicating with both the Delaware and Chesapeake, was, in this
respect, particularly exposed to insult and injury; but this remedy, he
thought, would be effectual. The gentleman last up wished the committee
to rise, in order to recommit it: he should vote for it if the gentleman
was willing to add, "to bring in a bill." The gentleman was in the
committee, if he had stated his objections there, it might have saved
time.

Mr. MURRAY wished to know what was fully meant by the idea of preventing
kidnapping. He confessed he did not rightly understand the meaning of
the word. Was the intention of the committee to have reference to the
taking of free negroes and selling them as slaves, or the taking slaves
to make them free?

Mr. SWANWICK said it was intended to prevent both evils. It was intended
to prevent their being stolen from their masters; and, also, to prevent
the power of the master taking them to the other States to sell them.
This measure, he thought, would prevent both. The State of Maryland had
taken measures to prevent it themselves; they had made it a heavy
penalty to take a negro out of the State; but that is not effectual to
prevent the evil now complained of. This was meant to prevent the
practice of examining ships before they sailed and when they arrived.

Mr. W. SMITH wished the committee to rise; not with a view of
recommitting the report, but to get rid of the business altogether. The
subject, he said, involved many serious questions; it required very
serious consideration, and he wished it had never come up. It was a
question with him how far Congress had a right to meddle with it at all.
He felt alarmed on the subject as brought from that State. He considered
it as a kind of entering-wedge, as a gentleman had lately said, on
another occasion. It was altogether a municipal regulation, and not at
all connected with trade or commerce, and therefore ought to be left to
the State Legislatures to settle. He did not think the constitution
allowed that House to act in it.

Gentlemen had said, that the laws of the States took no effect on the
waters. This, he thought, was founded on a mistake. The laws of the
States could prevent robbery on water as well as on land, if within the
jurisdiction of the United States. He hoped the committee would rise,
and dismiss the subject.

Mr. ISAAC SMITH thought the gentleman knew not the proper meaning of the
report. It was not to make a law against stealing merely, but against
its being done successfully; many instances, he said, had occurred,
where they had been hid many days on board the ships and taken away in
the night to the West Indies, and other parts of the world to sell them.
It was impossible that the existing laws of the States should prevent
this fraudulent practice: the intent of this law was to prevent this
practice; by being examined, and forced to take certificates along with
them, it could not be easily done. The particulars of the remedy would
be more readily seen when the bill was brought in; it would explain
itself; it then might be modified, altered, or rejected altogether. He
thought it could give no offence or cause of alarm to any gentleman; and
he was sure it was no way contrary to the constitution.

Mr. MACON wished the committee to rise, and not have leave to sit again.
He began to see more of the impropriety of the measure than before, and
for the same reasons as the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. SMITH.)

Mr. SWANWICK said, this House had ascertained a certain proof, by which
our seamen are known, by giving them a certificate of their citizenship,
specifying their person and freedom, which had operated against
impressment: and was it not equally necessary, and would it not be
equally competent, to protect a man from injuries to which his color has
exposed him? Our unfortunate negroes and mulattoes are exposed by their
color to much insult. In some places, he said, they were so exposed,
that color alone was evidence of slavery. He would not enter into the
question, whether all ought to be free, because it was not immediately
before the House; but if these people were black or white, if free, they
ought to be protected in the enjoyment of their freedom, not only by
State Legislatures but by the General Government.

Mr. MURRAY did not expect to have raised the sensibility of the
gentleman last up. It really arose from his ignorance, he said. He
wished to know the origin of the matter; he did not know whether it had
originated in a memorial, or whether it came from the humanity of some
patriotic member, unsolicited. Great and manifold evils did exist in
this point; he meant to make a motion on the subject, as Maryland felt
heavily from the practice. He confessed he was not sufficiently
acquainted with the English language to know the proper meaning of the
word _kidnapping_; he therefore wished to know if it extended to the
object he had in view. He declared he did not wish to encourage the
harboring of negroes; far from it; he wished to prevent it. He did not
think the law extended far enough on that point; at present, negroes,
through the influence of their own minds, or the insinuations of others,
or both, frequently leave their masters, and are harbored by other
persons. The law takes no notice of this, except it can be proved that
the negro is some person's property, and has absconded: this is very
difficult to prove; therefore great evils attend its lenity. 'Tis true,
if it can be proved that the negro has absconded and was harbored, there
was a very heavy penalty inflicted; but, he said, this was difficult to
prove. This, he owned, was his _insinuation_, as the gentleman termed
it; and upon this subject he meant to claim the attention of the House.
This evil, he said, might arise from the false philosophy and misplaced
philanthropy of the advocates of emancipation. He was ever willing to
give the question a fair trial, and thought himself bound to thank the
gentleman for his extreme benevolence in advocating it.

Mr. SWANWICK, to satisfy the gentleman from Maryland, told him, that the
subject came before the House from the State of Delaware.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he did not know how far the committee should go, he
should not vote for the matter to go into the committee. He said, it was
that kind of business which, by the constitution, was to be left to the
different States, he could not agree to the subject going any further.
The observations of the gentleman from Pennsylvania had convinced him
that that House ought not to interfere with the individual States on the
subject; the interests and policy of the different States were so
various, that it would be a dangerous thing to meddle with. He thought
it an improper question for discussion; he conceived it would be sound
policy not to touch it in that House. The gentleman had gone too far to
make use of the word _emancipation_. He feared lest the use of it should
spread an alarm through some of the States. It might imperceptibly lead
from step to step till it ends in mischief.

Mr. NICHOLAS hoped the business would not be dismissed. We, said Mr. N.,
who reside in the Southern States, are unfortunately possessed of such a
kind of property as has a considerable odium attached to it; but, if we
unfortunately hold slaves, we ought not to contribute to the making
slaves of free men, but I would wish to establish them in their freedom.
If we can give relief as the thing exists, let it be; by all means do
it, whether it incur the pleasure or displeasure of some of the
slaveholders. He hoped the subject would have full investigation.

The question was then put for the committee to rise. Fifty-four members
rising in the affirmative, it was carried.

Mr. SITGREAVES then moved for the Committee of the Whole to be
discharged from the further consideration of the report; this, he said,
was in order to make way for another motion to refer it back to the
committee, to report by bill or otherwise.

The question was put, and the committee discharged.

Mr. SWANWICK moved that the business be recommitted to the Committee of
Commerce and Manufactures, to report by bill or otherwise.

Mr. COIT wished the subject to be postponed for further consideration
before it was sent to the committee. He had doubts as to the propriety
of sending it at all. He thought it had not had that discussion a
subject so important required.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he believed this was the first time it was considered
in the House. It had been tried in a committee but never taken up by the
House, and now gentlemen wished to send it back to the committee, with
instructions to bring in a bill. The Committee of Commerce and
Manufactures was considerably deranged since last session, when this
business came before them; many new members were added, and it required
more information before it could come to the conclusion prescribed.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, if any one good purpose could be derived to the
House or to the gentlemen, he would not oppose it; but he was at a loss
to know what good object could be attained by a delay. With respect to
what had been said by the gentleman, (Mr. SMITH,) that the committee
were forced to bring in a bill, he was surprised that such an idea
should be formed. If that committee report a bill, this House is not
even pledged to pass it. When the subject is sent to the committee with
that instruction, can it be conceived that committee is forced to report
a bill? There is no such thing intended nor included in the words, as
either this House should be pledged to pass a bill, or that the
committee should report one. The object is, that the House, through the
medium of the committee, should have a plan prepared for their
consideration, and the word "otherwise" leaves the committee to exercise
its own discretion as to the report.

The gentleman from Connecticut, with a prudence and consistency highly
becoming, wishes time to think on the subject. But how is that gentleman
to have foundation for his reflections until a bill is drawn? Mr. S. did
not know what were the resources of that gentleman's mind, but for
himself, he must own that in all the attitudes in which this subject
had presented itself, he could not distinctly see the plan. One
gentleman had said there was no remedy the United States could apply but
what was incompatible with the laws of the individual States. Mr. S.
presumed that until he saw the mode to be adopted, he could not say
whether it was easy or difficult. On the whole, he thought to postpone
the subject could answer no good end, while it might delay the object,
and do injury.

Mr. COIT said, very probably the resources of his mind may not be equal
to that gentleman's, he therefore wished the subject to be delayed that
he might have time to get into the knowledge of the business.

Mr. COIT'S motion for postponement was then put and carried--yeas 46,
nays 30.


_Hugh Lawson White._

Mr. BLOUNT then called for the order of the day on the report of the
Secretary of War on the petition of Hugh Lawson White, a soldier under
General Sevier, against the Indians. The House accordingly resolved
itself into a Committee of the Whole.

The following report from the Committee of Claims was then read:

      That the claim set forth in the said petition, is intended
      to establish a principle that will apply to the whole of
      the militia which were called out under Brigadier General
      Sevier, in 1793, to act offensively against certain Indians
      south-west of the Ohio.

      That the expedition against these Indians, as appears from
      the muster-rolls, comprehended a period of above five
      months, or from the 22d July to 31st December, 1793.

      That it was undertaken without authority derived from the
      President, under the laws of the United States, and for the
      avowed purpose of carrying the war into the Cherokee
      country.

      That the tenor of the instructions from the Department of
      War to the Governor of the South-western Territory forbade
      offensive operations.

      Having given these facts, it may be proper to add, that it
      appears, by a recurrence to official papers, that the
      Indians had greatly perplexed and harassed by thefts and
      murders, the frontier inhabitants of Tennessee; and
      previous to the service, for which compensation is
      demanded, had shown themselves in considerable force, and
      killed at two stations (one of them within seven miles of
      Knoxville) fifteen persons, including women and children:
      that it must rest with Congress to judge how far these
      aggressions of Indians, and such other circumstances as can
      be adduced to the parties, constitute a case of imminent
      danger, or the expedition a just and necessary measure.

Mr. A. JACKSON[5] said, by a recurrence to the papers just read, he
doubted not it would appear evident, that the measures pursued on the
occasion alluded to were both just and necessary. When it was seen that
war was waged upon the State, that the knife and the tomahawk were held
over the heads of women and children, that peaceable citizens were
murdered, it was time to make resistance. Some of the assertions of the
Secretary at War, he said, were not founded in fact; particularly with
respect to the expedition being undertaken for the avowed purpose of
carrying the war into the Cherokee country; indeed they were
contradicted by a reference to General Smith's letter to the Secretary
of War. He trusted it would not be presuming too much, when he said,
from being an inhabitant of the country, he had some knowledge of this
business. From June to the end of October, he said, the militia acted
entirely on the defensive, when twelve hundred Indians came upon them
and carried their station, and threatened to carry the seat of
Government. In such a state, said Mr. J., would the Secretary (upon whom
the Executive power rested, in the absence of the Governor) have been
justified, had he not adopted the measure he did of pursuing the enemy?
He believed he would not; that the expedition was just and necessary,
and that, therefore, the claim of Mr. White ought to be granted.

He therefore proposed a resolution to the following effect:

      "_Resolved_, That General Sevier's expedition into the
      Cherokee Nation, in the year 1793, was a just and necessary
      measure, and that provision ought to be made by law for
      paying the expenses thereof."

Mr. HARPER said, this appeared to be a subject of considerable
importance; he hoped the resolution would, for the present, lie on the
table. He therefore moved that the committee rise and ask leave to sit
again.

Mr. COIT said, the report wanted some more preparation before it should
have come before the House; he would therefore move that it be referred
to the Committee of Claims; he knew of no reason against this reference,
as many reports from Heads of Departments had been so referred.

Mr. BLOUNT hoped the motion would not prevail. The expedient of
referring it to the Secretary at War was resorted to, when it first came
before the House. He hoped now it would not be deferred, but decided on.
He thought the Committee of Claims, from having once had it before the
House, knew as much of the case as they could know, and perhaps all was
included in this report.

Mr. D. FOSTER made the same observations in effect as Mr. BLOUNT.

Mr. COIT said, gentlemen had not given a shadow of a reason why it
should not be referred to that committee.

Mr. JACKSON owned he was not very well acquainted with the rules of the
House, but from the best idea he could form, it was a very circuitous
way of doing business. Why now refer it to the Committee of Claims, when
all the facts are stated in this report, he knew not. If this was the
usual mode of doing business, he hoped it would not be referred.

Mr. W. LYMAN thought, the time it was under consideration before, when
referred to the Secretary at War, was the time to have thought of
referring it to that committee; but now it was too late; now the House
had a report before it. It appeared to him a mere formality. It looks
like throwing the business out. He had not made up his mind which way he
should vote, but he thought one report was sufficient; he, therefore,
hoped it would come under consideration.

Mr. BLOUNT said, when he first presented the petition, he moved it to be
referred to the Committee of Claims; it was then rejected, and sent to
the Secretary at War.

The Committee rose, and obtained leave to sit again.


FRIDAY, December 30.

_The Chickasaw Claims._

ALEXANDER D. ORR, from Kentucky, appeared, and took his seat.

Mr. ANDREW JACKSON presented a petition of George Colbert, one of the
chiefs and warriors of the Chickasaw nation of Indians, complaining of a
non-performance of stipulations entered into in certain _talks_ held
with Governor Blount and other agents of the United States, in which
they agreed in defensive support of each other's rights; that their
nation was invaded by the red people, (the Creeks,) when they applied,
according to treaty, for aid; that their brother, James Robertson, said
he had no orders to send them any assistance; and that he must first
have orders from their father the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
However, a detachment of volunteers under the command of Colonel
Mansker, came to their aid. He asked compensation for supplies furnished
to that detachment during sixty days. He said he had applied to his
beloved friend the Secretary at War, who told him that Congress had set
apart no money out of which it could be paid; he, therefore, applied to
Congress for relief.

This petition was referred to the Committee of Claims.

_Hugh Lawson White._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
petition of Hugh Lawson White.

The resolution of Mr. ANDREW JACKSON having been read,

Mr. COIT called for the reading of the petition upon which the report
was founded. It was read.

Mr. A. JACKSON said, the rations found for the troops on this expedition
had already been paid for by the Secretary of War, and he could see no
reasonable objection to the payment of the whole expense attending the
expedition. As the troops were called out by a superior officer, they
had no right to doubt his authority. Were a contrary doctrine admitted,
it would strike at the very root of subordination. It would be saying
to soldiers, "Before you obey the command of your superior officer, you
have a right to inquire into the legality of the service upon which you
are about to be employed, and, until you are satisfied, you may refuse
to take the field." This, he believed, was a principle which could not
be acted upon. General Sevier, Mr. J. said, was bound to obey the orders
he received to undertake the expedition. The officers under him were
also obliged to obey him. They went with full confidence that the United
States would pay them, believing that they had appointed such officers
as would not call them into the field without proper authority. If even
the expedition had been unconstitutional (which he was far from
believing), it ought not to affect the soldier, since he had no choice
in the business, being obliged to obey his superior. Indeed, as the
provisions had been paid for, and as the ration and pay-rolls were
always considered a check upon each other, he hoped no objection would
be made to the resolution which he had moved.

Mr. COIT said, he had called for the reading of the petition, because he
could not see the connection between it and the resolution under
consideration. The petition prayed for recompense for the services of
the petitioner, and the men under his command, and the proper resolution
would be that the prayer of it ought or might not be granted; but,
instead of this, the resolution before them went to the whole troops
employed in General Sevier's expedition.

Mr. A. JACKSON said, by referring to the report it would be seen that
the Secretary of War had stated, that to allow the prayer of this
petition, would be to establish a principle that would apply to the
whole of the militia in that expedition. If this petitioner's claim was
a just one therefore, the present decision ought to go to the whole, as
it was unnecessary for every soldier employed in that expedition, to
apply personally to that House for compensation.

Mr. RUTHERFORD observed, that the gentleman from Tennessee had set the
matter in so fair a light that it was not necessary to say much more on
the subject; but, as he had been acquainted with the frontier from his
infancy, he would just give it as his opinion, that the expedition was a
necessary one, and that the expense ought immediately to be paid. He
hoped, therefore, the resolution would be agreed to unanimously.

Mr. HARPER was not prepared to say, without more information than he had
on the subject, that the measure was just and necessary, or the
contrary. He felt disposed to think favorably of the expedition; but he
thought the House should have further information before it came to any
resolution on the subject. They had, it was true, a letter from General
Smith, the then Secretary, but he thought this was not sufficient. He
thought it would be better to refer the report and other papers to a
select committee, with instructions to inquire into the necessity and
propriety of the expedition, and report thereon. He hoped, therefore,
the present resolution would be disagreed to, and the committee would
rise. He would then bring forward a resolution to that effect. The
Secretary of War, he said, had not gone fully into the subject; he had
given them copies of two letters, but not his opinion. He did not think
that an expedition of so important a nature, and which must involve in
it a very heavy expense, should be decided upon without further
information.

Mr. CRAIK agreed in sentiment with the gentleman from South Carolina,
(Mr. HARPER.) He said there was great difficulty in forming an opinion
from the report itself; though the Secretary of War seemed to think the
calling out of the Militia necessary, there were other expressions in
the report which appeared to convey a contrary sentiment. He referred to
the letter of General Smith, but mentioned that there were other papers.
He could not say the expedition was not necessary; but he thought
further information was desirable, and the report should be committed to
a select committee, for the purpose of gaining that information.

Mr. W. SMITH agreed with the two gentlemen last up, that further
information was necessary. The question, he said, involved a number of
important points. In the first place, a question was involved, whether,
if the expeditions was necessary, as it was not authorized by law, the
expense ought to be defrayed by the United States? By the report of the
Secretary of War, it had appeared that Congress were well apprised of
all the circumstances which rendered the expedition necessary, yet they
did not think proper to authorize it. In the letter of the Secretary of
War to Governor Blount, on the subject, was this passage:

      "If those difficulties existed while the Congress were in
      session, and which, it was conceived, they alone were
      competent to remove, they recur, in the present case, with
      still greater force; for all the information received at
      the time Congress were in session, was laid before both
      Houses, but no order was taken thereon, nor any authority
      given to the President of the United States; of consequence
      his authority remains in the same situation it did on the
      commencement of the last session. It is, indeed, a serious
      question to plunge the nation into a war with the Southern
      tribes of Indians, supported as it is said they would be."

Mr. S. also read from the report "that the expedition was undertaken
without authority," &c. The Secretary afterwards, indeed, stated, in his
report, the disagreeable situation of the country at the time, by way of
palliative; but, as Congress were possessed of these facts, and did not
authorize offensive operations, it became a nice point to determine
whether the expedition in question was justifiable. He would not say
that such a situation of things might not occur as would justify a
measure of the kind, but it was of consequence to determine whether this
was such a case, which could not be done hastily. Neither had the House
any information of the magnitude of the expense, whether it would be
two or three hundred thousand or half a million of dollars. He should,
therefore, hope the Committee of the Whole would be discharged, and that
the subject would be committed to a select committee.

Mr. MADISON saw no necessity for referring this subject to a select
committee. If it was suggested that the official information which was
before them was inaccurate, and that a more full explanation of the
situation of things was necessary, there would be some ground of
reference; but he did not find that this was the case. The Secretary of
War stated facts, and referred to documents to prove "that the Indians
had greatly perplexed and harassed, by thefts and murders, the frontier
inhabitants of Tennessee, had shown themselves in considerable force,
and killed at two stations fifteen persons." If this was a state of
facts, and it could not be doubted, the words of the constitution on the
subject were clear: "No State shall, without the consent of Congress,
lay any duty on tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war in time of peace,
enter into any agreement or compact with another State, or with a
foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such
imminent danger as will not admit of delay."[6] There could be no doubt,
therefore, Mr. M. said, but this expedition came within the meaning of
the constitution. In many cases, he said, it was difficult to determine
betwixt offensive and defensive operations, as it was sometimes
necessary, when acting on the defensive, to use an offensive measure. He
had no doubt on the subject, and thought the expense of the expedition
should, by all means, be paid.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, that he was not prepared to adopt the
resolution which was moved by the member from Tennessee, nor even to
decide finally upon it, unless he could be persuaded that the gentleman
from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) was correct in saying that the report before
them contained all the information which it was possible for them to
obtain. He was convinced that there were other official papers and
documents which would throw additional light upon the subject, and
therefore, ought to be in possession of the Committee of the Whole
before they took any decisive step. He alluded to the confidential
communications from the PRESIDENT, in December, 1792, which gave rise to
lengthy discussion, with closed galleries, upon the measures that ought
to be adopted in consequence of the hostile acts and threats of those
very south-western Indians, who were the objects of the expedition for
which they were called upon to pay. The House of Representatives then
decided that they would neither declare war against those nations of
Indians, nor authorize the PRESIDENT to carry an offensive expedition
into their country, if, in the recess of Congress, he should deem it
proper, in consequence of their continuance in hostility. As the acts of
Congress upon this very application would operate in future as a
precedent and kind of commentary on that part of the constitution which
limited the instances in which a State might levy troops and act
offensively, without the previous assent of the General Government, they
could not, Mr. D. said, be too particular in their investigation, nor
too strict in their reference to dates and facts. He hoped that the
Committee of the Whole, would be discharged, and the report of the
Secretary of War referred to a select committee, whose duty it would be
to report those facts, with their dates, which gave rise to the claim in
question, and which justified, under the provision in the constitution,
the raising of troops and carrying on an offensive war, without the
previous consent of Congress or approbation of the PRESIDENT.

Mr. NICHOLAS believed, on a reference to dates, it would be seen that
these attacks of the Indians were subsequent to those which were in the
knowledge of Congress at the time mentioned, as they took place while
Governor Blount was at Philadelphia; and he thought no further
information was necessary on the subject than the letter from General
Smith to the Secretary of War, printed with the report, to prove that
the expedition was both just and necessary. General Sevier's going into
the Cherokee country was no proof that his operations were offensive. If
other information could be obtained by referring the business to a
select committee, he should have no objection; but he believed this
would not be the case. He wished the letter of General Smith to be read.
[It was read accordingly.]

Mr. BALDWIN was not able to recollect how great a portion of the members
present were in the House when this business was brought before Congress
in the year 1792. His own recollection was fresh upon the subject. It
was a period when they were much alarmed for our Indian frontier, North
and South. The North was fortified, and it was recommended to have a
legion on the South. The gentleman from South Carolina, he recollected,
was opposed to the measure, and thought the Executive had determined too
soon upon hostility. Mr. B. said he had at that time frequent
conversations with the then Secretary of War, who informed him that he
had written to the Governor of Tennessee that, in case the pressure of
the Indians was so great as to require it, he must call out the militia.
The Governor was well known, and sufficient confidence was placed in him
that this power would not be abused. He believed the troops on the
Northern frontier had not proved sufficient, and that they had already
paid the expense of troops which were called in to their assistance. At
this period, Mr. B. said, the danger which threatened the country was
great, and it was happy for us it had been so well got over. He believed
it was well that the legion for the Southern frontier was not equipped,
though he at that time thought it necessary. The expense of the
expedition in question, he said, would be nothing compared with that
which would have taken place had the legion contemplated been equipped.
Mr. B. said, he had no doubt with respect to the propriety of paying the
expense of this expedition. He did not think the number of men was
great, or that the charge would be very heavy.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, he was inclined to believe the attacks of
the Indians, which provoked the expedition of General Sevier, were
subsequent to those in the knowledge of Congress at the time the subject
was under discussion.

He was one of those, he said, who thought that the hostile dispositions
shown by those Indians at that time called for force, and he had
introduced a resolution, by means of his colleague, to that effect. It
was not, therefore, that he did not think the expedition authorized, but
because he had a desire to have the facts relative to the subject
clearly stated, that he wished the business to be committed to a select
committee.

Mr. RUTHERFORD said, they were not particular about the manner of doing
the business, provided it was done. He was confident the expense of the
expedition ought to be paid. When the Indians were upon them, what could
the Governor do? Was he to send forward to the seat of Government to be
instructed what to do? No; resistance was necessary, and it was not
becoming in them now to say, "You did not act perfectly regular--the
thing was not exactly as it should have been." It was a critical period,
he said, and if the expenses were not paid, it might have a bad effect
in future.

Mr. KITCHELL was in favor of the committee rising. He remembered the
transactions which took place on this business, as mentioned by his
colleague, (Mr. DAYTON.) He said, he was one of those who voted against
the proposition of using hostile means, because he thought it possible
to ward off the evil. It had been warded off; but he believed there was
sufficient ground for calling out General Sevier, and he doubted not, if
the business was referred to a select committee, the result would be
satisfactory to those gentlemen who brought forward the business.

The committee rose, and leave not being granted to sit again, on motion,
the report and papers accompanying it were referred to a select
committee of Messrs. A. JACKSON, J. SMITH, BLOUNT, DENT, and HARPER.[7]


FRIDAY, January 20, 1797.

_Direct Taxes._

The House then took up the consideration of the resolution reported
yesterday by the Committee of the Whole, on the subject of further
revenue.

Mr. COIT wished for a division of the question, viz: that the
proposition for a tax on land and that for slaves should be put
separately.

Mr. SWANWICK called for the yeas and nays. They were agreed to be taken.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought the resolution should not be divided, but that the
propositions for a tax on land and a tax on slaves should go together,
as he should object to vote for the tax on land except that on slaves
accompanied it. He thought the gentleman had better try the question, by
moving to strike out what respected slaves.

Mr. MADISON thought it would be best for the two propositions to go
together; but if they did not, he did not think the embarrassments
insuperable. If the question was divided, those who thought a tax on
slaves necessary must vote for the first part; and if the second was
rejected, there would not be wanting an opportunity of voting against
the tax on land. It was necessary to observe, that it had been found
expedient to associate these two taxes together, in order to do justice,
and to conform to the established usage of a very large tract of
country, who were entitled to some degree of attention, and to whom a
tax on land, without a tax on slaves, would be very objectionable.

Mr. COIT said, he could not gratify the gentleman from Virginia by
varying his motion, as it would not answer the purpose he had in view.

Mr. NICHOLAS supposed, if the motion was persisted in, he was at liberty
to move to insert _slaves_ in the first part of the resolution. The
gentleman certainly knew his own views best; or he thought it was
possible to have settled the business he proposed.

Mr. W. SMITH saw no difficulty on the subject. Gentlemen would vote for
the first part of the resolution, in hopes that the second would pass;
but if it did not pass, they would have an opportunity of voting on the
main question, and thereby defeat the whole.

Mr. VAN CORTLANDT would vote for both together, but not separately.

Mr. GALLATIN inquired as to a point of order, whether, if the first
part of the resolution was carried, and the second negatived, the
question would not then be taken upon the resolution as amended?

The SPEAKER answered in the affirmative.

Mr. WILLIAMS said, it would save time if the question was taken upon the
whole resolution together; for if several gentlemen voted against the
first proposition, lest the last should not pass, the whole might in
this way be defeated. He thought a vote might be safely taken upon the
whole together, as no one would be bound by the vote in favor of the
bill, if he should not approve of it. For his own part, he wished to see
the plan, though he did not know that he should vote for it.

Mr. NICHOLAS supposed there was not the difficulty mentioned by the
gentleman from New York. Gentlemen would not risk the whole by voting
against the first part of the resolution; since, if the second was not
carried, they could afterwards reject the whole.

The question was then put, that the House agree to the first resolution,
viz:

      "_Resolved_, That there ought to be appropriated, according
      to the last census, on the several States, the sum of----,
      to be raised by the following direct taxes, viz:

      "A tax ad valorem, under proper regulations and exceptions,
      on all lands, with their improvements, including town lots,
      with the buildings thereon."

It was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 48, nays 39.

The second part of the resolution, relative to slaves, was about to be
put, when

Mr. GALLATIN said, before the question was taken on this division, he
would just mention why this species of personal property was brought
under view, whilst all other personal property was unnoticed.

It was very true, that stock upon a farm in the Northern and Eastern
States paid nearly as great a proportion of the taxes of those States as
the negroes did those of the Southern States, and therefore it might
seem somewhat wrong to introduce negroes in the one case and not cattle
in the other. The reason which induced the Committee of Ways and Means
to adopt this mode was, that negroes are confined to certain spots of
land in the Southern States, while horses and cattle extend nearly over
a whole country. And a land tax, unaccompanied with a tax on slaves,
would be very unpopular in those States, as it would throw too great a
burden upon farmers who did not hold slaves, and fall too lightly upon
those whose property chiefly consisted of slaves. There was this
difference betwixt the two species of property: A farmer in the Northern
or Eastern States would not think himself aggrieved by not paying a tax
upon his farming stock; but a farmer in the Southern States would think
himself aggrieved if his land was taxed, whilst the slaves of the
slaveholder were not taxed. It was on this account that this species of
property was introduced.

Mr. MURRAY was not struck with the observations of the gentleman last
up, so as to say he would ultimately vote for this species of tax; at
present, he should vote for a bill to be brought in; but unless he found
the bill could reconcile the principle more, and do greater justice in
the case than he at present conceived, he should then oppose it.

He said, he considered slaves in the Southern States as laborers, and
unless gentlemen could show him where laborers were taxed, he should not
think it right to vote for that part of the bill. He was decidedly in
favor of a land tax, but against the other part of the question. Mr. M.
said, he merely mentioned this that he might not hereafter be charged
with inconsistency, in case he should vote against the bill. He
repeated, unless provision be made for taxing labor in other parts of
the United States, he must vote against this part of the bill if brought
in, because the tax would operate very unequally.

Mr. HARPER said, though he was entirely opposed to the tax proposed by
the resolution, and should vote against the whole, yet he thought it
right that a tax on slaves should be introduced with a tax on land; for,
as this direct tax was to be raised by apportionment through the States,
whether the Southern States paid on slaves, or the Northern States on
land, made no difference in effect; each paid in its own way; one mode
was more convenient for the Northern, another for the Southern, and
another for the Eastern--no injury was done by this to any other State.

Mr. G. JACKSON said, he was against all species of direct taxation, but
particularly on this species; and, if a tax on land was carried, he
should bring forward a resolution to lay a tax upon all property vested
in public securities. He wished for the yeas and nays on this question.

The yeas and nays were agreed to be taken.

Mr. NICHOLAS wondered to hear the observation of his colleague. He
should vote for the question, though he and his constituents would be
affected by it; but, in the district which that gentleman represented,
there were no slaves; and it was therefore his constituents' interest to
have a tax on slaves, in order to lighten that on land.

Mr. G. JACKSON said, it was not so much on account of the interest of
himself or constituents that he opposed this tax, but he objected to it
as a capitation tax.

Mr. MOORE said, the situation of the Southern States had been truly
stated. In the Western parts, there were few slaves. He said, in the
representation to that House, the labor of the negroes had been
considered as five to three, with respect to white persons; therefore,
the ability of the State to pay was considered in the same proportion.
His colleague from the mountains (Mr. G. JACKSON) should consider that,
if the holders of slaves were not to pay a portion of the tax imposed on
the State of Virginia, it would fall very heavy upon his constituents,
and those of his colleague, where few blacks were kept.

He hoped, therefore, it would pass.

Mr. JEREMIAH SMITH was aware that a tax on slaves would lighten the tax
on land in the Southern States, and therefore he did not wonder at the
Representatives from those States wishing it to take place; but, by so
apportioning the tax, would not the landholders in the Southern States
pay less than the landholders in parts of the Union where no slaves were
kept? He believed they would. A person, for instance, in New Hampshire,
holding the value of £1,000 in land, would pay a larger portion of the
tax than a holder of land to the same extent in Virginia. He believed
this would be unjust, and an objection to this mode of taxing the
Southern States, as, though the tax would fall more equally on them, it
would not be so with respect to other States.

Mr. GOODRICH said, this tax was introduced into the system for the
accommodation of that part of the Union where slaves were numerous.

A disposition to render the plan as acceptable, in every part of the
country, as it could be made, consistently with the interests of the
whole, ought to prevail. But, before a tax on slaves was adopted, its
operation on the Union, and its effects, as it respected different
districts, should be considered.

A direct tax ought to fall as equally as possible every where; that on
land and houses, with their improvements, which had been agreed to,
would be laid by a valuation seldom repeated--perhaps, once in ten or
fifteen years. The expense of its assessment and collection would be
nearly equal throughout the United States; but, with respect to a tax on
slaves, there would be required frequent enumerations--at least an
annual enumeration. This would be attended with considerable expense, to
be defrayed, not by the particular districts, for whose benefit this
species of tax was introduced, but by the United States.

There was another objection. A land tax was certain--it might, and
undoubtedly would, be made a lien on the real estate on which it was
laid. It would, be liable to little, if any, loss. Not so with a tax on
slaves. Such a tax, he apprehended, would be uncertain, exposing the
revenue to considerable defalcations. If a provision could not be made
to place the loss on the districts where it happened, by retaxing them
it would operate unequally. He imagined a retaxation for defalcation, if
it could be made, would be considered as unjust, and create discontent
among the individuals who were subjected to it; and if that could not be
done, the deficiency must fall on the Union, and would produce
uneasiness from its partial effects. He did not know how the detail
would be arranged. He had been of the number who were desirous to see
the collection-law, before they decided on the resolution before them,
so as to have possessed the whole subject. At present, he saw so many
difficulties from incorporating this species of tax into the plan, he
could not assent to it.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he did not understand the objections of the gentleman
from New Hampshire, (Mr. J. SMITH.) He did not see how he could produce
an equal value in land in every part of the Union. The tax, he said,
would be apportioned according to the number of persons, and not
according to the number of acres in any State.

If the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. GOODRICH) would rely upon his
information, he might be assured that an annual enumeration of slaves
would not cost so much as an assessment of land made once in ten years.
With respect to the tax being uncertain, he was totally mistaken. It was
the most productive tax in the Southern States. If the tax was laid
wholly upon land, it would be laid on a great part which would be
unsaleable, and when a report came to be made of the collection, there
would be found great deficiencies; but, with respect to slaves, there
would be no failure, because they were a species of property which would
always find a ready sale in the Southern market.

Mr. S. SMITH said, he had heard much on that floor with respect to
equality of taxation. It was impossible, he said, to make taxes fall
exactly equal; they will fall, in some cases, heavier than in others. He
would state a case. When a tax on carriages was under consideration,
they found the gentlemen from Connecticut voting without scruple,
because that State paid only two or three hundred dollars annually, when
Maryland paid five thousand dollars a year to that duty. There was no
equality in this; yet those gentlemen winked at the disproportion. He
hoped they would do so in the present case.

Mr. POTTER said, if this part of the resolution was agreed to, it was to
apportion a tax on the personal property of the Southern States, which,
no doubt, they would be glad of; and if gentlemen from those States
could point out any way by which the personal property of other States
could be come at, he would agree to the present proposition; but he
believed this could not be done; and, if not, he saw no reason why the
personal property of those States should be made to bear a part of the
proposed burden, whilst personal property in other States was suffered
to go free. It was a hard case, he said, that a man who possessed three
or four hundred dollars in land, should be made to pay a portion of the
direct tax, whilst men of affluence, who possessed many thousands in
public securities, or loaned on interest, should pay nothing.

The SPEAKER reminded the House that the question was very much lost
sight of; it was not whether a tax should be laid on carriages or
personal property, but whether they would agree to the report of the
Committee of the Whole, viz: "that a tax should be laid on slaves, with
certain exceptions."

Mr. HENDERSON said, he should vote against this proposition, because it
was a direct tax, as he should vote against every question of that
kind, until every source of indirect taxation was exhausted; and he
thought this was not the case at present.

Mr. CLAIBORNE said, he thought, also, that direct taxes should not be
resorted to until indirect sources were exhausted; but he believed, they
were now exhausted, and that direct taxes were the only means left to
them of raising money. As he lived in a country which was unfortunately
_cursed_ with negroes, he wished the present motion to pass, for the
sake of making the tax bear, in some degree, equally in the Southern
States; but if he thought with his colleague (Mr. JACKSON) that a tax on
slaves bore any affinity to a capitation tax, he should also oppose it;
but he had no such idea.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he would just notice what had fallen from the
gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. GOODRICH) which was the only thing like
argument which had been used against the present proposition. As to what
had been said about the quantum of tax falling on different States, or
what had been said by the gentleman from Rhode Island (Mr. POTTER) with
respect to the personal property of the Eastern States, he did not see
how it applied to the present question. If the proposed tax was certain,
and the expense of collection would not be greater than would attend the
collection of the tax in other States, he did not see any objection to
it.

The gentleman from Connecticut had said, that the expense of an annual
enumeration of slaves would be great, and that it would fall upon the
United States. He would inform that gentleman and the House, that when
no assessment took place, but merely an enumeration, it would be
attended with no expense on the collection of the tax. The distinction
which he made was, when a valuation and enumeration were both necessary,
and when an enumeration alone was necessary. In the first instance, the
value of the property was to be ascertained, and the tax laid
accordingly; but where an enumeration was only wanted, (the tax per
head, according to age, &c., having been settled,) no expense would be
incurred.

Mr. G. said, he spoke from experience. In Pennsylvania there was a
certain tax on personal property, the taking an account of which did not
increase the expense. Every three years there was an assessment of
personal property, amongst which was slaves; but the enumeration was
managed in this way: the collector called twice upon persons--the first
time he gave them notice to pay, and took an account of their property,
which, consisting of few articles, and the value being already fixed, he
could tell them at the time, the amount to be paid at his next call.

As to any degree of uncertainty apprehended from this tax, that might be
removed by throwing the deficiency, if there should be any, upon the
land. He thought, therefore, the objections which had been urged against
this tax would be completely obviated.

Mr. COIT allowed, that nothing was more clear than that the manner in
which the Southern States paid their apportionment of the proposed
burden, could make no difference to the Northern and Eastern States; but
the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) allowed there was some
weight in the objections, with respect to the assessment and collection
of the tax.

If he understood that gentleman, he said that the making an enumeration
of slaves would make no difference in the expense. He did not know how
this could be. If two objects were to do, viz: to value and assess the
land, and to enumerate and value the slave, it was new doctrine to him,
if these two things would not cost more than if only one had been done;
or, if this business would be done for nothing, it would be one of the
first things the United States had had done upon those terms.

Upon the collection, there would also be an additional expense and a
probability of loss; the more detail there was in the business, the
greater liability to error and loss to the United States; and in
proportion to this loss would these States pay less than others.

Mr. HARTLEY said, he should at present vote for the proposition; but
should feel himself at liberty to vote differently on the bill, if he
did not approve it. Difficulties arose in his mind as to the propriety
of taxing personal property in one State and not in another, by which
means a bounty seemed to be given on land in the Southern States to the
amount of the difference of the taxes between the land in those States,
and that in other States, upon which purchasers would naturally
calculate. This difficulty might probably be removed from his mind; and,
therefore, in order to give the whole of the business a fair chance, he
should wish the resolutions to go back to the Committee of Ways and
Means, to bring in a bill.

Mr. PAGE did suppose that gentlemen coming from States which were in the
habit of collecting direct taxes, would have endeavored to accommodate
the business to the situation and circumstances of different States, so
as to make the system the most convenient to each. He did suppose that,
whenever it should have been determined to enter upon direct taxation,
that sums would have been apportioned to each State, and that they would
have been left to themselves to have raised the money in the way which
they thought most convenient. Insuperable objections, however, it
seemed, had been found against this system, as appeared from the report
of the Secretary of the Treasury; but it was unreasonable that the
Northern States should complain that the Southern States would pay the
tax with greater facility than them. They might, he said, as well
complain against the richness of their soil, or the warmness of their
climate.

With respect to the tax falling lighter on them than on other States,
those who held slaves would find it lighter, but those who had none,
would not. But he thought it extraordinary that, whilst they were
upbraided with holding a species of property peculiar to their country,
they should also be upbraided with wishing to pay a duty upon that
property.

Mr. P. said, he did not see what difference it could make to other
States, that they raised a part of the tax required of them from slaves.
The Secretary of the Treasury had recommended this mode, the Committee
of Ways and Means had reported accordingly; and they were ready to pay a
tax for their slaves, in addition to the expense they were at for them
already; for, it should be recollected, persons holding slaves,
contribute largely to the duties collected from imposts, by the purchase
of flannels and cloth, rum, molasses, &c., necessary for their food and
clothing.

If a person living in a State where slavery did not exist, paid
something more for his land, the difference was certainly not equal to
the satisfaction he must enjoy in reflecting, that his State was free
from that evil. His land, on that account, would be worth three times as
much as land of the same quality in the Southern States. Why, then, do
gentlemen complain? The Southern States themselves might have objected
to this tax; they might have doubted the constitutionality of it;
indeed, he did doubt it, but he had agreed to it; and he believed there
was no better way of making the tax go down in those States, than by the
present measure.

For his own part, Mr. P. said, he wished he lived where there was no
slavery; and if he could find a climate he liked as well, he would
change his situation on that account.

Mr. BRENT said, it was a very extraordinary thing that gentlemen who
represented States where there were no slaves, should oppose a tax on
that species of property, and that the Southern States where slavery
existed, should be advocating that tax.

By the report of the Secretary of the Treasury, there appeared a
deficiency of revenue, and in order to supply that deficiency, they had
determined to have recourse to direct taxation; and, after the amount
which each State ought to furnish, had been ascertained, he thought it
should have been left to the different States to have raised the money
from such funds as they judged best, provided they had been secure.
This, he thought, would only have been liberal and proper. It had,
however, been determined otherwise; but, from a knowledge that, by
introducing land and slaves together, as objects of taxation, the tax
would be more equally levied in the Southern States, if that plan had
been adopted. And, surely, he said, it could have given no satisfaction
to any other State, that, by laying a tax on land only, it should have
operated in a very oppressive manner in some parts of the Southern
States, and scarcely have been felt at all in other parts of those
States; and yet, this would appear to be the opinion of the gentleman
from New Hampshire; for, he said, if this law passed, a person
possessing landed property in New Hampshire, of the value of £1,000,
would pay more than a landholder to that amount in the Southern States.
And was this, he asked, a subject of regret? If the State of Virginia
paid the amount required of her in a manner which bore most equally upon
the whole of her citizens, ought that to displease the citizens of other
States? He thought not. He was of opinion, that it would be a desirable
thing that the tax should be found to fall equally on the citizens of
every State.

Another objection, produced by the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr.
GOODRICH) was that a tax on this species of property would not be so
secure as a tax on land. If that gentleman had been acquainted with the
situation of the Southern States, he would have known that slaves formed
the most certain fund of those States; for, whilst their wide and
extensive waste lands would not command any price, slaves were always
ready sale. Hence it arose, that the States were not able to raise a tax
on land, whilst a tax on slaves had never failed to be productive.

With respect to the inconvenience or expense attending a tax on slaves,
in Virginia, he said, no expense would be necessary; because it was the
custom of that State to take annually, a list of their slaves, which was
regularly recorded in the archives of the State. If gentlemen were,
therefore, so economical that they would not expend a few of the public
pence to get a list of this property, let them recur to the document he
had mentioned, which might be done without expense.

To those who know the situation of the Southern States, the remarks made
by the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) must have been
irresistibly impressive. Almost the whole of the lower part of the
country possessed property of this kind, whilst the upper parts had
scarcely any. If a tax was, therefore, imposed upon land only, the upper
part of the country would be extremely aggravated, and would murmur, and
they would murmur with justice.

Gentlemen from the Eastern States called upon the Representatives of the
Southern States to point out a mode by which they might come at the
personal property of their States. But, he would ask them, if,
independent of land with its improvements, they possessed any other
species of property which could not be eluded? He believed they could
not point it out; why, then, call upon gentlemen from the Southern
States to do, what they, who certainly knew best their own resources,
were unable to do?

The gentlemen from the Southern States, he said, had discovered those
objects which they thought best able to bear the burden; and if the
Representatives of the other States were not satisfied with the tax on
land, let them come forward and say what other property they have
equally secure, upon which a tax may be laid.

It was a phenomenon, he would again say, that the Representatives of
States where slavery existed, should be contending for a tax upon
slaves, and that members from States where slavery was not tolerated,
were opposing it. He could not help believing that the real object of
gentlemen had not been avowed. It was something hidden and unseen.[8]

Mr. KITTERA said, that the opposers of this part of the resolution were
the opposers of a direct tax altogether. It was observable that those
upon whom the tax would fall, did not complain. It was extraordinary
that the complaints should come from another quarter. As to the
objections of his colleague (Mr. HARTLEY) that part of the tax being
laid on slaves in the Southern States, would affect the value of land,
it would make no difference whether the tax was on land or slaves, as it
affected land, its operation would be the same. It was therefore no
solid objection against the resolution.

On the question, that the House do agree to the last part of the said
resolution, in the words following, to wit: "A tax on slaves, with
certain exceptions;" it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 68, nays
23, as follows:

      YEAS.--Fisher Ames, Abraham Baldwin, Thomas Blount,
      Theophilus Bradbury, Richard Brent, Daniel Buck, Samuel J.
      Cabell, Gabriel Christie, Thomas Claiborne, Isaac Coles,
      William Cooper, William Craik, James Davenport, George
      Dent, George Ege, William Findlay, Abiel Foster, Jesse
      Franklin, Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Nicholas
      Gilman, Henry Glenn, Christopher Greenup, Andrew Gregg,
      William B. Grove, Wade Hampton, George Hancock, Robert
      Goodloe Harper, Carter B. Harrison, Thomas Hartley, John
      Hathorn, Jonathan N. Havens, William Hindman, James
      Holland, Andrew Jackson, John Wilkes Kittera, Matthew
      Locke, Samuel Lyman, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel Macon, James
      Madison, John Milledge, Andrew Moore, Frederick A.
      Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray, Anthony New, John
      Nicholas, Alexander D. Orr, John Page, Josiah Parker, John
      Patton, Francis Preston, Robert Rutherford, Samuel Sewall,
      Samuel Sitgreaves, Israel Smith, Isaac Smith, Samuel Smith,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, Jr., William Strudwick, John
      Swanwick, John E. Van Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Abraham
      Venable, Peleg Wadsworth, John Williams, and Richard Winn.

      NAYS.--Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Joshua Coit, Samuel W.
      Dana, Henry Dearborn, Dwight Foster, Nathaniel Freeman,
      Jr., Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Thomas Henderson,
      George Jackson, William Lyman, Francis Malbone, Elisha R.
      Potter, John Read, John S. Sherburne, Jeremiah Smith,
      Nathaniel Smith, Zephaniah Swift, George Thatcher, Richard
      Thomas, Mark Thompson, and Joseph B. Varnum.

And then the main question being taken, that the House do agree to the
resolution, as reported by the Committee of the whole House, it was
resolved in the affirmative--yeas 49, nays 39.

_Ordered_, That the Committee of Ways and Means do prepare and bring in
a bill or bills, pursuant to the said resolution.


MONDAY, January 23.

THOMPSON J. SKINNER, from Massachusetts, in place of THEODORE SEDGWICK,
appointed a Senator of the United States, appeared, produced his
credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


FRIDAY, January 27.

_Appropriations for 1797._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
subject of appropriations for the year 1797, when the article which
relates to the contingent expenses of the two branches of the
Legislature, amounting to twelve thousand dollars, being read,

Mr. BALDWIN said, he had often before made the remark, (and he thought
it not unseasonable now to repeat it,) that the House was too apt to be
merely formal and superficial in passing on the general estimate for the
year. He was sorry to observe that this item had within this year or two
been considerably increased; he believed the price of wood, stationery,
and other articles purchased for the session, was now much the same as
in 1795, though the printer's bill might be higher; yet, as the session
would be but three months, he thought the sum allowed for 1795 would be
sufficient. He had always thought this charge for the contingencies of
the two Houses, one of the strongest instances of that kind of loose
economy which it has been complained, and perhaps with too much justice,
pervades all the operations of the Federal Government--we have often
been reminded that, to make an expedition into the woods to an Indian
town, or to build a frigate, or to coin one hundred tons of copper,
costs us a great deal more than it ever did any other Government in this
country. If this is a strong instance of that style of economy, let us
begin the reformation with ourselves, and not be so prodigal this year
in our contingent expenses; our circumstances call on us for greater
attention to economy. He was sensible the place for correcting these
evils was ordinarily on passing the law authorizing the expense, and not
on the appropriation for the payment of it; but this item, and many
others, depended on no law--changing the sum in the estimate will
control the expense. If any one will take the trouble of looking over
the vouchers on which these accounts have been settled for past years,
he will see that there is room for more economy. One branch of the
Legislature consists of about thirty members--four thousand dollars is
a great sum for the purchase of their wood, quills, and paper, and for
furnishing them with copies of business under consideration. Is it
possible that twelve thousand dollars can be necessary for the two
Houses? The whole yearly expenses of some of the State Governments do
not amount to a much greater sum--he hoped this would be struck out, and
the sum which was allowed for 1795, and some preceding years, be
inserted.

Mr. SMITH presumed the estimate was founded upon information received
from the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of that House. He did not
conceive it would make any difference in the expenditure, whether a
larger or smaller sum be appropriated; as he did not suppose the Senate
or that House would print the less because a less sum was appropriated.
The gentleman, he said, might, by his speech, give an idea to the
public, that this would be a saving of so much money; but it would, in
reality, make no difference.

After a few observations from other members, the question was put and
negatived--37 to 30.

The committee then rose, and had leave to sit again. And the House
adjourned till Monday.


MONDAY, January 30.

GEORGE LEONARD, from Massachusetts, appeared, and took his seat.

_Manumitted Slaves._

      [Mr. SWANWICK presented the petition of Jacob Nicholson and
      Jupiter Nicholson, Job Albertson and Thomas Pritchet, dated
      at Philadelphia, stating that they had been the slaves of
      persons in Perquimans County, North Carolina, who had
      manumitted them, and whose surname they took--that
      afterwards they had been seized by other persons and sold
      into slavery under a law of the State--that to escape from
      this bondage they had fled to Philadelphia, where they had
      been seized under the fugitive slave act: and pray relief
      from Congress.]

The petition being read--

Mr. SWANWICK said, he hoped it would be referred to a select committee.

Mr. BLOUNT hoped it would not even be received by the House. Agreeably
to a law of the State of North Carolina, he said they were slaves, and
could, of course, be seized as such.

Mr. THATCHER thought the petition ought to be referred to the Committee
on the Fugitive Law. He conceived the gentleman much mistaken in
asserting these petitioners to be absolute slaves. They state that they
were slaves, but that their masters manumitted them, and that their
manumissions were sanctioned by a law of that State, but that a
subsequent law of the same State, subjected them to slavery; and if even
there was a law that allowed them to be taken and sold into slavery
again, he could not see any propriety in refusing their petition in
that House--THEY CERTAINLY (said Mr. T.) ARE FREE PEOPLE. It appeared
they were taken under the fugitive act, which he thought ought not to
affect them; they now came and prayed the House so to model that
fugitive act, as to prevent its affecting persons of their description.
He therefore saw great propriety in referring their petition to the
committee appointed to amend that act in another part; they could as
well consider its relation to the present case. He could not see how
there would be a propriety in rejecting their petition; they had an
undoubted right to petition the House, and to be heard.

Mr. SWANWICK was surprised at the gentleman from North Carolina (Mr.
BLOUNT) desiring to reject this petition; he could not have thought, nor
could he indulge the suspicion now, that the gentleman was so far from
acknowledging the rights of man, as to prevent any class of men from
petitioning. If men were aggrieved and conceive they have claim to
attention, petitioning was their sacred right, and that right should
never suffer innovation; whether the House ought to grant, was another
question. The subject of their petition had a claim to the attention of
the House. They state they were freed from slavery, but that they were
much injured under a law of the United States. If a law was ever made
that bore hard on any class of people, Mr. S. hoped that the door would
never be shut to their complaints. If the circumstance respecting these
people was as they stated, their case was very hard. He animadverted on
the atrocity of that reward of ten dollars offered for one of them if
taken alive, but that fifty should be given if found dead, and no
questions asked. Was not this, he said, encouragement to put a period to
that man's existence? Horrid reward! Could gentlemen hear it and not
shudder?

Mr. BLOUNT said, the gentleman last up was mistaken in calling the
petitioners free men; the laws of North Carolina, as he observed before,
did not suffer individuals to emancipate their slaves, and he should
wish to know what evidence there was to prove these men free, and except
that was proved, the House had no right to attend to the petition.

Mr. SITGREAVES, in answer to the gentleman last up, said he would
reverse his question, and ask what evidence he had to prove that these
men are not freemen; can he prove they are slaves? They have stated that
a law has been made in North Carolina with a view to affect their case,
and bring them again into a worse slavery than before; they want to know
whether they cannot obtain relief by their application to the Government
of the United States. Under these circumstances, Mr. S. wished to know
why their petitions should not be taken into consideration? Was there
any thing in these men, he asked, that should prevent every kind of
assistance being bestowed on them? Had they not an equal right to be
heard with other petitioners? He hoped the House would not only give
them a hearing, but afford them all the consolation of which their
unfortunate case was susceptible. If the House were obliged, through a
want of power to extend to the case, to object compliance with the
prayers, yet, he hoped it would be done with all due tenderness; before
hearing them, he thought it would be exceedingly unjust to decide. These
people may produce documents sufficient to obtain favorable attention;
therefore, it was impossible before they were heard to conceive whether
the House could constitutionally grant relief or not. He could see no
impropriety in referring it; the object of referring a case, was to
inquire into facts; thus, the committee prepared the way for discussion
in the House; and why the House should refuse to deliberate and discuss
this case, he knew not.

Mr. HEATH was clearly convinced these people were slaves, and therefore
hoped their petition would lie on the table. He would remind the
gentleman that, if they undertook this business, they would soon have
petitions enough of the same kind, and public business would be thereby
prevented. It appeared to him to be more within the jurisdiction of the
Legislature of that State; indeed, the United States had nothing to do
with it.

Mr. MADISON said, he should be sorry to reject any petition whatever, in
which it became the business of the House to attend; but he thought this
case had no claim on their attention. Yet, if it did not come within the
purview of the Legislative body, he thought, it might be suffered to lie
on the table. He thought it a judicial case, and could obtain its due in
a Court of Appeal in that State. If they are free by the laws of North
Carolina, they ought to apply to those laws, and have their privilege
established. If they are slaves, the constitution gives them no hope of
being heard here. A law has been passed to prevent the owners of those
slaves emancipating them; it is therefore impossible that any relief can
be granted. The petitioners are under the laws of North Carolina, and
those laws cannot be the interpreters of the laws of the United States.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he was not prepared to deny that this petition is
in the situation the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. MADISON) states; nor
was he prepared to prove that it came under the power of the General
Government; but he could see no kind of reason why it should not be sent
to a committee who should examine the case and report whether it
required Legislative interference, or whether it was a subject of
judicial authority in the country whence the petitioners came. Many
petitions, he said, were sent to the House, who referred them for
investigation to a committee, and many had been reported as being under
judicial power only, and as such been rejected here. If this underwent
the same order, and should be found to be of a judicial nature, the
committee would report so, and the House would honorably refuse it. This
he thought the only just method.

Mr. RUTHERFORD concurred with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that this
memorial ought to be referred to a committee who would report whether
these people had been emancipated, according to a law of the State of
North Carolina, or not. The circumstances attending this case, he said,
demanded a just and full investigation, and if a law did exist either to
emancipate, or send these poor people into slavery, the House would then
know. He doubted not, every thing just and proper would be done, but he
hoped every due respect would be paid to the petition. In short, he was
assured every member in the House would wish to act consistently. This
case, from the great hardships represented in the petition, applied
closely to the nicest feelings of the heart, and he hoped humanity would
dictate a just decision.

Mr. GILBERT hoped the petition would be referred to the committee
proposed; he thought it laid claim to the humanity of the House. He
thought every just satisfaction should be given, and attention paid, to
every class of persons who appeal for decision to the House.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the practice of a former time, in a similar case,
was, that the petition was sealed up and sent back to the petitioners,
not being allowed even to remain on the files of the office. This
method, he said, ought to be pursued with respect to the present
petition. It was not a matter that claimed the attention of the
Legislature of the United States. He thought it of such an improper
nature, as to be surprised any gentleman would present a petition of the
kind. These men are slaves, and, he thought, not entitled to attention
from that body; to encourage slaves to petition the House would have a
tendency to invite continual applications. Indeed it would tend to
spread an alarm throughout the Southern States; it would act as an
"entering-wedge," whose consequences could not be foreseen. This is a
kind of property on which the House has no power to legislate. He hoped
it would not be committed at all; it was not a proper subject for
Legislative attention. He was not of the opinion of some gentlemen, that
the House were bound to sit on every question recommended to their
notice. He thought particular attention ought to be paid to the lateness
of the session; if this subject were to be considered, too much time of
the House would be devoured which was much wanted on important business.

Mr. THATCHER said, he was in favor of referring this petition. He could
see no reason which had been adduced to prove the impropriety of
receiving a petition from these people. The gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. BLOUNT) is of the opinion that these people being slaves,
the House ought not to pay attention to their prayer. This, he said, was
quite new language--a system of conduct which he never saw the House
practise, and hoped he never should. That the House should not receive a
petition without an evidence to prove it was from a free man. This was a
language which opposed the constitutional freedom of every State where
the Declaration of Rights had been made; they all declare that every man
is born equally free, and that each has an equal right to petition if
aggrieved--this doctrine he never heard objected to.

The gentlemen from Virginia (Mr. MADISON and Mr. HEATH) had said, it was
a Judicial and not a Legislative question; they say the petition proves
it, and that it ought not to be attended to. Mr. T. said, he saw no
proof whatever of the impropriety of the House receiving it. There might
be some Judicial question growing out of the case; but that was no
reason, because it might possibly undergo a Judicial course, that the
General Government were not to be petitioned. The gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. SMITH) had said, "that this was a kind of property on
which the House could not legislate;" but he would answer, this was a
kind of property on which they were bound to legislate. The fugitive act
could prove this authority; if petitions were not to be received they
would have to legislate in the dark. It appeared plainly that these men
were manumitted by their masters; and because a number of men who called
themselves legislators should, after they had the actual enjoyment of
their liberty, come forward and say that these men should not remain at
liberty, and actually authorize their recaptivity, he thought it
exceedingly unjust to deprive them of the right of petitioning to have
their injuries redressed. These were a set of men on whom the fugitive
law had no power, and he thought they claimed protection under the power
of that House, which always ought to lean towards freedom. Though they
could not give freedom to slaves, yet he hoped gentlemen would never
refuse to lend their aid to secure freemen in their rights against
tyrannical imposition.

Mr. CHRISTIE thought no part of the fugitive act operated against
freedom. He thought no good could be derived from sending the petition
to a committee; they could not prove whether they were slaves or not. He
was much surprised any gentleman in the House should present such a
petition. Mr. C. said, he was of the same opinion with the gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. SMITH) that the petition ought to be sent back
again. He hoped the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SWANWICK) would
never hand such another petition into the House.

Mr. HOLLAND said, the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. THATCHER) said,
"the House ought to lean towards freedom." Did he mean to set all slaves
at liberty, or receive petitions from all? Sure he was, that if this was
received, it would not be long before the table would be filled with
similar complaints, and the House might sit for no other purpose than to
hear them. It was a Judicial question, and the House ought not to
pretend to determine the point; why, then, should they take up time upon
it? To put an end to it he hoped, it would be ordered to lie on the
table.

Mr. MACON said, he had hearkened very closely to the observations of
gentlemen on the subject, and could see no reason to alter his desire
that it would not be committed. No man, he said, wished to encourage
petitions more than himself, and no man had considered this subject
more. These men could not receive any aid from the General Government;
but by application to the State, justice would be done them. Trials of
this kind had very frequently been brought on in all the different
courts of that State, and had very often ended in the freedom of slaves;
the appeal was fair, and justice was done. Mr. M. thought it a very
delicate subject for the General Government to act on; he hoped it would
not be committed; but he should not be sorry if the proposition of a
gentleman (Mr. SMITH) was to take place, that it was to be sent back
again.

Mr. W. SMITH observed, that a gentleman (Mr. THATCHER) had uttered a
wish to draw these people from their state of slavery to liberty. Mr. S.
did not think they were sent there to take up the subject of
emancipation. When subjects of this kind are brought up in the House
they ought to be deprecated as dangerous. They tended to produce very
uncomfortable circumstances.

Mr. VARNUM said, the petitioners had received injury under a law of the
United States, (the fugitive act) and not merely a law of North
Carolina, and therefore, he thought, they had an undoubted right to the
attention of the General Government if that act bore hard on them. They
stated themselves to be freemen, and he did not see any opposition of
force to convince the House they were not; surely it could not be said
that color alone should designate them as slaves. If these people had
been free, and yet were taken up under a law of the United States, and
put into prison, then it appeared plainly the duty of the House to
inquire whether that act had such an unjust tendency, and if it had,
proper amendments should be made to it to prevent the like consequences
in future. It required nothing more under that act than that the person
suspected should be brought before a single magistrate, and evidence
given that he is a slave, which evidence the magistrate could not know
if distant from the State; the person may be a freeman, for it would not
be easy to know whether the evidence was good, at a distance from the
State; the poor man is then sent to his State in slavery. Mr. V. hoped
the House would take all possible care that freemen should not be made
slaves; to be deprived of liberty was more important than to be deprived
of property. He could not think why gentlemen should be against having
the fact examined; if it appears that they are slaves, the petition will
of course be dismissed, but if it should appear they are free, and
receive injury under the fugitive act, the United States ought to amend
it, so that justice should be done.

Mr. BLOUNT said, admitting those persons who had been taken up were
sent back to North Carolina, they would then have permission to apply to
any of the courts in the State for a fair trial of their plea; there are
very few courts in which some negroes have not tried this cause, and
obtained their liberty. He agreed with the gentleman from Massachusetts,
on the freedom of these men to procure their rights; it did not appear
to him that they were free; true they had been set free, but that
manumission was from their masters, who had not a right to set them free
without permission of the Legislature.

Mr. KITCHELL could not see what objection could obtain to prevent these
people being heard. The question was not now, whether they are or are
not slaves, but it is on a law of the United States. They assert that
this law does act injuriously to them; the question is, therefore,
whether a committee shall be appointed to inquire on the improper force
of this law on the case of these men; if they are freemen, he said, they
ought not to be sent back from the most distant part of the United
States to North Carolina, to have justice done them, but they ought to
receive it from the General Government who made the law they complain
of.

Mr. K. said, he had not examined the force of the law on the subject,
and was not prepared to decide; there could be no evil in referring it
for examination; when the committee would report their opinion of the
subject and gentlemen be prepared to act on it.

On the question for receiving the petition being put, it was
negatived--ayes 33, noes 50.[9]


TUESDAY, February 7.

THOMAS SPRIGG, from Maryland, appeared, and took his seat.

_Increase of Salaries._

A bill was also received from the Senate for increasing the compensation
of the members of the Legislature and certain officers of Government;
which was read, and, on motion that it be read a second time, it was
carried, 33 to 30. It was accordingly read a second time.

The bill contemplates an advance of $5,000 to the present salary of the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and $2,000 to the VICE PRESIDENT, to
commence on the 4th of March next, and continue for four years; and that
the members of the Senate and House of Representatives, the Secretary of
State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of War, Attorney
General, Postmaster General, Assistant Postmaster General, Comptroller
of the Treasury, Auditor, Register, Commissioner of the Revenue,
Accountant of the War Department, the Secretary of the Senate, the Clerk
of the House of Representatives, and the principal clerks employed by
them, the Sergeant-at-Arms of the House of Representatives, the
Door-keepers and Assistant Door-keepers of both Houses, have an advance
of 25 per cent. upon their present compensation.

Mr. PARKER moved that the further consideration of this bill be
postponed till the first Monday in December next. He said they had
lately had the subject of augmenting the salaries of all the officers
here mentioned, except the PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT and themselves,
under consideration; and as they had resolved to refuse an advance to
others, he trusted they should also refuse it to themselves. He thought
the present an improper time to go into the subject.

Mr. HARTLEY wished the gentleman would consent to some day next week. He
could not say he was ready to agree to the whole of the advances
proposed, but he wished the subject to be taken into consideration, and
perhaps by the time he had mentioned they might have some further
information on the subject of our finances.

Mr. MACON said, the most regular way for the gentleman from Virginia to
obtain his object, would be to move to have the bill committed to a
Committee of the Whole, and made the order of the day for the 4th of
March.

Mr. PARKER made that motion.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped this motion would not be agreed to, as it was a sort
of manoeuvre to get rid of the subject, which he did not approve. He
would either have the bill negatived at once, made the order of some day
in the present session, or postponed till the next.

Mr. AMES said gentlemen had no doubt a right to govern their own votes
according to their own notions of propriety. No man had a right to
prescribe to another. His conscience was no rule to any other man. But
he thought he was authorized to say, they neither had nor claimed a
right to do a right thing in a wrong way. To agree to the motion
proposed, would be an insincere way of putting a negative upon the bill.
He trusted gentlemen who wished this would do it in a more direct way.
The compensation of the PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT could not be
augmented, he said, after they had entered upon their office; and to say
they would take up the subject for consideration at a time when their
powers would not exist, was an evasive manner, which he approved not. It
was an easy thing for gentlemen to say _no_ on the question, without
taking this circuitous way of putting an end to the subject.

Mr. VENABLE thought the view of his colleague would be answered as well
by a postponement to the 3d of March as to the 4th, and it would be more
orderly. Nor did he think this way of disposing of the business called
for the censure which the gentleman from Massachusetts had thrown upon
it. It was a question upon which that House had already decided by a
considerable majority. No new light had been thrown upon the subject,
and he thought it by no means disrespectful to postpone it. It was well
known that the effect of this motion would be a postponement for the
present session. This was what he wished; and if his colleague would
consent to alter his motion to the 3d of March, he should not hesitate
to vote for it.

Mr. PARKER had no objection to the motion standing for the 3d of March,
though he did not consider the motions for the first Monday in December
or the 4th of March as unparliamentary. He thought the salaries of the
PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT high enough. The salaries of some of their
public officers might at present be somewhat too low, but the time would
soon come when the price of living would become lower, and then they
would be fully adequate; and therefore he did not wish to see them
advanced at present.

Mr. BUCK was opposed to putting off the question till the time
contemplated by the present motion. To get rid of the subject in such a
way, would be descending from that state of independence which they
ought to preserve, and would have the appearance of a slight cast upon
another branch of Government. If they were prepared to meet the
question, they might as well meet it now as then. To agree to the motion
proposed, would show a degree of cowardice, and effectually put it out
of their power to consider and determine upon the subject. The Senate,
he said, had found sufficient reason to originate this bill, and he
thought, if it were only out of complaisance to them, the subject should
not be treated in the way proposed. It was said that this subject had
already been decided, but he did not think so. There had been no general
proposition for augmenting compensation. They had had the subject under
view partially, but he knew there were some members (he knew of one at
least) who voted against any partial advance, because they thought it
should be general. This was his motive. He thought all the officers of
Government were upon an equal footing, and therefore he voted against
advancing the salary of one and not of another--not because he thought
they were already sufficiently compensated; he did not think they were.
He wished, therefore, the subject for a general augmentation to come
under discussion. If he should be convinced an advance was improper, he
should give it up, and should be against putting the subject off to a
time when it could not be considered.

Mr. HARTLEY again urged the propriety of postponing for a shorter
period: he mentioned the 17th instant.

Mr. MACON said he was opposed to the bill _in toto_, and he considered
the motion of the gentleman from Virginia as meant to try the question.
He wished it to stand for the 4th of March, as at first proposed,
because, if it stood for the 3d, the subject might be called up and
acted upon on the last day of the session. He should therefore renew the
4th of March, because, if there were a majority who wished the bill to
be rejected, it was desirable that as little time as possible should be
lost upon the subject.

The question for postponing till the 4th of March was put and negatived,
46 to 45.

Mr. PARKER then moved to have it postponed till the 3d of March.

Mr. HENDERSON thought it more proper to postpone till the 3d than till
the 4th. He was ready, he said, to meet the question, either in a direct
or indirect way. He had made a calculation, and found that the advances
proposed would amount to from $100,000 to $110,000. Mr. H. believed our
finances were not in a state to admit of this addition to our expenses;
besides, he trusted every necessary of life would soon be reduced in
price, so as to render any advance of salary to our officers
unnecessary.

The question was put and negatived, 57 to 32.

On motion of Mr. HARTLEY, Friday week was proposed and negatived, there
being only 35 votes for it.

Mr. GALLATIN moved that the subject should be made the order for this
day. He said he had voted for postponing it till the 4th of March, with
a view of getting rid of it; but since it must be considered, he wished
it to be disposed of as soon as possible.

Mr. SITGREAVES proposed that it be made the order of the day for Monday.

The sense of the House was first taken for Monday and negatived, there
being only 41 votes for it. It was then put for this day and carried,
there being 58 votes for it.


WEDNESDAY, February 8.

_Election of President._

The SPEAKER informed the House that the hour was come at which they had
appointed to meet the Senate, for the purpose of counting the votes for,
and declaring the election of a PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, and that the Clerk would inform the Senate they were
ready to receive them.

The Clerk accordingly waited upon the Senate, and the PRESIDENT and
members of the Senate soon after entered and took their seats, the
PRESIDENT on the right hand of the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, and the members of the Senate on the same side of the
Chamber; when the President of the Senate (Mr. ADAMS) thus addressed the
two Houses:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The purpose for which we are assembled is expressed in the
      following resolutions. [Mr. ADAMS here read the resolutions
      which had been adopted by the two Houses relative to the
      subject.] I have received packets containing the
      certificates of the votes of the Electors for a President
      and Vice President of the United States from all the
      sixteen States of the Union: I have also received
      duplicates of the returns by post from fifteen of the
      States. No duplicate from the State of Kentucky is yet come
      to hand.

      It has been the practice heretofore, on similar occasions,
      to begin with the returns from the State at one end of the
      United States, and to proceed to the other; I shall
      therefore do the same at this time.

Mr. ADAMS then took up the packet from the State of Tennessee, and after
having read the superscription, broke the seal, and read the certificate
of the election of the Electors. He then gave it to the Clerk of the
Senate, requesting him to read the report of the Electors, which he
accordingly did. All the papers were then handed to the tellers, viz:
Mr. SEDGWICK, on the part of the Senate, and Messrs. SITGREAVES and
PARKER on the part of the House of Representatives; and when they had
noted the contents, the President of the Senate proceeded with the other
States, in the following order:

FOR JOHN ADAMS.
North Carolina,    1
Virginia,          1
Maryland,          7
Delaware,          3
Pennsylvania,      1
New Jersey,        7
New York,         12
Connecticut,       9
Rhode Island,      4
Massachusetts,    16
Vermont,           4
New Hampshire,     6
                  --
                  71

FOR THOMAS JEFFERSON.
Tennessee,         3
Kentucky,          4
Georgia,           4
South Carolina,    8
North Carolina,   11
Virginia,         20
Maryland,          4
Pennsylvania,     14
                  --
                  68

FOR GEORGE WASHINGTON.
North Carolina,    1
Virginia,          1
                  --
                   2

FOR THOMAS PINCKNEY.
South Carolina,    8
North Carolina,    1
Virginia,          1
Maryland,          4
Delaware,          3
Pennsylvania,      2
New Jersey,        7
New York,         12
Connecticut,       4
Massachusetts,    13
Vermont,           4
                  --
                  59

FOR AARON BURR.
Tennessee,         3
Kentucky,          4
North Carolina,    6
Virginia,          1
Maryland,          3
Pennsylvania,     13
                  --
                  30

FOR SAMUEL ADAMS.
Virginia,         15

FOR OLIVER ELLSWORTH.
Rhode Island,      4
Massachusetts,     1
New Hampshire,     6
                  --
                  11

FOR SAMUEL JOHNSTON.
Massachusetts,     2

FOR JAMES IREDELL.
North Carolina,    3

FOR JOHN JAY.
Connecticut,       5

FOR GEORGE CLINTON.
Georgia,           4
Virginia,          3
                  --
                   7

FOR CHARLES COTESWORTH PINCKNEY.
North Carolina,    1

FOR JOHN HENRY.
Maryland,          2

All the returns having been gone through, Mr. SEDGWICK reported that,
according to order, the tellers appointed by the two Houses had
performed the business assigned them, and reported the result to be as
above stated.

The PRESIDENT of the Senate then thus addressed the two Houses:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of
      Representatives_:

      By the report which has been made to me by the tellers
      appointed by the two Houses to examine the votes, there are
      71 votes for John Adams, 68 for Thomas Jefferson, 59 for
      Thomas Pinckney, 30 for Aaron Burr, 15 for Samuel Adams, 11
      for Oliver Ellsworth, 7 for George Clinton, 5 for John Jay,
      3 for James Iredell, 2 for George Washington, 2 for John
      Henry, 2 for Samuel Johnston, and 1 for Charles C.
      Pinckney. The whole number of votes are 138; 70 votes,
      therefore, make a majority; so that the person who has 71
      votes, which is the highest number, is elected President,
      and the person who has 68 votes, which is the next highest
      number, is elected Vice President.

The PRESIDENT of the Senate then sat down for a moment, and rising
again, thus addressed the two Houses:

      In obedience to the Constitution and law of the United
      States, and to the commands of both Houses of Congress,
      expressed in their resolution passed in the present
      session, I declare that

      JOHN ADAMS is elected President of the United States, for
      four years, to commence with the fourth day of March next;
      and that

      THOMAS JEFFERSON is elected Vice President of the United
      States, for four years, to commence with the fourth day of
      March next. And may the Sovereign of the Universe, the
      ordainer of civil government on earth, for the preservation
      of liberty, justice, and peace, among men, enable both to
      discharge the duties of these offices conformably to the
      Constitution of the United States, with conscientious
      diligence, punctuality, and perseverance.

The PRESIDENT and members of the Senate then retired, and the House came
to order; when Mr. SITGREAVES made a report on the business, which was
read and ordered to be entered on the journals.


THURSDAY, February 9.

_Election of President._

Mr. SITGREAVES, from the joint committee appointed to confer with a
committee of the Senate on the subject of the election of a PRESIDENT
and VICE PRESIDENT, made a further report, viz: that they had agreed
with the committee of the Senate to recommend to the House of
Representatives the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That the Clerk of this House be directed to
      give, by letter, to the Vice President elect, a
      notification of his election."

This resolution was agreed to; but some time afterwards, Mr. PARKER (one
of the committee) wished it to be rescinded, as he understood, though
the committee from the Senate had concurred in this mode of notifying
the VICE PRESIDENT of his election, the Senate would not agree to it,
but wished to follow the mode adopted on a former occasion, viz: a
message was sent from the House of Representatives to the Senate,
directing that the persons elected should be notified in such a manner
as they should direct. He wished, therefore, to prevent delay, the
resolution might be rescinded and a different one agreed to. This motion
occasioned a good deal of conversation. It was observed by the SPEAKER
that the resolution was already before the Senate, (where it seemed it
was not intended to be sent, as it was a distinct resolution of that
House, a similar one to which was proposed for the adoption of the
Senate by the joint committee.) It was at length, however, agreed to be
rescinded. Immediately after which a message was received from the
Senate, informing the House that they had disagreed to the resolution,
and appointed a committee of conference. The House accordingly took up
the message, and also agreed to appoint a committee of conference.

_Compensation to Public Officers._

Mr. PARKER then renewed his motion, and the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the bill respecting compensations, Mr.
MUHLENBERG in the chair; when

Mr. PARKER moved to strike out the first clause. He thought it necessary
to make some additional allowance to the PRESIDENT, but he would do it
in a different way from that proposed. When the present PRESIDENT came
into office, he said, he had a quantity of furniture presented him,
which might now be nearly worn out, and be of little value. It might be
proper, therefore, to purchase new furniture for the gentleman just
elected. It would be also during the period of the present Presidency
that Government would remove to the Federal City, which would be
attended with a good deal of expense to the PRESIDENT. He should wish,
therefore, that a provision should be made for defraying that expense,
and also for the purchasing of new furniture, but he should be opposed
to the making of any addition to the salary at present.

Mr. HARTLEY spoke in favor of retaining the clause.

Mr. R. SPRIGG said he should vote against the proposed advance of
salary, and could not consent to any other mode of augmenting the
present compensation allowed to the PRESIDENT. He could by no means
agree to the plan proposed by the gentleman from Virginia; for, if they
were to renew the furniture of the PRESIDENT every four or eight years,
it would be found a pretty expensive business. That gentleman had also
mentioned the removal of the Government, as taking place during the next
Presidency; but, he said, the new election would happen about the time
of removing the Government, and provision for paying that expense might
be made at that time. He thought the salaries were already sufficiently
high, and that it would be with difficulty that money was found to pay
the present expenses of Government.

Mr. WILLIAMS was of opinion, on the score of economy, that it would be
better to advance the compensation of the PRESIDENT in the way proposed
by the present bill, and let him purchase his own furniture, than to
purchase new furniture, which, perhaps, when the Government was removed,
would not be suitable for his house in the Federal City. Mr. W. said he
was one of the committee on the subject of compensation, and they
endeavored to ascertain whether the twenty-five thousand dollars allowed
to the PRESIDENT were an adequate compensation. It was generally
believed it was not. They ought, he said, to enable their First
Magistrate to live in a style becoming his situation. All their
Executive officers should receive such salaries as would enable them to
see company agreeably to their rank, otherwise the respectability
attached to those offices would suffer greatly in the public opinion. He
hoped, therefore, the section would not be struck out.

Mr. BUCK said, as the motion now made was to try the principle, it would
be well to go into an examination of the subject. He said he had never
been a champion for raising salaries, or a stickler for lowering them;
but, as the subject was brought before them, he should cheerfully
declare his sentiments upon it. He conceived the true question to be,
whether it was right and just that they should augment the salaries of
the officers of Government and the members of the Legislature, or
whether the present compensations were just and adequate to the
sacrifices which they made in undertaking the business of Government.
Because he did not believe, with some other gentlemen, that they were to
estimate the compensations of their officers in proportion as money was
scarce or plentiful in the Treasury, nor did he believe there was a
real distress in Government for want of money; but their difficulties
arose from a difference of opinion in that House on the mode of raising
money. He believed there were persons who thought Government squandered
away the public money; that its officers divided the loaves and fishes
amongst them; and that the only way in which this profusion of expense
could be checked was by pursuing a system of direct taxation, which
would make the people feel the amount which they contributed to the
support of Government. He should not undertake to examine this
principle, nor deny that such facts might exist. It would be enough to
look at existing circumstances in our country, and see how far they
would apply. Our Government, he said, rested on public sentiment for
support, and must always be regulated by it. He was willing, he said, to
go all lengths with gentlemen in adopting a system of taxation
calculated to raise a permanent revenue. Nor was he apprehensive for the
result, when dictated by reason and justice.

Contemptible must be that state of Government, said Mr. B., where its
public officers are starved for want of a proper spirit in the people to
support them. Is America, said he, arrived at this melancholy state? If
she were, God forbid she should ever experience another revolution! Is
this all our boasted acquisition, in return for the struggle we have
made for our country? No; he denied the fact. America was not reduced to
that state which will not allow her to pay the expenses of her
Government, nor is she unwilling to pay them; neither is public
sentiment so debased as not to approve of any measure which shall be
taken to secure a handsome maintenance for our officers. There was no
occasion for hypocrisy in the business; he was willing to state the
whole truth plainly to his constituents. He should not think of telling
them they were giving too high salaries for their officers, when he
knew, that, owing to their insufficiency, they were diminishing their
own private fortunes. Nor did he wish to intrench on his own property in
serving the public; he believed there was no occasion for this. He
should, therefore, speak plainly to them.

Mr. B. said, he would inquire whether the present salaries were a
reasonable and just compensation for the services performed? In respect
to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, it was said that he had already a
large salary. He knew that twenty-five thousand dollars had a great
sound in the ears of many, but he trusted the people of the United
States not only possessed just views of Government, but that they also
possessed virtue to support the just measures of Government, and would
not consent that their Executive officers should be placed on such a
footing as to be looked down by officers from foreign countries who
moved in a lower sphere. Therefore, when they looked into the reason of
the thing, and found their present salaries were unequal to their
support, not in the style of splendor observed in foreign courts, but
according to the manner of living in Philadelphia, would they not be
willing to increase them? He believed they would.

The present PRESIDENT, he said, was a man of fortune, and never took
from the Government more than would support his table, either during the
war or during his Presidency. And what, he asked, did these expenses
amount to? To the whole sum allowed him by law. But were they always to
expect to have a PRESIDENT who would give his services to his country?
Or had the PRESIDENT set a bad example, by living in a style of
extravagance and splendor? He believed this was not the opinion of
Americans, or that of foreign countries. If, then, the present PRESIDENT
had lived upon his own fortune, and the whole of his compensation had
gone to defray the expenses of his table, if this compensation was not
advanced, how were future Presidents to come forward, to support the
same style? They could not do it without infringing on their own
fortunes. And do the citizens of the United States, he asked, wish their
First Magistrate to be placed in this situation? He could not think so.
He believed they meant to make ample provision for his support; and if
the present provision was found inadequate, they would condemn their
Representatives; they would say they did not support the dignity of
their country, if they neglected to advance it.

The same observations, Mr. B. said, would apply to the VICE PRESIDENT,
and to other officers of Government. He did not wish the salaries of
their officers to be such as should enable them to make fortunes out of
them, but he would have them sufficient to afford a handsome living.
Were they so at present? He believed not. It had been said, the other
day, that they could not afford to live in the same style with persons
who stood on the same footing with them before they went into office. He
could not say whether they were obliged to intrench on their own private
fortunes; if it was so, he asked if it were reasonable or just that they
should be so placed? It certainly was not; and, therefore, convinced as
he was that the people of the United States were willing and able to
support the expenses of their Government, and that they wished their
officers to have a just and reasonable compensation, which should not
only enable them to make a respectable appearance in the eyes of their
own citizens, but in those of foreigners, he should have no scruples in
giving his consent to the advances proposed.

As to the compensation allowed to the members of that House, here he had
knowledge; he could speak from experience. He could say that he had
diminished his income one thousand dollars a year since he had a seat in
that House. Did his constituents, he asked, wish this? He believed not.
They did not wish him to intrench on his private fortune while he was
serving them. They did not expect him to squander away their money in
profusion, nor did he; he lived in the most economical style; but they
wished his reasonable expenses to be paid. Besides, said Mr. B., were
the rates of compensation, when first established, established upon this
principle? He thought not. They were then thought to be a just and
reasonable compensation; and, if it was not then unreasonable, it could
not now be reasonable. Was it right, he asked, when every kind of labor
was higher by one third or one-half than at that time, that the
compensations allowed to persons employed by Government should remain
stationary? He could not conceive that this was either just or proper,
or that the citizens of the United States wished it.

If any conclusion might be drawn from the practice of individual States,
they would be warranted in making the proposed advance, since many of
their Legislatures had advanced the pay of their members. Indeed, he
believed the people were generally convinced of the necessity of
advancing the compensations allowed to the officers of Government and
members of the Legislature, under the present circumstances.

Mr. B. said he was not for making a permanent increase of salaries,
except to the PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT. He did not conceive that the
members of the Legislature ought to have more than was sufficient to
support them, without obliging them to infringe upon their own fortunes.
He wished the advance thereof to operate no longer than until the
present existing circumstances were removed; he should move, therefore,
to have the duration of this regulation for one year, instead of two, as
it was possible in the mean time the price of living might be so reduced
as to make the additional allowance no longer necessary.

Mr. RUTHERFORD said, if gentlemen reasoned together for a moment, they
would be convinced this measure was altogether improper and unjust. Our
present PRESIDENT, said he, is looked up to with reverence, as to
Cincinnatus, as a good republican. When the commissioners from the
Republic of Holland went to treat with Spain, they went in a style of
such simplicity as to command the greatest respect. They afterwards
appointed a Stadtholder, a man of great reputation and patriotism
doubtless, like our PRESIDENT; but, as soon as they suffered themselves
to lose sight of their simplicity and plainness of manners, and got into
the policy and splendor of Courts, they were enslaved by their
Stadtholder; for, within these few years, the office of Stadtholder has
been declared hereditary. What an extravagance is this; that a man
should be born a Stadtholder or a King! While the Roman people
maintained their simplicity of manners, while Cincinnatus was amongst
them, they were a happy people; but when they lost sight of their
plainness of manners, they lost sight of their happiness. Let us look at
our sister rising Republic, and observe how they are doing away all pomp
and pageantry in their Government and country, and aiming at a
simplicity of manners; but, said he, I fear we have not lost sight
sufficiently of kings, priests, and courts. This was his dread. It was
necessary to bound these ideas. Patriotism could not be purchased, and
should they despair of getting a man to fill the office of PRESIDENT
without they increased the salary? Must they hire a man for this
purpose? No, they should not be obliged to do this; there would always
be found men of abilities and patriotism to fill that office, without
any view to pecuniary advantage.

Mr. DENT said the question was to make an amendment by striking out the
first section. Being in favor of that part which contemplated the
addition of five thousand dollars to the salary of the PRESIDENT, and
opposed to any addition to that of the VICE PRESIDENT, he wished the
question divided, in order to accommodate his vote.

The Chairman said the motion was to strike out the whole section, and it
could not be divided.

The motion for striking out was then put and carried--56 members being
in favor of it.

_Election of President._

A message was received from the Senate informing the House that the VICE
PRESIDENT had laid before them the following communication:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      In consequence of the declaration made yesterday in the
      Chamber of the House of Representatives of the election of
      a President and Vice President of the United States, the
      record of which has just now been read from your journal by
      your Secretary, I have judged it proper to give notice
      that, on the 4th of March next, at 12 o'clock, I propose to
      attend again in the Chamber of the House of
      Representatives, in order to take the oath prescribed by
      the Constitution of the United States to be taken by the
      President, to be administered by the Chief Justice or such
      other Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States as
      can most conveniently attend; and, in case none of those
      Judges can attend, by the Judge of the District of
      Pennsylvania, before such Senators and Representatives of
      the United States as may find it convenient to honor the
      transaction with their presence.


FRIDAY, February 10.

_Naval Policy: Purchase of a Site for a Navy Yard._

The next resolution which came under consideration, was that proposing
the purchase of a site for a navy yard.

Mr. PARKER doubted, from the spirit which seemed to be shown on this
occasion, that this resolution would not pass.

Mr. W. SMITH hoped this would be agreed to. Whatever gentlemen may now
think or determine on, it was probable we should at some time become a
naval power; and even with the most distant prospect of that, it would
show economy to prepare for it. He said it never could be too soon to
begin the business, and the most effectual method of procuring live
oak, and preserving it, was to take the earliest means to obtain, and
secure it, when obtained, for seasonable use. He read an extract from
the Secretary of War's report in support of the plan.

Mr. COIT said he was alarmed at the expense of this business. He saw in
the report the salaries of two persons already at Norfolk and
Portsmouth, for taking care of the timber, at 500 dollars each, 1,000
dollars. If they were to pay at this rate for overlooking the timber for
one ship, what might they expect would be the expense of a navy yard?

Mr. PARKER said, the persons to whom these salaries were paid, took care
of the timber at Norfolk and Portsmouth. It was necessary that some
person should look after it, or it should be disposed of; but, in case
the present resolution was agreed to, there would be no occasion in
future to pay these persons, as all the timber and other materials would
be stored in the navy yard. He said he had received an estimate from the
War Office of the expense which would be likely to attend the
establishment of a navy yard. The expense of 100 acres of land, and all
the necessary buildings, was estimated at 37,210 dollars.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, after having squandered so much money in getting
timber for these vessels, he thought some change of habit should take
place before they embarked largely in this matter. They had given twice
or thrice as much as the timber was worth, yet they were now called upon
to go on in the same course. It was not a time for going into this
business. If such a thing was even proper, two or three years could make
but little difference, and there could be little doubt but every thing
could then be bought at half price. This, however, was not his principal
objection. It was this: he did not want to see any such establishment; a
navy would never do any real good to this country, but would increase
the unhappiness of it. It would require large sums of money to support
it; its benefits were doubtful, and it might be of very mischievous
consequence to the nation.

Mr. SWANWICK said he entirely agreed with the gentleman from Virginia
(Mr. NICHOLAS) that there was a necessity for some change of habit; they
appeared to be getting that change at present, and whatever their habits
were at present, he supposed they would come right at last. Whatever
might be their opinion of the necessity of a naval force, the European
nations, he believed, would convince them of the necessity of it, if
they only gave them time enough.

It was an extraordinary thing to look at the progress of economy in that
House with respect to these frigates. In the first place, six frigates
were necessary; they were afterwards reduced to three, and because an
officer was appointed to take care of the timber left on hand, a
gentleman from Connecticut wondered that $500 should be so employed. A
motion had been made to confine the Executive to finish the hulls of the
ships only. This would have been a strange economy. Indeed, such
attempts were made at economy on this business as were never introduced
upon any other. The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. NICHOLAS) had observed
there was no use for ships at all. If the House were of that opinion,
such a resolution had better at once be come to; but the strange sort of
hesitating conduct which was adopted, exceeded all that he had heard of
in legislation.

Had gentlemen who declared these vessels to be of no use, contemplated
the situation of this country; that it depended wholly upon commerce for
revenue; that that commerce was now put in jeopardy, and that no
substitute had been found for the revenue thence arising? And would not
all this hesitation, whenever the subject of a navy came under
consideration, tempt European nations to continue their unjust
depredations upon our property at sea? It certainly would.

But even gentlemen who wished to confine themselves merely to the
finishing of the vessels at present, would not surely think it improper
for them to establish a navy yard, and to secure timber for future use.
Did those gentlemen consider what it was to deprive the country of a
rich mine of ship timber? If they hesitated on this subject, they surely
did not.

What had been said by the gentleman from Maryland on the subject of
Algiers, was very just; and the want of a navy power would have a
similar effect upon all our negotiations, as foreign nations would rise
or fall in their demands, according to our power at sea. The money
thrown away upon Algiers to purchase peace, would have been much better
employed in building ships; for if we had a few ships, that power would
not have committed the depredations upon us which she had done. And
whether the money was paid to Algiers or expended in building ships, it
was in both cases for the same purpose, viz: the protection of commerce.
But there was this great difference between the two expenditures. In the
one case, the dollars were shipped off to a foreign country, and in the
other, they were paid to our own citizens. The iron used was from our
own mines; the guns from our own manufactories; the hemp, and every
other material, were of our own growth and manufacture, so that the
money went into the hands of our artisans, manufacturers, and farmers.
And, therefore, though the frigates had cost a great deal of money, it
was some modification of the expense to consider that the money was gone
into the pockets of our own citizens. But, he asked if the loss we
sustained for the want of a naval power could be estimated? He said it
could not. We not only lost our property, but our seamen, and they were
not only lost to us, but were probably in the service of those countries
which were committing depredations upon us. The loss of property might
be recovered; but a hardy race of seamen once lost, could not be
recovered.

What an affecting spectacle had we the other day of sixty of these
unfortunate men returning from Algerine slavery? They were received into
the arms of their country with all the sympathy which the occasion
called for; but could gentlemen help feeling, at the same time, for the
impotence of our Government, when they recollected that the liberty of
these men had been purchased at a very high price from a petty despot?
And shall we continue to go on thus, and encourage the Barbary powers to
enslave our seamen by showing so great a reluctance to enter upon any
measure which might afford a defence against their depredations?

Mr. MURRAY believed it would be a very prudent measure to secure the
ship-timber in question; for if we did not, it was probable some foreign
nation would get possession of it. He did not know whether the laws of
Georgia would permit foreigners to purchase the land upon which this
timber grew; but if they would not, it would be no difficult thing to
get possession of it through the medium of an individual. If this
country were to become a maritime power, and no one who considered the
subject for a moment could doubt it, this was too rich a mine to be
neglected. What had been said about adopting the Chinese policy, might
serve to amuse them; but when they looked at the commerce of the
country, it was impossible they should not see the necessity of a naval
force to protect that commerce against the depredations of any nation
who chose to attack it. Indeed, it was come to this, they must either
provide for the protection of commerce, or deny the utility of it, and
give it up altogether.

But the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. NICHOLAS) was afraid if these
frigates were sent out to sea, they would involve us in a war. What!
said he, can it be supposed that three frigates would give us that
ridiculous kind of spirit which would induce us at any rate to go to
war? This would be a species of insanity which he did not think it was
probable we should fall into. No: these vessels would serve to protect
our coasts, and preserve our commerce from attacks, at least, within a
small distance from our own ports. How far they might serve to render us
of some importance in the eyes of foreign nations, he could not tell;
but he believed that three frigates would have a greater effect in this
respect with us, than ten to Sweden, Denmark, or Holland. We lie, said
he, near the high road of commerce to the West Indies, and these three
frigates, backed by national wealth, would show a disposition to become
a maritime power, and would have their effect upon European nations.

Besides, Mr. M. said, these vessels would be the foundation of a future
Navy. He was for shaping our means of defence to the means of offence
employed against us by other nations; for until the European nations
became wise enough to cease from war, it was necessary to provide means
of defence against their attacks. He should, therefore, always give his
support to every means of national defence. He wished our nation to
stand upon a respectable footing as a nation, since the most magnanimous
conduct was no security against the attacks of foreign powers. He
should, therefore, be in favor of a naval yard, and of providing
ship-timber for future use.

Mr. HARPER said, the two resolutions respecting a naval yard and a
provision for timber should come under consideration together; because,
if no provision was made for purchasing timber, a naval yard would be of
no use.

This question, he said, was capable of being considered under two points
of view: the one whether the measure was proper; the other, if the
measure was proper, whether it would not be better postponed for the
present. Both of these points required a considerable degree of
attention. There was a variety of considerations on both sides of the
question, and it remained for them to determine for the best.

Was it proper for this country, he asked, to turn its attention towards
marine strength? Did not our situation, and the circumstances in which
we stand, compel us to turn our attention to this object? He thought
they did, and for one or two reasons which he would submit to the
consideration of the committee.

It appeared to him out of the question that any kind of commerce should
be continued without some ships-of-war to protect it. This was the
dilemma in which we were placed. It was said by some gentlemen that this
dilemma might be avoided, by suffering commerce to go on unprotected,
and subject it to all risks; and that even then, there would be
sufficient benefit arising from it, to induce its continuance. This he
did not believe. If persons engaged in commerce could have no dependence
upon the protection of Government, a very few years, perhaps a few
months more, might convince them that the business could not and ought
not to be continued.

The present Government, he said, had only been in existence eight years,
and for nearly four of them commerce had been subject to every kind of
depredation. The usual calculation with respect to Europe was, that
during every ten years, it would be subject to war, and that these wars
would have a duration of from six to eight years, in the course of which
our property and citizens would be subject to the same violations and
injuries which they had for the last four years experienced, if no
provision was made, by a naval power, to prevent it.

Brought to this dilemma, said he, which side will you take? Will you
give up commerce, or build a Navy to protect it? Besides, he said, a
great part of our citizens who had been trained up in commerce from
their infancy, could not be driven from that kind of employment to which
they had always been accustomed. They could not be induced, like the
Chinese, to stay at home; they would be engaged in commerce, their
favorite pursuit. If they, then, were compelled to protect commerce, he
asked if there was any other way of doing it than by a Navy? He believed
not. Treaties afford a feeble and very inadequate protection; they were
broken whenever it suited the interest of a nation to break them.
Letters of marque might afford some protection; but this would operate
as a heavier tax upon the people than even the support of the Navy. The
money which a merchant expended in this way would eventually come upon
the people in the price which they would be obliged to pay for their
merchandise, and the means would be very inadequate to protection.

In China and the East Indies, Mr. H. said, the inhabitants could shut
themselves up within their own territory, and avoid any intercourse with
foreign nations. In countries so far removed from Europe, as to prevent
any one nation from making a monopoly, of its trade, this policy might
exist. But could America lay up her ships, and say she would open her
ports to all nations? No; that very instant you give up your trade to
that nation which has the greatest power at sea; for she will
immediately block up your ports, and oblige you to trade with them only.
In order, therefore, to trade with all nations, we must be the carriers
of our own produce, for other nations would not leave us at liberty to
do so. The strongest power would say to the others, you shall not trade
with these people, you shall do so and so, or we will go to war with
you. You must, therefore, said he, protect your own trade.

Will these resolutions, then, said he, if adopted, tend to this point?
He believed they would. To provide a dock-yard, and to take care of a
supply of timber suitable for the purpose of ship-building, were very
essential steps. Much expense, he said, would be saved in carrying on
the building of several ships together in one yard, instead of having
them scattered in different parts of the Union. Timber might also be
laid up to season in this yard, so as always to be ready for use; for,
he believed that much of the delay which had attended the building of
the ships now on the stocks, had been owing to the difficulty which had
attended the procuring of proper timber. Besides, Mr. H. said, its being
known to foreign nations, that you had provided a dock-yard, would have
some weight; it would at least have the appearance of an intention of
building a Navy.

With respect to the purchasing of land clothed with live oak timber, he
thought it a very desirable measure. It was well known that this timber
was confined to a few spots--a few sea islands on the coast of South
Carolina and Georgia, and some small strips along the seashore; and in
each of these places there were only a few trees of a sufficient size
for building large ships. The land upon which these trees grew, since
the cultivation of cotton had been introduced into those parts, was
become valuable land for that purpose. This induced the people to cut
down the timber and burn it, for the sake of getting the land, and there
was no way of arresting this practice, but by securing the land; and
being of so good a quality, when the trees were cut down, it would
probably sell for a greater price than was originally given for it.

Mr. GALLATIN saw no connection between the two resolutions, which the
gentleman who had just sat down thought it necessary to connect
together. The last resolution proposed the purchase of land clothed with
live oak; the present proposed the appropriation of a sum of money for
purchasing the site of a naval yard, &c., as a foundation for a Navy.
The last went only to the securing of timber for the building of a Navy,
if at any day it should be thought necessary; he believed he should vote
for the last, but certainly against the first.

They had been told that no commerce could exist without protection, and
that that protection must be a Navy; from whence it would follow, that
if a Navy was necessary to protect commerce, it must be a Navy competent
to vie with the navies of other nations. He would here ask, how
gentlemen drew their conclusion, that commerce could not exist without
the protection of a Navy. He wished they would show from the example of
any nation in Europe, or from our own example, that commerce and navies
had gone hand in hand. There was no nation, except Great Britain, said
he, whose Navy had any connection with commerce. No nation, except
England and Holland, had more to do with commerce than this country, and
yet we had no Navy; and though for the four last years this commerce had
been subject to continual depredations, it was not exceeded by any
nation, except the two he had named. And if they looked to Europe, they
would find there was no connection between navies and commerce. Russia
and Sweden had considerable navies, but little commerce; whilst Holland,
whose Navy was by no means large, ranked next to England with respect to
commerce. Hamburg, he said, was one of the first commercial States in
Europe, yet she had no Navy. Navies, he said, were the instruments of
power, more calculated to annoy the trade of other nations than to
protect that of the nation to which they belong.

But there was another position which he should take in opposition to
gentlemen who supported the creation of a Navy, viz: that however useful
or desirable a Navy might be, this country was not equal to the support
of one. We might have two or three frigates indeed, but, when he said we
could not support a Navy, he meant to say we could not support such a
Navy as should claim respect, in the sense which those gentlemen spoke
of it; such as being an object of terror to foreign nations. If they
calculated what the three frigates had cost, considered the scanty
manner in which this country was peopled, our inability to raise any
very large revenue, and the high price of labor, the truth of this
assertion would appear evident.

Again, if such a Navy were created, how was it to be manned? He wished
gentlemen to point out any mode in which a Navy could be manned in this
country without having recourse to the abominable practice of
impressment. If the nations of Europe found it impossible to man their
fleets without having recourse to these violent means, he believed it
would be impossible, without breaking down those barriers which secured
the liberty of every citizen, to man a Navy in this country.

Perhaps he might be asked, if we were, then, to be left without
protection? He thought there were means of protection which arose from
our peculiar situation, and that we ought not to borrow institutions
from other nations for which we were not fit. If our commerce had
increased, notwithstanding its want of protection; if we had a greater
number of seamen than any other nation, except England, this, he
thought, pointed out the way in which commerce ought to be protected.
The fact was, that our only mode of warfare against European nations at
sea, was by putting our seamen on board privateers, and covering the sea
with them; these would annoy their trade, and distress them more than
any other mode of defence we could adopt.[10]


MONDAY, February 13.

_Purchase of Live Oak Lands._

Mr. HARPER said, that though the House had declined coming to a
resolution to authorize the PRESIDENT to purchase certain lands in
Georgia, clothed with live oak and red cedar timber, as a reserve for
future naval purposes, yet there seemed to be a disposition to cause an
inquiry to be made on the subject. He therefore proposed a resolution to
the House to the following effect:

      "_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
      authorized and requested to cause to be made and reported
      to this House as early as may be after the meeting of the
      next session of Congress, an inspection of lands furnished
      with live oak and red cedar timber, with the relative
      advantages of different situations with respect to their
      fitness for naval purposes, and the rates at which
      purchases may be made."

Ordered to lie on the table.

_John de Neufville._

On motion of Mr. MADISON, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the following report of the committee, to whom was referred
the memorial of Anna de Neufville, widow of John de Neufville, deceased.
They report--

      "That the services and sacrifices of the said John de
      Neufville to the United States, during the war of their
      Revolution, as stated in the said memorial, and vouched by
      the testimonies herewith reported, constitute a reasonable
      claim, in behalf of his, at present, very distressed widow
      and children, on the justice of the United States. That it
      being impossible, from various and peculiar circumstances
      incident to the services rendered, to ascertain and
      liquidate the compensation due into a precise sum, it is
      necessary for Congress to decide on and provide for such
      allowance as may be deemed equitable and right. That, in
      the opinion of the committee, the sum of three thousand
      dollars may be a proper allowance. They therefore propose
      the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That provision ought to be made, by law, for
      granting to the widow and two children of John de
      Neufville, the sum of three thousand dollars, to be equally
      divided among them."

This report was advocated by Messrs. HARPER, W. SMITH, SWANWICK, HAVENS,
HEATH, THATCHER, VARNUM, and RUTHERFORD. They stated that the husband of
the petitioner, John de Neufville, was an eminent merchant at Amsterdam;
that he was an influential character there, and, at an early period of
our Revolutionary war, entered with great zeal into the interests of
America; that, meeting with Mr. William Lee, the Commissioner of the
United States, he endeavored to bring about a treaty between the United
Netherlands and the United States, which being discovered by the
British, that Court used its influence with the Government of that
country to harass and drive him out of the country; that during his
residence at Amsterdam, his house was a constant asylum for American
citizens; that he had made large advances in money for the service of
the United States, which obliged him to extend his credit beyond what
was warranted by the regular course of trade, and a failure in the
payment of which (owing to the embarrassed circumstances of the United
States at that time) had greatly injured him, and left him to the mercy
of his creditors. The consequence was, he was reduced from affluence to
poverty at an advanced period of life. Some years ago he arrived at
Boston with his wife and two children, where he subsisted in a very
humble manner upon the bounty of his friends in Holland; those friends
having, by the reverses occasioned by the Revolution, been much injured
in their property, could afford him but a scanty pittance; but Mr. de
Neufville being dead, the petitioner was deprived of this assistance;
and, to add to her repeated misfortunes, the son of her late husband,
from their multiplied sufferings, had been deprived of his reason. Under
this pressure of grievances, the petitioner was come from Boston to lay
her case before Congress, and pray relief. This peculiarly distressing
case was supported with great zeal and feeling by its advocates,
particularly by Mr. HARPER.

The claim was opposed by Messrs. COIT, SWIFT, and NICHOLAS. An
application, it seems, was made by Mr. de Neufville, during his
life-time, for redress; upon which the then Secretary of State (Mr.
JEFFERSON) reported. This report, after stating all the facts upon
which the claim was founded, gave it as his opinion, that the petitioner
had no real claim on the United States. This report, it seems, had never
been acted upon. The reading of it, as well as of all the documents
relative to this claim, was called for, and they were accordingly read.
The opposers of this claim acknowledged the distressed situation of the
petitioner, but denied the justice of her claim upon the United States;
the treaty which Mr. de Neufville proposed to enter into with Mr. Lee,
they supposed, was a treaty which he believed would prove beneficial to
his country, and not to the United States: that there were many claims
in our own country from persons who had been injured by the war, the
justice of which was less equivocal, and the distress at least equal.
Mr. NICHOLAS said, a few days ago only, a poor man, whose health had
been so much impaired in the war, that he was unable to earn his living,
had applied to him to bring his case before Congress, yet, as the
pension law affords no relief to any person, except he had been wounded,
he was obliged to inform him that he could do nothing for him. There
were multitudes of such instances, equally distressing with the present,
to which no relief could be afforded.

Mr. THATCHER moved to have the three thousand dollars struck out, and
five inserted. This was negatived--45 to 37; but the resolution was
agreed to as reported--yeas 63, nays 25.


THURSDAY, February 16.

_John C. Symmes._

Mr. GALLATIN said, a report had been made upon the contract between John
C. Symmes and his associates, and the United States, which it was of
importance to pass into a law this session, as the object was four
hundred thousand acres of land, which was worth about eight hundred
thousand dollars.

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the subject, when the report, which was very long, having been read, the
committee agreed to the resolution reported, which was in the following
words:

      "_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to bring in a
      bill to authorize the President of the United States to
      grant, in fee simple, to John C. Symmes and his associates,
      that part of a tract of land, the boundaries whereof are
      ascertained by a survey executed in conformity to the act
      of Congress, entitled 'An act for ascertaining the bounds
      of a tract of land purchased by J. C. Symmes,' and returned
      to the Treasury Department the 10th of January, 1794, which
      is not included within the bounds of a grant already made,
      on September 8, 1794, to the said J. C. Symmes and his
      associates; excepting and reserving out of the same the
      lots reserved by the original contract, entered into
      between the United States and the said Symmes and his
      associates; provided that the said Symmes and his
      associates shall previously, in conformity to the terms of
      the original contract, make the requisite payment for the
      tract to be granted to them, and for the 47,625 acres, part
      of the grant already made to them on the 30th September,
      1794, for which they have not yet paid any consideration;
      and provided, also, that the township reserved for an
      Academy shall have been previously laid off and secured,
      according to the terms of the contract, and of the
      resolutions and law of Congress relative thereto."


FRIDAY, February 17.

_Increase of Duties._

BROWN SUGAR.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the proposed increase, it was calculated, would raise
110,000 dollars, and as the article was not liable to be smuggled, nor
its consumption to be decreased, it would be a certain, and he thought,
an eligible tax.

Mr. HOLLAND had no doubt but this tax would augment the revenue; but he
knew also that it would fall more upon the poor than upon the rich, and
he thought they ought not to add to their burdens. He thought there were
other articles which would bear some addition, but either brown sugar or
salt would be much felt. If they studied that which would be burdensome,
here they might fix, but he hoped this was not the principle. By
advancing an article so universally used, a rise of labor (already too
high) must naturally follow.

Mr. KITCHELL believed the rich and opulent would bear their portion of
this tax as well as the poor, as it would fall upon fine sugar as well
as upon brown. It would therefore be paid in proportion to the sugar
used, and would fall as equally as any other tax which could be laid.

In this instance, Mr. K. said, gentlemen seemed apprehensive of the poor
bearing too great a part of the burden; but, if the direct tax on land
were to take place, would it not, he asked, fall much heavier upon the
poor than a tax on sugar? He believed it would; since the poor who held
lands would be called upon to pay their portion of it, whilst the rich
who held no lands, would escape it. He, therefore, thought this a far
preferable tax.

Mr. DEARBORN said, if further revenue was necessary, he could not
conceive any article which would bear an advance of duty better than the
one proposed. The present duty, he said, was one and a half cent a
pound, and could it be supposed that to lay an additional half cent upon
it, could make much difference to the consumer, or that it would ever be
felt, or that, at the end of a year, it would be discovered whether one
and a half or two cents duty had been paid upon a pound of sugar? He
should have no objection, instead of half a cent, to lay an additional
cent upon this article. In various parts of the country, brown sugar was
retailed at from 12 to 20 cents a pound, the price being much increased
from the present distressed situation of the West Indies. But they would
find sugar of the same quality selling in one place for 12, in another
for 14 or 16 cents; therefore, whether the duty was one or two cents, he
did not think it would be felt by any body. It was true, that it was an
article used by the middling and lower classes of the people; but the
tax falling upon fine as well as brown sugar, all parts of the community
would bear an equal share in the burden.

Mr. WILLIAMS moved to strike out the half cent, and insert a cent. It
appeared to him that such an advance could not materially affect the
consumer. The people, it was true, might use less; but, if they did so,
as it was an article of luxury, every pound of sugar less which was
consumed, would be of benefit to the country, by keeping the money which
it cost in a foreign market at home. But he did not believe that this
would be the case; or that the proposed additional duty would increase
the price of labor, as had been suggested. He believed the price of
labor would be regulated by the price which the farmer was enabled to
get for his produce. Whatever the farmer could afford to give his
laborer (especially in this country where agriculture is the true
interest) would fix the price of all other labor.

Mr. HOLLAND said, perhaps the constituents of the gentleman last up
might manufacture their own sugar, and therefore would not be affected
by this tax; but the greater part of his constituents were obliged to
use and purchase their sugar; and if it were a luxury, it was one he did
not wish to deprive them of, but that they might have it upon the same
terms as usual. He looked upon it as a necessary of life, already at too
high a price, and he should, therefore, oppose any advance of duty upon
it.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he and his constituents were in the same situation
with the gentleman from New York (Mr. WILLIAMS) and his constituents.
They manufactured almost the whole of their own sugar; very little
imported sugar was used; indeed, they sometimes exported sugar; but
though this reason seemed to act pretty powerfully upon the gentleman
from New York, it would not have the same effect upon him. Whenever a
measure operated partially upon other parts of the Union, though it
might operate in favor of his constituents, he should feel himself in
duty bound to oppose it. On the ground of their being Representatives of
the whole Union, as well as on the ground of policy, he did not believe
it was right to endeavor to throw a burden upon one part of the Union,
because the part in which they were most particularly interested, would
escape it. He hoped the amendment would be rejected, and after the sense
of the committee should have been taken upon it, he also would move an
amendment. At present, brown sugar paid one and a half cent a pound
duty, and molasses three cents per gallon. He should, therefore, move to
have an additional cent laid upon molasses, in order that the two
articles might be increased in the same proportion. He was against any
increase at present; but if the duty on one article was increased, the
other ought also to be increased.

Mr. WILLIAMS observed, that he had said the people in the part of the
country from whence he came, made their own sugar during the war; if
they were to make it now, it would cost them more than double the price
at which they might purchase it. He said, when the gentleman from
Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) found the land tax was not likely to pass,
he wished to defeat every proposition for an indirect tax. He had
attempted, therefore, to defeat an additional tax on sugar, by proposing
to add molasses to the resolution. He did not think this fair; he wished
every proposition to stand upon its own ground. A few days ago that
gentleman had insisted upon the necessity of laying a direct tax; but
now he came forward, and said no additional revenue was wanting. He
wished not to have a compulsory tax, but a tax which persons might pay
or not. If they did not like to pay the tax on sugar, they might do
without it.

Mr. COOPER said he was against any additional duty on salt or sugar,
though he and his constituents (as well as his colleague and his
constituents) should bear no part of the burden, as they made not only
sufficient for themselves, but for sale. Indeed, he said, a duty on salt
exported out of the United States, would produce revenue, as a
considerable quantity was sent into Upper Canada.

Mr. WILLIAMS denied that his constituents made any salt; they had no
salt but what paid duty; nor did his constituents make one-fourth of the
sugar they used; nor did he believe his colleague's (Mr. COOPER's)
constituents made one-half of the sugar they used, as he well knew that
a large quantity of sugar was sent to that district by way of Albany.

Mr. READ hoped the amendment would obtain. Although such persons as
lived at a distance from market manufactured their own sugar, and
consequently would be excused from this duty, yet they labored under
many disadvantages in other respects, on account of their remoteness
from market, and therefore he had no objection to their being excused
from the operation of this tax. He did not believe this tax on sugar
would fall upon poor persons. Farmers, indeed, used a little brown
sugar, but they would rather pay a little more for this article than
have their land taxed.

Mr. CLAIBORNE was against the amendment. If an additional duty of one
cent was laid upon brown sugar, the different dealers would make it
three or four, so that it would be materially felt.

Mr. GALLATIN then moved to amend the resolution, by adding an additional
cent per gallon upon molasses. At present the duty on brown sugar was
one and a half cent per pound, and on molasses three cents per gallon.
The advance of 33 per cent. on the present duty would be the same that
had been agreed to be laid upon sugar.

Mr. SWANWICK seconded the motion. The only way in which the tax on brown
sugar could be secured was by advancing the duty on molasses in the same
proportion, otherwise molasses would be used in the place of sugar, and
the duty would be evaded. But he would have gentlemen consider in what
situation they placed the revenue in respect to drawbacks. The person
who paid the duty was probably not the same who drew the drawback on
exportation; the United States run the risk, therefore, of paying the
drawback, without receiving the duty. Though he thought the tax on sugar
highly objectionable, yet if it were adopted, he thought it right that
it should be accompanied by a proportionate tax on molasses as a
security to the duty being paid. One cent a pound on sugar, it was said,
was a trifle; but it was well known that the price of that article was
at present very exorbitant, from the disorders which had taken place in
the West Indies.

Mr. NICKOLAS hoped the amendment would be agreed to. His principal
objection to a tax on sugar was, because, having been successful in
making one addition, it would be an argument for making future ones, but
if molasses was added to it, the tax would then fall more equally on the
poor of different parts of the Union, and be a means of keeping down the
tax.

Mr. BUCK said, if he thought the advocates of this amendment would vote
for the resolution when amended, he might be induced to vote for it; but
he believed they did not mean to do so. If an increase of the duty on
brown sugar would fall upon the poorer class of the people, an
additional duty on molasses would fall much heavier upon them. But he
thought gentlemen were mistaken with respect to the operation of the tax
on brown sugar; in the country it would not fall upon the poor, though
in the cities it might do so; though in increasing the duty on brown
sugar, that on fine was also increased. In the country it was the rich
who used brown sugar; they had not got to that pitch of refinement which
called for the use of fine sugar; they used brown sugar, and the poor
used none; they sweetened with molasses. Notwithstanding this, if he
thought gentlemen meant to vote for the resolution when amended, he
would not object to the addition on molasses, as he did not think so
small an advance would be materially felt.

Mr. RUTHERFORD hoped they should not agree to lay an additional duty on
either of these necessaries of life. He hoped there was sufficient good
sense in the House to oppose such a measure. They were used by all
classes, from the infant to the stoutest man; particularly by many poor,
infirm, aged persons, who looked upon them as nutritious and balmy
nourishments. He hoped, therefore, they would not increase the price of
those articles; for, if an additional cent was added, the dealers would
add two, three, or four cents, which would be more than the poor could
afford to pay for them.

Mr. CHRISTIE believed the gentleman from Pennsylvania meant, by the
introduction of this amendment, to defeat the tax on sugar altogether;
he should, therefore, vote against this amendment; but if the additional
tax on sugar should be carried, and the additional tax on molasses
should be introduced alone, he would vote for it, but he would not vote
for them together. He did not think the tax on sugar would fall upon the
poor, particularly as fine sugar would be taxed equally with the brown.
He thought it was a fair object of taxation. He believed they should
want revenue, and he did not know an article from which it could be
better raised.

Mr. FINDLAY was at a loss to know how a tax on molasses would operate;
but his doubts had been removed by the gentleman from Vermont, (Mr.
BUCK,) who had informed them it was used by the poor in place of brown
sugar. In many parts of Pennsylvania molasses was scarcely known, and
brown sugar was generally used by the poor; if, therefore, the same
class of persons in one part of the country used molasses for the same
purpose for which brown sugar was used in other parts, it was only
reasonable that both should be taxed in the same proportion.

His colleague (Mr. GALLATIN) had mentioned that his constituents would
not pay any of this tax, as they made their own sugar. It was so with a
part of his constituents, but not with the whole. As it would be unjust
to pass one tax without the other, he should be in favor of the
amendment.

Mr. GALLATIN said, it had been charged against him, that he had
introduced his amendment with a view to defeat the tax on sugar. He had
already said that he did not wish for any indirect tax during the
present session; but, at the same time, he considered it his duty, if a
majority should choose to pass the resolution, to make it as good as
possible before he voted against it, for this purpose he had introduced
his amendment. Whenever the duty on sugar was increased, that on
molasses should also be increased. With respect to what had been said
about the duty on brown sugar not falling upon the poor, it was
contradicted by the quantity every year imported into the United States.
When they knew that this amounted to twenty-two millions of pounds
weight, they must conclude that it was used by the poor as well as the
rich; for though the Eastern States used a great deal of molasses, it
was not the case in the Middle, Southern, and Western States; all
classes of citizens in those States used sugar. The voting for the
amendment now was the same as voting for it in any other shape. It was
doing now what would be done hereafter, if now omitted. There was
nothing informal in it. He saw no reason which could be urged for one
taking place, which would not equally hold with respect to the other.

Mr. SWANWICK thought that those gentlemen who separated the articles of
sugar and molasses, would wish to defeat the object; thus it was with
the gentleman last up. This was introduced with a view of securing the
collection. Mr. S. said he had before stated the injury the United
States might sustain in case of a failure of pay from the imported, and
need not repeat that he objected _in toto_ to the tax.

Mr. BUCK asked if, when on the question on the resolution, (if,
adopted,) a separate vote could be given? He was answered no. Then he
would observe to the gentleman that, if it could not be separated, he
hoped it would not be introduced, it having been said the duty on sugar
would operate on the poor; now, he said, here was an article introduced
with it that would operate worse than the other; therefore, he should
oppose both, if put together, when, if separated, he should have voted
for the tax on molasses alone, as sugar was a great means of sustenance
and use.

The Chairman again remarked (in reference to what had fallen from Mr. W.
SMITH) that the amendment was in order, though he did not think it the
most fair way of introducing the subject.

Mr. GALLATIN conceived that he was the best judge of the fairness of his
proceedings; and as the Chairman had declared the amendment to be in
order, he expected a question would be taken upon it.

Mr. NICHOLAS begged leave to differ in opinion from the Chair in this
instance, though he must own much deference was due to it: he thought
the proceedings perfectly fair. Mr. N. would vote for this, in order to
have the two connected; that gentleman could now vote against the
addition of molasses, then he would have an opportunity to vote on sugar
alone. He should wish it extended to both alike. The gentleman (Mr.
BUCK) was mistaken in his application on this subject; it was not taxing
the sustenance of the poor in one article more than another, for the
sugar would most affect one part, yet molasses would as much affect
another; he, therefore, hoped, if gentlemen wished fair and equal
taxation, that this association would take place; this equalization
would go to prevent any opposition to the tax, which would otherwise be
hazarded.

Mr. BUCK was satisfied with this explanation; therefore, supposing
gentlemen who supported the amendment would vote for both, according to
this modification, he should go with them; if not, he should oppose the
amendment.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, he did not rise to speak to the point of
order; he considered that as already settled by the Chairman. Every
member, he said, against laying an additional tax upon molasses, would,
of course, vote against the amendment; and all those who had no
objection to the tax, but who did not wish it to be thus introduced, of
whom he found there was not a few, might join them, as, after the
additional tax on sugar was agreed to, that on molasses might be again
introduced.

Mr. S. SMITH said, he had some doubt before the last gentleman was up,
of the propriety of tacking these two articles together, but now he had
none. One part of the Union, he supposed, would be for voting out
molasses: but his constituents would not like the tax on sugar, except
it was accompanied with that on molasses; as a subject of sweetening he
thought they should both go together. Mr. S. said, he had another
article of sweetening, which he wished also to add to the resolution:
great quantities of sugar-candy were manufactured in Holland and sent
all over Germany; it was used with tea and coffee, in the place of
sugar. This article, he said, was finding its way among the Germans in
this country. At present it only paid a duty of 10 per cent. _ad
valorem_, which was a very inadequate duty, when compared with that paid
on sugar. Mr. S. said, he was against going into the subject of indirect
taxes, but he thought with the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
GALLATIN) that it was his duty to make the resolution as good as he
could. Nothing had been said to prove that we had not revenue enough for
the present; but he would, however, move to add nine cents a pound upon
sugar-candy imported.

Mr. S. said, he agreed with the Secretary of the Treasury, that sugar
was amongst the most proper articles upon which to lay an additional
impost; but he wished for some permanent source of revenue, and not
adopt the trifling modes proposed. Gentlemen talked of deceiving the
people; he said they could not be deceived; they would know there were
two parties in that House, the one for direct, the other for indirect
taxes. Those gentlemen who were opposed to direct taxes brought forward
these articles in place of it. The people need not be told this; they
saw it evidently enough.

Mr. HOLLAND said, though he was opposed to direct taxes, he was also on
sugar and molasses; he saw all the disadvantages of some other gentlemen
on taxing West India produce at this critical juncture; but if it must
pass, he should think it his duty to endeavor to make it pass as
unexceptionably as possible; however, he should oppose both, and though
it affected his constituents differently from those of Vermont, yet he
should not include them as necessarily connected. Mr. H. thought if
these were opposed, there might be many articles more proper to lay a
tax on; but he thought there was no necessity for any this session.

The question for adding one cent per gallon on molasses was then put and
carried.

Mr. S. SMITH then moved that nine cents per pound be laid on sugar-candy
imported, observing that it was much used by the Dutch, and there being
much sweetening in it, it should bear a proportionate duty.

Mr. W. SMITH wished the gentleman to be candid on the motive of his
proposition.

Mr. S. SMITH answered, that his conduct with respect to the subject had
always been fair and unequivocal; he wished the whole proposition to be
defeated, which he had before declared, but, to make it equal and
consistent, he proposed the addition.

It was then put and carried.

The question was put on the whole resolution, as amended, and
carried--yeas 52.


FRIDAY, February 17

_Increase of Duties._

SALT.

Mr. HARPER then proposed that an additional duty of five cents per
bushel should he laid upon all salt imported in the United States. [Mr.
H. read the letter of the Secretary, wherein he mentions salt as being
at a much lower rate of duty than in other countries, and that no tax
laid upon it could be evaded, from its necessity and bulk.] Mr. H.
added, as, in his opinion, satisfactory answers had been given to the
objections which had been urged against this tax, it was not necessary
to say more on the subject.

Mr. GALLATIN said the arguments of the Secretary of the Treasury were
excellent fiscal arguments, and went to say, "provided we can get money,
no matter how." He says salt cannot be smuggled; that we know: whether
the duty was increased, or remain as it was, the people must consume the
same. This was true, and the same arguments might be used for taxing the
light or the water. Of all the necessaries of life, a duty was most
easily collected upon salt; and this was the reason which had induced
other countries to tax it so heavily; and yet this was used as an
argument for increasing the duty here; but he was not one of those who
felt any consolation, upon such an increase of duty, that there were
other countries where the duty was yet higher.

Mr. G. said, as to any satisfactory answers which had been given to the
objections to this tax, he had not heard them; he believed they had not
been answered at all; except, indeed, sullen silence might be deemed
satisfactory answers; if it were, they had indeed been answered
satisfactorily.

Mr. G. here repeated the objections to the tax which he had made on a
former occasion, viz: that it would operate as a poll-tax; that it would
fall partially on some districts of country, and upon some classes of
citizens more than others. He said salt in that part of the country from
which he came was already upwards of four dollars a bushel, and that it
would be therefore oppressive to increase the evil, by adding fresh
duties upon it.

Mr. NICHOLAS said a tax on salt was equally objectionable, whether it
was considered as a poll-tax, or as a tax upon agriculture. As a
poll-tax, every one would see the injustice of charging all men alike
with a tax, without respect to their ability to pay it; as a tax upon
agriculture, he was able to say something from experience. He was
willing to give all the authority to the opinion of the Secretary of the
Treasury which he could wish, but he could not yield his opinion to him.
He knew that agriculture was at present very much depressed by the high
price of salt; he had himself refrained from the use of it, by its
dearness, though he believed his cattle had been the worse for it. The
poorer class of citizens in the part of the country from which he came
were generally owners of cattle, and employed themselves in taking care
of them. These men found it at present as much as they could do to make
a comfortable living, and any additional tax on salt would be very ill
received by them. He was satisfied that it was a tax which would operate
with great inequality; it was a tax upon one kind of employment--upon an
employment which was generally pursued by the poorer classes, and
consequently least able to pay it. It might be said, five cents a bushel
was a trifle; but he said he objected to it from the principle of taking
money where it could be got, as, if five cents were now to be added, the
same argument would hold for adding another and another five on a future
day.

Mr. HOLLAND was opposed to the amendment; he said no article which could
be mentioned would bear a greater augmentation than salt; indeed the
whole revenue of the United States might be raised from it, because it
must be used by every person; but that was no reason why the whole
burden should be laid on it. In North Carolina, Mr. H. said, it was four
dollars per bushel, which was sufficiently high without adding to the
price, and was always a cash article, and difficult to be had for that.
It being an article of absolute necessity, the rich would not pay more,
if so much, as the poor.

Mr. RUTHERFORD said, he was against this tax for two reasons; the first
was on account of its inequality, and the next on account of its
odiousness. A tax on salt, he said, was almost like taxing the common
air. Farmers were obliged to use large quantities of it for their stock;
it rendered them docile and easy to be managed. Indeed it could not be
done without; a person was nothing without salt. The price at present
was enormous on the frontier, and this duty would add prodigiously to
it; for this reason he should give it his flat opposition.

Mr. FINDLAY said, because salt was necessary, and because it could not
be smuggled, would not surely be sufficient arguments for increasing the
duty upon it. The law of reason, he said, was the law of justice. Mr. F.
gave an account of the progress of this tax. His colleague (Mr.
GALLATIN) must have been mistaken as to the price which this article
bore in the Western country. He had himself lately paid six guineas for
six bushels of salt. Indeed this was considered as the greatest
inconvenience in that part of the country, and they could not at present
be relieved from it. Providence, who generally bestowed the necessaries
of life in a very general manner, had not provided them with salt. And
shall we, for this reason, monopolize a revenue upon it? For the same
reason would hold good for paying the whole upon it as a part. He
trusted they would not be so unjust to the people of that country.

Mr. HARPER said, after all the time which had been taken up in
discussing this subject, he would not occupy the attention of the
committee longer than while he made one or two remarks.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) had said that no answer
had been given to his objections against an additional tax on salt. He
should not enter into a dispute with that gentleman upon what might be
deemed an answer; but he believed many members of that House would
remember that an answer was given, and probably they might also think it
a satisfactory one; at least it was so to one person. The objections
brought against this tax would be well-founded, if the whole revenue was
proposed to be raised from it; or if it were intended as a substitute
for a land tax, or any other great object; if two or three millions were
wanted from it, then it might be objected to upon good ground; but when
one hundred thousand dollars only were proposed to be drawn from this
source, he did not think the objections would hold. Admitting, said Mr.
H., that there was some inequality in the operation of this tax, those
persons upon whom it fell heaviest were exonerated from many other taxes
which other parts of the country had to pay. They had, for instance,
just agreed to increase the duty upon a certain species of cotton goods,
of which they would not purchase a single yard. The present revenue was
six millions four hundred thousand dollars, of which salt pays near
three hundred thousand dollars. The people on the frontier, who pay for
salt, are in a great measure exempt from other articles taxed; they
purchased neither foreign wines nor spirits, high priced dresses nor
furniture; all they wanted was corduroys, &c., which was very
unfrequent. If five cents per bushel was laid on salt, those persons
would have about a dollar a year more to pay, and nine-tenths not half a
dollar. What could be more easy? Indeed, except the people were told of
the duty they would not know it, as its effects would be so trifling.

With respect to the price of salt at Fort Pitt, as a gentleman had
observed, it might be high, but was this occasioned by a duty? No, but
by the situation of the country. Ought they not, then, he asked, to
devise some species of tax by which to draw some part of the revenue
from the inhabitants of the back country? He thought so far from this
being wrong, that justice required it. This subject did not address the
understanding, but the sensibility of the House, or perhaps the
sensibility of those out of the House.

The objections against the tax which had been urged, he thought, ought
not to have any weight, since it would operate with the greatest
equality upon the whole, and there would be safety, propriety, and
justice, in making the augmentation in question. Suppose two cents were
put, instead of five; this would raise a good sum, and be very easy.

Mr. S. SMITH moved that the committee rise; which was negatived--there
being only twenty-five in favor of it.

Mr. W. SMITH said the question had best be taken on blank cents, then
five, four, or any number of cents could afterwards be added.

The question was then put, and lost--yeas 41, nays 48.


SATURDAY, February 18.

_Naval Appropriation._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
granting an appropriation for finishing the three frigates, and also
upon the bill repealing that part of the act which provided for the
officering and manning the frigates, both having been committed to the
same Committee of the Whole. That for repealing a part of the former law
came first under consideration.

Mr. W. SMITH said he could not abandon the idea of our some time
becoming a naval power; he very much disliked the repealing this act; in
order, however, to make the bill more palatable, and to remove some of
the embarrassments which the Senate would otherwise have to encounter,
he would move to substitute, instead of the word "repeal," the words
"suspend for ---- years."

Mr. COIT thought the very beginning of the frigates a wild notion, and
hoped the most distant idea of manning them would not enter gentlemen's
minds; he should therefore oppose the motion.

Mr. VENABLE said, it seemed the gentleman who moved the amendment did
not think it necessary the ships should now be manned. The operation of
the amendment appeared to put it in the power of one branch of the
Legislature, at a future day, to man the ships, and send them to sea. He
was surprised at the changeableness of the gentleman who moved and
favored the equipment. When a naval armament was first proposed, it was
objected to, as looking like forming a Naval Establishment. They then
told us it was expressly to repel the encroachments of the Algerines;
and that, as soon as peace was obtained with that power, the building of
them was to stop. Now they come forward, and avow a desire to have a
Navy Establishment. Thus originate evils which if not stopped early,
would spread and become dangerous. The only fair argument they have on
the subject is, that a Navy is now become necessary. Certain it is,
that, if they intend to have a Naval Establishment, to protect our
commerce and repel our injuries, three frigates will be very incompetent
to the object. He should not object to finishing them, and only because
so much had been expended on them already, but should ever oppose
fitting them for sea.

Mr. SWANWICK asked the gentleman what security there was in a peace with
Algiers? Could he say we were at peace with them now? Certainly we are
in a worse situation with that power now than then; we are parting with
our cash, (which makes it such a scarce article,) and yet we have no
benefit. Now it is said it is altogether a vision--a fancy or a dream.
Then gentlemen get up and ask what we are to do with three frigates? He
would answer, that so far as they went, they gave stability and
protection to our commerce. True, they were not thirty frigates, but he
believed, few as they were, they would save more than five times what
they cost in only one year. The richest ships we have are now taken and
robbed by every picaroon and pirate infesting the seas, because we have
no security; and he was surprised it was not worse. He had no doubt but
it would be an emolument; it would be a protection to the great revenue
we enjoy. That very trade, he said, which was subject to spoliation from
such petty robbers, paid into the revenue five or six millions of duty
annually. If this was still permitted to be encroached on, it was an
error, and it would soon be seen; and this was by a people called "free
and enlightened." He had no doubt they would soon be enlightened enough
to see they had done wrong. If gentlemen are against finishing these
frigates, why do they not come forward and declare it? Let us sell them,
said he, at public auction. What will be the effect if we have it told
at our wharves that we object to man them, because we have peace with
Algiers? He hoped they would be manned, or else have tacked to the bill,
that, when finished, they were to be sold for East Indiamen or
something. If that were gentlemen's wish, this was the time to come
forward and say so, and let it be put in the bill. He would ask, Was
there any thing in the name of Government, if it operated in this
manner? It was extraordinary conduct, indeed.

Gentlemen say they will not vote to finish these frigates, except the
repeal for manning is included. When it goes up to the Senate, may they
not say they will not vote to finish, except it be to man them? But, Mr.
S. said, he supposed gentlemen depended upon negotiation, if any thing
was wrong. What were the consequences of our late negotiation? We have
two things before us--treaty or ships. As for treaty, we have seen our
money sent across the Atlantic, and scattered a thousand ways: this was
throwing it into the ocean. He had heard of a Doge of Venice throwing a
ring into the sea to marry it: it seemed this money was gone for the
same purpose, and its use would be no better than the Doge's ring. He
thought the most complete treaty was, power to resist aggression. This
business of negotiation is very unprofitable. You may obtain fair
promises from foreign ministers, but very poor redress, if any.

The question on the amendment was put and lost--ayes 30, noes 51.

Mr. HARRISON moved for the committee to rise and report the bill without
amendments.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, it seemed that gentlemen were making a new business
of this. At the time it was brought forward, gentlemen voted in favor of
it, because the law was to be repealed. He voted to separate the bills,
because he conceived it would not be right to say to the Senate, You
shall do two things together, or neither. He hoped the committee would
rise, that the House may not have such power over the business as to
keep it back. If the other bill pass the Senate, said he, we can take up
this, and pass it in a short time.

Mr. PARKER thought this a most extraordinary procedure, to say we will
not pass the appropriation bill till we know the Senate have agreed to
that for repealing. He thought the Senate had as great a right to
exercise their discretion as that House. He never expected to have heard
such expressions. This was holding out a _dictum_ for their conduct:
this he thought neither fair nor proper.

Mr. VENABLE thought the bills were connected. He wished to vote merely
for finishing the frigates. He hoped the committee would not rise, but
that it might be so amended as to add the other bill to it. When he
voted for the appropriation, he said, he voted for it only in such a
manner as should be reconcilable with his judgment. If the gentleman
would waive his motion, and the House would so connect it, he should be
gratified.

Mr. HARRISON said, as the last gentleman's ideas were fully to his
purpose, he should withdraw his motion.

On motion being made for connecting the bills--

Mr. BUCK hoped it would not prevail. The only reason he saw to object,
(and he thought that very forcible,) was, that it discovered a jealousy
in that House of another branch of the Government, which he thought very
unjustifiable. He had voted for the repeal, but should not vote for the
appropriation. He thought they ought to act for themselves, without
reference to the other branch. Any member may vote which way he pleased,
but to say he would not vote for one without they go to the other, was
unfair. He could see no justice in such a mistrust from this branch of
the Legislature. Suppose, he said, the bills go to the Senate
separately, they may concur in the appropriation, and reject the appeal.
Even in that situation, were it to be left, the Executive could not man
the frigates, unless they could obtain further appropriations--to
obstruct which would be preferable, and would put it out of the power of
the Senate to embarrass the House.

Mr. VENABLE said his vote was given without any relation whatever to the
Senate. He thought any act passed by this House could not, when sent up
to the Senate, be termed disrespectful, for each branch had a right to
act for themselves. He was surprised to hear the gentleman last up say
he should not vote this appropriation; for he had heard him say, on a
former occasion, that he would vote an appropriation for any treaty,
law, or whatever should exist to call for it. Mr. V. confessed himself
to be of a very different opinion; for he always thought the House had a
discretionary power to grant it or not, but that gentleman had long said
it had none.

Mr. BUCK said, as his doctrines had been called in question, he must beg
indulgence to explain. He never said that the House had not a right to
judge on the propriety of appropriation in an existing law. He conceived
a treaty quite another thing. The PRESIDENT and Senate have a
constitutional power to make a treaty; in that, he said, he did advocate
that that House had no right to withhold appropriations; but in laws,
where the power of making appropriations rests partly in that House,
they had a right to grant or withhold. This, he said, he had always
held.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, this appeared to him a very unreasonable clamor in
behalf of the Senate. The gentleman last up seemed very careful not to
awaken the jealousy of the Senate. How could he know what part would
awaken that idea of disrespect? He had formed his mind to vote on the
subject, and surely every member might do so, without a fear of showing
disrespect to another branch. The gentleman had said that this House may
refuse to appropriate for a law. Now, suppose the Senate refuse to
repeal without we appropriate, we are then forced to choose one of two
evils. Very often, Mr. N. said, the House were obliged to appropriate
for a law, it may be, so far executed that they could not refuse.
Suppose the PRESIDENT should, after this, appoint officers to enlist men
for the frigates, how could the House refuse to pay them? While a law
existed to man these ships, it would be difficult to prevent it: it
would enable those who were friendly to the measure to carry it into
effect. He hoped, therefore, the House would not run the risk by leaving
it open to such possible intrusion.

Mr. S. SMITH thought this was a very unfair way of doing business, but
he had been used to such things. He thought this form of _tacking_ was
very improper and unfair. It had been observed that we were the most
free and enlightened people, but he thought those who advocated these
measures proved the very contrary.

Mr. SWANWICK said, it appeared to him a kind of Legislative stratagem.
The whole intention of the business could be easily discovered. If there
was nothing improper, why should they fear to trust the Senate with it?
Having the yeas and nays on both bills, gentlemen could not easily
excuse them for voting for the repeal, as it would go out into the
country that many had voted contrary to their arguments. Thus we are
forced to vote against our own opinion, or not have the frigates
finished. He could plainly see that gentlemen meant to defeat the
object, and, he thought, in a very unfair way.

Mr. W. LYMAN spoke much of the impolicy and impropriety of the measures
of those gentlemen who supported naval preparations. Some time back, he
said, those very gentlemen were advising us to cultivate our land, and
not regard commerce--it was a broken reed to depend on; but now, they
want to put the nation to an enormous expense to protect that commerce
they thought so lightly of! The frigates would cost more than double
the money which was at first estimated: this would be a disgrace to any
nation. The whole process of the business had been bad, and he had no
doubt but the estimate now before the House would be found deficient.
Though he thought a small Navy would be useful, yet, until he saw its
process conducted more fairly, and with more discretion, he should not
vote a shilling to it: for the waste of money which had been discovered
in this, had given him a distaste to it.

A remark having fallen from Mr. L., on the constitutionality of this
appropriation--

Mr. W. SMITH said, that, what the gentleman observed, only respected an
Army. The constitution says, an appropriation for the Army shall not be
made for more than two years, but it said not a word about restricting a
Navy; and it is certain that the framers of the constitution had a view
to a Navy, as in three different parts it makes mention of it. [Here Mr.
S. read those parts from the constitution.] The question was not whether
to repeal the law or not, but whether the appropriation bill was to be
_tacked_ to the repeal. When before taken up, a majority voted for two
bills, and they are accordingly reported, and now the two are to be
united. This, said he, is directing the Senate to vote a certain way,
because this House saw it right. This was a kind of coercion which would
oblige them (if they support their independence, which they certainly
will) to reject the repeal. This, he said, was a spirit which every
gentleman in the House felt. He therefore hoped there would be two
bills.

Mr. GALLATIN did not conceive this a question on the constitution; it
was not on the power of the House as to the subject of appropriation,
but merely on connecting the two bills. He conceived it perfectly right
and proper to connect them, because the subject of them was the same. It
was not novel: appropriation and repeal had before been connected.
Indeed, he thought it improper to hold the Senate in any consideration
at all. He should not be guided by any apprehensions of what they would
do. The gentleman last up had said, it was unfair to connect them, as it
would oblige members who opposed one to vote for both. Now, a majority
will always decide, and those in the minority will always be affected.
That gentleman would rather take a question on each; but Mr. G. said he
would rather on both together. But both will not be material, more than
in a certain degree. He further observed that a decision had been come
to to keep the subjects apart. This, Mr. G. said, was only in order to
give leave to the committee to report one or two bills. But that could
not now affect the decision. The House might now do as they pleased. He
looked upon the first act of the law as rather explanatory of the other.
A law passed last year for the equipment of the frigates. The first law
expired as to the manning them. It is therefore only for fear the word
"equipment" should be so construed as to mean "manning," that we wish a
connection of these bills.

He thought it more candid and fair to have both the objects before the
Senate at one time than to separate them. If they think it an attack
upon their privileges they would act consistently therewith.

Mr. WILLIAMS could not see where the difference was, whether the bills
were apart or not. He was sorry any jealousy should be discovered
towards another branch; if the amendment were to go to the Senate they
had power to reject any part. The next Congress would take a view of the
subject, and do what they thought right, as the frigates would not be
fit to be manned till then.

Mr. BUCK again repeated his objections to uniting the bills.

Mr. N. SMITH thought there could be no good reasons for uniting the
bills. There had not yet been any appropriation made, and the money was
nearly expended; he thought the appropriation should be passed
immediately, as he had no doubt but both Houses would ultimately unite
in this object. If, therefore, any money was to be appropriated, let it
be done, and then if the House thought proper to agree to the repeal, it
could be done, as no delay ought to be made.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) said the other day, that
he would not, under any situation, vote the supply until he knew whether
there was any intention to fit them for sea or not. This, Mr. S. thought
the principal point; but except that gentleman, with others, thought the
ships were to remain in the same situation as at present, it certainly
was necessary to agree to the appropriations; this was voted on all
hands, though some could not agree to go all lengths. He did not believe
many could be found in the House who would wish them to remain and rot
on the stocks; but for gentlemen to say they would not agree to grant
the supply except the other part was repealed, he thought wrong. It was
true, they had the power to withhold even appropriations for the
PRESIDENT's salary, Senate, &c., but if such opposition was supported,
Government could not long exist. That House had power over the Senate,
and, _vice versa_, the Senate over that House--each had a right to think
and do as they pleased, but it would be wrong in one to curtail the
privilege of the other by an ill-timed opposition; this was merely to
show a spleen which could not but be to the detriment and delay of
business.

Mr. W. SMITH rose to answer some observations made by Mr. GALLATIN and
Mr. VENABLE, and proceeded to show the impropriety of tacking the bills;
he said it would produce insurmountable difficulties. He never could
agree to this _tortus discordans_ being sent up to the Senate.

Mr. VENABLE answered. The question was then put for tacking the two
bills, and carried, ayes 41, noes 36.

The committee then rose, and the House took up the amendments reported
by the Committee of the Whole. Whereupon, the first amendment reported
by the Committee of the Whole House, for adding a new section, to be the
second section of the said bill, being read, in the words following, to
wit:

      "_And be it further enacted_, That the sum of ---- dollars
      be, and the same is hereby appropriated for the purpose of
      finishing the frigates now building, called the United
      States, Constitution, and Constellation; and that the same
      be paid out of the surplus of revenue and income, which may
      accrue to the end of the year one thousand seven hundred
      and ninety-seven, after satisfying the objects for which
      appropriations have been heretofore made."

Mr. W. SMITH said, as the question would first be taken on the amendment
and then upon the resolution as amended, a member who wished to vote for
the finishing of the frigates, but not for the repeal, would not have an
opportunity of showing his sentiments by the yeas and nays. In order
that members who thought with him might have an opportunity of showing
their vote, he called for the previous question upon the proposition.

The SPEAKER declaring that this motion was not in order, Mr. W. SMITH
called for the yeas and nays upon the amendment.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, rather than not obtain an appropriation for
finishing the frigates, he should vote in favor of the amendment, though
he was of the same opinion with the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
W. SMITH) as to the unfairness of the proceeding.

Mr. DENT was of the same opinion.

Mr. MUHLENBERG said as the amendment stood annexed to the other bill, he
should vote against it; though, if the subject had continued in a
separate bill, he should have voted in favor of it.

The question was then taken on the amendment, and decided in the
affirmative, 59 to 25, as follows:

      YEAS.--Theodorus Bailey, Abraham Baldwin, David Bard,
      Thomas Blount, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Thomas
      Claiborne, John Clopton, Joshua Coit, Isaac Coles, William
      Cooper, Henry Dearborn, George Dent, William Findlay, Jesse
      Franklin, Nathaniel Freeman, jr., Albert Gallatin, Ezekiel
      Gilbert, James Gillespie, Henry Glenn, Christopher Greenup,
      Andrew Gregg, Carter B. Harrison, John Hathorn, Jonathan N.
      Havens, James Holland, Andrew Jackson, John Wilkes Kittera,
      George Leonard, Edward Livingston, Matthew Locke, Samuel
      Lyman, William Lyman, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel Macon, James
      Madison, John Milledge, Andrew Moore, Anthony New, John
      Nicholas, Alexander D. Orr, John Page, John Patton, John
      Richards, Robert Rutherford, John S. Sherburne, Samuel
      Sitgreaves, Thompson J. Skinner, Jeremiah Smith, Israel
      Smith, Isaac Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., Thomas Sprigg,
      Zephaniah Swift, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum,
      Abraham Venable, John Williams, and Richard Winn.

      NAYS.--Theophilus Bradbury, Daniel Buck, Samuel W. Dana,
      James Davenport, George Ege, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      Thomas Hartley, John Heath, William Hindman, Francis
      Malbone, Frederick A. Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray,
      Josiah Parker, John Read, Samuel Sewall, Nathaniel Smith,
      Samuel Smith, William Smith, John Swanwick, George
      Thatcher, and Peleg Wadsworth.

The bill was then recommitted to a Committee of the Whole, in order to
have the blank for the sum to be appropriated for finishing the vessels
inserted, and was filled with $172,000.


TUESDAY, February 21.

_Negotiation with the Mediterranean Powers._

Mr. W. SMITH moved that the House should go into a committee on the
business, which would require the galleries to be closed; the SPEAKER
accordingly put the question for going into a Committee of the Whole on
the bill to authorize a negotiation with the Mediterranean Powers,
which, being carried, the galleries were cleared accordingly.

After the galleries were cleared, the bill was agreed to with
amendments, and ordered for a third reading to-morrow.

On motion that the House come to the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That the injunction of secrecy upon the
      members of this House, so far as it relates to that part of
      the communication made by the President, by his Message of
      January 9, which has been printed, be taken off, and that
      all future debates and proceedings thereon be had with open
      doors."

A motion was made to insert, after the words "be taken off," "together
with the letter of Messrs. Barlow and Donaldson, of April 5, 1796." The
question on the amendment was taken by yeas and nays, and lost--yeas 19,
nays 65.

The main question was then taken by yeas and nays, and resulted--yeas
53, nays 36.

      Reports of the Secretary of State, relative to the present
      situation of affairs with the Dey and Regency of Algiers,
      accompanying the following confidential Message from the
      President of the United States, received the 9th of
      January, 1797:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives_:

      Herewith I lay before you, in confidence, reports from the
      Departments of State and the Treasury, by which you will
      see the present situation of our affairs with the Dey and
      Regency of Algiers.

                          G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, January 9, 1797.

      _To the President of the United States, the Secretary of
      State respectfully makes the following brief representation
      of the affairs of the United States, in relation to
      Algiers_:

      When Colonel Humphreys left America, in April, 1795, he was
      accompanied by Joseph Donaldson, Esq., who had been
      appointed Consul for Tunis and Tripoli; and him Colonel
      Humphreys was authorized to employ in negotiating a Treaty
      with Algiers, while he should proceed himself to France,
      for the purpose of obtaining the co-operation of that
      Government in this negotiation.

      They arrived at Gibraltar on the 17th of May. Colonel
      Humphreys concluded that it was expedient for Mr. Donaldson
      to go first to Alicant, rather than Algiers, in order to be
      near at hand, to ascertain facts and profit of occasions.
      He gave him instructions accordingly; and having also
      instructed Mr. Simpson, our Consul at Gibraltar, to renew
      our peace with the Emperor of Morocco, Colonel Humphreys
      sailed from Gibraltar the 24th of May, and arrived at Havre
      de Grace on the 26th of June; from whence he set off
      immediately for Paris. The object of his mission was
      communicated by our Minister, Colonel Monroe, to the
      Committee of Public Safety. On the 1st of July he had
      received only a verbal answer, that the French Government
      was disposed to interest itself, and to do every thing in
      its power, to promote the accomplishment of our wishes on
      the subject in question. On the 28th, assurances were
      received that immediate measures should be taken for giving
      particular instructions to the agents of the Republic, to
      use its influence in co-operating with us. The multiplicity
      of affairs with which the officers of Government were
      occupied, and the getting from London a sum of money
      necessary to purchase the usual peace presents, prevented a
      conclusion of this arrangement at Paris until September. It
      had been judged expedient, by Colonel Humphreys and Colonel
      Monroe, that Joel Barlow should be employed in the
      negotiation with the Barbary States, and his consent had
      been obtained. By the 11th of September, all the writings
      on the part of Colonel Humphreys were prepared for Mr.
      Barlow, to proceed with the instructions and powers from
      the Government of the French Republic to its agents in
      Barbary, in favor of our negotiation.

      Colonel Humphreys left Paris the 12th of September, and
      reached Havre the 14th, where he found the master and mate
      of the United States brig Sophia, both sick with fevers.
      While waiting there impatiently for their recovery, he
      received intelligence from our Consul at Marseilles, that
      Mr. Donaldson had concluded a Treaty of Peace with the Dey
      of Algiers; nevertheless, Colonel Humphreys thought it
      expedient that Mr. Barlow should proceed with the presents
      prepared and preparing at Paris; for, if not needed at
      Algiers, they would be wanted in the negotiation with Tunis
      and Tripoli.

      About the 5th of October, Colonel Humphreys sailed from
      Havre, and after a stormy passage of more than forty days,
      arrived at Lisbon on the 17th of November. There he found
      Captain O'Brien, who had arrived about the 1st of October,
      with the Treaty with Algiers.

      On the 3d of September Mr. Donaldson arrived at Algiers,
      and on the 5th the Treaty was concluded, and the peace
      presents immediately given, by a loan. Mr. Donaldson,
      knowing that funds had been lodged in London to answer his
      stipulations, engaged to make the payments in three or four
      months.

      Colonel Humphreys had received advice, under date of the
      30th July, from the Messrs. Barings, in London, to whom the
      funds had been remitted, that, having made progress in the
      sales of the United States' stock, they should hold, at his
      disposal, the whole of the value of $800,000, meaning to
      furnish, by anticipation, the value of that part which
      remained unsold, if the service of the United States
      required it. Colonel Humphreys, counting on the money as
      always ready after this period, sent Captain O'Brien from
      Lisbon to London, in the brig Sophia, to receive it. Owing
      to contrary winds, she did not leave Lisbon till the 24th
      of December. The other details, relative to the pecuniary
      transactions, appear in the report of the Secretary of the
      Treasury.

      The disappointments in the pecuniary negotiations, put the
      Treaty in jeopardy; the Dey threatened to abandon it, and
      it was with extreme difficulty that it was prevented. Mr.
      Barlow did not arrive at Alicant until February, 1796,
      where he proposed to wait the arrival of the funds: but,
      after a little time, his intelligence from Algiers showing
      that our affairs were in a critical situation, he
      determined to go thither immediately, with the hope of
      soothing the Dey. He arrived there the 4th of March; they
      had before prolonged the time to the 8th of April for the
      payment of the stipulated sums. On the 3d of this month the
      Dey declared what should be his final determination--that
      in eight days Mr. Barlow and Mr. Donaldson should leave
      Algiers; and if, in thirty days after, the money was not
      paid, the Treaty should be at an end, and his cruisers
      should bring in American vessels. Under these
      circumstances, and as the last hope of saving the Treaty,
      they were induced to offer the present of a frigate--this
      fortunately succeeded. For the particulars of this
      transaction, the Secretary begs leave to refer to the
      enclosed letter from Messrs. Barlow and Donaldson.

      Colonel Humphreys not deeming himself authorized to confirm
      this promise of a frigate, referred the matter to the
      Executive of the United States; and for this end despatched
      Captain O'Brien, in the brig Sophia, to America. There was
      evidently no alternative; and the promise was confirmed.

      The frigate is now building in Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
      and is expected to be finished in the spring. Captain
      O'Brien returned to Lisbon, where he arrived on the ---- of
      July. Colonel Humphreys had advantageously negotiated bills
      on London for $225,000. This sum was embarked on board the
      Sophia, and, on the 3d of August, Captain O'Brien set sail
      for Algiers. He has not since been heard of, and there is
      room to fear that some misfortune has befallen him. The
      money was insured at a small premium, against the danger of
      the seas; against all risks they demanded so high a premium
      as Colonel Humphreys judged it inexpedient to give, seeing
      the Sophia was a vessel of the United States, having a
      special passport from the President, as well as a passport
      in the Turkish language, under the seal of the Dey of
      Algiers.

      Such arrangements have been made by Mr. Barlow and Mr.
      Donaldson, at Algiers and Leghorn, as will doubtless insure
      the payment of the $400,000 originally expected from the
      latter place; and the same house have become engaged to the
      Dey and Regency for the residue of the money due as the
      price of peace, without which he would not agree to the
      redemption of the captives.

           The Secretary of the Treasury estimates
           these further sums to be provided to fulfil
           the terms of the Treaty                      $255,759
           For two years' annuities to the Dey            99,246
           To which are to be added the 10,000
           sequins promised by Mr. Barlow and Mr.
           Donaldson, mentioned in their letter           18,000
           And the expenses of the captives performing
           quarantine at Marseilles, and transporting
           them to America, estimated by
           the Consul at Marseilles, at about              6,500
                                                         -------
                                                         379,505

      On the 31st ultimo I received a letter from Mr. Barlow,
      dated the 13th of July, informing that the agent, Mr.
      Famin, at Tunis, who had been recommended to him by the
      French Consul Herculias, had concluded, with the Bey of
      that Regency, a truce for six months, from the 15th day of
      June last, and that without any presents.

                          TIMOTHY PICKERING,
                          _Secretary of State._

      DEPARTMENT OF STATE, January 6, 1797.


WEDNESDAY, February 22.

_Mediterranean Powers._

The bill for making appropriations to defray the expense of negotiations
with Mediterranean powers, was also read the third time. The provisions
of this act, (which has been the subject of the various discussions
which have lately taken place with closed galleries) are to the
following effect:

      "That the President of the United States be, and he is
      hereby authorized to apply a sum not exceeding 255,759
      dollars and three cents, to the expenses which may have
      been incurred in any negotiations with Mediterranean
      powers, beyond the sums heretofore appropriated; and that
      the said sum of 255,759 dollars and three cents, be, and
      the same is hereby appropriated for that purpose; and that
      a further sum not exceeding 96,246 dollars and 63 cents,
      be, and the same is hereby appropriated for discharging the
      two first years' annuity to the Dey and Regency of Algiers,
      pursuant to treaty, in addition to the gum appropriated for
      that purpose by the act of the sixth of May, 1796."

On the question being put that the bill do pass, Mr. GREENUP said he
never liked the bill in any shape whatever; he would therefore express
it now. He then called for the yeas and nays, which were taken, and
stood ayes 63, noes 19, as follow:

      YEAS.--Fisher Ames, Abraham Baldwin, Theophilus Bradbury,
      Nathan Bryan, Daniel Buck, Dempsey Burges, Thomas
      Claiborne, Joshua Coit, Isaac Coles, William Cooper, James
      Davenport, Henry Dearborn, George Dent, George Ege, William
      Findlay, Dwight Foster, Jesse Franklin, Nathaniel Freeman,
      jr., Albert Gallatin, Ezekiel Gilbert, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      Carter B. Harrison, Thomas Hartley, Jonathan N. Havens,
      Thomas Henderson, William Hindman, Aaron Kitchell, John
      Wilkes Kittera, George Leonard, Matthew Locke, Samuel
      Lyman, James Madison, Francis Malbone, John Milledge,
      Andrew Moore, Frederick A. Muhlenberg, John Nicholas,
      Alexander D. Orr, John Page, Josiah Parker, Elisha R.
      Potter, John Richards, Robert Rutherford, John S.
      Sherburne, Samuel Sitgreaves, Thompson J. Skinner, Jeremiah
      Smith, Nathaniel Smith, Israel Smith, Isaac Smith, Richard
      Sprigg, jr., Thomas Sprigg, Zephaniah Swift, George
      Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson, Philip Van
      Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg Wadsworth, and John
      Williams.

      NAYS.--David Bard, Thomas Blount, Samuel J. Cabell, Gabriel
      Christie, John Clopton, James Gillespie, Christopher
      Greenup, John Hathorn, John Heath, James Holland, Andrew
      Jackson, George Jackson, William Lyman, Samuel Maclay,
      Nathaniel Macon, William Strudwick, John Swanwick, Abraham
      Venable, and Richard Winn.

On motion of Mr. GALLATIN, the title was changed to "a bill to authorize
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to apply further sums to defray the
expenses of the negotiation with the Dey and Regency of Algiers."[11]

_John Cleves Symmes._

On motion of Mr. GALLATIN, the House took up the bill in addition to an
act for granting certain lands to John Cleves Symmes and his associates;
when

Mr. COIT moved to strike out the first section. His object, he said, was
to gain information, particularly with respect to the survey.

Mr. GALLATIN (who was Chairman of the Committee which made the report)
gave a concise history of the business; which satisfied Mr. COIT, who
withdrew his motion; and the bill was ordered to be read a third time
to-morrow.

The particulars of this case are as follows:

John Cleves Symmes and his associates entered into a contract with the
United States in the year 1787, for a million acres of land in the
North-western Territory, at a time when the geography of that country
was not well understood. The tract was to extend twenty miles up the
Great Miami to the Little Miami; but when this line came to be measured,
it was found that it cut the Little Miami in several places on land
which had been reserved by Virginia at the cession of this Territory to
the United States. Mr. Symmes was down in the country before he knew the
line thus drawn would thus cut into the lands of Virginia. The first
thing he did was to take possession of the country which is between Fort
Washington and the Little Miami, and to sell as much as he could of it.
General St. Clair, the Governor of that Territory, threatened to drive
Mr. Symmes and the settlers off this territory to which he had no right.
The innocent settlers, who had purchased the land of Mr. Symmes, sent
forward representations of their case to the PRESIDENT, which, together
with the representations of the Governor, produced an act to change the
boundary line of the purchase, which was passed April 12, 1792. This act
describes the boundary line of the tract of land to be between the two
Miamis and the Ohio. Mr. Ludlow was sent to survey it in 1793, when it
was found, that instead of there being one million of acres, there were
only five hundred and forty-three thousand nine hundred and fifty, which
was duly surveyed, and the survey lodged in the Treasury Office on the
10th of January, 1794. Here arose the first difficulty. The act passed
to change the boundary line could not take place without the consent of
Mr. Symmes. In consequence, the law was said to be enacted at the
request of Mr. Symmes. In 1794, Mr. S. had not made any request,
consequently the law was a nullity. He might at that time have said, he
would not have the land upon any other than the original contract, and
that it was the business of the United States to make up the deficiency;
and, if he had so acted, it is probable Congress would have been obliged
to have found him one million of acres of land, agreeably to his
contract; but, at that time, lands were not raised to so high a price as
they were now, and Mr. S. did not think it necessary to avail himself of
his contract. On the 11th April, 1792, a petition was presented in his
name, stating, that from an advance in the price of certificates,
resulted the impossibility of fulfilling his contract, and prayed that
an abatement might be made in the price of the land. On the 27th
September, 1794, instead of saying he would not abide by the new
boundary, he requests an alteration may be made in the boundary.
Notwithstanding this request, Mr. S. now says, he did not know any thing
of the survey, though more than nine months since it was made. At first
sight, it would be supposed the contract was void for want of
fulfilment; but as he says he never received from the public a
counterpart of the contract (though it is generally supposed he had in
some way got possession of a copy, but no proof existing of it,) the
claim was not forfeited. A circumstance was mentioned which seemed to
convey a strong supposition that Mr. S. was acquainted with the survey.
The day following the request he had made for the new boundary, was
issued to him a patent for three hundred thousand acres, referring to
that survey. Mr. S. now objects to the releasement which was given of
his first purchase as not being complete. It was stated that he had
taken possession of land to which he was no way entitled. The necessity
of the act being immediately passed appeared from an advertisement
(which Mr. GALLATIN read from a newspaper of that country) inviting
persons to come and purchase, under an assurance that his original
purchase would be completed. Mr. G. said that he had been offered some
part of the land at a dollar an acre; he was informed that it would sell
for two to settlers. Mr. G. said he knew it to be very capital land; and
if the four hundred and fifty thousand acres which remained would sell
for nine hundred thousand dollars, while he only gave three hundred
thousand for the whole, he would have made a good bargain.


THURSDAY, February 23.

_Direct and Indirect Taxes._

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE.

Mr. GALLATIN hoped that the motion would not prevail. He believed he was
the only person who had said, that he was not desirous that the bill
laying a direct tax should pass this session. For it was true, that,
although he was a strong advocate for a direct tax--although he thought
a sufficient permanent revenue could not be drawn from any other source,
yet he did not wish the law to pass during the present session; and the
reason was, because he had not a sufficient reliance upon his own
opinion, to wish a subject of this sort to come into being against the
opinion of so many members of this House as appeared to be opposed to
it. When the United States shall think it necessary to go into the
measure, he trusted it would pass with great unanimity. At present, he
doubted whether a majority of the country was not against the measure,
especially when he not only saw so great a division in that House, but
apparently a local division, as he believed only four members East of
Hudson's River, and but five South of Virginia had voted for the
measure, by which it appeared to be a mode desired only by the Middle
States. Until, therefore, gentlemen from those parts had returned home
and consulted their constituents upon the subject; until he knew that
the law could be carried into effect with more unanimity than at this
time appeared, he did not wish to press it. He was willing, therefore,
to take all the blame which was imputable to this circumstance upon
himself. He never wished the powers of Congress to be exercised in a way
which should not meet with pretty general concurrence. Yet, had he
thought the situation of the United States had been such, that
additional revenue was absolutely necessary to support the public
credit, and it could not have been conveniently raised from any other
source, every other consideration would have given way to that
necessity. But he did not think that any thing which had been said by
the gentleman from South Carolina showed that there would be any
deficiency in the revenue for the present, which would require
additional taxes to supply it.

He would just observe, that the great argument in favor of direct
taxes--an argument which had almost wrought conviction upon the mind of
the gentleman from South Carolina himself--was the uncertainty of a
revenue derived from commerce; and yet, from this circumstance, the
friends of indirect taxes wish to extend that plan to the utmost, and
raise every thing from it. He should have drawn different conclusions;
and from that uncertainty, he should have wished never to have gone
beyond those bounds which they knew were safe.

As to the receipts of 1797, Mr. G. said, we had well ascertained them,
because they arose from the importations of 1796, which they knew
amounted to 6,200,000 dollars, and which sum, with the internal duties,
would be fully adequate to the expenses of the Government for this year.
Yet some gentlemen thought the calculation too close, and therefore the
additional duties before them had been consented to, which he believed
every one must acknowledge would be fully equal to any deficiency that
could possibly arise. The arguments of the gentleman from South Carolina
applied to the year 1798. He said we did not know what might be the
amount of the importations of the present year; that it might be less
than last year, and therefore, that revenue ought to be provided to
supply the deficiency, if there should be any. The arguments would be
good, if the gentleman's data were true; but he had forgotten that the
expenses of 1798 would be less than those of the present year by 700,000
dollars, including not only the current expenses, but the instalment of
the Dutch debts, which in that year would only be 100,000 dollars. The
instalment this year is 400,000, so that in this item there will be a
difference of 240,000 dollars; in the next place, the 280,000 dollars
which this year has been agreed to be paid to the Dey and Regency of
Algiers, will not occur again; and also, the 180,000 dollars
appropriated for finishing the frigate, would not be to provide another
year. These three items made the 700,000 dollars which he had mentioned.
In addition he would add, that this year there had been a charge of
200,000 dollars for the defence of the frontier in 1795; but perhaps
something might be wanted in that quarter another year, and therefore he
would pass over that sum. But he thought there could be no danger of a
want of revenue in the year 1798.

Mr. G. said, he would not pretend to say that it would not be desirable
to increase the revenue, in order that they might pay a part of such
instalments of the foreign debt as would become due after the year 1801.
Certainly the sooner our debt could be paid, the better; but he meant
only to show that there was no necessity for increasing the revenue for
1798. If it were necessary to raise additional revenue, it would be for
two principal objects, the payment of the Dutch debt and the eight per
cent. deferred stock; but as these did not become due till the year
1801, they were not under the necessity of providing the means for it at
present.

During the next session, Mr. G. said, they should have time to compare
the two systems of taxes together, and to discover which offered the
best and most permanent sources of revenue. For the reasons he had
given, he should be opposed to the motion.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he should not adduce many arguments to show the
propriety of advancing the duty upon this article any more than that
upon any other; but he wished to bring before the committee a true
statement of the receipts and expenditures of the United States, in
order to show what sum of money would probably be wanted to answer the
demands of the United States. As he differed considerably from the
gentleman from Pennsylvania as to our real wants, he considered it as
his duty to lay this statement before the committee. He had investigated
the subject with as much accuracy as possible. He had attended to the
documents which had been laid before them, to the laws which would
probably pass this session, and to the probable increase of revenue. The
result of this examination was, that there would be a deficiency of
about a million of dollars. To what the additional imposts already
agreed to would amount, he could not say, but he believed they would
make 200,000 dollars, which would leave a deficiency of 800,000 dollars.
He made the following statement:


_Expenses of 1797._

Civil list,                                      $634,322
Military and Naval Establishment and pensions,  1,284,532
Deficiency of 1796,                               201,000
Algerine appropriation,                           376,500
Interest of Domestic Debt,                      3,471,972
Interest on Dutch debt,                           614,241
Instalments do do. 1797,                          400,000
Premium remitt. &c.                                50,000
Appropriations for frigate,                       171,000
                                                ---------
                                                7,213,567
                                                =========


_Revenues of 1797._

Impost,                                        $5,588,961
Internal revenues,                                337,255
Post Office,                                       35,000
Bank stock,                                       150,000
Stock redeemed,                                    88,636
Sundries,                                             746
                                                ---------
                                                6,200,598
Additional imposts in 1797,                       200,000
                                                ---------
                                                6,400,598
Probable deficiency of revenue,                   812,969
                                                ---------
                                                7,213,567
                                                =========

It would be observed, Mr. S. said, that the gentlemen from Pennsylvania
and Maryland, had calculated the impost at 6,200,000 dollars, whilst he
made it only at 5,588,961, which he took from the Secretary of the
Treasury's statement, and he believed this was the safest calculation.
He would not go into any very long argument on this subject, because it
had frequently been under discussion.

Mr. GALLATIN inquired from what document Mr. SMITH took his
calculations?

Mr. W. SMITH answered, from the report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
which was calculated upon a permanent plan. In calculations on the
subject of revenue, the largest amounts should not be taken. It was not
policy in gentlemen to adopt that plan; they should make allowances for
deficiencies and accidents. The situation of this country at present
required it, and it would be safe, prudent, and discreet, to do so. The
Secretary of the Treasury had estimated the internal revenue at 337,255
dollars, while those gentlemen made it 469,579. This they stated from
the revenue of last year, which it was probable would be considerably
more than this. He thought there was as much reason for taking one as
the other statement; and the Government would be exposed to hazard and
danger, unless allowances were made for deficiencies.

The deficiency, according to his calculation, was 1,012,969 dollars, and
after deducting from that sum 200,000 for the additional duties in the
bill before them, there would remain a balance of 812,969 dollars.
Admitting the gentleman's own statement to be true, there would still be
a deficiency of 100,000 dollars, and this without making any allowance
whatever for accidents and occurrences which will always happen, without
making any provision for the purchase of the public debt, which might at
this time be purchased to great advantage. If there had been money in
the Treasury for the purpose, instead of paying the debt at par, it
might have been bought up at 16 or 17s. in the pound. And he was of
opinion, from the present situation of things, the public debt would
remain low, and that a surplus in the Treasury might be well employed in
purchasing it.

So much for the revenue and expenses of the present year. With respect
to 1798, there was no necessity to go much into that subject. The
gentleman from Pennsylvania had estimated the instalment of the Dutch
debt, payable in this year, at 160,000 dollars only; but he asked
whether it would be wise to pay only that sum? And whether it had not
been in the contemplation of that gentleman, as well as others, to pay
as much as they could yearly? He knew they should not be obliged to pay
more; but he believed it would be a wise policy to pay an equal sum
every year. That gentleman made another deduction of 280,000 dollars,
which had been granted to the Dey and Regency of Algiers this year; but
might they not expect items which they did not contemplate, to this
amount? Contingencies, he said, occurred, which always swelled the
expenses greater than were contemplated. There was always something of
an extraordinary nature occurring to call for money; either an Indian
war, or insurrection, depredations of foreign powers, or attacks by the
Algerines. There was no guarding with certainty against them. The next
deduction was 100,000 dollars for the frigates. Whether this would be
saved or not, was uncertain. The next House might agree to go on with
the frigates.

Upon the whole, Mr. S. said, it would be prudent to provide a
sufficiency of revenue, and there was no prospect of getting it from any
other than the objects contained in the bill before them. A land tax was
agreed to be laid aside for the present, as gentlemen from the Eastward
seemed wholly against it, and those of the Middle States seemed to have
grown lukewarm upon the subject. The duty on stamps, which would have
provided considerable revenue, was also laid aside. They had agreed to
lay low duties upon distilled domestic spirits; no increase could
therefore be expected from that quarter. They could, then, only resort
to such articles of impost as would be likely, from their general demand
and other circumstances, to produce additional revenue. As, therefore,
no prospect appeared of getting other revenue than by the article before
them, he should be compelled to agree, though with reluctance, to the
advance of the duty on sugar.

With respect to their lands, they had authorized public stock to be
received in payment; and, though he thought this a very valuable
regulation, both for facilitating the sale of the land, and for paying
off the debt, the lands, on this account, would not produce much cash
into the Treasury.

Mr. S. SMITH said, very early in the present session, he read, with some
attention, the report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the subject of
direct taxes. He cast his eye upon certain articles which he thought
proper subjects upon which to raise further sums from indirect sources,
among which were salt, sugar, tea, and the whole of the 10 per cent.
class of goods; he communicated his sentiments to other gentlemen, and
they had been brought forward.

He supposed the House would have gone into a system of direct taxes.
This he had always considered as a difficult subject, and he never
could, himself, form a plan adequate to effect it; but he was desirous
that the subject should have been taken up, that in case of extremity it
might be called into operation. He did not think any immediate wants of
the revenue required this tax to be put into execution, but he wished to
take it into consideration, to see what could be done with it. He had
still his doubts whether it could be carried into execution; if it
could, it would doubtless form a valuable source of revenue, which could
not be injured. He had no doubt, however, of the present revenue being
equal to our present wants. The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. W.
SMITH) had taken his calculations from the report of the Secretary of
the Treasury; but the Secretary went into a permanent calculation for a
period of 18 years, in the course of which he calculated the sinking of
the whole debt.

The trade of 1796, Mr. S. said, would give nearly a million of dollars;
of course there could be no apprehensions upon the minds of gentlemen
that the receipts of 1797 would not be equal to the wants of Government.
The tax upon sugar would produce 300,000 dollars. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) was correct on this subject.

The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. W. SMITH) had said, it was not
wise to calculate upon the highest returns; but Mr. S. SMITH said it
was right to calculate upon a preceding year, and when they knew that
there would be received in this year from 700,000 dollars to one
million, there could be no doubt of the year 1798 falling far short of
that sum. For he was not one of those who thought the revenue arising
from this year would be much inferior to that arising from the last.

The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER) had supposed that the
British spoliations had not affected our revenue, but that those of the
French would be severely felt. He saw no difference between them, and
believed they would be felt alike in proportion to their extent. [Mr.
HARPER explained.] He believed the United States would only consume a
certain portion of the goods imported; the rest would be re-exported,
and the drawback received upon them; and, as he did not believe the
consumption of the United States had been lessened, it would follow that
it had been the re-exportation which had been diminished, and, of
course, that it would not be the duties which would be decreased, but
the drawbacks. This being the case, little was to be apprehended from a
defalcation of the revenue this year.

Indeed, he was of opinion, that the revenue arising from the present
year, would be equal to any preceding year. The expenses of 1797 would
be as follows:


ESTIMATE FOR THE YEAR 1797.

Instalment due on part of the Dutch debt, with interest
  on the whole debt, together about            $ 992,000
Annual 8 per cent. and 6 per cent. stock,      2,324,175
Annual interest on 3 per cent. do.               587,926
    Ditto on 5-1/2 per cent. do.                 101,689
    Ditto on 4-1/2 per cent. do.                   7,920
    Ditto on supposed unfunded debt,              78,261
    Ditto on Bank loans,                         372,200
                                             -----------
                                               4,463,971
  Internal expenditures (as below)             2,255,255
                                             -----------
                                              $6,719,226
                                             ===========

Civil List, Mint, and Diplomatic, (agreeably to the
  Secretary's report, estimated on the session of six
  months,)                                      $564,753
Deduct savings arising on the session of
  four months only,                               52,800
                                             -----------
                                                 511,953
Bill for foreign intercourse,                     40,000
Light-houses,                                     45,647
Miscellaneous claims,                             12,000
                                             -----------
                                                $609,600
                                             ===========

MILITARY DEPARTMENT.

Pay of four regiments and artillery corps,      $256,450
Subsistence,                                     236,900
Clothing,                                         75,000
Bounties,                                         16,000
Hospital Department,                              25,000
Ordnance                                          40,000
                                             -----------
                                                 649,350

Amount brought forward,                         $649,350
Two instructors,                                   1,450
Quartermaster's Department,                      150,000
Defensive protection,                             60,000
Indian Department,                                90,000
Contingencies of War Department,                  15,000
Repairing fortifications,                         20,000
Military Pensions,                                93,350
Naval Department,                                190,000
Balance due on Algerine business,                376,505
                                              ----------
Internal expenses of 1797,                    $2,255,255

The expenses of the Quartermaster's Department would in future be
considerably lessened; for, said Mr. S., heretofore great expense had
been incurred by land carriage, which in future would be avoided, as the
forage would all be conveyed by water. Indeed it had not been an unusual
thing for the horses employed in conveying forage from one post to
another, to eat the whole of it in their journey to and from their
destination, and some horses had been known to die from want on the
road. The conveyance being now by water, a great destruction of horses
would be prevented, and he doubted not that one hundred thousand dollars
would be saved under this head.


FRIDAY, February 24.

_Amy Dardin._

The House proceeded to consider the report of the Committee of Claims,
of the sixth ultimo, to whom was referred the petition of Amy Dardin,
which lay on the table; whereupon, the said report was read at the
Clerk's table, in the words following, to wit:

      "That the most important, and all the material facts
      respecting this claim, are stated in the former report of
      the committee appointed to consider the said petition. To
      that report the committee now ask leave to refer. Whatever
      justice there might originally have been in this claim
      against the United States, it is now, and for many years
      past has been, as clearly within the statutes of
      limitation, as a multitude of others, which have been
      rejected. The committee regret that no relief can, with
      propriety, be granted to the petitioner, upon her
      application. So many evils would result from a suspension
      of the limitation act, for the admission of claims similar
      to the one under consideration, the committee cannot
      recommend that measure to be adopted. They are of opinion
      the prayer of the petition ought not to be granted."

The question was taken that the House do agree to the said report, and
passed in the negative--34 to 27; when Mr. GALLATIN moved that a
committee be appointed to bring in a bill in favor of the petitioner.
This motion occasioned some debate.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he rejoiced in the vote which had passed in respect
to the report before them, as it was a precedent against the act of
limitation. When a claim was clear, it was a denial of justice not to
pay the debt. He did not think it was more justifiable in a Government
to refuse to pay its debts, than it was in individuals to do so. Though
an act of limitation had been passed, they ought only to consider it, in
a modified sense, as a guard against fraud; but, in cases where they
were convinced a debt was justly due, he did not see upon good
principles they could refuse to pay it. He was sure there was not a
member on that floor that would do so in his individual capacity. Nor
did he believe they needed to be operated on by the fear of a number of
these claims being brought: he believed their number was small. But,
said he, shall we fear that we shall be called upon to pay a few more
just debts? He trusted so unworthy an apprehension would not prevent
them from doing what was right. The act of limitation was produced, he
said, by an incapacity to pay the claims which were made upon
Government, and now they took advantage of that capacity, by refusing to
pay the just demands which were made upon them. The certificates which
had been given, not worth more than one-eighth of their nominal value,
had been scattered all over the United States, and the distance from the
seat of Government had been the reason application had not been made for
payment. He spoke from his own knowledge. He had some of them put into
his hands. Some of them he was fortunate enough to get paid before the
act of limitation passed; others were yet unsettled. It was only since
the erection of this Government, which had given them the ability to
pay, that these claims were brought forward; for six or seven years
every kind of claim was mustered, and the public debt was considerably
swelled by them, but now a contrary extreme was observed, and no claim,
however just, had a chance of being satisfied. He had never troubled the
House on a subject of this kind before, but he had taken advantage of
the fortunate decision of this morning to say a few words on the
subject.

Messrs. HEATH, MACON, WILLIAMS, and D. FOSTER, were against a committee
being appointed to bring in a bill; they hoped no partial regulation
would take place, but that if any exception was made, from the operation
of the act of limitation, it would be done in a general way, as there
was a great number of claims equally well entitled, with Mrs. Dardin's,
to payment. Indeed, Mr. D. FOSTER, Chairman of the Committee of Claims,
(who was not present when the question was taken upon the report,) said,
if this claim was granted, it would bring forward a thousand others.

The report, petition, and papers, were committed to the whole House on
Monday.


SATURDAY, February 25.

_Suability of States._

On motion of Mr. HARPER, the House then resolved itself into a Committee
of the Whole, on the report of the select committee on the resolution
sent from the Senate, authorizing the PRESIDENT to make inquiry of
certain States whether they had adopted the proposed amendment to the
constitution with respect to the suability of States.

The select committee did not confine themselves to this single
amendment, as reported from the Senate, but went back to the year 1789,
when twelve amendments were proposed by Congress; for though they state
eleven States out of fourteen had ratified ten of these amendments in
the year 1791, yet they were of opinion that a doubt might arise whether
eleven States ought to be considered as the three-fourths of fourteen;
they therefore wished the PRESIDENT to be requested to make inquiry also
from the non-ratifying States on the subject of these ten amendments.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, the resolution of itself was only exceptionable as it
had connection with the statement which went before it, in which it was
made a question whether the ten last amendments of the twelve proposed
by Congress to the States in March, 1789, were ever made part of the
constitution. He did not wish a doubt to be expressed on this subject.
This doubt, in the opinion of the committee, it seemed, rested on a
supposition that eleven were not three-fourths of fourteen. He could not
conceive how any doubt could arise on this subject, since it must be
acknowledged by every one that eleven was more than three-fourths of
fourteen. If the objection arose from fourteen not being divisible in
equal fourth parts, it was an objection to the constitution as
originally made. It was formed by thirteen States, which was no more
divisible into fourths than fourteen. On this ground, an amendment could
never have been made to the constitution. He hoped the Chairman of the
committee would give them some information on the subject.

Mr. HARPER said, it was not of much importance whether the committee had
doubts, or whether those doubts were well founded. The committee stated
they had these doubts. He had them; not whether eleven was three-fourths
of fourteen, according to arithmetical calculation--every school boy
knew, that, in that view, eleven was more than three-fourths of
fourteen; but it was, whether you could make a division of States. He
believed it could not be done; he believed there must be twelve
ratifying States to be three-fourths, as intended by the constitution,
because that number would be three-fourths of sixteen, which was the
nearest number to fourteen capable of four equal divisions. Whether this
doubt was well founded or not, there could be no harm in directing the
inquiry to be made; it would be made as soon for thirteen amendments as
for one, and if any other State should have ratified the ten amendments
in question, all doubt would be removed. Mr. H. noticed an error or two
which had escaped the committee in their report.

Mr. GALLATIN said, the resolution under consideration went to direct the
PRESIDENT to apply to all those States, by whom, as far as can be known
from the official documents heretofore transmitted, all or any of the
amendments at any time proposed by Congress still remained to be
ratified. There could be no occasion to make the inquiry with respect to
all these amendments, unless it were taken for granted that none of them
had yet been ratified. He was, therefore, of opinion, with the gentleman
from Virginia, that such an application would be very improper, as
bringing the ten last amendments into doubt, which he believed to be as
much a part of the constitution as any other article in it; he also
thought them a very valuable part, and not to be trifled with.

But, upon what ground, said Mr. G., do the advocates of this report
prove that 11 is not three-fourths of 14? The idea was so novel that he
could scarcely understand what principle they adopted in order to create
a doubt on their minds on this subject. To him the position that 11 was
more than three-fourths of fourteen appeared to be one of those
self-evident axioms which hardly admit of a proof. The principle on
which the doubt arose must be so very nice, so abstract, that he did not
know whether he was capable of comprehending it. Anxious as he was to
avoid saying any thing which might be construed as misstatement, he
would, however, attempt to analyze what he conceived to be the ground of
the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. HARPER.)

It appeared to him that that gentleman thought three-fourths in itself
was not a fraction of the unit, was not a number conveying to the mind
the simple idea of a fraction; but that it was a compound of fractions,
and that the only way by which the idea of three-fourths could be
conceived was by a decomposition. Because the idea of three-fourths was
by our numerical arithmetic expressed by the two figures 3/4, that
gentleman was unable to conceive what it meant except by decomposition,
by dividing the unit into four equal parts and multiplying the result by
3. And if that idea of three-fourths had happened to be expressed by the
fraction nine-twelfths, (which was the same thing as three-fourths,)
that gentleman could not have conceived it except by dividing in the
first place the unit into twelve parts and then multiplying the result
by nine. In fact he denied the existence of any number, part of a unit,
except as it consisted of an aggregate of such parts as the unit could
exactly be divided into.

Thus, when speaking of fourteen States, although he (Mr. GALLATIN) could
at once understand that three-fourths of fourteen was ten-and-a-half,
and, therefore, (admitting, as he did together with that gentleman, that
the vote of a State was indivisible) that eleven States were more than
three-fourths of fourteen, the gentleman from South Carolina proceeded
in a different way. The fourth part of fourteen being three-and-a-half,
he says that, as a State cannot be divided, you must take four States
instead of three-and-a-half for the fourth part of fourteen, and then
multiplying these four States by three, in order to get the
three-fourths, he concludes that twelve States are three-quarters of
fourteen--that the twelve States out of fourteen are necessary to ratify
the amendments. He believed the gentleman would allow that he had not
misstated his opinion.

Let us now see, said Mr. G., how this doctrine will operate. It would go
to prove, in some instances, that three-fourths of a number is greater
than the whole. Suppose, for instance, the case of five States.
One-fourth of five is 1-1/4; but as the vote of a State cannot be
divided, you must call it two; or, as the gentleman expressed it, five
not being divisible into four equal parts, you must take the nearest
number to five capable of such division, that is to say 8, the fourth
part of which is two; two, therefore, must be considered as the fourth
part of five States, and as three multiplied by two is six, it follows,
according to that gentleman's doctrine, that the three-fourths of five
is six! Suppose that, in the constitution, instead of the expression
three-fourths, it had been said that nine-twelfths were necessary. The
number of States when the constitution was framed was thirteen. In that
case one-twelfth of thirteen being one and one-twelfth, you must, the
vote of a State being indivisible, call it two; so that in that way of
reckoning, nine-twelfths (which is the same thing as three-fourths) of
13 is 18! Consequently, the consent of eighteen States would have been
necessary in order to ratify any amendment to the constitution of a
nation consisting only of 13 States.

Let us, said he, examine a little farther. The same part of the
constitution which provides for amendments of the constitution, says,
that an amendment shall be proposed by two-thirds of both Houses of
Congress; but he supposed the vote of a man was no more divisible than
that of a State. He wished to know, therefore, how the gentleman would,
on his principle, calculate what were two-thirds of the members present
when their whole number was not divisible by three?

In making treaties he wished to know what was meant by two-thirds of the
members of the Senate present? If the number present happened not to be
divisible by three, would that gentleman say, that, in that case, the
next number above the number present must be taken, which would be
divisible by three, and that if two-thirds of that number did not concur
in the vote for the treaty, no treaty should be ratified? On that
principle, in some instances, a greater proportion of the Senate would
be necessary to ratify a treaty than had been usually understood,
according to the generally received opinion of the sense of the
constitution in this respect.

Upon the whole, he believed it would be best to reject the report, as,
besides the objections alluded to, it was confessedly inaccurate in some
of its parts, and adopt the resolution sent from the Senate, which
applied only to the amendment respecting the suability of States. If the
House meant to go any further, they might introduce the first and second
amendments proposed at the same time with the other ten, but which had
not yet been ratified.

Mr. HARPER said, he would add a word or two to what he had already
offered on this subject. He did not know whether the House thought with
him on this subject, that it was a doubtful point whether the ten
amendments in question had been ratified according to the sense of the
constitution. If they did, they would of course, vote for the report.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, he acknowledged, had not only shown his
knowledge in arithmetic, but also his wit, which had not until now been
brought before them. In the enjoyment of the last he had participated in
common with the House.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) was in favor of rejecting the resolution
reported by the select committee, as it embraced too many objects, and
held out a kind of invitation for States to come forward and propose
amendments to the constitution. He trusted the first of the amendments,
proposed in 1789, relative to the proportion of representation, never
would be agreed to, as it would have extremely mischievous effects.
Indeed, if any thing were done with respect to that amendment, he should
think it ought to be to request those States which have not adopted it,
not to do it, and those who have agreed to it, to revoke their vote in
favor of it.

The question was then taken on the resolution reported, and negatived,
without division.

The resolution was as follows:

      "_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
      requested to apply, as speedily as may be, to all those
      States, by which, as far as can be known from the official
      documents heretofore transmitted, all or any of the
      amendments, at any time proposed by Congress, still remains
      to be ratified; and to obtain from them authentic
      information of the proceedings had by them, respectively,
      on the subject of those amendments, or any of them."

The question was then taken on the resolution of the Senate, and agreed
to. It was as follows:

      "_Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of
      the United States of America in Congress assembled_, That
      the President be requested to adopt some speedy and
      effectual means of obtaining information from the States of
      Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
      Kentucky, Tennessee, and South Carolina, whether they have
      ratified the amendment proposed by Congress to the
      constitution, concerning the suability of States: If they
      have, to obtain the proper evidences thereof."


_Accommodation of the President._

On motion of Mr. GALLATIN, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the bill to accommodate the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES;
when

Mr. HENDERSON said, he wished for information on this subject, as he had
not sufficient to convince him of the propriety of granting 14,000
dollars, in addition to the furniture now in possession of the
PRESIDENT; he therefore moved to strike out the 14,000, for the purpose
of inserting 5,000. The bill informed them that this sum, in addition to
what might arise from the sale of such of the present furniture as may
be decayed, out of repair, or unfit for use, was to be laid out in
furnishing the household for the PRESIDENT. It was very lately that they
had received a proposition from the Senate to advance the salary of the
PRESIDENT 5,000 dollars; the bill was rejected by that House. It
appeared to him that this bill went to effect the same thing in a
different way. If the object was merely to furnish the household of the
PRESIDENT, he thought a much less sum would be adequate to that purpose.
He thought 5,000, with the proceeds of the sale of such of the present
furniture as was unfit for service, might be sufficient. He had no doubt
that the sum would make the furniture of the PRESIDENT for four years to
come equal to what it had been for four years past.

Mr. NICHOLAS wished the gentleman would leave the sum blank, instead of
inserting 5,000.

Mr. HENDERSON consented.

The question was taken, and negatived--42 to 39.

The committee then rose, and the House having taken up the subject--

Mr. NICHOLAS said, as a majority of the House was against striking out
this sum, he wished to have some information why this sum was fixed
upon, and for what purpose it was to be applied. No one wished more than
he did to place the PRESIDENT in a situation conformable to his station;
but according to his information, this sum was more than was given to
the present PRESIDENT on his entering upon the office, though there
remained the whole of the furniture, most of which was worth as much at
this time as it was when first purchased.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he would give to the gentleman all the information
which he had on the subject. In the year 1778 or 1779, by a resolution,
of the old Congress, an household was established for the PRESIDENT of
Congress. This remained until the present Government went into operation
in the year 1789. It was then resolved, that Mr. OSGOOD should be
requested to fit up the House in a proper manner for the reception of
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. In that year the law passed for
compensating the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, which enacted that a
salary of 25,000 dollars should be allowed him, together with the use of
the furniture then in his possession belonging to the United States.
This furniture cost the United States 13,657 dollars, 83 cents. During
the period from 1779, when the household was first established until
1789, when the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES entered upon his office,
the furniture which had been purchased for the PRESIDENT by Congress,
was so much decayed, that it required nearly 14,000 dollars to replenish
it. It was the opinion of the joint committee, therefore, that in a
lapse of eight years, viz: from 1789 to the present time, the furniture
then purchased must have experienced equal dilapidation and decay, and
that a sum at least as large as was then allowed (particularly when it
was considered that the price of goods was very much advanced since that
time) should now be allowed for putting the present household upon the
same footing of respectability and convenience with that at New York in
1789. Mr. S. did not know that he could give any further information on
the subject. It was a matter of notoriety that a great part of the goods
then purchased were worn out and destroyed; such as the household linen,
crockery ware, &c., and that the PRESIDENT had renewed them at his own
expense; insomuch that if he were to take out of the House the furniture
which he had supplied, there would little remain in it besides tables,
chairs, bedsteads, and a few such articles; since all the carpets and
ornamental furniture of the House had been purchased by himself.

Whilst he was up, he would wish to obviate the only objection which had
been adduced to this bill. The gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. HENDERSON)
had supposed that this allowance was meant to carry into effect what had
been rejected in another way, alluding to the proposed advance of
salary. That gentleman might see a very obvious distinction between the
two things. If $5,000 had been added to the salary of the PRESIDENT, he
could have disposed of it as he pleased; but the money now proposed to
be granted, was to be employed in the purchase of furniture, &c., which
would remain the property of the United States, and would devolve upon
the next PRESIDENT. Mr. S. said, he would add, that in the joint
committee there was not a dissenting voice to the proposition, and he
hoped there would not be one in the House.

The question was put for engrossing the bill for a third reading, and
carried, there being fifty votes in favor of it. This day and Monday
were mentioned for the third reading; the question was carried for the
most distant day, 40 to 35.


MONDAY, February 27.

_Accommodation of the President._

The bill to accommodate the PRESIDENT was read the third time; when Mr.
HEATH moved to have the bill recommitted, for the purpose of striking
out $14,000 to insert $8,000. He thought $14,000 too large a sum to be
given to purchase new furniture; $8,000 he thought would be a
sufficiently handsome sum for the purpose. They were apt to be too
lavish with the public money on some occasions, and too sparing on
others. He had not been satisfied with the reasons which had been given
by the Chairman of the committee for giving the sum now in the bill. At
a time when our Treasury was so much in want of money, he did not wish
so large a sum to be given for this purpose; nor did he think it
necessary, except it were to put our PRESIDENT in the style of a
potentate or prince. And this he was sure the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES would not wish, as he believed he was a gentleman of great
economy, and would spurn at any thing like tinsel or expense. Five
thousand dollars had been thought a sufficient sum for this purpose, but
he was willing to give $8,000. He hoped the bill would therefore be
recommitted, and this sum be inserted.

Mr. MACON seconded the motion for recommitting the bill. He was against
it altogether. He did not see why they should furnish the house of the
PRESIDENT any more than that of any other of their officers. He thought
the thing improper at first, and that it was wrong to continue the
practice. If the salary was not large enough, it should be made larger,
though he thought it sufficiently large.

Mr. RUTHERFORD concurred with his colleague, Mr. HEATH. It was
necessary, he said, that Republicans should be consistent. If we thus
give away the people's money, said he, shall we not be charged with
rapaciously putting our hands into their pockets? Have we not, he added,
refused to redress grievances and injuries, and to do justice to many
deserving and distressed citizens, because our Treasury is low? And
shall we now, when there is no right reason for it, lay hold of the
public Treasury, and lavish away $14,000? For what? For adding new
furniture to the house of the PRESIDENT. No; he was willing to render
him all possible respect; he remembered well his letter to our sister
Republic of Holland. He had a pretty good memory. He remembered well his
patriotism; but he saw no reason to give him $14,000. He would give him
$8,000, which he thought would be a very pretty compliment; but to give
$14,000 would outrage every idea of that economy and Republican
simplicity which ought to characterize the American nation. Why, said
he, shall we, who are a Confederacy of the Democratic Republicans,
everlastingly keep our eyes upon the pageantry of Eastern Courts? Let us
rather attend to our own character than that of any despotic nation upon
earth. He hoped the bill would be recommitted.

The question for recommitting was carried--45 to 40.

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the bill, when--

Mr. HEATH moved to strike out $14,000 and insert $8,000.

Mr. GILLESPIE called for the estimate, which he understood was in
possession of the committee.

Mr. SITGREAVES said there was no estimate before the House or committee.
All that he had seen was a list of the furniture which had been
purchased for the PRESIDENT in 1789. He himself had not had patience to
go through it; but if the gentleman wished it, it might be read to the
House.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped there would have been no objection to this
appropriation. He thought the Chairman of the committee had fully shown
the propriety of granting the $14,000 to the PRESIDENT, who was not
merely an officer of the Government, but a branch of it. It was not
giving the money away, but merely advancing it on account of the United
States. He was not in favor of high salaries, but he wished the
situation of the PRESIDENT to be made comfortable and respectable.

Mr. HEATH said, he believed a great part of the furniture which was
purchased in 1789, was at present as good as when laid in; this was
particularly the case with respect to the mahogany furniture; and he
thought the $8,000 would be a sufficient sum to replace all articles of
a perishable nature, such as carpets, linens, &c.

Mr. HOLLAND was in favor of striking out, because it was only necessary
to appropriate as much as might be necessary whilst Government remained
here, as, when it should be removed, the furniture now used might not be
suitable for the house at Washington. At that time, he supposed a
further sum would be called for, and therefore he thought a less sum
than $14,000 would be sufficient for the present purpose.

Mr. WILLIAMS was in favor of the bill as it stood. He had been told that
it was the intention of the State of Pennsylvania to make an offer to
the PRESIDENT of the house which had lately been erected in this city;
if so, perhaps the furniture which might be purchased for it would be
suitable for the house in the Federal City. He had before said that he
thought it would have been better to have augmented the salary of the
PRESIDENT, and let him purchase his own furniture. But as that had not
been agreed to, he wished the committee now to rise and report progress,
that information might be gained on the subject; because he thought if
he was to have that house, that sum would not be too large.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he did not know whether the Legislature of this
State would conclude to make the PRESIDENT the offer which the gentleman
last up had mentioned; but of this he was sure, that if they did, he
could not afford to accept of it. For, if this bill passed, he was
certain that, under such circumstances, he could not remove into that
house, because he would not be able to furnish it.

Mr. S. said, he was surprised the House should so suddenly change their
opinion. He thought he had given sufficient information on the subject
to have shown the necessity of the grant. [Mr. S. here repeated what he
had before noticed respecting what had been allowed on a former
occasion.] When gentlemen entered minutely into the subject, they seemed
to have information which was not very correct. He believed the sum
mentioned in the bill not more than sufficient. The decay which had
taken place in the PRESIDENT's household would require that sum to make
it good. The gentleman from Virginia supposed there were many articles,
not perishable in their nature, which could not have been injured by
their use. He was mistaken. There was nothing but about $800 worth of
plated ware and the mahogany furniture which could at all come under
this description. Indeed, any gentleman who was in the habit of paying
his respects to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES must have seen with
regret that the appearance of his furniture was so far inferior to that
which was to be found in the houses of any of our wealthy citizens, or
even of those in moderate circumstances. When this was a notorious fact,
what ground, he asked, could gentlemen have for comparing the household
of the PRESIDENT to the pomp and splendor of Eastern Courts? On the
contrary, he thought there was a humility of appearance in the house of
the PRESIDENT, which he would not say was a disgrace to the country, but
which at least proved its rigid economy.

Mr. NICHOLAS said he voted for going into Committee of the Whole on this
subject from an idea that the sum proposed to be given to the PRESIDENT
was larger than was necessary, though he confessed he could not say what
that sum ought exactly to be; he was for giving enough and rather too
much than too little. Indeed, when he considered that the whole sum was
not to be expended, except it should be found necessary, and that a
certain style was expected to be observed in this station, he was not
for stinting the sum to what he thought just enough for purchasing
furniture. If the whole of the money granted must of necessity be
expended in furniture, he should have had more hesitation on the
subject; but as the expenditure would be left to the discretion of the
PRESIDENT, he could not suppose, from the well-known habits of economy
of that gentleman, it would be improperly disposed of. He therefore felt
no difficulty in agreeing to the sum in the bill; for though he thought
the sum too large, yet he would not so confine the appropriation as to
oblige their officer to go about the streets to look out for cheap
purchases of furniture.

Mr. BUCK said, previous to these measures being brought forward, they
had decided against any advance to the salary of the PRESIDENT. All that
time a committee was appointed to inquire into the state of the
PRESIDENT's household, and to report whether any, and what, further
accommodation was necessary to be afforded. He conceived that it was the
wish of that House that the gentleman who was coming into office should
have accommodations equal to those which had been given to the gentleman
who was leaving it. The committee had examined into facts, made a
report, and a bill had been brought in accordingly. The committee had
informed them upon what principles they had acted; and it did not appear
that they either intended to increase the splendor of the household of
the PRESIDENT, nor to add to his salary. If any member could come
forward and show that the report of the committee was erroneous, they
should have some ground upon which to reject it. He had heard no man say
this, and therefore all that had been offered on the subject ought not
to weigh against that report. When the bill was before them on Saturday,
there was a considerable majority in favor of it, and as they had no new
information on the matter, he saw no reason for a change of opinion.

Some members, Mr. B. said, had held out an idea that they were about to
give this money away, to enable the new PRESIDENT to live in the style
of foreign Courts. If the inhabitants of this city had adopted this
style, then it would be chargeable against the PRESIDENT, but not
otherwise, since it was acknowledged he had not kept pace with them in
this respect. The appropriating this money would only be converting it
into so much public property; for, when his term of office should
expire, he could not carry away a single article. It was not, therefore,
giving away a farthing, but merely providing for our own convenience to
enable the PRESIDENT to fill the office with comfort and reputation; and
as they had nothing before them to show the sum too large, he saw no
propriety in rejecting it, for the purpose of inserting any other.

Mr. RUTHERFORD said, if the House had committed an error one day, it
would be well for them to correct it another. If they were to give
$14,000 away on the present occasion, he thought they would commit a
very serious error. The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SITGREAVES) had
said many of the citizens of Philadelphia lived in a superior style to
the PRESIDENT. If so, he would say they were very bad citizens, since it
was proper that the citizens of this rising Republic should cultivate a
simplicity of living and of manners.

Mr. MACON thought some of the arguments introduced on this occasion were
very improper; such as the habits of economy or private fortune of the
gentleman who was to succeed to the Presidential chair. They were about
to settle a permanent principle, which it was proper to do at this time,
before a new Presidency commenced. He knew nothing of the private
property of the person who was to fill the office, nor had it any thing
to do with the matter. The question was, whether they were to go over
the same ground every four or eight years of furnishing the house of a
new PRESIDENT? He did not wish that it should be so; he wished the
salary to be the only consideration which the PRESIDENT should receive
for his services. If it had not been settling a permanent principle, he
should not perhaps have opposed it.

It had been said that the old PRESIDENT of Congress had a household
furnished him, but he received no salary from the United States except
his household. He considered this sum as an advance upon the salary paid
to the PRESIDENT by the different States, and before any salary was
fixed by the United States; but now, as an ample salary was paid to the
PRESIDENT, he did not think such a provision should be continued. It was
sometimes said that it was no matter what sum was appropriated, as, if
it was not wanted, it would not be expended; but, he believed, whatever
sum was appropriated would be expended; for he was not one of those who
thought that revenue could not be found. He believed if the money was
granted, it would be both found and spent.

Mr. SITGREAVES wished to correct the gentleman last up with respect to
one fact. He had said the PRESIDENT of the old Congress had no salary.
It was true that he did not receive any thing under that name, but there
was a provision, not merely for the furniture of his house, but for the
constant provision of it; and this was so considerable that from 1778 to
1779, in one year, eighty-three thousand dollars were paid for that
purpose.

Mr. MACON wished to know what sort of money this was; he supposed it was
in depreciated paper.

Mr. SITGREAVES was not certain what kind of money was meant.

Mr. JEREMIAH SMITH said, in settling an affair of this kind, it was
proper to have respect to the office, and not to the man who was to fill
it. He could himself consider the establishment of the PRESIDENT's
household in no other light than in the nature of a compensation for his
services, in the same way that he considered the privilege of franking,
stationery, and newspapers, allowed the members of both Houses, to be
such; because, if they were not allowed to them, they would have to
purchase those articles themselves; and if furniture was not provided by
Government for the house of the PRESIDENT, he must himself furnish it
out of his salary, or from his private purse. To refuse to provide the
necessary furniture would therefore be to reduce his salary; for it was
true that this plan of presenting furniture to the PRESIDENT was adopted
before the salary was fixed, so that it must have been considered as
being additional to the salary. And was that salary, he asked, near so
valuable now as it was when fixed? Certainly not. He trusted, therefore,
they should not reduce it.

This sum, Mr. S. said, was mentioned, from a consideration that four
years hence the seat of Government would be removed, and that then the
furniture would be in a great degree useless. They, therefore, only
recommended such a sum as they thought would be sufficient to put the
furniture in a proper state for that term. He believed that fourteen
thousand dollars would not do more than that.

Mr. MACON said he was always opposed to the privileges allowed to
members of franking, &c. Gentlemen talked about a statement; he did not
know what that might contain, he had not seen it; but he did not know
how it could require fourteen thousand dollars to repair furniture which
at first cost only thirteen thousand.

Mr. JEREMIAH SMITH said, the gentleman last up was inaccurate in his
statement. The thirteen thousand dollars which were allowed for
furniture for the late PRESIDENT, was in addition to the furniture
which had already been in possession of the PRESIDENT of Congress.

Mr. SHERBURNE said, the question was with respect to the quantum of
money to be granted, as every one seemed to allow that a certain sum was
necessary. By having recourse to what was done for other officers of the
Government, they might, perhaps, form an estimate of what would be
reasonable on the present occasion. A practice had been established of
allowing our Ministers to foreign countries a sum as an outfit equal to
one year's salary; so that nine thousand dollars were allowed a Minister
for this purpose, though it might happen that he would not be employed
more than a few months in the service. He thought, therefore, that
fourteen thousand dollars could not be thought too large a sum for the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, whose term of service was for four
years, and which would go to his successor in office; whereas, the nine
thousand dollars allowed to a foreign Minister were entirely at his
disposal, though he might not be in the service more than a month.

Mr. AMES said, it appeared to him that it would be desirable to proceed
according to precedent, as nearly as they could. It was not desirable to
innovate or change the established order of things, except strong
reasons existed for the change. On inquiring what had been the practice
heretofore, they found the PRESIDENT of the old Congress, as well as the
PRESIDENT now going out of office, had establishments made for their
household similar to that now proposed. If they looked forward to that
period when the seat of Government was to be removed, and considered the
furniture which would be necessary for the house in the Federal city, it
would be seen that there would be a necessity for a new establishment at
that time, as it was evident that the present furniture or what might be
purchased with the sum now contemplated, would be wholly inadequate to
the furnishing of that house. He supposed an additional grant of twelve
or fifteen thousand pounds would be necessary for that purpose.

We have chosen an elective Government, said Mr. A., and if it were meant
to be kept pure, they must encourage the people to make choice of such
men, without respect to fortune, as they think will serve them best, but
if instead of providing a suitable household for the PRESIDENT, they
left him to provide for himself in this respect, men of large fortune
only could engage in this part of the public service. And would this, he
asked, be doing honor to the Republican Government? He thought not.

The question for striking out was put and negatived--55 to 36. The
committee then rose, and when the question was about to be put in the
House--

Mr. GALLATIN said, the provision of the bill left it to the discretion
of the PRESIDENT whether he would expend the whole of the money, or not.
His opinion was, that the sum was too large; but the question for
striking it out having been negatived, the expenditure must be left to
the discretion of the PRESIDENT. He did not mean to go into any detail.
He did not wish to place the gentleman coming into office in a worse
situation than that of him who was going out; and as he felt no
objection to leave it to the PRESIDENT to make use of the whole or a
part of this money, as his discretion should direct, he should vote for
the bill.

Mr. CLAIBORNE said, as provision had been made for furniture for the
gentleman now in office, he was inclined to vote for the fourteen
thousand dollars proposed now to be granted for the same purpose to the
gentleman who was to succeed him.

Mr. HENDERSON wished to give his reasons for voting against this bill.
He wished to place the PRESIDENT coming into office in as comfortable
circumstances as he who was going out; but it appeared to him that the
sum proposed was larger than necessary for this purpose. Indeed, said
Mr. H., when he read an article of the constitution touching this
subject, he had his doubts with respect to the constitutionality of the
proceeding. That article said, "that the PRESIDENT should receive a
compensation which should neither be increased nor diminished during the
period for which he should have been elected; and that he should not
receive within that period any other emoluments from the United States,
or any of them."

Mr. SITGREAVES believed there could be no doubt as to the
constitutionality of the proposed grant of money, as the clause ran,
"during the period for which he should have been elected," which would
not prevent them from passing any number of acts before he went into
office.

The question on the passing of the bill was then taken by yeas and nays,
and stood 63 to 27, as follows:

      YEAS.--Fisher Ames, Theodorus Bailey, Abraham Baldwin,
      Theophilus Bradbury, Daniel Buck, Dempsey Burges, Thomas
      Claiborne, Joshua Coit, William Cooper, William Craik,
      Samuel W. Dana, James Davenport, George Dent, George Ege,
      Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Nathaniel Freeman, junior,
      Albert Gallatin, Ezekiel Gilbert, Nicholas Gilman, Henry
      Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William B. Grove,
      Robert Goodloe Harper, Carter B. Harrison, Thomas Hartley,
      William Hindman, John Wilkes Kittera, George Leonard,
      Edward Livingston, Samuel Lyman, William Lyman, James
      Madison, Francis Malbone, Andrew Moore, Frederick A.
      Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray, John Nicholas, John Page,
      Josiah Parker, John Patton, Elisha R. Potter, John Read,
      John Richards, Samuel Sewall, John S. Sherburne, Samuel
      Sitgreaves, Thompson J. Skinner, Jeremiah Smith, Nathaniel
      Smith, Isaac Smith, Israel Smith, William Smith, Richard
      Sprigg, junior, Thomas Sprigg, John Swanwick, Zephaniah
      Swift, George Thatcher, John E. Van Allen, Philip Van
      Cortlandt, Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams,

      NAYS.--Thomas Blount, Nathan Bryan, Samuel J. Cabell,
      Gabriel Christie, John Clopton, Isaac Coles, Jesse
      Franklin, James Gillespie, Christopher Greenup, Andrew
      Gregg, Wade Hampton, John Hathorn, Jonathan N. Havens, John
      Heath, Thomas Henderson, James Holland, Andrew Jackson,
      George Jackson, Aaron Kitchell, Matthew Locke, Nathaniel
      Macon, John Milledge, Anthony New, Alexander D. Orr, Robert
      Rutherford, William Stradwick, and Richard Winn.

_Military and Naval Appropriations._

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on this subject, when,
after some discussion respecting the price of rations, Mr. GALLATIN
insisting upon seventeen cents being a sufficiently high calculation,
and Mr. W. SMITH abiding by the estimate of the War Department at twenty
cents; the latter was agreed upon thirty-six to thirty-four, and the pay
and subsistence of the Army was settled, but which has since undergone
an alteration, owing to the two companies of cavalry being added by a
new bill. The sum for forage and clothing was also agreed upon, but
which afterwards, of course, from the above alteration, underwent an
augmentation. The hospital department being under consideration,

Mr. W. SMITH moved to fill the blank with thirty thousand dollars.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to fill it with ten thousand. He said, they had this
year had a statement of the expense of the Military Establishment, by
which they found that the hospital department had cost six thousand nine
hundred and five dollars. It had been the uniform practice of the House
to appropriate from thirty to forty thousand dollars under this head,
though the expense had never exceeded seven thousand; and to apply the
surplus to other purposes. He thought it wrong to appropriate four times
the sum necessary, and had therefore proposed to fill the blank with ten
thousand dollars, which was fifty per cent. more than had ever been
expended for the purpose.

Mr. PARKER believed than ten thousand dollars would be enough to pay for
physic for the Army. Indeed he believed it was generally expended in
wine and luxuries by the officers, and that little of it went to the use
of the subordinates.

The question for ten thousand dollars was put and carried.

The blank for the Ordnance Department was filled with forty thousand
dollars; and that for the fortifications of the ports and harbors of the
United States with twenty-four thousand dollars.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to fill the blank for the Quartermaster's Department,
the Indian Department, the defensive protection of the frontiers,
bounties, and all the contingent expenses of the War Department, with
three hundred thousand dollars.

Mr. VENABLE said, if the sum necessary for each of the above items could
be specified, he would rather have it so expressed than have the whole
in one sum.

Mr. W. SMITH said it would come to the same thing, if the several items
were voted in an aggregate sum, as they were all contingent expenses. He
should move to have the blank filled with four hundred and forty-six
thousand dollars.

Mr. GALLATIN observed there were two motions before the committee: one
to fill the blank with four hundred and forty-six thousand dollars, the
other with three hundred thousand. He would observe that one of the
items in this estimate, viz., that for the fortifications of West Point,
ought not to be included under this head; but, as to the other items, he
would mention, in answer to what had fallen from the gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. VENABLE) what was the reason which had induced the
committee to put them in one sum, which was to obtain the very object he
had in view in wishing to have all the items stated separately.

It would be recollected that they had had a letter from the Secretary of
the Treasury, in which he said, "that the appropriations for the
Military and Naval Establishments were considered as general grants of
money; and, though they were to be accounted for according to law, yet
it was the practice of the officers of the Treasury not to consider each
appropriation as specific, but the whole as a general grant of money."
This practice was making the law a mere farce, since the officers of the
Treasury did not consider themselves as at all bound by the specific
sums. He therefore concluded it to be proper to pass the law in such a
manner as to confine the expense to the appropriation for the different
items. It was said to be impossible to carry the law into execution on
this principle. It was said there were a number of contingent expenses
which could not be exactly ascertained, and that therefore it was
necessary the officers of the Treasury should have a certain discretion
given them to make use of the surplus of any item for which more than
was necessary had been appropriated. He believed the uncertainty here
mentioned existed, and therefore it had been concluded to be best to put
the contingent articles together in one sum, in order to give bounds to
the discretion of the Department.

Having given the reasons which caused the bill to be brought in in this
shape, Mr. G. said he would mention the items upon which the sum he had
proposed to fill up the blank was composed. For defensive protection,
sixty thousand dollars; for the Quartermaster's Department, one hundred
and fifty thousand dollars. This latter sum has been estimated at two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, but upon what ground he was at a
loss to know. The Army would now be fixed in garrison, and would not
have to march from post to post. None of the reasons given last year for
this expense would now apply; and he thought it unreasonable that the
same sum should be allowed for this item which was allowed at the time
when they were engaged in an Indian war.

In 1789, when we had eight hundred
  men in garrison, the expenses of this
  department was                           $11,076
In 1790, he did not recollect the number
  of troops, but not more, he believed      45,763
In 1791                                     92,223
In 1792 (in the height of the Indian war)  206,510
In 1793                                    178,602
In 1794                                    263,000
In 1795                                    317,647

What would be the expense of 1796, could not be exactly ascertained. It
appeared by the statement which they had received that upwards of two
hundred and four thousand dollars had been expended. Whether there were
any further demands unsettled, he could not tell. It appeared,
therefore, that the expense of that Department had increased from eleven
thousand to three hundred thousand dollars. This had been owing to two
causes--the increase of the Army, and by the Indian war. There had also
been a great loss of horses from having forage to fetch great distances.

Mr. DEARBORN could see no reason for making the appropriation so large
as had been proposed by the gentleman from South Carolina. It must be
recollected that the Army was in garrison, where there were
barrack-houses convenient for the officers and men, and contracts had
been entered into for delivering provisions at the different forts, and
there would therefore be a great deduction on account of the
transportation, in which seven or eight hundred horses had been used up,
and the horses on hand might also be sold. Camp equipage was a heavy
article of expense, but which would not be wanted whilst the troops were
in garrison. These two articles would of themselves make a very
considerable part of the whole item. There would also be a saving in the
purchase of horses, as the cavalry made more than half the expense. He
did not think more than one hundred thousand dollars could be wanted
under this head, except it were wanted for making new forts or
fortifications. There would now be no necessity for building officers'
houses, and huts for the soldiers for winter quarters. All these
circumstances considered, he thought the sum he had mentioned would be
sufficient.

The question for filling the blank with four hundred and forty-six
thousand was put and negatived, there being only thirteen votes in favor
of it. The sense of the committee was then taken upon three hundred
thousand, and carried--there being 51 votes in favor of it.

Mr. W. SMITH then moved to add to the bill, "For the repairs of the
fortifications of West Point, twenty thousand dollars."

Mr. COIT inquired if there was any estimate of this item.

Mr. GALLATIN said there was no estimate respecting West Point.

Mr. W. SMITH said there was an estimate for Niagara, Oswego, Detroit,
&c., which might include West Point, he proposed therefore to change the
motion, and insert "Niagara, Oswego, Detroit, &c.," which would include
West Point, if necessary.

Mr. GALLATIN wished the gentleman from South Carolina to say whether he
had any information with respect to West Point.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he had no particular information on the subject, but
as it was of importance the works there should be very complete, he
thought it prudent to grant something for that object.

Mr. GALLATIN hoped the proposition would be rejected. There was no
necessity for repairing the fortifications of the posts mentioned more
than any other of the forts upon the Lakes. They knew nothing of them,
but that they were too large for the garrisons in them; but he believed
if they once begun to appropriate money for this purpose, it would
become a yearly expense, And whilst they had been parsimonious with
respect to the ports and harbors of the United States, having only
appropriated twenty-four thousand dollars to that purpose, he could see
no reason for granting twenty thousand dollars for repairing the forts
of Niagara, Oswego, and Detroit, against a few Indians; as it was well
known that a block-house was as good a fortification against the Indians
as any other. When the regiment was raised to go and take possession of
that country, they built all their forts as they went along, without any
expense, except the price of a few tools. He hoped, therefore, they
should not by voting for this sum, introduce a new item of expense into
their annual appropriations.

Mr. W. SMITH agreed with the gentleman last up, that enough had not been
appropriated for the defence of the ports and harbors of the United
States; but if they had done wrong in one instance, it was no rule why
they should continue to do so. He thought it very important that the
forts he had mentioned should be so secured at least as that they should
not go to ruin. Under this item was included West Point, which was a
fort of great consequence; and he would rather forty thousand dollars
were appropriated than twenty thousand for this purpose.

Mr. DEARBORN said, as far as the proposition related to Niagara, Oswego,
and Detroit, he thought it improper to appropriate money for their
defence. He believed it would require a year or two to know what was
necessary to be done there. At Niagara, the works were large enough for
six or seven thousand men, and it would become a question whether they
should be reduced, or kept up as they were; at Oswego, nothing more
could be necessary than a block-house. It was true, there were
considerable works there, but until it was decided what they should do
with them, it would be improper to appropriate money for their repair.
The same thing might be said of Detroit. He had no idea that the
PRESIDENT could have information from those places of what was
necessary. Whatever temporary repair might be required there, the troops
themselves would be able to effect. As to West Point, he did not know
any thing about it, except that it was a place of consequence; he also
knew that a great deal of money had been laid out upon it. He hoped they
should get into a new system with respect to the defence of our ports
and harbors; and until that was done, he should be against granting any
considerable sum for this purpose. If gentlemen were in possession of
any information on the subject, he perhaps might be induced to vote for
a small sum: but not until he knew more of the matter.

Mr. LIVINGSTON spoke of the importance of the fort at West Point, and of
the necessity of keeping it in proper repair.

Mr. COIT said, the question seemed to have taken a new turn. He presumed
that West Point was not in the idea of the Secretary of War when he made
the estimate upon which this bill was founded. If it had been, it would
have been very improper to have begun with Oswego, and include West
Point in the _et cetera_. In June, 1796, 20,000 dollars, he said, were
appropriated for the repairs of this fort, and they had not been
informed that it had been expended.

Mr. GALLATIN said, there had been 7,000 dollars expended at West Point;
the other 13,000 dollars were not intended for that fort. The present
appropriation was doubtless intended for the forts mentioned, and those
in the same quarter. If any thing was wanted for West Point, a distinct
proposition should come before them for that purpose.

Mr. W. SMITH observed that the gentleman last up had stated that only
7,000 dollars had been expended at West Point; that was only the amount
which had been expended at the time the estimate was made; but the whole
might have been since laid out, as then only 520,000 dollars of the
appropriation of the Military Establishment had been expended.

Mr. GALLATIN said, that the total expenditure of the estimate alluded to
was 1,280,479 dollars.

The question was put and negatived, there being only 19 votes in favor
of it.

The committee then rose and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, February 28.

_Algerine Captives: Ransom._

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred the petitions of George
Smith and John Robertson, who prayed for a repayment of the money which
they had themselves paid for their ransom from Algerine slavery,
reported that the ransom of George Smith cost $2,426, of which Colonel
Humphreys had paid $1,526, and George Smith the remainder; that by the
late return of our citizens from Algiers, the expense attending the
redemption of each man was ascertained to be $2,396, independent of the
expense of the general negotiation, and allowing for small inaccuracies
on account of some expenses which could not at present be ascertained.
He recommends, therefore, that George Smith have paid him $873, which,
with the sum paid by Colonel Humphreys, would make about $2,400. John
Robinson paid for his own ransom $1,518, the interest upon which came to
$516; the Secretary therefore recommends that $2,034 be paid to him.

On motion of Mr. SWANWICK, this report was referred to a select
committee, viz: Messrs. SWANWICK, BLOUNT, COIT, SEWALL, and PARKER.

_General Appropriation Bill._

The amendments from the Senate to the bill making appropriations for the
support of Government for the year 1797, were taken up and agreed to, as
also those to the bill laying additional duties on sundry articles of
impost. The amendments which were agreed to were to add to white cotton
goods, "velvets and velverets, whether printed, stained, colored, or
otherwise, and all muslins and muslinets, two and a half per cent." And
also a new section, enacting that an addition of 10 per cent. should be
laid upon these articles when imported in ships or vessels not of the
United States. The duties are to take place after the 31st of December
next.

_Military and Naval Appropriations._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
Military and Naval Appropriations; when, the pay and subsistence of
three captains in the Naval department being under consideration--

Mr. SWANWICK thought it would be necessary to have a laborer or two
employed to take care of the vessels and materials.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the estimate for the captains was $4,200; if the sum
was made $5,000, there would be sufficient for the payment of any
laborers which might be necessary. Agreed to.

The blank for the payment of Military Pensions was agreed to be filled
with $96,350.

And for making good the deficiencies of the Military Establishment of
1796, $76,312.

Also, for the payment of the expedition of General Sevier into the
Cherokee nation, $22,816.

The committee now rose, and had leave to sit again.

_Executive Veto on the Army Bill._

The following Message, in writing, was received from the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, containing his objections to the bill for fixing the
Military Establishment:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      Having maturely considered the bill to alter and amend an
      act, entitled "An act to ascertain and fix the Military
      Establishment of the United States," which was presented to
      me on the twenty-second day of this month, I now return it
      to the House of Representatives, in which it originated,
      with my objections.

      _First._ If the bill passes into a law, the two companies
      of light dragoons will be, from that moment, _legally_ out
      of service, though they will continue afterwards _actually_
      in the service; and for their services during this
      interval, namely, from the time of _legal_ to the time of
      _actual_ discharge, it will not be lawful to pay them,
      unless some future provision be made by law. Though they
      may be discharged at the pleasure of Congress, in justice
      they ought to receive their pay, not only to the time of
      passing the law, but at least to the time of their actual
      discharge.

      _Secondly._ It will be inconvenient and injurious to the
      public to dismiss the light dragoons as soon as notice of
      the law can be conveyed to them, one of the companies
      having been lately destined to a necessary and important
      service.

      _Thirdly._ The companies of light dragoons consist of one
      hundred and twenty-six non-commissioned officers and
      privates, who are bound to serve as dismounted dragoons
      when ordered so to do. They have received, in bounties,
      about two thousand dollars; one of them is completely
      equipped, and above half of the non-commissioned officers
      and privates have yet to serve more than one-third of the
      time of their enlistment; and, besides, there will, in the
      course of the year, be a considerable deficiency in the
      complement of infantry intended to be continued. Under
      these circumstances, to discharge the dragoons does not
      seem to comport with economy.

      _Fourthly._ It is generally agreed that some cavalry,
      either militia or regular, will be necessary; and,
      according to the best information I have been able to
      obtain, it is my opinion that the latter will be less
      expensive and more useful than the former in preserving
      peace between the frontier settlers and the Indians, and,
      therefore, a part of the Military Establishment should
      consist of cavalry.

                          G. WASHINGTON.

      UNITED STATES, _February_ 28, 1797.

On motion,

      "_Resolved_, That to-morrow be assigned for the
      reconsideration of the said bill, in the mode prescribed by
      the Constitution of the United States."

The question to concur was put and carried--40 to 37.


WEDNESDAY, March 1.

_Military Establishment._

Mr. GALLATIN wished the bill for fixing the Military Establishment,
which had been returned by the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, with his
objections, to be taken up.

Mr. W. SMITH hoped this subject would be taken up, but before it was
entered upon, he wished the Committee of the Whole to be discharged from
the consideration of it, as he found, in a former instance of a similar
kind, the business had been settled in the House. The committee was
accordingly discharged. The House then proceeded to reconsider the bill,
agreeably to the direction of the constitution. The bill was first read,
and then the objections of the PRESIDENT.

The SPEAKER then read the clause in the constitution which directs the
proceedings on such an occasion, and which says, that in case two-thirds
of the House wherein it originated shall be in favor of passing the
bill, it shall be sent to the other, and if two-thirds of that House be
also in favor of it, it shall become a law. The votes of both Houses to
be determined by yeas and nays.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he meant to vote against the bill, but he did not
wish to stand charged with refusing to pay the men for the time they
were in service. He thought this bill was by no means liable to a charge
of this kind; as it could scarcely be supposed that, at the time they
were making a voluntary gift of $100 to every officer discharged, the
Legislature meant to defraud the men of their pay.

Mr. W. SMITH did not see any necessity for the observations of the
gentleman from Virginia. There was nothing in the Message of the
PRESIDENT which charged that House with an intention to defraud the men
of their pay. Whatever was the design of gentlemen, this was not the
charge. But certain it was that this would be the result of the bill,
and it would be six weeks or two months before they could be notified
that the act was passed. It was the legal opinion of the Attorney
General, therefore, that they would not be entitled to pay during that
time.

Mr. NICHOLAS was sorry that the gentleman from South Carolina and he did
not think alike on the subject; he thought the objections he had made
were necessary, and he had made them for the purpose stated. He thought
the PRESIDENT ought not to have doubted their willingness to have
allowed the pay in question. He was of opinion the House had given some
extraordinary proofs of their liberality this session; amongst other
proofs of this, they had determined to appropriate money for the
building of a thirty-six gun frigate, which he had caused to be built
without authority. But the pay of these men was so much a point of law,
that he believed the men would have been entitled to pay.

Mr. W. SMITH said, their having agreed to give each of the officers
$100, without mentioning the men, rather went against the gentleman's
conclusion; because, if any thing had been intended to have been given
to them, they would also have been mentioned.

Mr. WILLIAMS was sorry that some things had not been more attended to,
when that bill was under consideration; and, although there would be a
difficulty respecting the Brigadier General and Staff, yet he thought
the objections well founded, and would vote against the passing of the
bill, in order that a new one might be brought in to avoid the
objections, from the demands lately made for the protection of the
frontiers of Georgia and Tennessee, which amounted to upwards of
$300,000; he fully agreed with the PRESIDENT that it would be less
expense to keep up the two companies of dragoons than to employ militia
horse.

The yeas and nays were then taken, and stood 55 to 26.

The bill being accordingly lost, Mr. NICHOLAS moved that a committee be
appointed to bring in a new bill, which being agreed to, a new bill was
reported (exactly the same as the former, except an omission of the
parts objected to by the PRESIDENT.) It was ordered to be engrossed for
a third reading, and afterwards passed.

_Case of Hanging Maw._

Mr. BLOUNT called for the order of the day on the report of the
Committee of Claims on the petition of the widow of the late
Scollacuttaw, or Hanging Maw. The House accordingly went into a
committee thereon, when the report was read, as follows:

      "That the complaints against the conduct of one John Beard,
      and a number of armed men, who, she states, in the year one
      thousand seven hundred and ninety-three, contrary to law
      and the good faith of Government, attacked the
      dwelling-house of the petitioner and husband, killed and
      wounded a number of well-disposed Indians; burnt, and
      destroyed, and carried away their property, and wounded the
      petitioner. She now prays that some provision may be made
      for her.

      "After examining the statement made by the petitioner, and
      the facts upon which she rests her present application, the
      committee have found some difficulty in deciding what
      measures would be most advisable for the House to adopt.

      "Previous to the attack on the Hanging Maw, the frontier
      settlers of Tennessee and the Indians in that quarter had
      been guilty of mutual acts of aggression and hostility. A
      party of the Indians had killed some settlers; their trail
      was discovered, conducting across the Tennessee--this
      circumstance induced a belief in their pursuers that the
      Hanging Maw had been concerned in that business, and
      occasioned his being wounded, and the misfortunes
      complained of by his widow. The general opinion, however,
      represents the Hanging Maw as having been uniformly
      friendly to the settlers; as vigilant to apprise them of
      the approach of banditti; and constant in his exertions, on
      all occasions, to compose difficulties between them and his
      nation; and, withal, as possessing considerable influence
      over the Indians. The same disposition is also attributed
      to his widow, the present petitioner; who, instead of
      exciting her people to acts of retaliation, has abated
      nothing in her friendship to the white people.

      "All these circumstances seem to countenance, if not to
      require for her a pension from the Government, or some
      other relief from the Legislature. Such a provision might
      also be considered as extending its influence beyond the
      particular object; or, as an inciting cause to other
      Indians to pursue a similar line of conduct, under
      circumstances alike cruel and distressing, should they
      happen.

      "But, on the other hand, it is to be considered that there
      are citizens on the frontiers who have suffered injuries as
      cruel, and deprivations as severe by the Indians; and who
      have been thereby left in situations of distress that would
      equally call for assistance from the Legislature. Questions
      arise whether both descriptions of sufferers ought not to
      be provided for? Whether the abilities of Government would
      be competent to meet all possible claims of this nature?
      And whether help can be extended by law to the one, and
      consistently refused to the other?

      "It may be said that those who settle on the frontiers
      voluntarily assume all the risks and dangers attached to
      that position; and, therefore can have no just claim upon
      the Government for consequences resulting from their
      choice; whilst, on the contrary, policy requires that the
      minds of the Indians, who may be roused to hostility by
      acts of the settlers, should be quieted by small pecuniary
      interpositions.

      "Under these views of the subject, the committee have
      hesitated what report to make; but, upon the whole, as the
      authority vested in the Executive Department is competent
      to meet this claim; and should the petitioner, from her
      sufferings and her attachment to the United States, appear
      to the Executive to be entitled to any annual relief, as it
      may be afforded out of the appropriations for contingent
      expenses in the Indian Department, without any interference
      of the Legislature, and as this mode will probably involve
      the fewest difficulties, the committee think she should
      apply to that department; and that the prayer of her
      petition ought not to be granted."[12]

The committee reported their agreement with the resolution reported from
the Committee of Claims.

The question was taken, that the House do agree with the Committee of
the whole House in their agreement to the said report, and resolved in
the affirmative.


THURSDAY, March 2.

The bill for the relief of American seamen was read the third time and
passed.

_Military Appropriations._

On the motion of Mr. W. SMITH, the House went into a committee of the
Whole on the bill making appropriation for the Military Establishment,
when the following items were agreed to without debate:

For the payment of the army,                 $256,450
For the subsistence of the officers,           47,395
For the subsistence of the non-commissioned
  officers and privates,                      245,283
For forage,                                    14,904
For clothing,                                  83,050

Mr. W. SMITH then proposed to insert a new item, in consequence of the
bill just passed, "For the purchase of horses and the equipment of the
cavalry, $16,085."

Mr. GALLATIN said, the items which had been agreed to were upon the
ground of an increase of 126 dragoons which was not in the former bill.
The item now under consideration went to provide horses and equipments
for an additional company of cavalry. It appeared that this company was
heretofore without either, so that they must have been employed as
dismounted dragoons; and if they now appropriated the sum before them,
they would, in fact, add a company of horse to the establishment. He
believed it to be the general opinion that they had cavalry sufficient
at present; indeed, it was the opinion of a large majority of that House
that none were necessary; but if they did appropriate for any, he
thought they ought not to go beyond the present establishment.

Mr. W. SMITH said, if they refused to make the appropriation under
consideration, they declared that one of the two companies of cavalry
should act as infantry. By the bill passed yesterday, it was left
altogether to the option of the PRESIDENT to employ them either as
cavalry or infantry: but if this appropriation was withheld, he would be
under the necessity of employing them as infantry only, and this House
would now exercise a discretion which only yesterday they had vested in
the Executive.

It would be observed, that, in the message of the PRESIDENT, he had
fully stated the reasons why dragoons would be requisite. The business
upon which one of the companies was at present employed was to escort
the Commissioners employed in running the boundary lines betwixt the
territory of the United States and the Indians; the other was
indispensable for the protection of the frontiers.

What, Mr. S. asked, would be the consequence of refusing this
appropriation? One of the companies of dragoons would be obliged to act
as infantry, and Government would be compelled to employ militia-horse
at a great expense. If this was economy, he was mistaken in his ideas of
economy. The sum was conformable to the estimate which he had received
from the War Office.

Mr. HARTLEY was in favor of the appropriation, that the PRESIDENT might
be at full liberty to employ the troops on foot or on horse-back,
according as the service might require.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought, while they were making appropriations, this
subject might as well be included. If these men were to be kept, they
ought to be properly equipped. He said it was the opinion of the
PRESIDENT and the Secretary of War that cavalry was necessary, and
therefore he had concluded it would be proper, and wished them to be
kept up, so as to be called into service whenever necessary.

Mr. MILLEDGE thought there was great need of cavalry; it would be an
object of policy, as, by information he had received from the Governor
of Georgia, (which he had in his hand, and which was corroborated by a
late Governor,) horse were absolutely necessary--he thought three
companies--on the frontier. He therefore was in favor of the
appropriation.

Mr. VARNUM had no doubt but the gentleman from Georgia, and every
gentleman in the House, would be glad to have horse and infantry too
kept up in their State: every part would be glad to have the public
money expended upon it. He could not see why a body of cavalry should be
kept up in a time of peace. He thought the Legislature had as good a
right to judge as any person, notwithstanding the authorities produced
to sanction the appropriation. Mr. V. had no doubt, if this was granted,
that application would soon be made again for a similar purpose. He
hoped this appropriation would not take place; it would be a small
saving, and might as well be made, as there was so much want of it. He
could have wished the troops reduced to two regiments, which he thought
quite sufficient for a Peace Establishment. He hoped the PRESIDENT's
ideas on the subject would not obtain to govern the decisions of the
House, as we have the power, said he, to withhold appropriations; and
what gentlemen who were locally concerned should say, he could not be
guided by; as soldiers would consume their produce and spend money
amongst them, consequently they were interested.

Mr. CRAIK really lamented that the gentleman had not been in the House
yesterday, at the time the subject was more under consideration: he
might then have inveighed against the PRESIDENT. The observations might
have come with more propriety, if they had been made before the bill
passed, and when under discussion; but, after a law has passed the
proper authorities--after it has been resolved to have these troops of
horse--to say, we will not appropriate money to carry it into effect, is
strange conduct. If the determination of the gentleman was to oppose the
bill, he should have used every means to that purpose, and if not
effectual, at least to suffer others to enjoy their will--especially a
majority. For the sake of consistency, he hoped the gentleman would
withdraw his opposition, and not in this side-way try to defeat the
operation of a bill which has passed. The cavalry were voted because
they were supposed to be necessary, and now a gentleman comes forward,
endeavoring to excite the jealousy of the House on the Executive's
meddling with the Military Establishment. Mr. C. said he was pleased
that the PRESIDENT had refused it, if it was only to convince some
gentlemen that he had power to refuse that or any other bill. [Here Mr.
DENT asked the gentleman if he was in order.] Mr. CRAIK said he only
wished to prove the inconsistency of the member's conduct. He thought
the House should not betray a want of consistency. He believed, from the
statement of the member from Georgia, and the reasons of the PRESIDENT,
that horse were necessary, and he therefore should wish the
appropriation to be passed.

Mr. KITCHELL said, gentlemen seemed to be mistaken; they were
continually alluding to the law passed yesterday. There was not a word
about two troops of horse yesterday. All we then said, was, that we
would not say there should not be two troops of horse; the Message of
the PRESIDENT did not say that two troops should be mounted, nor do I
say, said Mr. K., that horse are not necessary; I think some are
necessary; but the inquiry seemed to be, now, whether the House were to
vote for more.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the gentleman's observations were very extraordinary;
he surely could not have attended to the subject, to say that the House
had not passed the law authorizing two troops of horse. We have a law in
force, said he, to ascertain and fix the Military Establishment, in
which we authorize the PRESIDENT to employ the two troops of dragoons,
to serve either on horse or foot at his discretion. The bill we sent up
yesterday does not repeal that law, and yet gentlemen would now come
forward to oppose the appropriation, and determine they shall act on
foot. He could not think with what propriety the restriction could be
made as the gentleman from Massachusetts wishes, nor could he think how
the gentleman from Jersey had attended. Should we now say they should be
at our direction, and that we would not grant money without? This would
be strange conduct--an assumption of power which he hoped the House
would never arrogate.

Mr. KITCHELL said his meaning was, that the horse were not established
yesterday, but before.

Mr. HARTLEY said it appeared, from good testimony, that the troops were
requisite to save the people on the frontiers from the depredations of
the Indians; he thought, therefore, that they having been established
before, the House were bound to make the appropriation to give effect,
or show the great inconsistency.

Mr. NICHOLAS said it was not his intention to vote for these men at all;
but if they must have them, perhaps it would be most economical to equip
them. With respect to their power of withholding the appropriation, he
had no doubt; and though they had yesterday passed a law establishing
two companies of cavalry, it was in the power of that House, of the
Senate, or of the PRESIDENT, to refuse an appropriation. This was the
sense of the constitution. When the bill came before the House, he
should give his negative to the additional horse; for, if they were
always to keep up the same number of men, whether in war or peace,
except two-thirds of both Houses were found to oppose the will of the
PRESIDENT, they might bid adieu to all restraint upon Executive power,
and count upon a military Government, if ever an Executive should be
found whose will it should be to make it so. If these were to be kept
up, he would still say the House had better go to $100,000 expense to
mount them on horse-back.

Mr. VARNUM said it was observed by gentlemen that those troops were not
mounted; if so, there must have been a very lavish waste of money.
However that might be, gentlemen who state this matter ought to state it
fairly. They ought not to say that two companies of cavalry were
yesterday voted. No, they were part of the old War Establishment. It was
true, the House had not the power to repeal the law; but one thing was
in their power, and that they ought to do, if they see this part of the
standing army necessary. The constitution returns the power to act on it
once in every two years to each branch of the Legislature. The House, he
thought, had good right to exercise their own opinion on the necessity
of mounting these men. It was not in the power of one branch to repeal
the law which keeps these men, but we ought to consider whether they are
to be put in the same situation as in time of war. Mr. V. said he
discharged his duty in voting against this appropriation. The House had
a right to judge, and it was not in the power of the PRESIDENT to act
for them.

Mr. HEATH said that the subject had been fully discussed, and therefore
he should only observe, that, from the authority which had recommended
the mounting of these cavalry, he should vote for the appropriation.

Mr. MILLEDGE repeated his arguments on the local situation of the
country, and asserted the absolute necessity of the troops.

The motion was put and carried--there being 56 in favor of it.

_Naval Appropriations._

Mr. W. SMITH then proposed to add $172,000 for finishing the frigates
United States, Constitution, and Constellation.

Mr. NICHOLAS said he should be against appropriating so large a sum for
this purpose. It was the sense of the House, on a former occasion, that
it would be proper to appropriate such a sum as should put them in such
a situation as to secure them from injury, but to stop short of making
them fit for sea, that the expense of manning them might be avoided.

Mr. SWANWICK said a new view of the subject seemed to be brought forward
at present. Before, they had determined to finish the frigates; but now,
they were not to finish them, lest they should be manned, but to finish
them in part only. A gentleman yesterday said, when speaking on the
subject of the PRESIDENT's Message, that he could not suppose they would
have refused to pay the soldiers, though there might be some deficiency
in the expression of the act; and might he not suppose, said Mr. S., if
the frigates were so nearly finished, he might go on to finish them, and
trust to the Legislature to furnish the money? These frigates, he said,
were a very extraordinary concern. It seemed as if it was only when it
was to be made a present of to Algiers, that a frigate could be
finished, and not when it was for the protection of our own commerce. He
trusted, however, that there would not be a majority found in that House
who would vote against finishing the frigates: as to manning them, that
would remain for a future consideration.

Mr. PARKER said, it would require all the money which had been named for
finishing the frigates, without rigging, though there would be a
considerable quantity of materials left on hand. There need be no
apprehension of their being manned, whilst seamen's wages remained at
the price they were, because men could not be got on the terms
stipulated in the law for this purpose. If a smaller sum than was
mentioned were to be granted, they might as well give nothing.

Mr. SITGREAVES supposed the blank was now proposed to be filled with the
same sum which had been agreed upon on a former occasion. If this were
the case, it ought to dissipate the fears of the gentleman from
Virginia, (Mr. NICHOLAS,) as it was well known that the sum was
predicated upon a supposition that the frigates were not to be manned.
If they were to be manned, a further appropriation would certainly be
necessary.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, it appeared to him that if all gentlemen were agreed
that this business should go no further than the building of the
frigates, they could have no hesitation to leave undone some of the
internal finishing work of the vessels; if they did not wish to put them
into such a situation as that they might force them into service upon
the spur of an alarm, they could have no objection to their being left
in such a situation as to be perfectly secure, but not finished fit for
sea.

Mr. SITGREAVES said this subject had heretofore undergone a very full
discussion. A motion was then made merely to finish the hulls, which was
negatived. It was then said that contracts were made for all the
materials, and that except the frigates were finished, the engagements
which had been entered into could not be fulfilled. But there was
another security against the danger apprehended. They had lately come to
a determination to make all appropriations specific and particular. What
was the language of the present appropriation? It was for finishing the
frigates, not for manning them. If it had been said to be for carrying
into effect the law for the Naval Establishment, there might have been
some little ground for apprehension; but, as it now stood, the Executive
could not proceed to man the vessels.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, when they voted the sum now asked for finishing the
frigates, the expenditure was accompanied by a law to repeal the manning
clause of the former act. He had made inquiries respecting contracts,
and found the money in hand was equal to the fulfilment of them; if
there had been any others, he supposed they should have heard of them.
He again said there were many ornamental parts of the vessels which
might be as well thrown upon the expense of next year as of this.

Mr. SWANWICK said, if Government could have had foresight sufficient to
have known that there would have been any objections made to the
finishing of the frigates, they would certainly not have entered into
any contracts to that extent, but they could not possibly do this. He
wished, if gentlemen were determined the frigates should not be made use
of, that they would say at once they should be sold on the stocks. With
respect to manning of them from the money proposed to be appropriated,
that was impossible, and he saw no reason for making the business
_doubly sure_ by any other precaution.

Mr. HOLLAND said it was, with great propriety, intended by many members
in the House to keep the frigates in such a state as to prevent their
being manned. If we appropriate to finish them, said he, we shall be
exposed to all the difficulties depicted by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania; for some way would be devised to procure and pay men, if
the House put it in the power of the Executive to do it: therefore he
hoped, to avoid all that trouble and expense, they would not vote to
finish them. For what purpose, said he, should they be finished, unless
it were intended to man them? To avoid every danger of that kind, he
should vote against the sum proposed.

Mr. HARTLEY said, that last year the six frigates which had been before
voted for were reduced to three, with intent to complete them. Was it
not probable then, he would ask, that the PRESIDENT would proceed to
complete those frigates, according to the power given him? Was it not to
be supposed that contracts were entered into for that purpose? No person
could suppose but contracts were made. Then certainly the House ought
not to expose the Executive to the ridiculous situation of receding from
his contracts! They would not be finished before next session, and
therefore no danger of equipping could be apprehended. It may be
necessary to use them, but at any rate it would be running no risk to
have them finished, as they could not be manned by this appropriation.

Mr. GALLATIN said, there seemed to be involved in the present
consideration the question whether or not we should have a Navy. As to
himself, he should vote against the present appropriation, because if
the frigates were completely finished, he should fear they would get to
sea. When they had on a former occasion consented to finish them, it was
under the condition of the law for manning being repealed; but they now
stood upon new ground. Mr. G. said he had been charged with
inconsistency of opinion, from having before said that he thought the
PRESIDENT would not be authorized to proceed in the manning of the
vessels under the present law, whilst he was now apprehensive that he
might do so. He wished to be on sure ground. He did not know but the
PRESIDENT might put a different construction upon the law from him.
Indeed, from the experience they had had of Presidential discretion,
they need not be surprised if the vessels were sent to sea, though no
appropriation was made for the purpose, should the PRESIDENT suppose
there was any plea for doing so. As a proof of this power having been
exercised heretofore, Mr. G. referred to the Western insurrection. In
that case, he said, no appropriation was made for the expense; but the
law authorizes the PRESIDENT to call out the militia when he shall see
occasion to do so; he called them out, and got money from the Treasury.
Indeed, the building of a frigate for Algiers, without any authority,
and the pledging of the faith of the nation to pay the expense of the
law-suits of our citizens in London, were strong proofs of what the
Executive could do.

Mr. G. said he did not mean to bring into view any arguments relative to
the propriety of establishing a Navy in this country. He should vote
against the present motion, because he did not wish to see the frigates
at sea, and because he conceived a Navy to be prejudicial to the true
interests of this country. Something had been said about contracts, but
he did not believe any existed. They had last year been told the same
thing. Any person reading the statements which had been furnished to
them, would perceive that the business was not done by any contract, but
that men were employed by Government, and regular wages paid to them.
The frigate which had been built for Algiers had been built by contract,
they had an estimate of it at so much a ton, but this was not the case
with respect to any other of the frigates.

Mr. W. SMITH did not wish to go into a long debate on the subject, when
they had so much business before them, in order to show whether it was
proper for this country to have a Navy or not; the only question now
was, whether they ought to appropriate money for finishing the three
frigates. If they did not do it, all the money which had been already
expended would probably be lost. The only objection to the doing of this
seemed to arise from a fear that the vessels would be manned, though
when this subject was before them, the other day, the gentleman from
Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) moved to postpone the bill relative to the
repealing or suspending the law for manning the vessels till next
session, from an opinion that, by the present law, the PRESIDENT was not
authorized to man them. That gentleman seemed now, however, in
contradiction to himself, to fear the PRESIDENT would put a different
construction upon the law: if he did not believe the PRESIDENT would
violate the law, he could not account for his refusing now to vote the
money which was merely necessary to finish the vessels. Mr. S. read an
extract from the report of the Secretary of War, to show the forward
state in which the vessels were, and added, that they were bound in duty
to finish them, were it only to prevent the loss of the money already
expended upon them.

Mr. DEARBORN observed, that if he was convinced, from the documents
which had been laid before them, that the sum now asked for was
necessary merely to finish the frigates, he should not hesitate to vote
for it; but it was not a little extraordinary that the gentlemen on that
committee (not even the Chairman, who seemed to have the business so
much at heart) could not say whether this sum was necessary for
finishing and rigging, or finishing without rigging, or for finishing,
rigging, and manning. The frigate building in this city, the captain had
told him, was calculated in point of size to carry 62 guns, instead of
44; which was one of the reasons they had cost so much more than they
had been estimated at. Mr. D. said, he suspected that the sum proposed
would not only be sufficient to finish the hulls, but to rig and fit the
vessels for sea, and until he had more satisfaction on the subject he
could not consent to give his vote for it.

Mr. KITTERA observed, that gentlemen first said, that under the present
law, the PRESIDENT could not proceed to man and send the vessels to sea,
but now they were apprehensive this might be done, though no
appropriation was made for the purpose. This, he thought, somewhat
inconsistent; but he believed whilst thirty dollars a month was given to
seamen by merchants, and their law only authorized eleven to be given,
there was not much to be feared on this head.

Mr. AMES said, that gentlemen opposed to the finishing of the frigates,
seemed to be also opposed to all ideas of this country ever becoming a
naval power; the necessity of this, he was persuaded, would ere long
appear. It was not to be supposed that a nation whose commerce was
greater than that of any other, except Great Britain, should go on long
without a naval protection; and he believed the more strenuous the
opposition shown against this measure, the sooner it would be
accomplished; he was not therefore displeased to see the present violent
opposition to every thing which looked towards this object.

It was not enough, Mr. A. said, for gentlemen to discourage the building
of ships, they would also discredit the administration of Government;
and nothing was more natural than that those who thought so ill of it
themselves should endeavor to spread those opinions. This was done
continually. With respect to the building of the frigates, he thought it
was a wise step; and as to the extra expense and delay which had
attended the business, he believed, gentlemen might take a share of the
blame upon themselves, on account of the versatility which had been
shown upon the occasion in this day agreeing upon one thing, and that
upon another. It was true, that another cause of extra expense was owing
to a resolution which had been taken to make the ships much larger than
was contemplated by the House; the vessel building here, he believed,
was nearly 1,600 tons. He was glad that this alteration of plan had been
adopted; not because more money would be expended on this account; not
because contrary to the direction of the Legislature, but because true
wisdom required it; they would now be an overmatch for any frigate, or
any vessel which the Algerines could send out against them. These, he
believed, were the views of the Executive in having them built of the
size they were. The number of the frigates agreed to be finished had
been reduced to three; and these they last session passed a law to
finish. But what was now to be done? It was said they should not be
finished. Who said this? Did the people? did the Government say it? No;
that House alone said it: so that that House were about to usurp the
supreme authority. We are the Government, we are the people, we are
every thing.

But, if there be a law which says that these three frigates should be
built and equipped for sea, was it not necessary, before it was
concluded that they should not be so built and equipped, that this law
should be repealed by all the branches of the Legislature? No, say
gentlemen, we can appropriate or not, according to our sovereign will
and pleasure. If they possessed the power to nullify what was enacted by
all the three branches of Government, it was greatly to be lamented. But
if they could appropriate according to their will, they were bound to
do it also according to their consciences too. It was not only a weapon,
but a shield, which it was their duty to use with great caution, and
according to law; for, if they were to use it contrarily, it would be to
make that House the supreme power, it would be to usurp the supreme
authority.

Mr. COIT believed the only real question before them was, what sum they
would appropriate for this object; he wished the mover would consent to
leave the item blank.

Mr. W. SMITH had no objection to its being left blank.

Mr. VENABLE said, if this was a mere question of expense, it was very
extraordinary that it should have called forth such a philippic from the
gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. AMES,) who had charged the House with
arrogating to itself all the powers of Government; as being omnipotent.
Upon what ground could he found such charges? If it were a question of
expense merely, there could certainly be no ground for such charges; but
if it were to be considered as a question of power, if they were to be
told they dared not to withhold the appropriation in question, here he
would intrench himself as a Representative of the people; he had a
right, as a member of that House, to vote against the expense which he
thought improper, and he would exercise that right. Every branch of
Government had the same right, and he wished them to exercise it. And he
would not be told, when he was about to exercise this right, that he was
arrogating to himself all the powers of Government. He was determined to
exercise his discretion on every question which came before him for
decision, and he would vote against this expense.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. AMES) seldom
spoke without casting some denunciation against that House. He had,
however, allowed that the PRESIDENT had done, with respect to this
fleet, all that any gentleman had charged him with doing; he had even
put the case stronger than any other person had put it; for he had said
that the Executive had determined to build the vessels of a larger size
than had been contemplated by the Legislature, in order to be an
overmatch for any other frigate. All this, said Mr. N., may be right,
and the approbation he gave this conduct, was a proof the gentleman
thought so; all he had to say was, that it was not legal; it might be
patriotic, and be done with an intention to serve the country; the
PRESIDENT might understand the interests of the country better than
they; but it was a conduct which would not meet with the same
approbation from him that it met with from the gentleman from
Massachusetts. That gentleman had also said that a law imposed a duty
upon the House to find the means for carrying it into effect. Were they
not, then, to be called upon for money to man the frigates? He asked
those gentlemen whether the PRESIDENT had not a right to man the
frigates, and if so, whether they should not be _obliged_ to find the
money?

The powers of this House to control appropriations, had, however,
already been settled. It was, indeed, an absurdity to call a body a
Legislature, and at the same time deny them a control over the public
purse; if this were not so, where would be the use of going through the
forms of that House with a money bill? The Executive might as well draw
upon the Treasury at once for whatever sums he might stand in need of. A
doctrine like this would be scouted even in despotic countries.

And what was all this power that so much alarmed the gentleman from
Massachusetts? It was merely a negative power to refuse to do what they
thought it would be mischievous to do. Mr. N. said there was a very
fashionable doctrine of throwing all power into the hands of the
Executive. If there were to be extremes, however, he believed an excess
of power would at least be as safe in their hands as in those of the
Executive; and if this were his opinion, and the ground upon which he
acted, the gentleman from Massachusetts never failed to take an opposite
direction. He never thought any Executive power too great.

Mr. PARKER remarked, that it had been said the frigates would carry 62
guns; it might have been possible to have made them so, but they were no
more than a large sized 44-gun frigate. They might be a little larger
than any other of that number of guns, but not so much. It was true they
were not at first contemplated to be so large, but strong reasons were
offered for making them of the present size; the expense was not
increased by the increase of size, in proportion to their usefulness. He
therefore himself approved of what the PRESIDENT had done; and, if he
had had the management of the business, he should have done the same. It
had been doubted whether the sum proposed to be granted would not only
finish, but equip and man the vessels. If the gentleman who had these
doubts would refer to the report which had been made on the subject, he
would find that $220,000 would be required for that purpose; the
$172,000 proposed would barely make them ready for sea in other
respects.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. GALLATIN,) who was generally very
correct in his statements, had supposed that if the frigates were
finished, the PRESIDENT might go on to man them without consulting the
Legislature upon the occasion; and, to show the possibility of doing
this, he had alluded to his having built a frigate for the Algerines
without the approbation of Congress. He lamented the situation in which
we stood with that country, but he believed the building of the frigate
was necessary. The Western insurrection, and the law-suits in London had
also been named, which he should not stop to notice.

In answer to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, he would say, that if the
PRESIDENT could man the vessels and send them to sea independent of
Congress, he might also finish them without their aid; but he did not
believe he would place himself in the same situation with respect to
them as if he had to do with a foreign nation. In relation to foreign
nations, he had great power; but, if he went beyond his power with
respect to internal regulations, he would be liable to impeachment, and
he would be one of the first to promote an impeachment, were such to be
his conduct.

Mr. AMES said, he understood the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. NICHOLAS)
to say, that the conduct of the Executive was illegal; but certainly if
a frigate was estimated to cost $12,000 and it cost $15,000, the
expenditure of the additional $3,000 was not illegal.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he had made use of the gentleman's own words with
respect to the change in the plan of building the frigates, which he had
called illegal.

Mr. AMES said, as to the size of the vessels, that was Executive
business. The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. VENABLE) seemed to take the
observation which he had made with a degree of sensibility perfectly
natural, because it went to touch the power which he had claimed as a
member of that House. The gentleman said, "Here I intrench myself behind
my privileges." Nothing was said about the public good; all was self.

And was it to be considered, he asked, that they enjoyed the powers
committed to them in their own right, as barons of empire, as sovereign
despots? Or was the power placed in them to be exercised like other
duties, according to justice and propriety? He believed no one would
deny that the latter was the truth.

How did the matter stand? They had attempted to repeal a law, but
another branch of the Legislature had refused to accede to the repeal;
of course it could not be effected. Were they then to act as if the law
had been repealed? Yes, say gentlemen, we will refuse to appropriate the
money since we think the thing unnecessary. He hoped, however, the day
would soon come (as melancholy would be the period until it did arrive)
when this power of refusing an appropriation to carry an existing law
into effect, should no longer be countenanced by a majority of that
House.

Mr. VENABLE was of opinion, that if the gentleman from Massachusetts had
only the public good in view, which he had spoken of, he could have had
no inducement to have gone into the arguments which he had introduced on
this occasion. He could assure that gentleman that he felt himself as
strongly bound to consider the public good in all his conduct as he
could be. He believed no instance could be named in which he had not
consulted that interest. As to what was, or was not, calculated for the
public good, he must be left at liberty to judge for himself. But the
gentleman had not put the business on this ground, but because gentlemen
differed in opinion from others, they were charged with assuming
absolute authority, with principles of despotism, overturning the
Government, &c.

Mr. V. said, it was his opinion, that in all laws which came before that
House, every member had a full right to say yea or nay, for which they
were not accountable to that gentleman, or to any other. The other
branches of Government had also the same power. Indeed, the other House
had exercised this right in negativing the repeal of the law relative to
the manning of these vessels. He trusted both Houses would always
continue to assert their right thus to use their discretion and
privilege.

Mr. AMES said, he had not charged that House with usurping power, or
breaking down the other branches of Government; nor did he say they had
not a discretion; but that their discretion ought to be regulated by
duty.

Mr. SWANWICK said, amidst all the foreign objections which had been
urged against this appropriation, he wished the act passed last session
to be referred to. [Mr. S. read an extract from it.] Here, in April
last, said he, it is provided that the frigates shall be finished, and
yet now gentlemen wished the House to come to a conclusion only to half
finish them. What, he asked, would the world think of such a versatility
of conduct?

Mr. KITCHELL thought, if they meant to get through the business which
lay before them, it was time they disposed of this question. He thought
the debate upon it had been sufficiently long.

Mr. BRENT said, when this subject first came before the committee, he
had determined to give the sum necessary to complete them; nor had he
ever wavered on the subject, until he heard the ground which had been
taken by the gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. AMES.) He did most
feelingly participate in the sentiments expressed by his colleague (Mr.
VENABLE) on the occasion. It was really difficult to know what was the
amount of his doctrines. In the first instance, he understood the
gentleman to rise for two purposes, viz: to justify the Executive from
certain charges which had been brought against him, and to show the
obligation which the House lay under to grant the money.

In the first place, the gentleman said the Executive had been charged
with violating the law; and, when he went into the subject, he
understood him to say, as his colleague understood him, that the
Executive had changed the plan; he understood him to say, that though
Congress had ordered 44-gun frigates, he had ordered 74's, which remark
he concluded by expressing his approbation of the PRESIDENT's conduct.
If he admitted that the Executive had violated the law, and yet
felicitated him upon having done so, he might enjoy his pleasure, he
would not participate with him.

With respect to the second part of his observations, as to the absolute
necessity under which every member lay to vote for the sum required for
finishing the frigates, because the building of them was directed by
law, this was a most important point. He thought this involved one of
the most valuable principles which that House possessed, and which
should never be lost sight of, viz: the right of every member to
exercise his discretion upon every question, appropriations as well as
others, which came before him. Did not the gentleman know that the most
solemn decision had taken place last session on this subject, by a large
majority? Indeed, said he, this sentiment was so ingrafted in the
constitution that the House could not divest themselves of it; for the
gentleman to say they did not possess it, was to make a dead letter of
their privileges. There could be no doubt on the subject; and it was a
sacred and essential principle which would go further to preserve our
liberties than any other which they possessed. He trusted, therefore,
they should guard it with special care.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he did not mean to follow the gentleman from
Massachusetts in what he had said on this subject, because he had not
felt the force of what he had advanced, nor very well understood what he
meant. Both his meaning and his motive for bringing this subject before
them to-day were to him mysterious. He had brought before them the
Treaty question anew, and it would be recollected what were the feelings
of the House on that occasion; but he could see no relation which it
bore to the present question; and though a number of members in that
House had asserted that they were bound to appropriate money to carry a
treaty into effect, he did not believe they were ready to say the same
with respect to laws.

The gentleman from Massachusetts had said, that if they put a meaning
upon the constitution in this respect different from him, that they
arrogated the supreme power to themselves. Did not he know that the
doctrine applied to the Senate as well as to that House? and did he not
see that that would be a check upon the abuse of it in either House,
since it was a weapon which both could use?

The gentleman had said they were bound to obey the law. Bound to obey
what law? The law for authorizing the building of the three frigates? He
did not understand how this law was to bind them. This was a mere
administrative law, which did not extend to the citizens of the United
States, but gave power to the PRESIDENT to do a certain act; therefore,
as citizens, they had nothing to do with that law, except they were to
obey it by appropriating the money necessary to carry it into effect.
Yet the gentleman allowed there might be cases in which it would be
right to use discretion in the appropriation of money. For his part, he
did not understand the being bound and not bound at the same time; to
have discretion and no discretion. He wished either that the one or the
other opinion might be adopted; and that they might be told that they
had, or that they had not, a right to exercise discretion in the
appropriation of money. If this exercise were to be allowed in any case,
why could it not be allowed in the present? He wondered, therefore, that
gentlemen in favor of this motion should have touched upon this ground.
He agreed with the gentleman that they had this discretion, and that it
ought to be used with caution, and not upon trifling occasions. But he
conceived this to be one of those occasions in which it was necessary
for those opposed to a Naval Establishment, to vote against this
appropriation. He meant against the appropriation in its extent. It was
because he considered a Naval Establishment as highly injurious to the
interests of this country, he should vote against every measure which
had a tendency to produce it. That gentleman, and others who thought
differently, would vote accordingly.

Mr. G. moved an amendment, viz: that before the word "frigates," to add
"the hulls of." On the question, ayes 45, noes 44--the Chairman giving
his vote against the amendment, it was not carried. It was then put in
the original form, to finish the frigates, the sum of ---- dollars, and
carried--ayes 54.

The question on the blank being filled with $172,000 was then put, and
carried--ayes 47.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to add an item to pay the bounty of one hundred
dollars which they had agreed should be paid to every officer discharged
from the military service in consequence of the regulations which had
taken place in the establishment.

This item was filled up with three thousand dollars.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to add the following words: "which several sums shall
be solely applied to the objects for which they are respectively
appropriated."

Mr. W. SMITH wished, as much as the gentleman from Pennsylvania, to
confine the expenditure to the sums appropriated; but the provision for
some objects might fall short, while others might have a surplus, which
he thought ought to be made use of to supply deficiencies in cases of
emergency. Ever since the establishment of the present Government, the
whole appropriation for the Military Establishment had been considered
as an aggregate fund out of which any of the objects of that
establishment might be paid for; but the expense of each object was now
to be confined to the specific appropriation. He was afraid, however
well this might look in theory, it would be found very mischievous in
practice. He wished the gentleman would amend his proposition by adding,
"so far as may be consistent with public exigency;" this would restrict
the expenditures, except in unforeseen cases of emergency, to provide
for which some latitude of discretion ought to be left to the Executive.

Mr. SITGREAVES did not see the necessity or propriety of the amendment
of his colleague, when the House had distributed the appropriations
amongst the different objects; as the amendment, he conceived, meant
nothing more than the department should not expend any more than the sum
appropriated for the different items, which they had no right to do if
there were no amendment. Heretofore, when appropriations were made in a
mass, the Secretary of War did not feel himself bound to govern himself
by the estimate which he had given in, but by particularizing the
different items, the former evil was corrected.

Mr. GALLATIN said, if the fact was exactly as it had been stated by his
colleague, his amendment might be unnecessary, but the Treasury
Department had not acted upon the principle which he had stated. They
had, notwithstanding the distribution of the appropriation, thought
themselves at liberty to take the money from an item where there was a
surplus, and apply it to another, where it was wanted. And when this was
objected to, as taking from the Legislature their appropriating power,
they answered that the Legislature had entered so much into detail that
they could not attend to their directions. They had, last session, made
the appropriations more specific than at present, yet the Secretary of
the Treasury, in a letter written to the House during this session,
said, "that it was well known to have been a rule since the
establishment of the Government, that the appropriations for the
Military Establishment were considered as general grants of money,
liable to be issued to any of the objects included under that
department." Therefore, unless this amendment was introduced, it would
leave the power as before. In order to make the business more easy, all
the contingent expenses were appropriated in one sum.

The object of this amendment, said Mr. G., was that no part of the pay
of the Army should go to the Quartermaster's Department, &c., and that
none of them should go to the building or equipping the frigates; but if
this were not the case, money might be found to get the frigates to sea
from the appropriations for the Military Department, if the PRESIDENT
should think it necessary so to apply it. As to the amendment, it would
do away the intention of it altogether.

Mr. HARPER was against the amendment. He thought the Department ought to
be at liberty, in case of an appropriation proving deficient, to have
recourse to other funds where there might be a surplus, and as none
would be taken, except where there was a surplus, he could see no
objection to this being allowed. Indeed, for want of such a privilege
very serious inconveniences might arise to the service, in case of
accident or unforeseen events.

Mr. GALLATIN said, the law did not operate in the manner which the
gentleman last up supposed. They had lately voted a sum of forty
thousand dollars to make good a deficiency of last year, which had been
used for some other purpose; in consequence the deficiency fell upon the
pay of the Army, although that could not increase, because the number of
men was never increased; it might be less, as the nominal, not the
actual number of men was appropriated for.

Mr. KITTERA thought the amendment a bad one. Suppose, said he, a boat
should be overset with tents in the lake, or a magazine blown up, the
losses could not be repaired, because, though there might be surplus
sums in the Treasury from other items in the establishment, yet, if this
amendment prevailed, they could not be touched. He thought this would be
the effect; he was against innovations.

The amendment was put and carried, there being fifty-four votes in favor
of it.

The committee then rose, and the House took up the amendments.

And then the main question, "to finish the frigates ---- dollars," was
taken by yeas and nays, as follows:

      YEAS.--Fisher Ames, Abraham Baldwin, Theophilus Bradbury,
      Richard Brent, Daniel Buck, Dempsey Burges, Joshua Coit,
      William Cooper, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, James
      Davenport, Henry Dearborn, George Dent, George Ege, William
      Findlay, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Nathaniel Freeman,
      jr., Ezekiel Gilbert, Nicholas Gilman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William B. Grove, Robert
      Goodloe Harper, Carter B. Harrison, Thomas Hartley, John
      Heath, William Hindman, John Wilkes Kittera, Edward
      Livingston, Samuel Lyman, Francis Malbone, John Milledge,
      Frederick A. Muhlenberg, William Vans Murray, John
      Nicholas, Alexander D. Orr, Josiah Parker, Elisha R.
      Potter, John Read, Samuel Sewall, Samuel Sitgreaves,
      Jeremiah Smith, Nathaniel Smith, Isaac Smith, William
      Smith, Thomas Sprigg, John Swanwick, Zephaniah Swift,
      George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson, John A. Van
      Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg
      Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Theodorus Bailey, David Bard, Thomas Blount, Nathan
      Bryan, Samuel J. Cabell, Gabriel Christie, Thomas
      Claiborne, John Clopton, Isaac Coles, Jesse Franklin,
      Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Christopher Greenup,
      Andrew Gregg, Wade Hampton, John Hathorn, Jonathan N.
      Havens, James Holland, Andrew Jackson, George Jackson,
      Matthew Locke, William Lyman, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel
      Macon, Andrew Moore, Anthony New, John Patton, John
      Richards, Israel Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., William
      Strudwick, and Abraham Venable.

The question to fill the blank with $178,000 was then put and
carried--ayes 47, noes 42, and the bill ordered for a third reading
to-morrow.


FRIDAY, March 3.

_Call for Statements._

Mr. GALLATIN said, he wished to propose to the House three resolutions,
calling for statements relative to the War Department, which he wished
to be laid before the House at the next session. They had heard it said
upon that floor, by gentlemen who were considered to be well acquainted
with the subject, that many expenses had taken place in that Department
which ought to have been checked. Conceiving a check of this kind to be
necessary, and knowing the expense of the Military Department was
increasing from year to year, beyond what the increase in the number of
troops would warrant, it was proper to lay the foundation of an inquiry
into the subject. Indeed, having just passed a pretty severe law
relative to the Receivers of Public Money, and understanding that the
Secretary of the Treasury had a long list of delinquents, he was
desirous of taking some steps in the business. From these
considerations, he offered the following resolutions for acceptance:

      "_Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed
      to lay before the House of Representatives, within the
      first week of January next, abstracts of the accounts of
      all paymasters, quartermasters, contractors, agents for the
      purchase of supplies, and generally of all the Receivers of
      Public Moneys, paid from the Treasury from the 1st of
      January, 1791, to the 1st of January, 1797, on account of
      the Military Establishment, so as to exhibit a detailed
      statement of the whole amount of moneys thus expended to
      that period; and whether any of the accounts be not finally
      settled; and shall lay before the House an estimate of
      moneys not accounted for.

      "_Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed
      to lay, at the same time, before the House of
      Representatives similar abstracts of the accounts of all
      the Receivers of Public Money expended for the building of
      the frigates.

      "_Resolved_, That it shall be the duty of the Secretary of
      the Treasury to lay before the House of Representatives,
      within the last week of January in each year, a statement
      of money expended for the Military Establishment during the
      next preceding year, distinguishing the sums expended under
      each head, for which specific appropriations have been
      made, and an estimate of the probable unsettled demands in
      relation to each of those heads."

The resolutions were severally agreed to.


EVENING SESSION.

_Military and Naval Appropriations._

The bill appropriating money for the Military and Naval Establishments,
was received from the Senate with an amendment, proposing to do away the
restriction which had been introduced into the bill to confine the
expenditure of money to the specific objects for which each sum is
appropriated.

Mr. DANA hoped the House would recede from the amendment.

Mr. GALLATIN said that, by the constitution, no money was to be granted
but by a law passed in the regular mode. Now, said Mr. G., this is not
by law, if, after a certain sum is granted for one item, it be not used
for that purpose, but put to some other object. This was certainly
according to the spirit of the constitution, and if you do not strictly
abide by that, you may as well set aside the constitution, and say we
will appropriate $6,000,000 for the support of Government for the
present year. If we mean to carry the constitution into effect we must
reject the amendment.

Mr. SITGREAVES observed, that his opinion on this point was, that the
House had a constitutional power to depart from any identifying of
articles to sums granted, and that departure grew out of necessity; for
the extreme embarrassment which would attend the practice of a strict
adherence, would render it impracticable. But, as he did not mean to
stand responsible for the motion, he should be satisfied with calling
for the yeas and nays; which were agreed to be taken.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought, that when gentlemen went on supporting such
unlimited measures as had lately taken place, and voting such a waste of
money, it would be very dangerous. When we see large sums voted for an
army and navy in time of peace, said he, it would justify us in adopting
some regulation to prevent it. The difference between the operation of
this and the other mode is, that in this you confine your public
officers to the identical object for which a sum is appropriated;
otherwise they might use what they would call overplus money for any
object they might think fit. According to this method, proposed by the
Senate, any sum may be taken from any certain object, and placed to any
other, which Mr. N. thought too unbounded a power to be placed in the
Executive.

Mr. PARKER said, he would not pretend to justify the expenditure on the
Military Establishment, but he could not help observing that the
casualties to which the forage and clothing, &c., which is transported
to our garrisons, are exposed, are very great. Though at peace with the
Indians, it is but a temporary one, and we cannot be sure they will not
intercept our stores; besides other accidents to which it is exposed,
all which make it necessary that the hands of the Executive should not
be tied from using the surplusage of some, for the accidental and
unforeseen deficiencies of others; without this the Army may be exposed
to the most poignant distress, owing to a deficiency in the
appropriation, while the Treasury has money in hand as surplus from
other objects. Considering the great importance of an appropriation, he
hoped gentlemen would not so incline to oppose the bill, especially,
said he, when our existence will not, as a Legislative body, be more
than four hours, and, in that time, it must pass other authorities
before it can be put into effect; if it is lost, the effects will be
bad. Mr. P. said he had as many scruples as any gentleman, and would
take every measure to preserve the constitution inviolate, but he should
be sorry if, under the fear of offending it, the Government should be
stopped.

Mr. HEATH.--If my existence was to be but for one moment, I would stand
here and oppose this resolution; to let it pass, is precluding the
freedom of inquiry into the conduct of our public officers. If we were
to commence this loose kind of a way of appropriating, we may go on to
do this, that, and the other, until we were too far to stop. Were we to
indulge ourselves to go into the wide fields of accident, we might
suppose this and that, but our imaginations would have no end. He
lamented the shortness of the time they had to discuss it.

Mr. GILBERT acknowledged this was the age of reason, but he was sorry
the House should be inclined to adopt an entire new doctrine of
privileges. We should not hazard a new position, when it may be attended
with the greatest danger; therefore he hoped they would agree with the
Senate.

Mr. HARPER thought it would not be very difficult to convince gentlemen
who oppose it, that the amendment was calculated to secure the very
object they wished. It was not a violation of the constitution, as some
gentlemen supposed. He would ask, could not an appropriation be made for
the use of the Military Establishment in general terms? Yes, he would
answer; else how could an appropriation in general terms have been made
for the intercourse with foreign nations? Certainly it could not be
unconstitutional to appropriate the overplus of one article to supply
the deficiency of another. One moment's reflection, Mr. H. thought,
would convince members of the error of a contrary opinion. It might not
be safe to do it without law, but here is a law allowing it. The whole
must suffer if the War Department is deficient, which cannot be avoided
if one is not to assist another branch, for it is scarce possible to
guard against every contingency. He thought the amendment beneficial in
the highest degree, and without it, would stop the War Department in its
operations. He hoped no delay would take place, as it endangered the
bill.

Mr. VARNUM said, that notwithstanding all that gentlemen might produce
to prove the necessity of giving the Executive large powers, yet it was
dangerous; he instanced that, if the Executive were determined to man
and equip the frigates for sea, they would have power to do it from
money appropriated, and intended for other purposes; thus it was
transferring a power, solely vested in the Legislature, into the
Executive Department. He thought it was an infringement on the
constitution; it was putting the power where it never was intended to
be; although he had great respect for that department, yet he did not
wish to see its powers extended too far. A gentleman had intimated he
should not wish the bill to be altered, if he was sure there would not
be war with the Indians. He would answer that there could not be a war
until the Legislature met again.

Mr. V. said, that there was one-fifth more money appropriated than could
be used before the next meeting of Congress, for there would be two
months of the present year's appropriation, during any part of which
another bill might be passed.

Mr. SWANWICK thought there was no danger of the bill being lost; it was
necessary to discuss a principle which appeared to admit of danger; it
was throwing the whole of the money to the mercy of the Treasury
Department.

Mr. PAGE said he should vote for the amendment, but he rose to express
his disapprobation of it, and he should have been glad if there was time
to make another bill. We must either suffer the community to abide under
great disadvantages, or ourselves. If they could exist, politically, he
said he should be happy to destroy that bill. He must acknowledge that
it was crammed down his throat.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, that the reasons urged by the gentleman from
Massachusetts, instead of the end he proposed, would have a contrary
effect. Mr. L. believed that this amendment had a tendency to lessen the
privileges of the House; believing this, no object of convenience, no
view to the general opinion, should ever prevent him voting against it.
He believed it pregnant with mischief. The Civil and Military
Departments would be too easily connected; if the one wanted assistance,
while the Treasury had money in hand it would be supplied. He thought
the House had voted sufficient to answer every purpose intended, and he
believed, whatever specious arguments may be used, the House would not
recede. If any evil attended, he was willing to take his part of the
blame; but he was not apprehensive of any.

Mr. W. LYMAN hoped it would not pass, as it was full of danger and bad
principles.

Mr. W. SMITH said, the appropriation to the Military Establishment had
always been considered a general grant of money; therefore it would
introduce no new principles, but the manner of this bill, passed in this
House the day before the close of the session, and sent up to the Senate
the very day of the adjournment.

Mr. S. said gentlemen talked about the constitution, but he thought they
had wrong ideas of the evils of this business: it was not whether they
gave too much power to their officers, but the Military Establishment
could not go on; then the PRESIDENT would be obliged to alarm the whole
nation, and incur a vast expense to get the Congress together, and all
for want of due time and regulations: and now we must cram it down the
throats of the Senate. Surely gentlemen should have some moderation, and
not be so hightoned as to prevent any other branch of the Legislature
from exercising their powers as well as us.

On the question being taken to concur with this amendment, the yeas and
nays stood, 38 to 52, as follows:

      YEAS.--Theophilus Bradbury, Daniel Buck, Dempsey Burges,
      Joshua Coit, Wm. Cooper, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana,
      James Davenport, George Dent, George Ege, Abiel Foster,
      Dwight Foster, Ezekiel Gilbert, Nicholas Gilman, Chauncey
      Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas
      Hartley, William Hindman, John Wilkes Kittera, George
      Leonard, Samuel Lyman, Francis Malbone, John Page, Josiah
      Parker, Samuel Sewall, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith,
      Isaac Smith, William Smith, Zephaniah Swift, George
      Thatcher, Richard Thomas, John E. Van Allen, Peleg
      Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Theodorus Bailey, Abraham Baldwin, David Bard,
      Thomas Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Samuel J.
      Cabell, Gabriel Christie, Thomas Claiborne, John Clopton,
      Isaac Coles, Henry Dearborn, William Findlay, Jesse
      Franklin, Nathaniel Freeman, jr., Albert Gallatin, James
      Gillespie, Christopher Greenup, Andrew Gregg, Wade Hampton,
      John Hathorn, Jonathan N. Havens, John Heath, James
      Holland, Andrew Jackson, George Jackson, Edward Livingston,
      Matthew Locke, William Lyman, Samuel Maclay, Nathaniel
      Macon, James Madison, John Milledge, Andrew Moore,
      Frederick A. Muhlenberg, Anthony New, John Nicholas,
      Alexander D. Orr, John Patten, Elisha R. Potter, John Read,
      John Richards, Robert Rutherford, John S. Sherburne,
      Thompson J. Skinner, Richard Sprigg, jr., Thomas Sprigg,
      William Strudwick, John Swanwick, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham
      Venable, and Richard Winn.

The bill was again sent to the Senate, and was soon after returned with
the amendment receded from.

_General Lafayette._

Mr. HARPER moved that a resolution, which he laid on the table
yesterday, respecting Major General Lafayette, should be taken up for
consideration. The motion was seconded by Mr. W. SMITH. The resolution
was in the following words:

      "This House, strongly impressed with a just sense of the
      important and disinterested services rendered to their
      country during the late war by their fellow-citizen, Major
      General Lafayette, and deeply regretting the sufferings to
      which he is now subjected from a long and rigorous
      imprisonment, and which have equally excited their
      sympathy, and the ardent wish of their constituents for his
      deliverance, do resolve that the President of the United
      States be informed, that this House will see with the
      highest satisfaction, any measures which he may deem
      expedient to adopt towards effecting the restoration of
      their said fellow-citizen to liberty."

The question was taken for the House to take it up, and lost--ayes 32,
noes 52.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said he had some time been wishing to put forward
something similar; he really hoped some negotiation would be carried on
to effect his liberation. It would be honorable to this country to
interpose in behalf of this man, who has a claim on American service.
While suffering for us on his part, let gratitude, and every feeling
that can affect the heart, be ours. Abandoned by his own country, and to
increase his sufferings, precluded from almost every enjoyment of life,
it would be honorable in us to interest ourselves in his behalf,
appropriating some small sum which may enable the PRESIDENT to make some
progress towards his releasement. Thus, while it is honorable to
America, if it has no effect, it may afford some comfort to the
unfortunate sufferer, to think he is not forgotten. He then proposed a
resolution, not materially varying from that just offered by Mr. HARPER,
hoping that the little variation would prevent it suffering a similar
fate.

Mr. PARKER said, as it was a personal question, he hoped it would lie on
the table.

Mr. COIT thought it a delicate question, and one which ought not to be
agitated, and therefore moved the previous question.

Mr. HARTLEY spoke of Mr. PARKER's observing its personality. He answered
that the man suffered much for this country, and therefore was entitled
to regard. He acknowledged with Mr. COIT, that there was much delicacy
in the business, and therefore hoped it would speedily be discussed; it
ought not be postponed; the man is now suffering in a most distressing
confinement. If any of the soldiers of 1789 were here with whom he was
in council, there would not be a dissenting voice to using every
exertion. He hoped the House would never forget such brilliant services.

Mr. SWANWICK said, there need not be a dissenting voice, but we ought to
be cautious how we multiply our negotiations, as this could not be done
without entering into a negotiation with the Emperor of Germany in the
regular way. It is not want of respect that should prevent us, but are
we provided to go into all the consequences attending a new negotiation?
There is a delicacy in it, of which we ought to be careful. There is not
the least doubt but the PRESIDENT has as much desire for his release as
any gentleman, but he, no doubt, deliberated, and saw the danger of it.
Mr. S. said he lamented our foreign negotiations _in toto_. There was no
good derived from them, and he could not anticipate any from new ones.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he felt as much disposition to take measures for his
release as any man, but he thought the business undertaken too hastily.
Suppose you give instructions to the PRESIDENT, and he does not think
proper to act on it, so far from being a compliment to Lafayette, it
would hurt his mind, should he hear it had been agitated.

Mr. CLAIBORNE saw no difficulty attending the resolution. He hoped the
House would render this essential service to the unfortunate sufferer,
if even in the last hour of the Congress.

Mr. CHRISTIE said, it was an improper time to take up the resolution,
but as they had to sit there two or three hours longer and no business
to do, this might as well occupy the attention of the House as not.

Mr. LIVINGSTON would be sorry to impose a burden upon the country, but
he thought this a duty incumbent on them. He hoped gentlemen would
openly come forward and avow their sentiments, and not shelter
themselves under the previous question. Remember, he came here from the
pompous ease of a foreign court; he voluntarily served the cause of
America, and bled for her; he, in a great measure, procured the interest
which formed the alliance with France in our defence; besides spending a
princely fortune in our cause, he asked nothing, nor would accept any
compensation for his services: and now he is abandoned to the most
dreadful situation possible; some of that compensation, justly due to
his services, is refused him as a balm to his former woes by not
attempting his release. This is the situation of the man for whom this
House is asked only to express their desire for his comfort; this is the
man who was met with pleasure in every part of the United States; all
the people rejoiced to express their gratitude to him; he was
accompanied with testimonials of admiration and thanks from the whole
Continent: and now we should not say that we will feel with pleasure
measures taken towards obtaining his liberty! We can pity him, and
regret his situation, but refuse to lend him the least assistance to
soothe his distress. We do not call upon the House to vent its infantine
sorrow, to show its womanish pity. No. We call on it to express a will,
predominant throughout the United States, in the behalf of this
unfortunate man. But it is said that we should get the ill will of the
nations who persecuted him. Unless they bid adieu to all the tender
feelings of humanity, they never can take offence. It has been also
supposed it would be ineffectual; he had no doubt but the Executive
would take those measures which would be most effectual and least
endangering to the nation; it could not make the situation of the
sufferer worse, and if we succeed in procuring his liberty, it would
give pleasure to every heart who can sympathize with the distressed, or
feel gratitude for high obligations: and if it does not have that happy
effect, still we may feel consolation at having done our duty. If these
measures were taken, it would illuminate the loathsome horrors of a
dungeon the most dreadful; it would sweep away the reproach "that
Republicans know no gratitude;" that we, who had his best exertions
whilst in prosperity, do not forget him in adversity. Mr. L. said he
really believed that if he had not known the principles of liberty here,
and helped us in our struggle for it, he would have never existed in
misery in the dungeon at Olmutz, and therefore the highest obligations
were laid on the United States to exert herself in his behalf.

Mr. HEATH hoped, that, although the gentleman had labored to excite the
pathetic, yet he would not charge the House with a want of Republicanism
if the measure was not adopted. Mr. H. thought it extremely improper to
be introduced in the House. He said the PRESIDENT knew the will of the
United States on the subject, and therefore, if he saw proper, he could
take it up. He hoped the gentleman would remember this was a complicated
case; for, since he had left this country, he had become a citizen of
another country. Mr. H. said he felt for his unfortunate situation: he
had fought under his banner. We are not to be charged with a want of
patriotism and feeling for this suffering hero, because we think it
imprudent to interest and involve ourselves in his behalf, merely to
indulge the flighty fancy of a few individuals. We might go, said he,
and address the PRESIDENT to exert himself as far as he saw proper in
his behalf, as a body of individuals, but not as a Legislature.

Mr. W. SMITH could see no kind of impropriety in the measure. It had
been said it was a new subject, and, therefore, ought not to be taken up
now; but it was not introduced yesterday! Did gentlemen want an age to
express an opinion which every member feels--which the whole nation
feels? The motion only went to express a wish that measures may be taken
according to the judgment of the Executive: if he had a thought or wish
to adopt measures, this would encourage him to carry them into effect.
Europe might feel a pleasure that we interested ourselves in his behalf.
Did he not embark his all for this country? It has been well said, said
Mr. S., that if the motion had been made in 1779 or 1780, no previous
question would then have been called--no opposition then made. Read the
journals of the National Representation for 1780 and 1783: there we find
one member from each State was appointed to take leave of him in behalf
of the whole. [Mr. S. here read the journals of that time, which insert
at length the proceeding, address, and answer, attending the
transaction.] There, said he, they expressed their zeal for his future
welfare, and gratitude for his favors, accompanying it with a letter to
the French King, requesting him to bestow his favors upon him. From the
frequent respectful mention made of his services on the journals of the
House, there appears to have been much attention paid to his services by
Congress. Even the Parliament of Great Britain, he said, had discussed
the question of his confinement; and should this House refuse, who are
so much obliged by his services? Nothing that had been said, in
opposition to it, could convince him but that we were called upon, by
every tie of gratitude, to adopt the measure. The satisfaction of
knowing that his services are not forgotten may render him more
comfortable in his dungeon--may follow him into the deserts of Siberia,
or wherever the cruel hand of oppression may send him.

Mr. MADISON did not think there was time to do all the business
requisite to render due justice to the motion, and he hoped the House
would do more than was intended by the motion. He believed the only
regular mode would be to appoint a committee to bring in a bill. He
therefore moved that the House go into committee for that purpose.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, according to the motion there was no necessity for
this mode, as it was of a nature not to require the aid of another
branch of the Legislature; it was quite sufficient if the House passed
the resolution. He was sorry to hear the previous question called for to
get rid of the subject, but he hoped it would not prevail: he thought
this motion required early attention. He said attention was due to
LAFAYETTE; America was highly indebted to him. It is a debt of justice,
and ought to be paid; and while this House delays to interpose in his
behalf he must remain in confinement. Those gentlemen who thought the
House ought to interpose should think this is the very time, if any good
is intended to be done: he therefore hoped they would not delay.

Mr. HARPER said, if the subject was on the sending an ambassador to
negotiate for the liberation of this man, it might with more propriety
be opposed. He was surprised that any gentleman in the House should be
opposed to expressing a wish for measures to be taken which may prove
effectual for that purpose.

When he had no need of our caresses, the United States resounded with
his name: he was then met with tokens of respect and congratulation
wherever he went. But now, pining under the cruel hand of despotic
vengeance in a loathsome dungeon, weighed down by chains, with a scanty
allowance; when we view his present, contrasted with his past,
situation--embarking from the magnificent splendor of a French court,
displeasing his sovereign--embarking himself, and hazarding every thing
that was dear to him, in support of American liberty--is this the man,
Mr. H. would ask, to whom America said, he should never cease to have
her best wishes and endeavors for his good, when, in the most grievous
captivity, we refuse to express a desire for a morsel of comfort to his
depressed mind! What avail our toasts--our boasted recollections of him,
and regret at his fate--if we take not every opportunity to alleviate
that distress? But the worst of his misfortunes is not to lie in a
dungeon: he is now racked with a fear of being sent into the
inhospitable deserts of Siberia, whence is no hope ever to expect his
return into the civilized world; and, with this unwelcome intelligence,
the American Legislature refuses to express a wish for his deliverance!
Who knows but the power in whose custody he is may expect America to
interest herself in his favor? And by a pretext like this he might be
liberated, or at least his fear of removal dissipated, and his present
misery alleviated. Mr. H. said he was sure it would be highly gratifying
to the citizens of America to hear of the measure; they had long
expected it, and, if undertaken, he had the greatest hopes of its
success, in a measure. If it should but tend to soften his present
distress, it would be a happiness; but if its effects should be to
restore to liberty one to whom America is so much indebted, it would
amply repay whatsoever trouble is taken towards its accomplishment.

Mr. W. LYMAN did not doubt of the services of the Marquis Lafayette; he
was always the subject of adoration and the toast of this country.
Besides, it has made him liberal grants for his services, and he thought
there could be no proof that we were wanting in marks of esteem for him.
With respect to the motion, Mr. L. asked, to whom was application to be
made? Does any gentleman on this floor know who confined him, or by
order of what government? No court are willing to avow it. Britain,
France, and Prussia disavow it, and he believed the Emperor also. Until
that was clear, the measure would be improper. May not the agitation of
such a question in the House awaken a jealousy in some of those powers
towards us, which may militate to our injury, and injure the man whom
the attempt is meant to serve? Gentlemen have depicted his sufferings in
very lively colors, said Mr. L., and were it in my power, or were it
consistently in the power of the House, I should be very happy to afford
relief. Until some of the difficulties in its way were cleared, he said,
he should be forced to put his negative to it. He thought gentlemen who
saw the matter so necessary, and the way so clear, had reason to
reproach themselves for letting it sleep so long, and for having
introduced it at the last hour of the session of the Houses.

Mr. HARPER and Mr. LIVINGSTON said that nothing but the constant press
of public business had prevented their motions sooner, and they thought
there was even now time enough, as it only required the expression of a
desire of the House for the object.

Mr. BUCK said the services and sufferings of the Marquis were indelibly
written on the hearts of all the citizens of America, and he thought
there was no need of that torrent of oratory which had been displayed to
affect the feelings of the House. He thought it would prove its weakness
to suffer its feelings to predominate. We ought to give a decision only
by the force of judgment, after due deliberation; for _feeling_ could
not look forward to consequences. Were we implicitly to obey it, we
should take many bad steps. Do we not know, said Mr. B., that he is
among the persons proscribed by France? and, considering the very
brittle situation of our peace with that country at present, we should
be induced rather to strengthen than weaken our ties; for the motion
goes to authorize the PRESIDENT to take _any_ measures to support
Lafayette. This being the situation, we know not where the measures may
end, and it would be a serious thing to be plunged in a war with France
on that account. He hoped the House would not precipitate the business,
but give themselves time to examine the consequences. This, Mr. B. said,
had induced him to oppose the motion. Though congenial to his feelings,
he therefore should vote for the previous, and against the main
question.

Mr. CLAIBORNE was against the previous question. He would hazard any
thing for the happiness of a man we owe so much to--who sees, said he,
the unfortunate man with his lady and daughter, under all the miseries
that despotism and tyranny can inflict, in a wretched dungeon, without
even the comforts of life! Here he appealed to the feelings of the
members in a very forcible manner, and, with the most bitter invective,
ardently wished the destruction of his cruel oppressors. He observed on
the uneasiness the members of the House were in if public business
detained them half an hour after the usual time of their dinners, and
applied the case to this unfortunate man in continual confinement, and
after all with miserable fare.

The previous question was then put, "Shall the main question be now
put?" and negatived--ayes 25.

Mr. LIVINGSTON then brought forward a similar resolution, which caused
very considerable debate, and was at length got rid of by the previous
question. The principal objection to the adoption of this motion seemed
to be the late period at which it was brought forward. All were agreed
as to the merits and the misfortunes of the man, and had the motion been
introduced at any other time than on the eve of the rising of the
session, there could be little doubt it would have been agreed to by a
very large majority.[13]

_Thanks to the Speaker._

Mr. BLOUNT said he wished to offer a resolution to the House, which, as
he was certain there could be no opposition to it, would occupy little
of their time. He should wish the Clerk to read it, and take the sense
of the House upon it. It was in the following words:

      "_Resolved_, That the thanks of this House be presented to
      JONATHAN DAYTON, in testimony of their approbation of his
      conduct in discharging the arduous and important duties
      assigned him while in the chair."

The Clerk accordingly put the resolution, and it was unanimously
carried; when--

The SPEAKER thus addressed the House:

      "GENTLEMEN: I feel myself deeply impressed with this fresh
      proof of your approbation of my conduct in the chair. The
      confidence and support which you have in every instance
      afforded me, in the station assigned to me, have alone
      enabled me to discharge the important duty with
      satisfaction to myself, and with advantage to the public."

_Adjournment of the Session._

A message was received from the Senate, informing the House that they
had appointed a committee to join a committee of that House, to wait
upon the PRESIDENT to inform him they had finished their business, and,
except he had any further communications to make, they were ready to
adjourn, without day.

The House then agreed to appoint a committee to join that of the Senate
to wait upon the PRESIDENT, and Messrs. SITGREAVES, PARKER, and
SHERBURNE being named, they accordingly waited upon the PRESIDENT; and--

Mr. SITGREAVES reported that the PRESIDENT had no further communication
to make, except "that he wished them a happy return to their families
and friends."

The SPEAKER then adjourned the House _sine die_, at about eleven
o'clock.[14]




FIFTH CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, MAY 15, 1797.[15]

PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,--JOHN ADAMS.


LIST OF MEMBERS.


SENATORS.

_New Hampshire._--John Langdon, S. Livermore.

_Vermont._--Nathaniel Chipman, Elijah Paine.

_Massachusetts._--Benj. Goodhue, Theodore Sedgwick.

_Rhode Island._--Theodore Foster, Ray Greene.

_Connecticut._--James Hillhouse, Uriah Tracy.

_New York._--John S. Hobart, John Laurance.

_New Jersey._--John Rutherford, R. Stockton.

_Pennsylvania._--William Bingham, James Ross.

_Delaware._--Henry Latimer, John Vining.

_Maryland._--John E. Howard, James Lloyd,

_Virginia._--Stevens T. Mason, Henry Tazewell.

_North Carolina._--Timothy Bloodworth, Alexander Martin.

_South Carolina._--John Hunter, Jacob Read.

_Georgia._--James Gunn, Josiah Tattnall.

_Tennessee._--Joseph Anderson, Andrew Jackson.

_Kentucky._--John Brown, Humphrey Marshall.


REPRESENTATIVES.

_New Hampshire._--Abiel Foster, Jonathan Freeman, William Gordon, Peleg
Sprague.

_Vermont._--Matthew Lyon, Lewis B. Morris.

_Massachusetts._-Bailey Bartlett, Stephen Bullock, Dwight Foster,
Nathaniel Freeman, Samuel Lyman, Harrison G. Otis, John Read, Samuel
Sewall, William Shepard, Thompson J. Skinner, George Thatcher, Joseph B.
Varnum, P. Wadsworth.

_Rhode Island._--C. G. Champlin, Thomas Tillinghast.

_Connecticut._--John Allen, Jona. Brace, Joshua Coit, Samuel W. Dana,
James Davenport, O. Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Nathaniel Smith.

_New York._--David Brooks, John Cochran, Lucas Elmendorph, Henry Glenn,
J. N. Havens, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, E. Livingston, John E. Van Allen,
Philip Van Cortlandt, John Williams.

_New Jersey._--Jona. Dayton, James H. Imlay, James Schureman, Thomas
Sinnickson, Mark Thompson.

_Pennsylvania._--David Bard, Robert Brown, John Chapman, William
Findlay, Albert Gallatin, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna, Thomas Hartley,
Joseph Heister, John W. Kittera, Blair McClenachan, Samuel Sitgreaves,
John Swanwick, Richard Thomas.

_Delaware._--James A. Bayard.

_Maryland._--George Baer, William Craik, John Dennis, George Dent,
William Hindman, William Matthews, Samuel Smith, Richard Sprigg.

_Virginia._--Richard Brent, Samuel J. Cabell, Thomas Claiborne, Matthew
Clay, John Clopton, Isaac Coles, John Dawson, Thomas Evans, Carter B.
Harrison, David Holmes, Walter Jones, James Machir, Daniel Morgan,
Anthony New, John Nicholas, Josiah Parker, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, A.
B. Venable.

_North Carolina._--Thomas Blount, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, James
Gillespie, William B. Grove, Matthew Locke, Nathaniel Macon, Joseph
McDowell, Richard Stanford, Robert Williams.

_South Carolina._--Lemuel Benton, R. G. Harper, Thomas Pinckney, John
Rutledge, William Smith, Thomas Sumter.

_Georgia._--A. Baldwin, John Milledge.

_Tennessee._--William C. C. Claiborne.

_Kentucky._--Thomas T. Davis, John Fowler.




PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


The first session of the Fifth Congress, under the Constitution of
Government of the United States, commenced at the city of Philadelphia,
agreeably to the Proclamation of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, of
the twenty-fifth day of March last, and the Senate accordingly assembled
on this day, being


MONDAY, May 15, 1797.

PRESENT:

THOMAS JEFFERSON, Vice President of the United States, and President of
the Senate.

JOHN LANGDON and SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire.

BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from Massachusetts.

THEODORE FOSTER and WILLIAM BRADFORD, from Rhode Island.

JAMES HILLHOUSE and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

ISAAC TICHENOR, from Vermont.

JOHN LAURANCE, from New York.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.

HENRY LATIMER, from Delaware.

JOHN E. HOWARD, from Maryland.

STEVENS T. MASON, from Virginia.

ALEXANDER MARTIN and TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH, from North Carolina.

JOHN HUNTER, from South Carolina.

JOSIAH TATTNALL, from Georgia.

The Senators whose names are subjoined produced their credentials on the
4th day of March last, and took their seats in the Senate, viz: Mr.
FOSTER, Mr. GOODHUE, Mr. HILLHOUSE, Mr. HOWARD, Mr. LATIMER, Mr. MASON,
Mr. ROSS, and Mr. TICHENOR.

WILLIAM COOKE, appointed a Senator by the State of Tennessee, produced
his credentials, and the oath required by law being administered, he
took his seat in the Senate.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, and acquaint him that a quorum of the Senate is assembled.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and ready to proceed to business.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that a
quorum of the House is assembled, and have elected JONATHAN DAYTON their
Speaker.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House have appointed a joint committee on their part, together with such
committee as the Senate may appoint, to wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, and inform him that a quorum of the two Houses is
assembled, and ready to receive any communications that he may be
pleased to make to them.

_Resolved_, That the Senate do concur in the appointment of a joint
committee, and that Messrs. LIVERMORE and LANGDON be the joint committee
on the part of the Senate.

Mr. LIVERMORE reported, from the joint committee, that they had waited
on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and had notified him that a
quorum of the two Houses is assembled; and that the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES acquainted the committee that he would meet the two Houses
in the Representatives' Chamber, at 12 o'clock to-morrow.


TUESDAY, May 16.

WILLIAM BLOUNT, from the State of Tennessee; THEODORE SEDGWICK, from the
State of Massachusetts; and JOHN VINING, from the State of Delaware,
severally attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House are now ready to meet the Senate in the Chamber of that House, to
receive such communications as the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall
be pleased to make to them. Whereupon,

The Senate repaired to the Chamber of the House of Representatives, for
the purpose above expressed.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and a copy of the Speech of
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, this day addressed to both Houses of
Congress, was read.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The personal inconveniences to the members of the Senate,
      and of the House of Representatives, in leaving their
      families and private affairs, at this season of the year,
      are so obvious, that I the more regret the extraordinary
      occasion which has rendered the convention of Congress
      indispensable.

      It would have afforded me the highest satisfaction to have
      been able to congratulate you on a restoration of peace to
      the nations of Europe, whose animosities have endangered
      our tranquillity; but we have still abundant cause of
      gratitude to the Supreme Dispenser of national blessings,
      for general health and promising seasons; for domestic and
      social happiness; for the rapid progress and ample
      acquisitions of industry, through extensive territories;
      for civil, political, and religious liberty. While other
      States are desolated with foreign war, or convulsed with
      intestine divisions, the United States present the pleasing
      prospect of a nation governed by mild and equal laws,
      generally satisfied with the possession of their rights;
      neither envying the advantages nor fearing the power of
      other nations; solicitous only for the maintenance of order
      and justice, and the preservation of liberty; increasing
      daily in their attachment to a system of government in
      proportion to their experience of its utility; yielding a
      ready and general obedience to laws flowing from the
      reason, and resting on the only solid foundation--the
      affections of the people.

      It is with extreme regret that I shall be obliged to turn
      your thoughts to other circumstances, which admonish us
      that some of these felicities may not be lasting; but, if
      the tide of our prosperity is full, and a reflux
      commencing, a vigilant circumspection becomes us, that we
      may meet our reverses with fortitude, and extricate
      ourselves from their consequences with all the skill we
      possess, and all the efforts in our power.

      In giving to Congress information of the state of the
      Union, and recommending to their consideration such
      measures as appear to me to be necessary or expedient,
      according to my constitutional duty, the causes and the
      objects of the present extraordinary session will be
      explained.

      After the President of the United States received
      information that the French Government had expressed
      serious discontents at some proceedings of the Government
      of these States, said to affect the interests of France, he
      thought it expedient to send to that country a new
      Minister, fully instructed to enter on such amicable
      discussions and to give such candid explanations as might
      happily remove the discontents and suspicions of the French
      Government and vindicate the conduct of the United States.
      For this purpose he selected from among his fellow-citizens
      a character whose integrity, talents, experience, and
      services, had placed him in the rank of the most esteemed
      and respected in the nation. The direct object of this
      mission was expressed in his letter of credence to the
      French Republic, being "to maintain that good understanding
      which, from the commencement of the alliance, had subsisted
      between the two nations, and to efface unfavorable
      impressions; banish suspicions, and restore that cordiality
      which was at once the evidence and pledge of a friendly
      union;" and his instructions were to the same effect,
      "faithfully to represent the disposition of the Government
      and people of the United States (their disposition being
      one) to remove jealousies and obviate complaints, by
      showing that they were groundless; to restore that mutual
      confidence which had been so unfortunately and injuriously
      impaired, and to explain the relative interests of both
      countries and the real sentiments of his own."

      A Minister thus specially commissioned, it was expected,
      would have proved the instrument of restoring mutual
      confidence between the two Republics; the first step of the
      French Government corresponded with that expectation. A few
      days before his arrival at Paris, the French Minister of
      Foreign Relations informed the American Minister, then
      resident at Paris, of the formalities to be observed by
      himself in taking leave, and by his successor preparatory
      to his reception. These formalities they observed; and on
      the ninth of December presented officially to the Minister
      of Foreign Relations, the one a copy of his letters of
      recall, the other a copy of his letters of credence. These
      were laid before the Executive Directory: two days
      afterwards, the Minister of Foreign Relations informed the
      recalled American Minister that the Executive Directory had
      determined not to receive another Minister Plenipotentiary
      from the United States until after the redress of
      grievances demanded of the American Government, and which
      the French Republic had a right to expect from it. The
      American Minister immediately endeavored to ascertain
      whether, by refusing to receive him, it was intended that
      he should retire from the territories of the French
      Republic, and verbal answers were given that such was the
      intention of the Directory. For his own justification he
      desired a written answer; but obtained none until towards
      the last of January; when receiving notice in writing to
      quit the territories of the Republic, he proceeded to
      Amsterdam, where he proposed to wait for instruction from
      this Government. During his residence at Paris, cards of
      hospitality were refused him, and he was threatened with
      being subjected to the jurisdiction of the Minister of
      Police, but with becoming firmness he insisted on the
      protection of the law of nations, due to him as the known
      Minister of a foreign power. You will derive further
      information from his despatches, which will be laid before
      you.

      As it is often necessary that nations should treat, for the
      mutual advantage of their affairs, and especially to
      accommodate and terminate differences, and as they can
      treat only by Ministers, the right of embassy is well
      known, and established by the law and usage of nations; the
      refusal on the part of France to receive our Minister is
      then the denial of a right; but the refusal to hear him,
      until we have acceded to their demands, without discussion,
      and without investigation, is to treat us neither as
      allies, nor as friends, nor as a sovereign State.

      With this conduct of the French Government, it will be
      proper to take into view the public audience given to the
      late Minister of the United States, on his taking leave of
      the Executive Directory. The speech of the President[16]
      discloses sentiments more alarming than the refusal of a
      Minister; because more dangerous to our independence and
      union; and at the same time studiously marked with
      indignities towards the Government of the United States. It
      evinces a disposition to separate the people of the United
      States from the Government; to persuade them that they have
      different affections, principles, and interests, from those
      of their fellow-citizens, whom they themselves have chosen
      to manage their common concerns; and thus to produce
      divisions fatal to our peace. Such attempts ought to be
      repelled with a decision which shall convince France, and
      the world, that we are not a degraded people, humiliated
      under a colonial spirit of fear and sense of inferiority,
      fitted to be the miserable instruments of foreign
      influence; and regardless of national honor, character, and
      interest.

      I should have been happy to have thrown a veil over these
      transactions, if it had been possible to conceal them; but
      they have passed on the great theatre of the world, in the
      face of all Europe and America, and with such circumstances
      of publicity and solemnity that they cannot be disguised,
      and will not soon be forgotten; they have inflicted a wound
      in the American breast; it is my sincere desire, however,
      that it may be healed. It is my desire, and in this I
      presume I concur with you, and with our constituents, to
      preserve peace and friendship with all nations; and
      believing that neither the honor nor the interest of the
      United States absolutely forbid the repetition of advances
      for securing these desirable objects with France, I shall
      institute a fresh attempt at negotiation, and shall not
      fail to promote and accelerate an accommodation, on terms
      compatible with the rights, duties, interests, and honor of
      the nation. If we have committed errors, and these can be
      demonstrated, we shall be willing to correct them. If we
      have done injuries, we shall be willing, on conviction, to
      redress them; and equal measures of justice we have a right
      to expect from France and every other nation.

      The diplomatic intercourse between the United States and
      France being at present suspended, the Government has no
      means of obtaining official information from that country;
      nevertheless, there is reason to believe that the Executive
      Directory passed a decree, on the second of March last,
      contravening, in part, the Treaty of Amity and Commerce, of
      one thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, injurious to
      our lawful commerce, and endangering the lives of our
      citizens. A copy of this decree will be laid before you.

      While we are endeavoring to adjust all our differences with
      France by amicable negotiation, the progress of the war in
      Europe, the depredations on our commerce, the personal
      injuries to our citizens, and general complexion of
      affairs, render it my indispensable duty to recommend to
      your consideration effectual measures of defence.

      The commerce of the United States has become an interesting
      object of attention, whether we consider it in relation to
      the wealth and finances, or the strength and resources of
      the nation. With a sea-coast of near two thousand miles in
      extent, opening a wide field for fisheries, navigation, and
      commerce, a great portion of our citizens naturally apply
      their industry and enterprise to these objects. Any serious
      and permanent injury to commerce, would not fail to produce
      the most embarrassing disorders; to prevent it from being
      undermined and destroyed, it is essential that it receive
      an adequate protection.

      The Naval Establishment must occur to every man who
      considers the injuries committed on our commerce, the
      insults offered to our citizens, and the description of
      vessels by which these abuses have been practised. As the
      sufferings of our mercantile and seafaring citizens cannot
      be ascribed to the omission of duties demandable,
      considering the neutral situation of our country, they are
      to be attributed to the hope of impunity, arising from a
      supposed inability on our part to afford protection. To
      resist the consequences of such impressions on the minds of
      foreign nations, and to guard against the degradation and
      servility which they must finally stamp on the American
      character, is an important duty of Government.

      A Naval power, next to the Militia, is the natural defence
      of the United States. The experience of the last war would
      be sufficient to show, that a moderate Naval force, such as
      would be easily within the present abilities of the Union,
      would have been sufficient to have baffled many formidable
      transportations of troops from one State to another, which
      were then practised. Our sea-coasts, from their great
      extent, are more easily annoyed and more easily defended by
      a Naval force than any other. With all the materials our
      country abounds; in skill, our naval architects and
      navigators are equal to any; and commanders and seamen will
      not be wanting.

      But although the establishment of a permanent system of
      Naval defence appears to be requisite, I am sensible it
      cannot be formed so speedily and extensively as the present
      crisis demands. Hitherto I have thought proper to prevent
      the sailing of armed vessels, except on voyages to the East
      Indies, where general usage, and the danger from pirates,
      appeared to render permission proper; yet the restriction
      has originated solely from a wish to prevent collusions
      with the powers at war, contravening the act of Congress of
      June, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-four, and not
      from any doubt entertained by me of the policy and
      propriety of permitting our vessels to employ means of
      defence, while engaged in a lawful foreign commerce. It
      remains for Congress to prescribe such regulations as will
      enable our seafaring citizens to defend themselves against
      violations of the law of nations; and, at the same time,
      restrain them from committing acts of hostility against the
      powers at war. In addition to this voluntary provision for
      defence by individual citizens, it appears to me necessary
      to equip the frigates, and provide other vessels of
      inferior force to take under convoy such merchant vessels
      as shall remain unarmed.

      The greater part of the cruisers whose depredations have
      been most injurious, have been built, and some of them
      partially equipped in the United States. Although an
      effectual remedy may be attended with difficulty, yet I
      have thought it my duty to present the subject generally
      to your consideration. If a mode can be devised by the
      wisdom of Congress to prevent the resources of the United
      States from being converted into the means of annoying our
      trade, a great evil will be prevented. With the same view I
      think it proper to mention that some of our citizens
      resident abroad have fitted out privateers, and others have
      voluntarily taken the command, or entered on board of them,
      and committed spoliations on the commerce of the United
      States. Such unnatural and iniquitous practices can be
      restrained only by severe punishments.

      But besides a protection of commerce on the seas, I think
      it highly necessary to protect it at home, where it is
      collected in our most important ports. The distance of the
      United States from Europe, and the well-known promptitude,
      ardor, and courage of the people, in defence of their
      country, happily diminish the probability of invasion:
      nevertheless, to guard against sudden and predatory
      incursions, the situation of some of our principal seaports
      demands your consideration; and as our country is
      vulnerable in other interests besides those of its
      commerce, you will seriously deliberate whether the means
      of general defence ought not to be increased by an addition
      to the regular artillery and cavalry, and by arrangements
      for forming a provisional army.

      With the same view, and as a measure, which even in a time
      of universal peace ought not to be neglected, I recommend
      to your consideration a revision of the laws for
      organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, to render
      that natural and safe defence of the country efficacious.
      Although it is very true, that we ought not to involve
      ourselves in the political system of Europe, but to keep
      ourselves always distinct and separate from it if we can,
      yet to effect this separation, early, punctual, and
      continual information of the current chain of events, and
      of the political projects in contemplation, is no less
      necessary than if we were directly concerned in them. It is
      necessary in order to the discovery of the efforts made to
      draw us into the vortex, in season to make preparations
      against them. However we may consider ourselves, the
      maritime and commercial powers of the world will consider
      the United States of America as forming a weight, in that
      balance of power in Europe, which can never be forgotten or
      neglected. It would not only be against our interest, but
      it would be doing wrong to one half of Europe, at least, if
      we should voluntarily throw ourselves into either scale. It
      is a natural policy for a nation that studies to be
      neutral, to consult with other nations engaged in the same
      studies and pursuits. At the same time that measures ought
      to be pursued with this view, our treaties with Prussia and
      Sweden, one of which is expired, and the other near
      expiring, might be renewed.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      It is particularly your province to consider the state of
      the public finances; and to adopt such measures respecting
      them as exigencies shall be found to require. The
      preservation of public credit, the regular extinguishment
      of the public debt, and a provision of funds to defray any
      extraordinary expenses, will of course call for your
      serious attention. Although the imposition of new burdens
      cannot be in itself agreeable, yet there is no ground to
      doubt that the American people will expect from you such
      measures as their actual engagements, their present
      security, and future interests demand.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The present situation of our country imposes an obligation
      on all the departments of Government to adopt an explicit
      and decided conduct. In my situation, an exposition of the
      principles by which my administration will be governed
      ought not to be omitted.

      It is impossible to conceal from ourselves or the world,
      what has been before observed, that endeavors have been
      employed to foster and establish a division between the
      Government and people of the United States. To investigate
      the causes which have encouraged this attempt is not
      necessary; but to repel by decided and united councils
      insinuations so derogatory to the honor, and aggressions so
      dangerous to the constitution, union, and even
      independence, of the nation, is an indispensable duty.

      It must not be permitted to be doubted, whether the people
      of the United States will support the Government
      established by their voluntary consent, and appointed by
      their free choice, or whether by surrendering themselves to
      the direction of foreign and domestic factions, in
      opposition to their own Government, they will forfeit the
      honorable station they have hitherto maintained.

      For myself, having never been indifferent to what concerned
      the interests of my country, devoted the best part of my
      life to obtain and support its independence, and constantly
      witnessed the patriotism, fidelity, and perseverance of my
      fellow-citizens, on the most trying occasions, it is not
      for me to hesitate or abandon a cause in which my heart has
      been so long engaged.

      Convinced that the conduct of the Government has been just
      and impartial to foreign nations; that those internal
      regulations, which have been established by law for the
      preservation of peace, are in their nature proper, and that
      they have been fairly executed; nothing will ever be done
      by me to impair the national engagements, to innovate upon
      principles, which have been so deliberately and uprightly
      established, or to surrender in any manner the rights of
      the Government. To enable me to maintain this declaration,
      I rely upon God with entire confidence, on the firm and
      enlightened support of the National Legislature, and upon
      the virtue and patriotism of my fellow-citizens.

                            JOHN ADAMS.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. TRACY, LAURANCE, and LIVERMORE be a committee to
report the draft of an Address to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in
answer to his Speech this day to both Houses of Congress.


WEDNESDAY, May 17.

RICHARD STOCKTON, from the State of New Jersey, attended.


THURSDAY, May 18.

HENRY TAZEWELL, from the State of Virginia, attended.


FRIDAY, May 19.

JOHN HENRY, from the State of Maryland, attended.


MONDAY, May 22.

JOHN BROWN, from the State of Kentucky, and JACOB READ, from the State
of South Carolina, severally attended.

JOHN RUTHERFORD, appointed a Senator from the State of New Jersey,
produced his credentials, which were read, and the oath required by law
being administered to him, he took his seat in the Senate.


TUESDAY, May 23.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee of
the draft of an Address, in answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES to both Houses of Congress, at the opening of the session.

On the motion to expunge the following paragraph, to wit:

      "We are happy, since our sentiments on the subject are in
      perfect unison with yours, in this public manner to
      declare, that the conduct of the Government has been just
      and impartial to foreign nations, and that those internal
      regulations, which have been established for the
      preservation of peace, are, in their nature, proper, and
      have been fairly executed."

It was determined in the negative--yeas 11, nays 15, as follows:

      YEAS--Messrs. Bloodworth, Blount, Brown, Cocke, Henry,
      Hunter, Langdon, Martin, Mason, Tazewell, and Tattnall.

      NAYS--Messrs. Bingham, Bradford, Foster, Goodhue,
      Hillhouse, Howard, Laurance, Latimer, Livermore, Read,
      Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tichenor, and Tracy.

And the report being further amended, was adopted, as follows:

      SIR: The Senate of the United States request you to accept
      their acknowledgments for the comprehensive and interesting
      detail you have given in your Speech to both Houses of
      Congress, on the existing state of the Union.

      While we regret the necessity of the present meeting of the
      Legislature, we wish to express our entire approbation of
      your conduct in convening it on this momentous occasion.

      The superintendence of our national faith, honor, and
      dignity, being, in a great measure, constitutionally
      deposited with the Executive, we observe, with singular
      satisfaction, the vigilance, firmness, and promptitude,
      exhibited by you, in this critical state of our public
      affairs, and from thence derive an evidence and pledge of
      the rectitude and integrity of your administration. And we
      are sensible it is an object of primary importance, that
      each branch of the Government should adopt a language and
      system of conduct which shall be cool, just, and
      dispassionate, but firm, explicit, and decided.

      We are equally desirous, with you, to preserve peace and
      friendship with all nations, and are happy to be informed,
      that neither the honor nor interests of the United States
      forbid advances for securing those desirable objects, by
      amicable negotiation with the French Republic. This method
      of adjusting national differences is not only the most
      mild, but the most rational and humane, and with
      governments disposed to be just, can seldom fail of
      success, when fairly, candidly, and sincerely used. If we
      have committed errors, and can be made sensible of them, we
      agree with you in opinion that we ought to correct them,
      and compensate the injuries which may have been consequent
      thereon; and we trust the French Republic will be actuated
      by the same just and benevolent principles of national
      policy.

      We do, therefore, most sincerely approve of your
      determination to promote and accelerate an accommodation of
      our existing differences with that Republic, by
      negotiation, on terms compatible with the rights, duties,
      interests, and honor of our nation. And you may rest
      assured of our most cordial co-operation, so far as it may
      become necessary, in this pursuit.

      Peace and harmony with all nations is our sincere wish;
      but, such being the lot of humanity, that nations will not
      always reciprocate peaceable dispositions, it is our firm
      belief, that effectual measures of defence will tend to
      inspire that national self-respect and confidence at
      _home_, which is the unfailing source of respectability
      _abroad_, to check aggression, and prevent war.

      While we are endeavoring to adjust our differences with the
      French Republic, by amicable negotiation, the progress of
      the war in Europe, the depredations on our commerce, the
      personal injuries to our citizens, and the general
      complexion of affairs, prove to us your vigilant care, in
      recommending to our attention effectual measures of
      defence.

      Those which you recommend, whether they relate to external
      defence, by permitting our citizens to arm for the purpose
      of repelling aggressions on their commercial rights, and by
      providing sea convoys, or to internal defence, by
      increasing the establishments of artillery and cavalry, by
      forming a provisional army, by revising the militia laws,
      and fortifying, more completely, our ports and harbors,
      will meet our consideration, under the influence of the
      same just regard for the security, interest, and honor of
      our country, which dictated your recommendation.

      Practices so unnatural and iniquitous, as those you state,
      of our own citizens, converting their property and personal
      exertions into the means of annoying our trade, and
      injuring their fellow-citizens, deserve legal severity
      commensurate with their turpitude.

      Although the Senate believe that the prosperity and
      happiness of our country does not depend on general and
      extensive political connections with European nations, yet
      we can never lose sight of the propriety as well as
      necessity of enabling the Executive, by sufficient and
      liberal supplies, to maintain, and even extend, our foreign
      intercourse, as exigencies may require, reposing full
      confidence in the Executive, in whom the constitution has
      placed the powers of negotiation.

      We learn, with sincere concern, that attempts are in
      operation to alienate the affections of our fellow-citizens
      from their Government. Attempts so wicked, wherever they
      exist, cannot fail to excite our utmost abhorrence. A
      Government chosen by the people for their own safety and
      happiness, and calculated to secure both, cannot lose their
      affections, so long as its administration pursues the
      principle upon which it was erected. And your resolution to
      observe a conduct just and impartial to all nations, a
      sacred regard to our national engagements, and not to
      impair, the rights of our Government, contains principles
      which cannot fail to secure to your administration the
      support of the National Legislature, to render abortive
      every attempt to excite dangerous jealousies among us, and
      to convince the world that our Government, and your
      administration of it, cannot be separated from the
      affectionate support of every good citizen. And the Senate
      cannot suffer the present occasion to pass, without thus
      publicly and solemnly expressing their attachment to the
      constitution and Government of their country; and as they
      hold themselves responsible to their constituents, their
      consciences, and their God, it is their determination, by
      all their exertions, to repel every attempt to alienate the
      affections of the people from the Government, so highly
      injurious to the honor, safety, and independence of the
      United States.

      We are happy, since our sentiments on the subject are in
      perfect unison with yours, in this public manner to
      declare, that we believe the conduct of the Government has
      been just and impartial to foreign nations, and that those
      internal regulations which have been established for the
      preservation of peace, are in their nature proper, and have
      been fairly executed.

      And we are equally happy in possessing an entire confidence
      in your abilities and exertions in your station to maintain
      untarnished the honor, preserve the peace, and support the
      independence of our country; to acquire and establish
      which, in connection with your fellow-citizens, has been
      the virtuous effort of a principal part of your life.

      To aid you in these arduous and honorable exertions, as it
      is our duty, so it shall be our faithful endeavor. And we
      flatter ourselves, sir, that the proceedings of the present
      session of Congress will manifest to the world, that,
      although the United States love peace, they will be
      independent. That they are sincere in their declarations to
      be just to the French, and all other nations, and expect
      the same in return.

      If a sense of justice, a love of moderation and peace,
      shall influence their councils, which we sincerely hope, we
      shall have just grounds to expect peace and amity between
      the United States and all nations will be preserved.

      But if we are so unfortunate as to experience injuries from
      any foreign power, and the ordinary methods by which
      differences are amicably adjusted between nations shall be
      rejected, the determination "not to surrender in any manner
      the rights of the Government" being so inseparably
      connected with the dignity, interest, and independence of
      our country, shall by us be steadily and inviolably
      supported.

                          THOMAS JEFFERSON,
                          _Vice President of the United States,
                          and President of the Senate_.

_Ordered_, That the committee who prepared the Address wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and desire him to acquaint the Senate at
what time and place it will be most convenient for him that it should be
presented.

Mr. TRACY reported from the committee that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and that he would receive the Address of
the Senate to-morrow, at 12 o'clock, at his own house.

_Resolved_, That the Senate will, to-morrow, at 12 o'clock, wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES accordingly.


WEDNESDAY, May 24.

ELIJAH PAINE, from the State of Vermont, attended.

Agreeably to the resolution of yesterday, the Senate waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and the VICE PRESIDENT, in their name,
presented the Address then agreed to.

To which the PRESIDENT made the following reply:

      _Mr. Vice President, and Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      It would be an affectation in me to dissemble the pleasure
      I feel on receiving this kind Address.

      My long experience of the wisdom, fortitude, and patriotism
      of the Senate of the United States, enhances in my
      estimation the value of those obliging expressions of your
      approbation of my conduct, which are a generous reward for
      the past, and an affecting encouragement to constancy and
      perseverance in future.

      Our sentiments appear to be so entirely in unison, that I
      cannot but believe them to be the rational result of the
      understandings and the natural feelings of the hearts of
      Americans in general, on contemplating the present state of
      the nation.

      While such principles and affections prevail, they will
      form an indissoluble bond of union, and a sure pledge that
      our country has no essential injury to apprehend from any
      portentous appearances abroad. In a humble reliance on
      Divine Providence, we may rest assured, that, while we
      reiterate with sincerity our endeavors to accommodate all
      our differences with France, the independence of our
      country cannot be diminished, its dignity degraded, or its
      glory tarnished, by any nation or combination of nations,
      whether friends or enemies.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and adjourned.


FRIDAY, May 26.

HUMPHREY MARSHALL, from the State of Kentucky, attended.


MONDAY, May 29.

JAMES ROSS, from the State of Pennsylvania, attended.


SATURDAY, June 24.

The following confidential Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of
      Representatives:_

      The Dey of Algiers has manifested a predilection for
      American built vessels, and, in consequence, has desired
      that two vessels might be constructed and equipped, as
      cruisers, according to the choice and taste of Captain
      O'Brien. The cost of two such vessels, built with live oak
      and cedar, and coppered, with guns and all other equipments
      complete, is estimated at forty-five thousand dollars. The
      expense of navigating them to Algiers may, perhaps, be
      compensated by the freight of the stores with which they
      may be loaded on account of our stipulations by treaty with
      the Dey.

      A compliance with the Dey's request appears to me to be of
      serious importance. He will repay the whole expense of
      building and equipping the two vessels; and as he has
      advanced the price of our peace with Tripoli, and become
      pledged for that of Tunis, the United States seem to be
      under peculiar obligations to provide this accommodation;
      and I trust that Congress will authorize the advance of
      money necessary for that purpose.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _June_ 23, 1797.

_Ordered_, That it lie for consideration.


SATURDAY, July 1.

JAMES GUNN, from the State of Georgia, attended.


WEDNESDAY, July 5.

The VICE PRESIDENT obtained leave of absence for the remainder of the
session.


THURSDAY, July 6.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a
President _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides, and the Hon.
WILLIAM BRADFORD was duly elected.


FRIDAY, July 7.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House have passed a resolution, that the President of the Senate, and
the Speaker of the House of Representatives, be authorized to close the
present session, by adjourning their respective Houses on Monday, the
10th day of this month; in which they desire the concurrence of the
Senate.


MONDAY, July 10.

_Ordered_, That Mr. TRACY and Mr. READ be a joint committee on the part
of the Senate, with such as the House of Representatives may appoint on
their part, to wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and notify
him that, unless he may have any further communications to make to the
two Houses of Congress, they are ready to adjourn.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House have appointed a joint committee on their part to wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and notify him that, unless he may have
any further communications to make to the two Houses of Congress, they
are ready to adjourn.

Mr. TRACY reported from the joint committee, that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, agreeably to order, who replied, that he
had no further communication to make to Congress, except a respectful
and affectionate farewell.

The PRESIDENT then adjourned the Senate without day.




FIFTH CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

In pursuance of the authority given by the constitution, the PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES, on the 25th day of March last, caused to be issued
the Proclamation which follows:

      BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:

      A PROCLAMATION.

      Whereas the Constitution of the United States of America
      provides that the President may, on extraordinary
      occasions, convene both Houses of Congress; and whereas an
      extraordinary occasion exists for convening Congress, and
      divers weighty matters claim their consideration, I have
      therefore thought it necessary to convene, and I do by
      these presents convene the Congress of the United States of
      America, at the City of Philadelphia, in the Commonwealth
      of Pennsylvania, on Monday the fifteenth day of May next,
      hereby requiring the Senators and Representatives in the
      Congress of the United States of America, and every of
      them, that, laying aside all other matters and cares, they
      then and there meet and assemble in Congress, in order to
      consult and determine on such measures as in their wisdom
      shall be deemed meet for the safety and welfare of the said
      United States.

      [Sidenote: [L. S.]]

      In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the United
      States of America to be affixed to these presents, and
      signed the same with my hand. Done at the City of
      Philadelphia the twenty-fifth day of March, in the year of
      our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven, and
      of the Independence of the United States of America the
      twenty-first.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      By the President: TIMOTHY PICKERING, _Secretary of State_.


MONDAY, May 15, 1797.

This being the day appointed by the Proclamation of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, of the 25th of March last, for the meeting of Congress,
the following members of the House of Representatives appeared, produced
their credentials, and took their seats, to wit:

_From New Hampshire._--ABIEL FOSTER and JONATHAN FREEMAN.

_From Massachusetts._--THEOPHILUS BRADBURY, DWIGHT FOSTER, NATHANIEL
FREEMAN, Jr., SAMUEL LYMAN, HARRISON GRAY OTIS, JOHN READ, SAMUEL
SEWALL, WILLIAM SHEPARD, GEORGE THATCHER, JOSEPH BRADLEY VARNUM, and
PELEG WADSWORTH.

_From Rhode Island._--CHRISTOPHER G. CHAMPLIN and ELISHA R. POTTER.

_From Connecticut._--JOSHUA COIT, SAMUEL W. DANA, JAMES DAVENPORT,
CHAUNCEY GOODRICH, ROGER GRISWOLD, and NATHANIEL SMITH.

_From Vermont._--MATTHEW LYON.

_From New York._--DAVID BROOKS, JAMES COCHRAN, LUCAS ELMENDORPH, HENRY
GLENN, JONATHAN N. HAVENS, HEZEKIAH L. HOSMER, EDWARD LIVINGSTON, JOHN
E. VAN ALLEN, PHILIP VAN CORTLANDT, and JOHN WILLIAMS.

_From New Jersey._--JONATHAN DAYTON, JAMES H. IMLAY, and MARK THOMPSON.

_From Pennsylvania._--DAVID BARD, JOHN CHAPMAN, GEORGE EGE, ALBERT
GALLATIN, JOHN ANDRE HANNA, THOMAS HARTLEY, JOHN WILKES KITTERA, BLAIR
M'CLENACHAN, SAMUEL SITGREAVES, JOHN SWANWICK, and RICHARD THOMAS.

_From Maryland._--GEORGE BAER, Jr., WILLIAM CRAIK, JOHN DENNIS, GEORGE
DENT, WILLIAM HINDMAN, WILLIAM MATTHEWS, and RICHARD SPRIGG, Jr.

_From Virginia._--SAMUEL JORDAN CABELL, THOMAS CLAIBORNE, MATTHEW CLAY,
JOHN CLOPTON, JOHN DAWSON, THOMAS EVANS, WILLIAM B. GILES, CARTER B.
HARRISON, DAVID HOLMES, WALTER JONES, JAMES MACHIR, DANIEL MORGAN,
ANTHONY NEW, JOHN NICHOLAS, ABRAM TRIGG, and ABRAHAM VENABLE.

_From North Carolina._--THOMAS BLOUNT, NATHAN BRYAN, JAMES GILLESPIE,
WILLIAM BARRY GROVE, MATTHEW LOCKE, NATHANIEL MACON, RICHARD STANFORD,
and ROBERT WILLIAMS.

_From South Carolina._--ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER, JOHN RUTLEDGE, Jr., and
WILLIAM SMITH, (of Charleston District.)

_From Georgia._--ABRAHAM BALDWIN and JOHN MILLEDGE.

And a quorum, consisting of a majority of the whole number, being
present,

The House proceeded, by ballot, to the choice of a SPEAKER; and, upon
examining the ballots, a majority of the votes of the whole House was
found in favor of JONATHAN DAYTON, one of the Representatives for the
State of New Jersey: whereupon,

Mr. DAYTON was conducted to the chair, from whence he made his
acknowledgments to the House, as follows:

      "Accept, gentlemen, my acknowledgments for the very
      flattering mark of approbation and confidence exhibited in
      this second call to the chair, by a vote of this House.

      "Permit me, most earnestly, to request of you a continuance
      of that assistance and support, which were, upon all
      occasions, during the two preceding sessions, very
      liberally afforded to me; and, without which, all my
      exertions to maintain the order, and expedite the business
      of the House, must be, in a great degree, unsuccessful."


TUESDAY, May 16.

Several other members, to wit: from New Jersey, JAMES SCHUREMAN and
THOMAS SINNICKSON; from Virginia, JOHN TRIGG; and from South Carolina,
THOMAS SUMPTER, appeared, produced their credentials, were qualified,
and took their seats in the House.

_President's Speech._

It being near twelve o'clock, the SPEAKER observed that it had been
usual on similar occasions to the present, to send a message to the
Senate, to inform them that the House is now ready to attend them in
receiving the communication of the PRESIDENT, agreeably to his
appointment: such a message was agreed to, and sent accordingly.

Soon after, the members of the Senate entered, and took the seats
assigned them; and a little after twelve, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES entered, and took the chair of the SPEAKER, (which he vacated on
the entrance of the Senate, the President and Clerk of the Senate being
placed on the right hand of the chair, and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives and the Clerk on the left.) After sitting a moment, he
rose and delivered the following Speech. [See Senate proceedings,
_ante_.]

Having concluded his Speech, after presenting a copy of it to the
President of the Senate, and another to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, the President retired, as did also the members of the
Senate; and the Speaker having resumed his chair, he read the Speech:
after which, on motion, it was ordered to be committed to a Committee
of the Whole to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, May 17.

Several other members, to wit: from New Hampshire, WILLIAM GORDON and
JEREMIAH SMITH; from Pennsylvania, ANDREW GREGG; appeared, produced
their credentials, were qualified, and took their seats.

_The President's Speech._

The House then went into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. DENT in the
chair, on the President's Speech. It was read by the Clerk.

Mr. CRAIK then moved a resolution, which, he observed, was merely a
matter of form, as there had been one to the same effect, on every
similar occasion. It was, "that it is the opinion of this committee,
that a respectful Address should be presented to the President in answer
to his Speech to both Houses of Congress, containing assurances, that
this House will take into consideration the various and important
matters recommended to their consideration." The committee agreed to the
resolution. They rose, and it immediately passed the House in the common
form.

On motion, it was _Ordered_, That a committee be appointed to prepare an
Answer to the Speech.

Mr. VENABLE, Mr. KITTERA, Mr. FREEMAN, Mr. RUTLEDGE, and Mr. GRISWOLD,
were nominated to report the Answer.


FRIDAY, May 19.

RICHARD BRENT, from Virginia, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat.

_Documents Referred to in the President's Speech._

The SPEAKER informed the House that he had received a communication from
the Department of State, containing sundry documents referred to by the
President in his Speech to both Houses, numbered from 1 to 18. He
proceeded to read No. 1, viz:

1. A letter from General Pinckney to the Secretary of State, dated
Paris, December 20, 1796, giving an account of his arrival at Bordeaux;
of his journey from thence to Paris, in which, from the badness of the
roads, he broke three wheels of his carriage; of the ill treatment he
received from M. Delacroix, &c. He remarks, that it is not surprising
that the French Republic have refused to receive him, since they have
dismissed no less than thirteen foreign Ministers; and since they have
been led to believe by a late emigrant, that the United States was of no
greater consequence to them than the Republics of Genoa or Geneva. He
also mentions, that it seemed to be the opinion in France, that much
depended on the election of the President, as one of the candidates was
considered the friend of England, the other as devoted to France. The
people of France, he observes, have been greatly deceived, with respect
to the United States, by misrepresentation, being led to believe that
the people and Government have different views; but, adds he, any
attempt to divide the people from the Government, ought to be to the
people of the United States, the signal for rallying. Gen. Pinckney
several times mentions Mr. Monroe in this letter with great respect; and
says that before his arrival the Directory had been very cool towards
him, but, since that time, they had renewed their civilities to him.

2. Is a report of Major General Mountflorence to General Pinckney, dated
December 18, 1796, on the subject of American vessels brought prizes
into the ports of France.

3. Extract of a letter from Gen. Pinckney to the Secretary of State,
dated Paris, January 6, 1797, in which he mentions the distressed
situation of American citizens, arriving in the ports of France, who
were immediately thrown into prison, and could not be released, until an
order was got from the American Minister, countersigned by the French
Minister of Foreign Affairs; and no Minister being acknowledged there at
present, no relief could be afforded. He, however, applied to M.
Delacroix on their behalf, by means of the secretary, Major Rutledge,
and got them attended to through the Minister of General Police. General
Pinckney gives a further account of conversations which passed between
his secretary and M. Delacroix, on the subject of his quitting Paris, in
which he told him he must do so, or be liable to the operation of the
police laws; but refused to commit his orders to writing. He mentions
Barras's answer to Monroe's address as a curious production; but says it
was not particularly calculated as an answer to what was said by Mr.
Monroe, as he had it prepared, and was unacquainted with what would be
said by Mr. Monroe.

4. Extract of a letter from Gen. Pinckney to the Secretary of State,
dated Amsterdam, February 18, informing him, that, having had official
notice to quit the French Republic, he had gone to Amsterdam.

5. Extract of a letter from General Pinckney to the Secretary of State,
dated Amsterdam, March 5, in which he observes, that before he left
Paris, it was rumored that the Dutch were determined to treat American
vessels in the same manner as the French had done. He now believes that
the French wished them to do so, as he had lately received intelligence
that the Dutch had objected to do this, alleging that it would be a
great injury to them, as they should then lose their trade with this
country, and if so, they would be deprived of furnishing that support to
the French which they then gave them. France acquiesced because she saw
it was her interest; and having 25,000 troops in Batavia, it was
generally known that they could do what they pleased with that country.
The General adds, with detestation, that there are American citizens
who fit out privateers to cruise against the trade of this country.

6. Extract of a letter from Major General Mountflorence to General
Pinckney, dated Paris, February 14, mentioning the capture of a vessel
from Boston, and another from Baltimore, by an American citizen on board
a privateer: adding, that American citizens of this class are
continually wishing for more rigorous laws against American commerce.

7. Extract of a letter from the same to the same, dated Paris, February
21, giving an account of two more American vessels being brought into
L'Orient by the same man, and of another vessel taken by a French
privateer.

8. Extract of a letter from General Pinckney to the Secretary of State,
dated Amsterdam, March 8, mentioning the capture of several American
vessels; he also speaks of the disagreeableness of his situation; and
was of opinion that the new third of the French Councils would determine
whether this country and France were to remain at peace or go to war.
Though the former was desirable, he wished the measures of our
Government to be firm.

9. Speech of Barras, President of the French Directory, on Mr. Monroe's
recall.

10. The decree of the Executive Directory of March 2, relative to the
seizure of American vessels.

11. Extract of a letter from John Quincy Adams, Esq., Minister Resident
of the United States, near the Batavian Republic, to the Secretary of
State, dated at the Hague, November 4, 1796, giving an account of the
disposition of the people of that country towards this, which he states
to be friendly; and this he attributes to its being their interest to be
so. This country, he remarks, is the only quarter from which they
receive regular payments. He adds, however, that they have no will in
opposition to the French Government.

12. Extract of a letter from the Committee of Foreign Relations of the
Batavian Republic, to the above Minister, dated September 27, 1796,
making it appear very desirable that the United States should join them
in their common cause against Great Britain, reminding him of the many
services which they had rendered to this country.

13. Extract of a letter from John Quincy Adams in answer to the above,
wherein he says he shall not omit to forward their letter to this
country.

14. Extract of a letter from John Quincy Adams to the Secretary of
State, dated Hague, February 17, 1797, representing the French Republic
as paying as little attention to other neutral powers as to the United
States. He alludes to their conduct towards Hamburg, Bremen, Copenhagen,
&c.

15. Extract of a letter from Rufus King, Esq., to the Secretary of
State, dated London, March 12, 1797, to the same effect.

16. A letter from the Minister of Spain, resident in Philadelphia, to
the Secretary of State, dated May 6, 1797, complaining of the injurious
operation of the British Treaty against Spain, in three respects, viz:
as it destroys the doctrine of free ships making free goods; as it makes
certain articles contraband of war, which in former treaties were not
considered so; and as it gives to Great Britain a right to navigate the
Mississippi, which that Minister insists belonged not to us to give, as
it belonged wholly to Spain before it gave the right to the United
States, by the late treaty, to navigate that river. He concludes his
letter with saying, that the King of Spain is desirous of harmony
between the two countries, and relies upon the equity of his complaints
for satisfaction.

17. A letter from the Secretary of State to the Spanish Minister, in
answer to the above; in which he acknowledges that the treaty lately
concluded between the two countries had proved satisfactory to the
United States, as it put an end to a dispute which had existed for many
years respecting the navigation of the Mississippi, and also as it
afforded satisfaction to our mercantile citizens for the capture of our
ships and cargoes. All these, he allowed, were acts of substantial
justice; but all the other stipulations were wholly voluntary, and
perfectly reciprocal. With respect to the three articles of complaint
respecting the British Treaty, he justified the stipulations as being
just and consistent, and such as this country had a right to enter into.

18. A letter from General Pinckney to the Secretary of State, dated
Paris, February 1, stating that the day after the arrival of the news of
Buonaparte's successes in Italy, he received a letter from M. Delacroix,
directing him to leave Paris. General Pinckney concludes this letter
with observing, that the French seem to speak of this country as if it
were indebted to them for independence, and not to any exertions of our
own. Our treaty with Great Britain is execrated; they wish us to have no
connection with that country; they wish to destroy the trade of Great
Britain, and they look upon us as her best customer.

The whole of these documents having been read, on motion, they were
committed to the Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union, and
500 copies ordered to be printed.


MONDAY, May 22.

JAMES A. BAYARD, from Delaware, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat.

_Answer to President's Speech._

On motion, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr.
DENT in the chair, on the Answer reported to the President's Speech,
which was read by the Clerk, as follows:

      The committee to whom it was referred to prepare an Answer
      to the Speech of the President of the United States,
      communicated to both Houses of Congress, on Tuesday, the
      16th May, 1797, report the following:

      _To the President of the United States_:

      SIR: The interesting detail of those events which have
      rendered the convention of Congress at this time
      indispensable, (communicated in your Speech to both
      Houses,) has excited in us the strongest emotions. Whilst
      we regret the occasion, we cannot omit to testify our
      approbation of the measure, and to pledge ourselves that no
      considerations of private inconvenience shall prevent, on
      our part, a faithful discharge of the duties to which we
      are called.

      We have constantly hoped that the nations of Europe, whilst
      desolated by foreign wars, or convulsed by intestine
      divisions, would have left the United States to enjoy that
      peace and tranquillity to which the impartial conduct of
      our Government has entitled us; and it is now with extreme
      regret we find the measures of the French Republic tending
      to endanger a situation so desirable and interesting to our
      country.

      Upon this occasion, we feel it our duty to express, in the
      most explicit manner, the sensations which the present
      crisis has excited, and to assure you of our zealous
      co-operation in those measures which may appear necessary
      for our security or peace.

      Although the first and most ardent wish of our hearts is
      that peace may be maintained with the French Republic and
      with all the world, yet we can never surrender those rights
      which belong to us as a nation; and whilst we view with
      satisfaction the wisdom, dignity, and moderation, which
      have marked the measures of the Supreme Executive of our
      country, in its attempts to remove, by candid explanations,
      the complaints and jealousies of France, we feel the full
      force of that indignity which has been offered our country
      in the rejection of its Minister. No attempts to wound our
      rights as a sovereign State will escape the notice of our
      constituents: they will be felt with indignation, and
      repelled with that decision which shall convince the world
      that we are not a degraded people; that we can never submit
      to the demands of a foreign power without examination, and
      without discussion.

      Knowing, as we do, the confidence reposed by the people of
      the United States in their Government, we cannot hesitate
      in expressing our indignation at the sentiments disclosed
      by the President of the Executive Directory of France, in
      his Speech to the Minister of the United States. Such
      sentiments serve to discover the imperfect knowledge which
      France possesses of the real opinions of our constituents.
      An attempt to separate the people of the United States from
      their Government, is an attempt to separate them from
      themselves; and although foreigners who know not the genius
      of our country may have conceived the project, and foreign
      emissaries may attempt the execution, yet the united
      efforts of our fellow-citizens will convince the world of
      its impracticability.

      Happy would it have been, if the transactions disclosed in
      your communication had never taken place, or that they
      could have been concealed. Sensibly, however, as we feel
      the wound which has been inflicted, we think with you, that
      neither the honor nor the interest of the United States
      forbid the repetition of advances for preserving peace; and
      we are happy to learn that fresh attempts at negotiation
      will be commenced; nor can we too strongly express our
      sincere desires that an accommodation may take place, on
      terms compatible with the rights, interest, and honor of
      our nation. Fully, however, impressed with the uncertainty
      of the result, we shall prepare to meet with fortitude any
      unfavorable events which may occur, and to extricate
      ourselves from the consequences, with all the skill we
      possess, and all the efforts in our power. Believing with
      you that the conduct of the Government has been just and
      impartial to foreign nations; that the laws for the
      preservation of peace have been proper, and that they have
      been fairly executed, the Representatives of the People do
      not hesitate to declare that they will give their most
      cordial support to the execution of principles so
      deliberately and uprightly established.

      The many interesting subjects which you have recommended to
      our consideration, and which are so strongly enforced by
      this momentous occasion, will receive every attention which
      their importance demands; and we trust, that by the decided
      and explicit conduct which will govern our deliberations,
      every insinuation will be repelled which is derogatory to
      the honor and independence of our country.

      Permit us, in offering this Address, to express our
      satisfaction at your promotion to the first office in the
      Government, and our entire confidence that the pre-eminent
      talents and patriotism which have placed you in this
      distinguished situation, will enable you to discharge its
      various duties with satisfaction to yourself, and advantage
      to our common country.

The Clerk having finished reading the Answer, the Chairman proceeded to
read it paragraph by paragraph. The three first paragraphs were read
without any thing being said upon them; but, upon the fourth being
read--

Mr. EVANS moved, that instead of "will be felt with _indignation_,"
should be inserted, "will be felt with _sensibility_," as a milder
phrase; as he wished to avoid using expressions more harsh than was
necessary.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, if his colleague would give him leave, he believed he
had an amendment to offer, which would be proper to be offered before
one he had moved, as he believed there was a rule in the House which
forbids the striking out a clause after it had been amended; and if the
amendment he should propose obtained, it might be necessary to strike
out a part of that paragraph. It was his intention to move a new
paragraph, to be inserted between the first and second. He believed it
would be in order to do so.

The Chairman wished the proposition to be read.

Mr. NICHOLAS asked if it was not always in order to insert a new
section.

The Chairman believed it was, provided it was not intended as a
substitute for another.

Mr. NICHOLAS said he should candidly avow it to be his intention to
insert several new sections. For the information of the committee, he
would, therefore, read the whole, though he meant at present, to move
only one.

The following are the propositions which Mr. N. read in his place; the
first of which was under consideration:

After the first section insert:

      "Although we are actuated by the utmost solicitude for the
      maintenance of peace with the French Republic, and with
      all the world, the rejection of our Minister and the manner
      of dismissing him from the territories of France, have
      excited our warmest sensibility; and, if followed by
      similar measures, and a refusal of all negotiation on the
      subject of our mutual complaints, will put an end to every
      friendly relation between the two countries; but we flatter
      ourselves that the Government of France only intended to
      suspend the ordinary diplomatic intercourse, and to bring
      into operation those extraordinary agencies which are in
      common use between nations, and which are confined in their
      intention to the great causes of difference. We therefore
      receive with the utmost satisfaction, your information that
      a fresh attempt at negotiation will be instituted; and we
      expect with confidence that a mutual spirit of
      conciliation, and a disposition on the part of the United
      States to place France on the footing of other countries,
      by removing the inequalities which may have arisen in the
      operation of our respective treaties with them will produce
      an accommodation compatible with the engagements rights,
      duties, and honor of the United States.

      "We will consider the several subjects which you have
      recommended to our consideration, with the attention which
      their importance demands, and will zealously co-operate in
      those measures which shall appear necessary for our own
      security or peace.

      "Whatever differences of opinion may have existed among the
      people of the United States, upon national subjects, we
      cannot believe that any serious expectation can be
      entertained of withdrawing the support of the people from
      their constitutional agents, and we should hope that the
      recollection of the miseries which she herself has suffered
      from a like interference, would prevent any such attempt by
      the Republic of France; but we explicitly declare for
      ourselves and our constituents that such an attempt would
      meet our highest indignation, and we will repel every
      unjust demand on the United States by foreign countries;
      that we will ever consider the humiliation of the
      Government as the greatest personal disgrace."

Mr. THATCHER observed, the gentleman from Virginia had read three or
four paragraphs, in the form of amendments. He presumed he did not mean
to add these, without striking out some part of the report. He wished
him to say what part he meant to strike out, that they might see how the
Answer would stand when amended in the way he proposed. If they stood
together, they would be inconsistent.

Mr. GILES presumed it was the object of the committee to bring into view
a comparison of ideas in some shape or other, and he thought the
amendment proposed was calculated to produce this effect. If he
understood the Answer as reported, it was predicated upon the principle
of approving all the measures which had been taken by the Executive with
respect to France, whilst the amendment avoided giving that approbation.
The simple question was, which of the two grounds the House would take?
He believed the best way of ascertaining this, would be to move to
insert, and if the amendments were carried, to recommit the report, to
be made conformable to them.

Mr. GALLATIN said, when an amendment was carried which affected other
parts of a composition, it was not usual to strike out, but to
recommit.

The Chairman having declared the motion to be in order,

Mr. NICHOLAS said, the present crisis was, in his mind, the most serious
and important which this country had known since the declaration of its
independence; and it would depend much, perhaps, upon the Answer which
they were about to return to the Speech of the President, whether we
were to witness a similar scene of havoc and distress to that which was
not yet forgotten; such as had been passed through upon an important
occasion, but such as could be entered upon only as a last resource. The
situation in which we stood with respect to France called for the most
judicious proceeding; it was his wish to heal the breach, which was
already too wide, by temperate, rather than widen it by irritating
measures. He hoped, on this occasion, they should get rid of that
irritation which injury naturally produced on the mind. He declared he
felt for the insult which had been offered to Mr. Pinckney; and he felt
more for him, from the dignity with which he had borne it, which had
proved him a proper character for the embassy. He was sorry that it
should have been thought necessary by the French Republic to refuse to
acknowledge him as the Minister of this country; but he did not think it
right to suffer this first impression to influence their proceedings
upon this business. If the insults offered were a sufficient cause for
war, let the subject be examined by itself, separate from all others;
but, if it be our wish to proceed with negotiation, he thought it wisest
and best to adopt a firm but moderate tone.

As he before observed, he felt for the situation of the gentleman
employed by this country; he thought it was a trying one, and did great
honor to himself, and he deserved the thanks of his country for the good
temper with which he had sustained it; but Mr. N. confessed the subject
did not strike him with all the force with which it seemed to have
impressed the mind of that respectable character. He did not consider
the insult offered to Government as going further than the ill-treatment
which our Minister had received. He believed that the circumstances,
which appeared in the papers laid before them, in some degree accounted
for the conduct of the French Government. It appears that at first the
Directory were willing to receive Mr. Pinckney, but when they saw his
credentials they refused to acknowledge him. This circumstance, he said,
seemed to give a character to the transaction which explained its
meaning.

It will be recollected, said Mr. N., that since the cause, or imagined
cause (let it be one or the other) of complaint against this country,
that there has been an intercourse between the two Governments on this
subject. It was to be expected that if there had been any intention in
Government to have come to an adjustment of the difference between the
two countries, our Minister would have been clothed with some power of
accommodation. Mr. N. supposed that when the French Directory agreed to
receive him, this was their opinion; but upon seeing his letters of
credence, they found no such power was given or intended. [He read the
object of his mission from the President's Speech, viz: "faithfully to
represent," &c.]

If these, he said, were all the objects expressed in his letters of
credence--and if there had been more, the President would doubtless have
informed them of it--the matter perfectly justified the character he had
given of it.

He made these observations, because he thought on an occasion like the
present, the truth should be made to appear, and though an insult had
been offered to this country, which could not fail to produce
irritation, yet that irritation should stop short of the point where it
would produce action, as he was certain any steps taken which might
hazard the peace of the country, would not conduce to the welfare of its
citizens.

There was a subject, he said, which seemed to have involved itself with
this, and of which he should take some notice, viz: a charge against
certain persons with being attached to the French cause. It might,
perhaps, be the opinion of some members of that House, more particularly
of strangers, that he was improperly influenced by party zeal in favor
of the French, a zeal which it had been blazoned forth existed to an
immoderate degree in this country. He had frequently heard insinuations
of this sort, which he considered so groundless as to be worthy only of
contempt; but when charges of this kind were made in the serious manner
in which they were now brought forward, it was necessary to call for
proof. Who, said he, is the man who has this proof? He knew of none. For
his own part, he had no intercourse with the French but of the commonest
kind. He wished those who possessed proofs of improper conduct of this
kind, would come forward and show them--show who are the traitors of
whom so much is said. He was not afraid of the impressions any such
charges brought against him, might make upon his constituents, or where
he was known; indeed, he had not the arrogance to believe the charge was
levelled against him, though he believed he was frequently charged with
a too great attachment to the French cause.

When he first came into that House, he found the French embroiled with
all their neighbors, who were endeavoring to tear them to pieces. He
knew what had been the situation of this country when engaged in a
similar cause, and was anxious for their success. Was there not cause
for anxiety, when a nation, contending for the right of self-government,
was thus attacked? Especially when it was well known, that if the powers
engaged against France had proved successful, this country would have
been their next object. Had they not, he asked, the strongest proofs
(even the declarations of one of their Governors) that it was the
intention of England to declare war against America, in case of the
successful termination of the war against France? It redounded to the
honor of the citizens of this country, he said, that they had never
shown a disposition to embark in the present European war.

The difference, Mr. N. said, between the Address reported, and the
proposition he had brought forward was this: the former approved all the
measures of the Executive, and the latter recommended an inquiry
relative to the operation of the British Treaty. It was this question
upon which the committee would decide, and it was of importance, he
said, that they should weigh the causes of difference between us and the
French Republic, and not decide that we are right, without examination,
because, if, after being brought to hostility, we are obliged to
retract, it would show our former folly and wantonness.

Mr. N. said he would inquire into the rights of France as they respected
three principal subjects, which were more particularly causes of
complaint between the two countries. These were, the right of our
vessels carrying English goods, the article respecting contraband goods,
and that respecting the carrying of provisions. He knew no better way to
determine how far we could support those articles of the British Treaty,
than by extracting the arguments of our own ministerial characters in
support of these measures. With respect to the question of free ships
making free goods, his impressions were very different from those of the
Secretary of State. He says, with respect to the regulation of free
ships making free goods, it is not changing a right under the law of
nations; that it had never been pretended to be a right, and that our
having agreed to it in one instance, and not in another, was no just
cause of complaint by the French Government. He advocates this
transaction in his letter to Mr. Adet last winter. Mr. N. said, he knew
not what was the origin of the law of nations upon the subject; he knew
not how it came into existence; it had never been settled by any
convention of nations. Perhaps, however, the point now under
consideration came as near to a fixed principle, as any other of what
are called the laws of nations ever did, as only one nation in Europe
could be excepted from the general understanding of it. Mr. Pickering,
he thought, seemed not to have given full force to this circumstance,
but seemed to have weakened the evidence. [He referred to what Mr.
Pickering had said upon the subject.] It was Mr. Pickering's idea, that
the stipulation of free ships making free goods, was a mere temporary
provision; that it was not an article in the law of nations, but a new
principle introduced by the contracting parties. In order to prove this
was not the case, Mr. N. referred to the provisions entered into by the
armed neutrality of the north of Europe; to a treaty between France and
Spain; to a note from the Court of Denmark; and to the declaration of
the United States themselves on the subject.

With respect to contraband articles, he had little to say. It was
asserted that the articles stipulated in the British Treaty as
contraband, were made so by the law of nations. Where the doctrine was
found he could not say. It had been quoted from _Vattel_; this authority
might be correct; but he never found any two writers on this subject
agree as to this article. In a late publication on the law of nations
(_Marten's_) he found it directly asserted that naval stores were not
contraband. But he said, if the contrary were the law of nations, they
were bound to extend the same privilege to France which they gave to
England: they could not have one rule for the one nation, and a
different one for the other.

The 18th article of the British Treaty, respecting the carrying of
provisions, always struck him as a very important one. It had heretofore
been contended that this article did not go to any provisions except
such as were carrying to besieged or blockaded places; but he believed
the British had constantly made it a pretence for seizing provisions
going to France. Indeed, if he was not mistaken, the British Minister
had publicly declared in the House of Commons, that the provisions on
board the vessels intended for the Quiberoon expedition had been
supplied from what had been captured in American vessels.

Mr. N. contended that this was the opinion of the Executive of this
country, as published in all the public papers, and of course known to
the Government of France. In the letter of Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Pinckney
in 1793, he declares that there is only one case in which provisions are
contraband, and shows the necessity of a neutral nation observing the
same rules towards all the powers at war. But, in the present case, the
right was ceded during the present war.

It was an unfortunate circumstance against the neutrality of this
country, to find a doctrine so differently applied at different times.
It was a strong proof of the progress of the passions. It might be
considered as a fraudulent thing, in one instance, to give up a right
for a compensation to ourselves.

Mr. N. concluded with observing that he had gone over the subject, he
feared, not without being considered tedious by the committee; but he
felt himself greatly interested in the present decision. He believed any
additional irritation in their measures would place peace out of our
reach. He believed, therefore, it was their business to avoid it. He
believed it would be for the honor and happiness of the country to do
so.

Mr. W. SMITH said, as the gentleman last up had taken a wide range of
argument, he must excuse him if he confined himself, in his reply, to
those parts of his observations only which appeared to him essentially
to relate to the subject under consideration.

He believed the question was, whether they should alter the report in
the manner proposed; that is, whether they should strike out words
which expressed the sensibility of this House at the unprovoked insults
offered by the French Republic to our Government and country, or adopt
the gentleman's amendment, which he read.

If they agreed to this amendment, they must necessarily expect from the
French Republic fresh insult and aggression; for it seemed to admit that
hitherto no insult had been intended.

The amendment might be divided, Mr. S. said, into two parts. The first
went to vindicate the French from any intentional insults towards this
country: it even held out an idea that the Executive ought to offer some
concessions to France, and even designated the kind of concession. He
should, therefore, without taking notice of what the gentleman had said
about the political parties of this country, or what he had said
respecting himself personally, confine his observations to the points in
question.

The first point was, whether the conduct of France was justifiable in
rejecting our Minister, and sending him from the Republic in the manner
they had done?

He thought the committee had abundant materials before them completely
to refute the first proposition; and he was surprised, knowing that
these documents were in the hands of every member, that the gentleman
from Virginia could expect to impress their minds with the idea that no
indignity whatever had been offered by the French Government to this
country in that transaction.

Mr. S. said, that it appeared most clearly that the French Directory
intended to treat this Government with marked indignity; for though the
gentleman from Virginia suggested an opinion that their refusal to
receive Mr. Pinckney was owing altogether to his not being invested with
extraordinary powers, this was evidently not the case, as the Directory
had been well informed as to the character in which Mr. Pinckney came,
before they received his letters of credence, as appears by the letter
of M. Delacroix to Mr. Monroe, styling Mr. Pinckney his successor, and
by other documents communicated by the President, (which he read.) There
was no doubt, then, with respect to the Directory being well acquainted
with the character in which Mr. Pinckney went to France, viz: as
Minister Plenipotentiary or ordinary Minister; but, after keeping him in
suspense near two months, on the day after the news arrived of
Bonaparte's successes in Italy, he was ordered, by a peremptory mandate,
in writing, to leave the French Republic. This mandate was accompanied
by a circumstance which was certainly intended to convey an insult; it
was addressed to him as an Anglo-American, a term, it is true, they
sometimes used to distinguish the inhabitants of the United States from
those of the West India Islands, but, in his opinion, here evidently
designed as a term of reproach, as he believed no other similar
instance could be mentioned. Upon this circumstance, however, he laid no
stress; the other indignities which our Minister had received were too
great to require any weight to be given to this circumstance.

The gentleman from Virginia had confined the complaints of the French
Government to three articles of the British Treaty; though, if the
committee referred to the letter of Mr. Delacroix, it would be found
that they did not confine them within so narrow a compass. They
complain, first, of the inexecution of treaties; there are several
points of complaint relative to that head. 2d. Complaints against the
decrees of our Federal Courts. 3d. Against the law of June, 1794; and,
4th. Against the Treaty with Great Britain. Yet the gentleman confines
himself altogether to the latter. And really he did not expect at this
time of day, after the subject had been fully discussed, and determined,
and the objections refuted over and over again, that any gentleman would
have endeavored to revive and prove their complaints on this head well
founded. The three articles were: 1st, that free ships did not make free
goods; 2d, the contraband article; and 3d, the provision article.

1. The stipulation with respect to neutral vessels not making neutral
goods in the British Treaty, was not contrary to the law of nations; it
only provided that the law of nations was to be carried into effect in
the manner most convenient for the United States. But this doctrine, he
said, was no new thing. It had been acknowledged most explicitly by Mr.
Jefferson, Secretary of State, in July, 1793, and was so declared to the
Minister of France; yet no objection was made to it until the British
Treaty was ratified, though long previous thereto French property was
captured on board our vessels. Mr. Jefferson, writing on this subject to
the French Minister, said: "You have no shadow of complaint;" the thing
was so perfectly clear and well understood by the law of nations. This
happened as long ago as July or August, 1793. But two years afterwards,
when the British Treaty was promulgated, the whole country was thrown
into a flame by admitting this very same doctrine. France herself had
always acted under this law of nations, when not restrained by treaty:
in _Valin's_ Ordinances of France this clearly appears. The armed
neutrality was confined to the then existing war; Russia herself, the
creator of the armed neutrality, entered into a compact with England, in
1793, expressly contravening its principles. The principle was then not
established by our Treaty with England; but such being the acknowledged
law of nations, it was merely stipulated that it should be exercised in
the manner least injurious to us.

2. The next article of complaint was with respect to contraband goods.
If gentlemen will consult the law of nations, they will find that the
articles mentioned in the British Treaty are by the law of nations
contraband articles. They will find that in all the treaties with
Denmark and Sweden, Great Britain had made the same stipulation. Indeed,
the gentleman had acknowledged that it was so stated by some writers on
the law of nations; but he wished to derogate from the authority of
those writers, in the same way as Mr. Genet, in his correspondence with
Mr. Jefferson, had called them "worm-eaten folios and musty aphorisms;"
to _Vattel_ might be added _Valin's_ Ordinances, a very respectable work
in France. How, then, can the gentleman with truth say that we have
deviated from the law of nations?

3. The last point which the gentleman took notice of was the provision
article. There was no doubt that this Government would never allow
provisions to be deemed contraband, except when going to a besieged or
blockaded port. Though he made this declaration, yet it was but candid
to acknowledge that this was stated by _Vattel_ to be the law of
nations. [He read an extract from _Vattel_.]

When this was stated by Lord Grenville to Mr. Pinckney, our then
Minister in London, Mr. Pinckney acknowledged it to be so stated in
_Vattel_, but very ingeniously argued that France could not be
considered as in the situation mentioned in _Vattel_, since provisions
were cheaper there than they were in England, and therefore the case did
not apply. When our Envoy was sent to London, both parties were
tenacious on this ground. Our Minister was unwilling to agree to this
construction of the law of nations; but the British Minister insisted
upon it, and if there had not been some compromise, the negotiation must
have been broken off, and a war probably ensued. The result was,
therefore, that, without admitting it to be the law of nations, it was
agreed that where provisions were contraband by the law of nations, they
should be paid for, but not confiscated, as the law of nations
(admitting that construction) would have authorized. Therefore some
advantage was secured to France, for if Great Britain had confiscated
our vessels going to France with provisions, it would certainly have
damped the ardor of our citizens employed in that commerce; but under
this regulation our merchants were certain of being paid for their
cargoes, whether they arrived in France or were carried into England.
These were the three grounds of objection which the gentleman from
Virginia had stated as grounds of complaint by the French against the
British Treaty.

Before he went further, he would observe that, admitting (which he did
not admit) that there had been solid grounds of objection against the
British Treaty, before it was ratified, yet they ought now to be closed.
It had received a full discussion at the time; it had been carried into
effect, was become the law of the land, and was generally approved of by
the country. Why, then, endeavor to stir up the feelings of the public
against it by alleging it to be just cause of complaint? If the
committee wanted any proof of the approbation which that instrument had
received, he thought it might be gathered from the general approbation
which had been given of the administration of the late President on his
retirement from office, in doing which the people had doubtless taken
into view the whole of his conduct. Nor did he think the people had
shown any hostility to the Treaty in their late election of members to
that House. Indeed, he believed that the approbation which the Treaty
received increased in proportion as the subject came to be understood.

Admitting further, that the Treaty had changed the existing state of
things between Great Britain and France, by having granted commercial
favors to Great Britain; by the 2d article of our treaty with France,
the same favors would immediately attach to France, so that she could
have no reason to complain on that ground. Indeed France had herself new
modified the treaty between that country and this, and had taken to
herself what she deemed to be the favors granted to Great Britain. [Mr.
S. read the decree on this subject of 2d March last.]

Mr. S. said, he believed he had examined all the observations of the
gentleman from Virginia, relative to the Treaty, which were essential to
the subject under consideration. He did not wish to go much farther on
the present occasion, because he agreed with him, that it was proper
they should keep themselves as cool and calm as the nature of the case
would admit; but he thought whilst so much deference was paid to the
feelings of France, some respect ought to be paid to the feelings of
America. He hoped the people of America would retain a proper respect
and consideration for their national character; and however earnestly he
wished that the differences subsisting between the two countries might
be amicably settled, yet, he trusted that our national dignity would
never be at so low an ebb as to submit to the insults and indignities of
any nation whatever. In saying this, he expressed his hearty wish to
keep the door of negotiation with France unclosed; but at the same time
he strongly recommended to take every necessary step to place us in a
situation to defend ourselves, provided she should still persist in her
haughty demeanor.

Mr. S. said, as he knew indecent and harsh language always recoiled upon
those who used it, he did not wish to adopt it; but, at the same time,
it was due to ourselves to express our feelings with a proper degree of
strength and spirit. He was not in the habit of quoting any thing from
M. Genet, but there was one expression of his which he thought contained
good advice, "all this accommodation and humility, all this
condescension attains no end."

After the gentleman from Virginia had dwelt sufficiently upon the danger
of irritating the French, he had emphatically called upon us to
recollect our "weakness." It might have been as well if he had left that
to have been discovered from another quarter. He hoped we had
sufficient confidence in the means of defence which we possessed, if
driven to the last resort; and he believed if there was any one more
certain way of provoking war than another, it was that of proclaiming
our own weakness.

He hoped such a language would now be spoken as would make known to the
French Government that the Government and people of this country were
one, and that they would repel any attempt to gain an influence over our
Councils and Government. The gentleman had said that there did not
appear to be any design of this kind, and had endeavored to do away what
was stated as the opinion in France, in General Pinckney's letter. He
did not mean to rest this altogether upon the reports of an emigrant,
whom General Pinckney mentions as having represented this country
divided, and of no greater consequence than Genoa or Geneva, but he took
the whole information into view. [He read the extract relative to this
subject.]

It was evident, Mr. S. said, from this information from France, that an
opinion had been industriously circulated there that the Government and
people of this country were divided; that the Executive was corrupt and
did not pursue the interests of the people; and that they might, by
perseverance, overturn the Administration, and introduce a new order of
things. Was not such an opinion of things, he asked, calculated to
induce France to believe that she might make her own terms with us? It
was well known what the French wished, and it was time to declare it
plainly. His opinion was that they designed to ruin the commerce of
Great Britain through us. This was evident. They talk of the British
Treaty; but they suffered it to lie dormant for near twelve months,
without complaining about it. Why were they silent till within a few
weeks before the election of our President? Why did they commit
spoliations upon our commerce long before the British Treaty was ever
dreamt of? Their first decree, directing spoliations of our property,
and the capture of our provision ships, was on the 9th of May, 1793, a
month before the provision order of Great Britain, which was dated June
8, 1793; and why have they, from that time to this, been committing
spoliations on our commerce? The British Treaty was published in Paris
in August, 1795; a year after, in July, 1796, they determine to treat us
in the same way that we suffer other nations to treat us, and this
decree was not made known to our Government till the October following,
a few weeks before the election of President.

But this was not all; the French had pursued similar measures towards
all the other neutral powers. Sweden, in consequence, had no Minister in
their country, and was on the eve of a rupture. The intention of the
French evidently was, to compel all the neutral powers to destroy the
commerce of Great Britain; but he trusted this country had more spirit
than to suffer herself to be thus forced to give up her commerce with
Great Britain; he trusted they would spurn any such idea.

Mr. S. hoped the observations which he had made would not be construed
into a wish to see the United States and France involved in a war. He
had no objection to such measures being taken for preserving peace
between the two countries as should be consistent with national honor.
It was a delicate thing for them to suggest what the Executive ought to
do. It was out of their province to direct him. The Executive had
various considerations to take into view. We had injuries to complain of
against France, for the spoliations committed upon our commerce. If the
Executive conceive we have a right to redress, that subject will of
course constitute a part of our Envoy's instructions. Would it then be
proper, said he, for this House to interfere with the Executive, to
obtrude its opinion and say, "You must give up this point; we take upon
us (without any authority by the constitution) to give _carte blanche_
to France, without any indemnification or redress."

The gentleman says it is the object of the amendment on the table to
recommend to the Executive to remove any inequalities in the treaties;
that was alone sufficient to vote it out.

There had been no period since the Revolution which had so powerfully
called on Americans for that fortitude and wisdom which they knew so
well how to display in great and solemn emergencies. It was not his
intention to offend any one by stating the question in such strong
terms; but he was persuaded that when the present situation of our
affairs with respect to France was well understood, it would be found
that to acquiesce in her present demands was virtually and essentially
to surrender our self-government and independence.


TUESDAY, May 23.

Two other members, to wit: from North Carolina, JOSEPH MCDOWELL, and
from Virginia, JOSIAH PARKER, appeared, produced their credentials, were
qualified, and took their seats.

_Answer to the Presidents Speech._

The House then went into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. DENT in the
chair, on the amendment of Mr. NICHOLAS to the report of the select
committee, in answer to the President's Speech.

Mr. FREEMAN first rose. He observed, that in his observations on the
subject before the committee, amid the conflicting opinions of gentlemen
whom he respected, he did not mean to express his own either with
confidence or with zeal. Though one of the committee that had reported
the Address, he could not approve it _in toto_. He had two principal
objections to it. First, to that part which went to an unequivocal
approbation of all the measures of the Executive respecting our foreign
relations; and, secondly, to that part which contained expressions of
resentment and indignation towards France. In framing an answer to the
President, he conceived the committee should have refrained from
expressing an unqualified approbation of all the measures of the
Executive. To omit it would not imply censure. By introducing it, it
forced all those who entertain even doubts of the propriety of any one
Executive measure to vote against the Address.

The principal causes of the irritation on the part of France, insisted
upon in the Answer, were the rejection of our Minister, and the
sentiments contained in the Speech of the President of the Directory to
our late Minister. If gentlemen would look into the documents laid
before the House by the President, he was confident they would find the
true reason for the refusal to receive our Minister. He came only as an
ordinary Minister, without any power to propose such modifications as
might lead to an accommodation, and when the Directory discovered this
from his credentials they refused him. In answer to this, it had been
urged that M. Delacroix, Minister of Foreign Affairs, from the first,
well knew that Mr. Pinckney was only the successor to Mr. Monroe, and
that his coming in that quality was not the reason why the French
refused to receive him. Mr. F. referred to the documents which had been
laid before the House on this subject, from which it appeared that the
secretary of M. Delacroix had suggested a reason for the apparent change
of opinion on the subject of receiving Mr. Pinckney. Suppose, the
secretary observed, that M. Delacroix had made a mistake at first in the
intentions of the Directory, was that mistake to be binding on the
Directory?

He did not wish to be understood to consider the conduct of the French
as perfectly justifiable; but he could not conceive that it was such as
to justify, on our part, irritating or violent measures. As to the
Speech of the President of the Directory, he could not say much on it,
he did not perfectly understand it. As far as he did, he considered it a
childish gasconade, not to be imitated, and below resentment. [He read
part of it]. It was certainly arrogant in him to say that we owed our
liberty to their exertions. But if the French could derive any
satisfaction from such vain boasting he had no objection to their
enjoying it. There was another part of the Speech that had been
considered as much more obnoxious. It was said to breathe a design to
separate the people here from their Government. The part alluded to was
no more than an expression of affection for the people; he could see
nothing in this irritating or insulting; it was a mode of expression
which they used as to themselves, and by which they wished to convey
their affection for the whole nation. The term people, certainly
included the Government, and could not with propriety, therefore, be
said to separate the people from it.

An idea had been thrown out by the gentleman from South Carolina, that
the people generally approved of the British Treaty; he inferred it from
the fate of the late elections. For his part he could see no great
alteration to have been produced by the late elections; and if there had
been it would not have been an evidence to his mind that the people
approved of the British Treaty. He believed, for his part, that the
opinions of a great majority of the people had been uniformly averse to
it; and those who advocated it were by this time nearly sick of it. It
was true a spirit was aroused by the cry of war at the time the subject
of appropriation was pending, that produced petitions, not approving
however of the stipulations of the treaty, but asking that it might be
carried into effect since it had reached so late a stage.

Another engine, he observed, had been wielded with singular dexterity.
Much had been effected by the use, or rather abuse, of the terms
federalist and anti-federalist, federalism and anti-federalism. When the
Federal Constitution was submitted to the people, to approve it, and
endeavor to procure its ratification, it was federalism. Afterwards,
when the Government was organized and in operation, to approve every
measure of the Executive and support every proposition from the
Secretary of the Treasury, was federalism; and those who entertained
even doubts of their propriety, though they had been instrumental in
procuring the adoption of the constitution, were called
anti-federalists. In 1794 to be opposed to Madison's propositions, the
resolution for the sequestration of the British debts, and the
resolution prohibiting all intercourse with Great Britain, was
federalism. In 1796 it was federalism to advocate the British Treaty;
and now he presumed that it would be federalism to support the report of
the committee and hightoned measures with respect to France. In 1793 he
acknowledged that federalism assumed a very different attitude from what
it had on the present occasion; it was then the attitude of meekness, of
humanity, and supplication. The men who exclusively styled themselves
federalists, could only deplore with unavailing sighs the impotence of
their country, and throw it upon the benevolence and magnanimity of the
British Monarch. Their perturbed imaginations could even then see our
cities sacked and burnt, and our citizens slaughtered. On the frontier
they heard the war-hoop, and the groans of helpless women and children,
the tortured victims of savage vengeance. Now we are at once risen from
youth to manhood, and are ready to meet the haughty Republic of France
animated with enthusiasm and flushed with victory. Mr. F. observed, that
he rejoiced however that gentlemen adopted a bolder language on this
than had been used on the former occasion. He felt his full shame in the
national degradation of that moment. He was in favor of firm language;
but he would distinguish between the language of manly firmness and
that of childish petulance or ridiculous bombast.

Mr. GRISWOLD said, if he understood the state of the business, the
question was, whether the committee would agree to the amendment
proposed by the gentleman from Virginia? If it contained sentiments
accordant to the feelings of the committee, it would of course be
adopted; if not, it would doubtless be rejected.

He supposed it would form an objection to this amendment, if it were
found to be inconsistent with the other parts of the report. He believed
this to be the case; but he would not make objections to it on this
ground. He would examine the paragraph itself, and see whether it
contained sentiments in unison with those of the committee. He believed
this would not be found to be the case, and that when the committee had
taken a view of it, it would be rejected.

If he understood the proposition, it contained three distinct
principles, viz:

1. To make a new apology for the conduct of the French Government
towards this country.

2. That the House of Representatives shall interfere with and dictate to
the Executive in respect to what concessions ought to be made to the
French Republic.

3. It depends upon the spirit of conciliation on the part of France for
an adjustment of the differences existing between the two Governments.

The apology, he said, was a new one, and one which the French had not
thought of making for themselves; for they tell us, as it appears from
Mr. Pinckney's letter to the Secretary of State, "they will not
acknowledge or receive another Minister Plenipotentiary from the United
States, until after the redress of the grievances demanded of the
American Government, and which the French Republic has a right to expect
from it." We say (or rather the gentleman from Virginia says in his
amendment) they rejected our Minister because he had not power enough;
therefore, for the apology now made for the French Government they were
indebted to the ingenuity of the mover.

Now, said Mr. G., I do not wish that the House of Representatives should
undertake to make apologies for the conduct of the French Government
towards this. It was true they needed apology; but he did not think it
was proper for us to make it for them. Further, as this apology was not
made by themselves, but wholly different from their own assertions, it
was not likely that they would fall into it. They say, "Permit us to
sell our privateers in your ports; annul treaties and repeal laws, and
then we will tell you on what terms we will receive Mr. Pinckney, and
peace from you." After this declaration, he did not think it would be
proper to attempt any new apology for them. He therefore supposed, that
so far as this proposition offered a new apology for the French
Republic, it could not meet with the approbation of the committee.

The next proposition contained in the amendment was, that the House of
Representatives should interfere with the Executive power of this
country, and dictate to it what sort of steps should be taken towards
reconciling the French Government. He asked whether this was consonant
to the principles of the constitution? Whether the constitution had not
delegated the power of making treaties to other branches of the
Government? He believed it had, and that therefore we had no right to
dictate to the Executive what should or what should not be done with
respect to present disputes with the French Government. On this ground,
therefore, he considered it as improper.

In the next place, the amendment contained another proposition, viz:
that we rely upon a spirit of conciliation on the part of France for an
accommodation of differences. And, said Mr. G., do we really rely upon
this? Have we such evidence as should incline us to rely upon it? Have
the French Government expressed any inclination to settle the
differences subsisting between them and us? The communications which
were received from the Supreme Executive, do not bear this complexion.
The communication from the French Minister to this Executive does not
wear it. Our proclamations are called _insidious_; our Minister is
insulted and rejected; and attempts are made to divide the people of
this country from their Government. Is this conciliation? Does it not
rather appear as if they intended to alienate the affections of the
people from their Government, in order to effect their own views? He was
convinced it did, and that they could not rely upon a spirit of
conciliation in them. For his own part, he did not rely upon it; he
relied upon this country being able to convince the world that we are
not a divided people; that we will not willingly abandon our Government.
When the French shall be convinced of this, they will not treat us with
indignity. Therefore, he trusted, as the proposed amendment did not
contain such sentiments as were likely to accord with the feelings of
the committee, that it would be rejected.

Mr. GILES said the subject under discussion was a very important one. It
appeared to him, from various documents, that all the steps taken by the
Executive had a view to an eventual appeal to arms, which it was his
wish (as it was the wish of many in that House) to avoid. It was proper,
therefore, that the clashing opinions should be discussed. If the
proposition brought forward for this purpose was not sufficiently simple
and explicit, he wished it might be made more so. For he believed the
question to be, whether the committee be prepared to pass a vote,
approving of the whole course of the conduct of the Executive, or
whether France should be put upon the same ground with the other
belligerent powers. That she is at present upon the same footing, no
gentleman had attempted to show. Gentlemen who wish to get rid of this
ground, say this is a thing which should be left to the Executive. He
thought it was, however, a proper subject for their discussion; for
whatever power the Executive had with respect to making of treaties,
that House had the means of checking that power. Suppose, said Mr. G., I
were on this occasion called upon to tax my land, was it not necessary I
should inquire into the subject, and endeavor to avoid a measure which
would probably prove a serious drain upon the blood and treasure of the
country? He was unwilling to have his land taxed for the purpose of
supporting a war on this principle. It was evident that the French took
one ground in this dispute, and the United States another, and whilst
this continued to be the case, no negotiation would have any effect.
Indeed, said he, it is war; and if the measure proposed was taken, we
make war if we do not declare it.

Mr. BALDWIN said, he had taken the liberty to express his concern
several years ago, that this custom of answering the PRESIDENT's Speech,
which was but a mere piece of public ceremony, should call up and demand
expressions of opinion on all the important business of the session,
while the members were yet standing with their hats in their hands, in
the attitude of receiving the communications, and had not yet read or
opened the papers which were the ground of their being called together.
It applied very strongly in this instance, as this was a new Congress,
and a greater proportion than common of new members; he thought it an
unfavorable attitude in which to be hurried into the very midst of
things, and to anticipate business of such vast importance to the
country, before they had time to attend to the information which had
been submitted to them. He trusted some fit occasion would before long
be found to disencumber themselves of a ceremony, new in this country,
which tended only to evil and to increasing embarrassments. He observed
that it was under the influence of these impressions, he had made it a
rule to himself, for many sessions, to vote for those amendments and
those propositions in the Address which were most delphic and ambiguous,
and while they were respectful to the PRESIDENT, left the House
unpledged and open to take up the business of the session as it
presented itself in its ordinary course. It was on this ground he should
vote for the amendment now under consideration.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, when the report of the committee should be before
them, he should have some remarks to make upon it; but at present he
should offer only a few observations upon the proposed amendment.

He said he had strong objections to the amendment; but one so strong
that he need not urge any other: it was, that in agreeing to it they
should dictate to the Executive, which he believed would be infringing
upon the Executive power. As it was his peculiar duty to give
instructions to Ministers, it would be improper in them to say what
should be the instructions given to a Minister; but if it were not so,
he should not vote for those of the gentleman from Virginia.

In the instructions of a Minister, it was usual to comprise a variety of
propositions. Certain things were first to be proposed; if these could
not be obtained, he was instructed to come forward with something else,
and if this could not be got, he went on to his ultimatum. But, if the
proposition of the gentleman from Virginia were to obtain, his
instructions would be publicly known. In vain would it be for him to
offer this or that, they will say the House of Representatives has
directed you what to do, and we will not agree to any thing else. This
would be contrary to all diplomatic proceedings; for that reason he
should be opposed to the House saying what should be his instructions.
Indeed, if it were usual, he should be against it in this instance, as
he believed it would encourage an extravagant demand. What, said he,
have they said to our Minister--or rather to the person who was formerly
our Minister, but who then had no power? They told him to go away; they
had nothing to say to him: they would receive no more Ministers from the
United States until their grievances were redressed. This country is
charged with countenancing an inequality of treaties. The French have
said, redress our grievances in a certain way. But, said Mr. R., if we
do this, we shall put ourselves under the dominion of a foreign power,
and shall have to ask a foreign country what we shall do. This was a
situation into which we must not fall without a struggle.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, though he had wished to have taken a little more
time before he had troubled the committee with his observations; yet, as
there now appeared an interval, he should take the opportunity of
occupying it for a few minutes.

He should not answer the observations of the gentleman from Georgia,
with respect to the style of the Answer reported; but he believed that
those gentlemen who would look at it without a perverted vision, would
not discover the faults in it which that gentleman had discovered. He
thought it rather remarkable for the simplicity of its style than for a
redundancy of epithet. He discovered more of the latter in the amendment
than in the original report. It was true that the superlative was used
in different places, but he thought it was used where it ought to be. He
would not, however, detain the committee with matter so immaterial, but
would proceed to what appeared to him of some consequence.

A stranger who had come into the House during this debate, and heard
what had fallen from the mover of the proposed amendment, and from
members who had followed him, would have supposed, that instead of an
act of ordinary course being under discussion, they had been debating
the question of a declaration of war against France.

He would declare, for himself at least, on the subject of war, that he
agreed in certain of the sentiments of gentlemen on the other side of
the House. A state of war was certainly a curse to any nation; to
America it would be peculiarly a curse. It ought to be avoided by all
possible means. It was not only impolitic, but madness, to run into war.
But he thought there were two sides of the subject. He thought that
peace was the greatest of all possible blessings; but he also thought
that peace might be purchased too dearly, and war avoided at too great
an expense. He thought peace might cost a greater value than money--our
independence. This was no new sentiment in this country. It was thought
that peace might be bought too dearly in the Revolutionary war; they
then thought it better to be at war than to submit to the alternative
evils. France also shows that she prefers a state of war--a war carried
on at an unexampled expense of blood and treasure--to a state of peace
with despotism. He thought, therefore, that we should hold a language of
a firm and manly tone. To preserve peace by all honorable means, but not
by dishonorable means. As he observed last session, on a similar
occasion, we should cultivate peace with zeal and sincerity; but
whenever our intention of doing so was publicly expressed, it ought to
be accompanied with an opposite assertion of a determination, if our
endeavors to maintain peace fail, that then every resource of the nation
shall be called into existence in support of all that is dear to us.
Such a declaration, at this time, was extremely proper. At present, he
said, all the observations which had been made relative to war, were
very premature. They might be brought into consideration, when any
measure should be discussed which might lead to a war with France. Then
would be the time to count the cost and the benefit. At present, he
conceived, our only object was, to inquire what were the feelings which
the conduct of France had created in our minds, and whether we were
prepared to express those feelings.

Shall we, said he, from a fear of irritating the French Republic, in a
communication with our own Executive, suppress our feelings, or what is
worse, suppress the truth? For his own part, he saw nothing in the
present business but an expression of feelings naturally excited by the
occasion; nothing but a declaration of facts. This being the case, the
question was, whether, from fear of irritating the French Government,
they should suppress these feelings.

It would be well to consider what would be the consequence of this
condescension. He did not think they were warranted in believing that
they should put France in a better humor with us by this means. He was
sure that gentlemen who were in the last Congress would recollect that
the Answer to the Address was reported in very mild terms, from a spirit
of accommodation in the committee who formed it, and that it was
afterwards pruned in the House with care, yet there had been no
amelioration of the disposition of the French towards this country.
Instead of inducing them to behave better to us, had it not been with a
knowledge of this that they have offered us fresh insult and indignity?
Indeed, Mr. Pinckney suggests an idea that this moderation of ours may
have been one of the operating causes of sending our Minister from their
country. Besides, gentlemen have not pointed out the particular
expressions which they consider as irritating in the report. For his own
part, he thought the amendment might be considered as more irritating
than the draft of the committee. What was the language of the amendment?
[He read it.] He gave it as his opinion, that there was more of war and
bullying in it than in the original report. It was true the threat it
contained was accompanied by an _if_. Now, all the difference between
the draft and the amendment was, that in the former, instead of using
the _if_, they had at once expressed indignation at the insults offered
to this country by the French Republic, and given assurances to the
Executive that they would repel indignity with indignation.

But, said he, let us, on this occasion, confine ourselves to the real
question now before us. We have been informed, said he, by the
PRESIDENT, in his Speech to both Houses, of the conduct of the French
towards this Government, and have since received the documents upon
which this report was founded. He had not yet heard any gentleman
justify the conduct of the French. He had heard, indeed, some attempts
to palliate or apologize for it, but none to vindicate it. His ideas of
these things were, that the French had not only injured us, but added
insult to injury; and while he retained this belief, he could not help
feeling indignation and resentment. The question before the House was
not, Will we resent it? Our actions, better than our words, show our
desires for peace. It was a desire in which we were too much interested,
to be doubted; yet it was proper that this desire should be accompanied
with expressions of our feelings on the occasion. What objections could
there be to this? If we were sunk so low, if our fears of the French
Republic are so great, that we dare not express what we feel, our
situation was become really deplorable. He hoped this was not, nor ever
would be the case. He hoped we should cultivate peace with sincerity,
but with firmness. For if the French Republic is so terrible to us, that
we must crouch and sink before her; if we hold our rights at her nod,
let gentlemen say so. And if we are to give up ourselves to her, let it
be an act of the Government; do not let us conceal under the appearance
of spirit, actual submission. Nations, it was true, might be brought
into such a situation as to be obliged to surrender some of their rights
to other nations; but when this is done, it should be done with some
degree of character. Let it not be done as a confession of guilt. Let
us, said he, however, surrender any thing, sooner than the fair fame of
our country. He was not a military man, nor did he know how he should
act upon such an occasion; but he knew what we ought to do. We ought,
rather than submit to such indignity, to die in the last ditch. Why
insinuate that the Government had been wrong? was it not enough to
submit to injury; shall we not only receive the stripes, but kiss the
rod that inflicts them?

Mr. OTIS observed, that he was so little accustomed to the mode of
conducting a debate in that honorable House, that he hardly knew in what
manner to apply his remarks to the subject before the committee. A
specific motion had been laid on the table by the gentleman from
Virginia, which reduced the true question before them to a narrow
compass; but the mover, in discussing his own proposition, had enlarged
upon subjects dear to his mind, and familiar to his recollection. In
this circuit he had been ably followed by the gentleman from South
Carolina, and others; so that the whole subject of the Address to the
PRESIDENT, and the reply of the committee, was brought into view, with
many considerations that did not belong to it. It was his design to have
remained silent until the subject had been exhausted by other gentlemen,
and if any remark of an important nature had been omitted, which was not
likely to have been the case, he would have suggested such ideas as
might have presented themselves to his mind; but a motion having been
made for the committee to rise, he would then offer a few observations,
not so much for the sake of illustrating the question, which had been
done most successfully, but in order to declare his sentiments upon this
important occasion. He so far agreed with the gentleman from Georgia,
that he believed, upon ordinary occasions, an Answer to the PRESIDENT's
Address should be calculated to preserve an harmonious intercourse
between the different departments of Government, rather than to pledge
either branch of the Legislature, collaterally, upon subjects that would
come regularly under their consideration. But the present was not an
ordinary occasion, and the situation of the country required that the
Answer should not be a spiritless expression of civility, but a new
edition of the Declaration of Independence. He expressed his regret that
upon this question gentlemen should have wandered into a review of
measures and subjects, so frequently examined, so deliberately settled,
and which had a tendency to rekindle party animosity. If they would
never acquiesce in the deliberate acts of the Government, because their
personal sentiments had been adverse to them in the season of their
discussion, there could be no end to controversy. For his part he
conceived that all party distinctions ought now to cease; and that the
House was now called by a warning voice, to destroy the idea of a
geographical division of sentiment and interest existing among the
people. His constituents and himself were disposed to regard the
inhabitants of the Southern States as brothers, whose features were cast
in the same mould, and who had waded through the same troubled waters to
the shore of liberty and independence. He hoped that gentlemen would, in
their turn, think the other part of the Union entitled to some
consideration.

The Address of the PRESIDENT disclosed, for the contemplation of the
committee, a narrative of facts, and of the existing causes of
controversy between the French Republic and ourselves; the overtures for
reconciliation, which were to be repeated by attempts to negotiate, and
the measures of defence that might be proper, in case negotiation should
fail. The injuries sustained by us were of a high and atrocious nature,
consisting in the capture of our vessels, depredations upon the property
and persons of our citizens, the indignity offered to our Minister; but
what was more aggravating than the rest, was, the professed
determination not to receive our Minister until the complaints of the
French should be redressed, without explanation and without
exception--until we should violate treaties, repeal laws, and do what
the constitution would not authorize, vacate solemn judgments of our
courts of law. These injuries should not be concealed. He did not wish,
however, to indulge in unnecessary expressions of indignation, but to
state in plain and unequivocal terms the remonstrances of injured
friendship. If any man doubted of the pernicious effects of the measures
of the French nation, and of the actual state of our commerce, let him
inquire of the ruined and unfortunate merchant, harassed with
persecutions on account of the revenue, which he so long and patiently
toiled to support. If any doubted of its effects upon agriculture, let
him inquire of the farmer whose produce is falling and will be exposed
to perish in his barns. Where, said he, are your sailors? Listen to the
passing gale of the ocean, and you will hear their groans issuing from
French prison-ships. Such were the injuries, and such the requisitions
of the French nation; and he defied the ingenuity of any gentleman to
draw a comparison between the Directory and the British Parliament, in
favor of the former; and insisted that the demands of Charles Delacroix
were upon a parallel with those of Lord North. He enlarged upon the
analogy of the circumstances attending the pretensions of the British
Government to bind us, when we were colonies, and of the French to
subjugate us, now we are free and independent States. He thought it
expedient to cultivate the same spirit of union, and to use the same
firm and decided language. He regretted that questions should be
agitated upon this occasion, which had been formerly the cause of party
spirit and dissensions; and did not believe that the immortal men who
framed the noted instrument which dissolved the charm of allegiance and
shivered the fetters of tyranny, condescended to differ about verbal
criticisms and nice expressions, through fear of giving offence; nor
that it was incumbent upon the members of the committee to repress the
assertion of their rights, or smother a just and dignified expression of
their susceptibility of insult, because the French had been once our
friends, or because the commencement of their revolution was a struggle
for liberty. There was a time when he was animated with enthusiasm in
favor of the French Revolution, and he cherished it, while civil liberty
appeared to be the object; but he now considered that Revolution as
completely achieved, and that the war was continued, not for liberty,
but for conquest and aggrandizement, to which he did not believe it the
interest of this country to contribute.


WEDNESDAY, May 24.

WILLIAM SMITH, from Pinckney district, South Carolina; SAMUEL SMITH,
from Maryland; JOHN ALLEN, from Connecticut; and WILLIAM FINDLAY, from
Pennsylvania, appeared, produced their credentials, were qualified, and
took their seats.

_Answer to President's Speech._

The House again went into Committee of the Whole on the Answer to the
PRESIDENT's Speech, and Mr. NICHOLAS' amendment being under
consideration,

Mr. SWANWICK opened the debate. He lamented the loss of time which was
generally experienced at the opening of every session in debating the
Answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT, when, perhaps, business of the
first moment called for immediate attention. It was much to be wished
that committees appointed for this purpose would confine themselves to
the instructions which were given to them on the occasion, which were in
general terms, viz: "to prepare a respectful Address, assuring the
PRESIDENT that the House will take into their serious consideration the
various important matters recommended to their attention." If Answers
were drawn in general terms, conformably to these instructions, he
thought very many of the embarrassments which they now experienced would
be avoided, and every member would be left at liberty to pursue such
measures as appeared to them right, when they came before him in the
ordinary course of business unclogged by any creed which he might have
been called to assent to before he had an opportunity of considering the
subjects it contained. It also often occasioned much warmth in debate,
and served to divide the House into two parties on the very threshold of
their business. This could not possibly have any good effect, but the
contrary; he should therefore be happy to see the practice simplified or
abolished altogether.

The effect at present has been, that no sooner had the committee
appointed to draft an Address made a report, than the gentleman from
Virginia proposed a substitute, which, according to his idea, was more
proper. A warm debate had taken place, and he believed that either might
be adopted without effect, as they were merely a form of words leading
to no conclusion. Suppose a majority of _one_ was obtained on the
report, what end would be produced? None; for it might be that the very
persons who voted on this general question, might vote against
particular subjects when they came under consideration; as every one
would recollect the difficulties which had been experienced in getting
three frigates built, and this difficulty, he doubted not, would again
occur. Since, however, these two forms of an Answer were before them,
and they were called upon to say which they would adopt, it might be
proper to go into some consideration of the subject.

The difference between the two productions seemed to be, that the one
reported seemed to express great indignity on account of the injuries
received from the French Republic, and a determination to repel them;
that produced by the gentleman from Virginia was of a more conciliatory
tone, recommending to the PRESIDENT to begin his negotiations with
placing the French Republic on the same ground with the other
belligerent powers; so that the difference was simply as it respected a
few words.

What were the arguments in favor of the warm tone? They were told it
would have a great effect on the French Republic, because if a spirited
Answer were given to the PRESIDENT's communication, signifying (as his
colleague Mr. SITGREAVES had strongly expressed it) that we were
determined to _die in the last ditch_, it would strike them with terror.
If he thought this effect could be really produced, it might be some
inducement for him to agree to it.

Mr. S. remarked, that they were told by Mr. Pinckney, in his letter to
the Secretary of State, that it was probable that two events had
contributed to his dismissal from the French Republic, viz: one, the
victories of Bonaparte in Italy, the other, the Addresses of the Senate
and House of Representatives in answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT at
the last session. With respect to the Answers alluded to, no opinion
could be formed from this assertion, because, though that of the House
of Representatives was tolerably moderate, yet that of the Senate was as
warm as any thing could be produced. He read extracts from both, and
compared them with each other, giving the credit which, in his opinion,
was due to the most moderate.

The first and most necessary step to be taken was, to put all the
belligerent powers upon the same footing, which could not be an offence
to any. But it was said that to recommend this measure to the Executive,
was to dictate to him; that it was carrying humility on the front of the
Minister who should be employed. What! said Mr. S., would it be to carry
humility in his front to say, "I come to place you on the same footing
with the most favored nation?" It certainly could not; since it was the
language of right reason, of justice.

As to dictating to the Executive, could it be called dictating when we
merely express our opinion and advice to him, on points which he has
himself laid before us; and, in order to deliberate on which we were
thus unusually called together? Very low and debasing, indeed, must be
the situation of this House, if they were to be muzzled and prevented
from laying their sentiments before the Chief Magistrate of the Union!
When treaties are made, we are told they are laws over which we have no
power. If we dare not speak on the subject before they are made, is this
House reduced merely to the odious task of laying taxes, without being
allowed to exercise its sense on any other public measures connected
with them? Why does the PRESIDENT communicate these things to us, if we
are not allowed to express any sentiments about them? Why do the people
elect their representatives all over this widely extended empire, if,
when they are convened, they are not allowed the privilege of expressing
their opinions on the dearest interests of their constituents? But it is
stated that this will create division among the branches of the
Government, who ought always to act and think alike. Were this the case,
there was no use to divide the Government, as our constitution does,
into three branches; they might all have been left in one, and then no
accident of this kind would have happened; but the fact is, this very
division of the branches was devised in order that they might operate as
checks on each other. The people thought it better that a division of
this kind should prevent acting at all, than that we should act hastily
and unadvisedly. Thus when a law, after mature deliberation, passes this
House as wise and good, the Senate were not obliged on this account to
see it in the same light; they judge for themselves, and, if they see
cause, reject it, and no complaint takes place on our part because they
do so. In another Government, indeed that of England, all the branches
have been contrived into the most perfect union, Kings, Lords, and
Commons, all agree, but has the Government been the better for this?
Happy had it been for that nation, had this not been the case. Many an
unwise measure they have gone into, might then, fortunately for the
nation, have been totally prevented.

But it has been said we ought to express the highest indignation at the
conduct of France. Let us examine for a moment on what this is founded.
Three grounds have been mentioned; the dismission of our Minister, the
spoliations on our ships, and the interference with our Government, in
attempting to divide the people from it. As to the first, the dismission
of our Minister, said Mr. S., nobody can feel more sensibly than I do,
this indignity; but it only leads me to regret, as I have often already
expressed my regrets, at our sending so many diplomatic gentlemen to
Europe. Wretched will be our case, if we are embroiled whenever these
gentlemen shall be refused, or uncivilly treated. All history is full of
instances of wars, founded on such points of etiquette as these, and
they admonish us against employing embassies, as much as possible, to
avoid these dangers from our foreign connections. But it seems, the
Directory, by Mr. Pinckney's letter, at the same time sent away thirteen
other foreign Ministers; yet we do not hear that these nations went to
war on this account. One of them was Sweden, a very powerful maritime
nation, possessed of a considerable fleet; her Minister was dismissed;
she contented herself with sending away the French Minister also, and
here the dispute ended. But, surely allowance ought also to be made for
the present revolutionary state of France. If all things do not proceed
there with the order they ought, it is perhaps because of their present
warlike and revolutionary position, which cannot but mend every day, and
should induce us to make some allowance for them.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said that, having listened to the gentlemen who had
preceded him with the most respectful attention, and heard their ardent
expressions of patriotism and the lively sense which they entertained of
the true dignity of our Government, he should not attempt to follow them
into a field which had been exhausted, but would leave it to the
consideration of the committee and his country to determine upon his
sentiments and the measures which he should suggest whether he was not
equally disposed with others to promote the peace and honor, the
happiness and security of his country and Government; he would leave it
for his measures to speak for him; he would not be led away by any idle
or extraneous vanity from objects so solemn and important; he should
speak freely as became an American at a crisis so very pressing. First,
then, he should notice the Address that was before the committee, and
the amendment which had been proposed to be made to it; he was sorry to
observe the manner in which they had been discussed. It had been
considered, on one side, that to adopt any language in reply to the
Address but that which has been laid before the committee in the report,
would amount to a surrender of all our rights, privileges, and
independence, as a nation, to France; on the other, it has been held
that the differences between us and France are distorted, and that we
should at least not shut up every avenue to negotiation by an obstinate
and blind assertion of our own infallibility. If he believed with those
of the former opinion, that we should in any shape incur the stigma of
degrading ourselves, or if he suspected even that we should sacrifice
one right of our country or Government by an adoption of the amendment
proposed, or he thought we should not endanger our national character
and safety by the adoption of the report, he should most certainly
reject the amendment and adopt the report; or if he believed, with the
gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. OTIS,) that the demands of France now
were any wise analogous to those of Great Britain on a former occasion,
sooner than consent to a dereliction of independence and national
character he would not stop short of the language of that report; but as
he could not force his judgment to so outrageous a misconstruction, as
he saw on the contrary numerous reasons to entertain a very different
opinion, he would not consent to incur the perils and the errors in
which that report would involve us; he could not consent to so hasty, so
precipitate, and inconsiderate a step.

The question properly before the House at this time is, whether we shall
continue to express so perfect a reliance on all the acts of our own
Government; whether we shall say obstinately to France that there is no
possible case in which our judgment could have been misled or mistaken
in our conduct towards her; and, by determining to adhere to our former
conduct, preclude every possibility to an amicable adjustment; or leave
a reasonable opportunity open for an effectual discussion and adjustment
of differences, wherever they may subsist.

The scope of the Speech of the PRESIDENT to both Houses, it must be
confessed, goes to bind us to the former conduct; and it is too evident
that the report, in strict coincidence with the sentiments of several,
but not all its supporters, bears that same dangerous tendency. From
which line of conduct are we to expect the most beneficent issue, to
treat with a complaining power by a determination to show that its
complaints are groundless, or by examining the complaints and the
evidence in amicable negotiation and deciding afterwards? Let us examine
the complaints of France, and then determine whether they are all so
frivolous as to excite irritation at the mere mention of them; unless we
are so convinced, unless we are thoroughly satisfied that they are so,
we cannot vote the Answer as it is reported. Should we discover in such
an examination that some of our measures have been founded at least in
mistake, would it then be proper to adopt the language of the Address?
But should we persist under such a possibility of mistake, what do we
risk? an evil much more fatal than the worst that could follow the most
sober resolution which we can now adopt; we risk the alternative of
abandoning it after a war in which we may be sufferers, and after we may
have retarded the increasing prosperity of our country half an age. We
have an example before us in a nation that was eager to snatch at a
remote pretext for an assumed interference in her Government; we have
seen that nation, among the most powerful and haughty in Europe, the
most vain of her dignity, (real or unreal,) the most apt to interfere in
the government of others; we have seen her enter into a war, and we have
seen her driven to the lowest state of humiliation; we have seen her
obliged to pursue the most abject means of solicitation to obtain a
peace from that very nation whom she had irritated to a war; and we saw
her more humiliated still, by the rejection of those propositions which
she had made to obtain peace. Have we a better prospect than that
nation? Are our means equal to hers? Are we, indeed, ready to embark in
a war--with France, too--and present such a lesson to the world as
America at war with France, after France has defeated the efforts of all
the world? He again asked, have we the means? Let gentlemen who are
willing to plunge us into that dilemma make the reply; but let not
gentlemen indulge in so hateful a picture. But, although we have no
means, he was still against surrendering the honor of our country;
fortunately, no such sacrifice is demanded, no such measure is
necessary; and were we ten times more destitute even than we are, he
should never submit to our national degradation, were there a power so
insolent as to expect it.

It was, he knew, a very ungracious, and often an unpopular task, to
display the errors of our own Government; there was a national vanity, a
vain and unmeaning pride, which sought to be bolstered up by frippery of
words and acts of dissimulation. He knew that this empty and pernicious
vanity often assumed the post and place of the true dignity of a
country, and blinked contumely on him that was disposed to prefer the
plain, frank, open path of integrity and truth. He would choose between
these opposite passions of a nation, and preferring his duty to
unmerited reproach, he would neither repress the sentiments of his mind,
nor foster those which he conceived to be pregnant with ruin; he would
glory more in promoting the justice of his country than in conducting
her to the most brilliant triumphs in an unjust cause; he would,
therefore, calmly examine whether France had just cause of complaint;
and whether she had or not a just cause, he would assert that France
might, without exciting indignation, think herself injured; that she
might, was a sufficient reason with him for preferring the amendment, as
it left an opening for rather amicable discussion and accommodation,
rather than the report which had the opposite character.


THURSDAY, May 25.

Mr. GILES rose.--He said that he had always been against this form of
giving Answers, since the time the practice first began; it was derived
from the British House of Commons, which was a bad source for
precedents. In that House, however, the Speech and the Answer were both
known to be the work of the Minister, and treated with great freedom.
Mr. G. thought that it would be better to direct the Committee of Rules
and Orders of the House, to make one standing Answer, which would serve
regularly for all Speeches. This would be an improper time for such a
regulation, but though we could not now get rid of a bad habit, it was
not necessary to vindicate it. He said, that Mr. LIVINGSTON had
yesterday taken part of the ground which he intended to take. The
question before the House amounted to this: shall we recommend it to the
PRESIDENT to place all nations on a level as to commerce, and to remove
the inequalities between them? To assist him in deciding this point, he
would refer to facts and dates; and, as he did not wish to represent
things in false colors, he would be glad to be corrected, if he should
happen to go wrong. He would begin at the 1st of February, 1793, when
England dismissed the French Minister, and the Republic, in consequence,
declared war against her. On the 22d of April following, the PRESIDENT
declared this country to be in a state of neutrality, and warned the
citizens to observe it. At this time, about the 10th May, M. Genet
landed and raised a considerable alarm by commencing an improper
correspondence with our citizens. Government from that time took a wrong
impression, and acted under the idea of a dangerous French influence in
this country. All this was a mistake. Genet was universally reprobated,
unless by a few disorderly people, and Government from that trial should
have learned to trust us. In consequence of the disturbance that Genet
made, many societies entered into resolutions to support government.
Even the pulpit reviled Genet. If execration, disappointment, and
contempt, could fill up the measure of punishment, he had it. From the
arrival of Genet to that of Fauchet, some sentiments were kept alive,
and some phrases that he would review. The _Friends of Order_ and the
_Disorganizers_ were two of them. Then we had the reign of _moderation_,
but of so frantic a kind, for the short time which it lasted, as to
exercise the greatest of despotism over opinion. This _order_,
_moderation_, and _disorganization_, were all gone and no more said
about them. Among Mr. G.'s constituents, when notice came of the Western
insurrection, they were all ready to march in support of Government;
instead of calling themselves the friends of order, they proved that
they were so. The country remained from this time in a tranquil state
till the arrival of Mr. Jay's Treaty. On the 5th of December, 1793, a
Message was received from the PRESIDENT, speaking of France in the most
friendly terms. In spite of Genet's quarrel there was no
misunderstanding with the Republic, and Mr. G. quoted this circumstance
to prove that there was no serious difference till the arrival of Mr.
Jay's Treaty. Mr. G. said that he would review what was in the mean time
passing in Europe. During the summer of 1793, Britain made no less than
six treaties with different nations, and one stipulation in each of them
was that the contracting parties should stop all provisions going to
France, and force all other nations to do so. The first of these
treaties was made with Russia, on the 20th of March, 1793: the second
was with Spain; the third with Prussia; the fourth with the Emperor; the
fifth with Portugal; and the last with the King of the two Sicilies. It
was said that France preceded Britain in the order for stopping
provisions; Britain did not publicly issue such orders until the 16th of
June, 1793; but Britain had, in reality, adopted the practice long
before. The French orders fluctuated; but, at one time, the United
States were exempted from stoppage, when others were stopped. He then
noticed the stoppage of provisions to the West Indies; the Orders of the
6th of November, 1793, and the 8th of January, 1794. In the very short
interval between these two dates, France had gone on so fast that
Britain found it better to ameliorate the condition of neutral States.
During this time, England also made a truce for Portugal with Algiers,
and this truce has cost us fifteen hundred thousand dollars, besides
what it may cost hereafter. Timber had been promised to be cut for the
Algerines, of a kind which this country could not furnish in due
quality. Some of it was to be brought so far as from the north-west
branch of the Susquehanna. He would pass over Lord Dorchester's speech
to the Indians, and the British soldiers and savages joining the
tomahawk against our Western frontiers. He mentioned these things,
merely to keep them in view. There was something, he said, which he
could never think of without surprise. This was a conversation between
Lord Grenville and Mr. Pinckney. It was related in a letter, dated the
9th of January, 1794, from Mr. Pinckney. It took notice of Lord
Grenville telling Mr. Pinckney the desire which the British Government
had of maintaining harmony with the United States, and their readiness
to support the Government of this country against a dangerous Jacobin
faction who wanted to overturn it. Mr. G. said, that this betrayed more
interference on the part of Britain than there ever had been on the part
of France. From this time our Government had taken a leaning towards
Britain. French influence was only a sentiment which we felt for the
sake of liberty, but which was sometimes conjured up as a chimera to
serve certain purposes. The United States had a real interest in
cherishing the sentiment, which never could be dangerous.

As for British influence, it was a matter much more substantial. That
people speak the same language with us, are scattered from one end of
the continent to the other, intermarry with us, and have a very great
commercial intercourse. Lord Grenville's proposition had led to Mr.
Jay's Treaty. As to France trying to engage us in the war, any other
nation in the world would be glad to do so. France had addressed the
people of America, and was resisted: Britain had addressed our
Government; and Mr. G. feared that the latter had not made so firm a
stand. While Congress were taking proper measures to check the
depredations, Mr. Jay, to the astonishment of mankind, was named
Ambassador to England. The Treaty was signed on the 19th of November,
1794. The instructions, Mr. G. had never seen, but if we may judge from
the Treaty itself, they were extremely full. For the making of such a
Treaty he had never heard a reason, nor had he ever been able to learn
one good consequence likely to accrue from it. It had been called an
instrument of peace, and its first effect was, that we were summoned to
fight with France, Spain, and Holland. One of the articles was that free
ships do not make free goods. This was highly injurious both to France
and the United States; it implied a breach of the law of nations,
because, before you can search for an enemy's goods you must stop
neutral ships. This regulation could only be understood as operating
against France. If we could not help the practice going on, we should at
least have suffered it to stand as it was, without any countenance. All
the principal articles of export from the United States were declared
contraband, except tobacco, and, indeed, that might be included under
the general title of provisions, as people would sometimes be in want of
a chew. He spoke of this provision clause as infamous. He referred to
Count Bernstoff, Minister of Denmark, who had kept his country in a more
honorable situation than perhaps any other in Europe had done during the
present war. Mr. G. read the refusal of Count Bernstoff to comply with
the British requisition to that effect. During the armed neutrality, the
United States had owned that free bottoms should make free goods. Was
there any reason since to alter our opinion? He would be glad to hear
gentlemen answer if there was any. He had always said that the provision
article was unjust to France, and yet on account of the British Treaty
we are to plunge into a war before we know whether we are in the right
or in the wrong. Gentlemen who had promoted the British Treaty now came
forward to support it, but it would now be more manly to declare at once
that we cannot do so. In Citizen Adet's complaints, many articles were
unjust and trifling, but this was always the case in productions of that
sort. Mr. G. then referred to the speech of Barras: he said that Britain
still went on robbing and impressing American seamen. Mr. HARPER had
yesterday said that the impressments were few; but how were we to be
certain of that? The men are not allowed to write to us, and Mr.
Pinckney informs us that vast numbers of them are in French jails. He
had always wondered at our having so few communications on this head
from the Executive. A law had passed in this House and in the Senate
upon this subject, without any information from that quarter. Gentlemen
had allowed that it would be just enough to grant an equality of
privileges to every foreign nation; but, Mr. HARPER had objected, that
if this were granted to France, she would still continue to demand. When
she makes an unjust claim, said Mr. G., we should stop; he would not be
for going any further. The French had not acted on vague claims; they
take neutral and contraband articles; they take the ships, and when they
find our seamen on board of British vessels, they threaten to treat
them as pirates, and will not allow them to prove that they were
impressed.


TUESDAY, May 30.

JOHN FOWLER, from Kentucky, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat.

_Answer to President's Speech._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
Address reported in Answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES; when

Mr. COIT said he thought that part of the 5th paragraph which related to
the Executive Directory would be less exceptionable, and equally convey
their disapprobation of such sentiments, if it were expressed more
generally, and without any allusion to M. Barras. He proposed,
therefore, to strike out from "at," in the 4th line of the 5th
paragraph, to "United States," in the 6th line, and to insert "any
sentiments tending to derogate from that confidence; such sentiments,
wherever entertained, serve to evince an imperfect knowledge of the real
opinion of our constituents."

Mr. W. SMITH objected to the amendment of the gentleman from
Connecticut, (Mr. COIT,) because it was hypothetical. He wished, as the
fact was clearly established, to have a direct reference to the Speech
of Barras, in their indignation at the sentiments. As the matter had
appeared of sufficient importance to find a place in the PRESIDENT's
Speech, he thought it was also worthy of their notice. He insisted upon
its being an attempt to divide the people of this country from their
Government, by speaking insultingly of the latter, and flattering the
former. He did not exactly know what was meant by the "suggestion of our
former tyrants," but he supposed it meant bribery, and that by
"perfidious people," General Washington was included.

Mr. W. SMITH said, that by the Government, the Executive only was meant.
He was convinced of this from the manner in which he had seen the word
used in the French Government paper, entitled the _Redacteur_.

Mr. COIT believed, that whatever M. Barras had said, it was not worth
their attention. We might defy France or Frenchmen to say worse of us
than they themselves said. He did not himself know how far the Speech of
Barras was an act of Government; for, said he, when we directed our
Speaker to reprimand Randal and Whitney, the words he used upon the
occasion were not an act of the House. On another occasion, when the
House were about to receive the French flag, they could not call what
was said by the Speaker on that occasion, an act of the House.

Mr. WILLIAMS said, if Mr. Pinckney's letter was an authentic paper, the
Speech of Barras was likewise so; and if so, it was doubtless an
indignity to Government. He did not think with the gentleman from
Massachusetts, (Mr. FREEMAN,) that it was "childish gasconade." He
believed it was intended as an insult to the Government of this country.
As to the gratitude which had been said to belong to the French nation,
for their assistance in the war, he thought their services were amply
repaid by the separation of this country from Great Britain. Besides, he
added, the French never came to the assistance of this country until
they saw we were likely to be successful in our struggle.

Mr. GORDON said there could be no doubt of the authenticity of Barras'
Speech, since it stood upon the same ground as the rest of the
documents. It was a flagrant insult upon Government, in his opinion, and
warranted all that had been said upon it, as it was doubtless an attempt
to separate the people from the Government.

Mr. THATCHER said the question was, whether or not any notice should be
taken of the insulting Speech of Barras. When, said he, the French flag
was presented to this House, we were told we were not to stop to reason,
but to express forthwith our feelings of affection. But now, when the
most unexampled insult is offered us, such as one man would not receive
from another, we are not to notice it at all, lest it should offend the
French Republic. He knew of only one reason for passing it over in
silence, and that, it was true, had some weight with him. That Barras
spoke as the organ of the French nation, there could be no doubt; but he
had his doubts whether he knew himself what he said. The Speech had
strong marks of _delirium_, and he could not help believing that, when
he delivered it, he was either _drunk_ or _mad_. If the world went on
for six thousand years to come, they would never again behold such a
production.

Mr. MCDOWELL was in favor of the amendment. He did not think himself
bound, as had been insinuated by the gentleman from South Carolina, to
echo all the sentiments in the PRESIDENT's Speech. He wished to have an
opinion of his own. He agreed that Barras' Speech was an indignity to
the United States. He felt it, and would express it: but he did not
think this the proper time. He denied the justness of the construction
put upon the Speech by the gentleman from South Carolina. He supposed by
"perfidious persons," was meant the persons in this country, generally
called the "British faction." He differed in opinion also with that
gentleman on the subject of dividing the people and Government, and
could not allow that the phrase "good people" was intended as an insult.
He allowed it was going too far to say that we owed our liberty to
France; but being in some respect true, it took off from the offence. He
was sorry to see on one side of the House constant attempts made to
excite the resentment of the people of this country against France. It
was not necessary at present to raise such feelings. They were not about
to unsheath the sword, and to say, "We conquer or die." What gentlemen
could not effect by reason, they seemed inclined to effect in a
different way. He did not think this fair conduct.

Mr. VENABLE supported the amendment. He did not think any of the
objections made against it had much weight in them. He thought the mode
of expressing our sense of the indignity shown to this country by the
Speech in question, was judiciously chosen by the gentleman from
Connecticut. It was most consistent with dignity. It was not wise in
them to take notice of every harsh expression which might be used
against this country in any foreign nation; for, if such were our
conduct, foreign nations would have good ground of complaint against us,
and on that floor the account would be settled. Nor did he think it very
becoming or dignified in gentlemen in that House so to express
themselves as to excite frequent risibility; nor was it very honorable
to that Assembly. [Alluding to the gentleman from Massachusetts.]

Mr. SITGREAVES had no doubt of the Speech of Barras being an official
paper, and that its object was to divide the people from the Government.
If he proved this, he trusted the language of the report would be
preserved. It would be allowed that Barras was the mouth of the
Directory, and that the sentiments which he speaks, are not his own, but
what were beforehand agreed upon. It was doubtless, therefore, a solemn
official act. With respect to the observation of the gentleman from
Virginia, that what he said respecting our Government was not applicable
to the Executive, but to the people at large, he believed he was wholly
mistaken, as the word Government, in the French language, constantly
meant Executive, as was abundantly clear from the way in which it was
used in Mr. Adet's notes. [He quoted a number of passages to prove his
assertion.] It was generally used for the Executive in contradistinction
to Congress, or any other of the constituted authorities. If it were
clearly intended to convey an insult upon our Executive, (and there
could be no doubt of it,) even the mover of the amendment could not
think it unbecoming in that House to express themselves in the words of
the Address.

Mr. GALLATIN said, whatever might be the insult intended by the Speech
of the Executive Directory, he thought it best to notice it in general
terms as it was the sentiment which was objectionable and not the
Government of France. But as so much had been said about Government and
people, he would say, that an insult offered to the people could not be
less offensive than one offered to the Government. He supposed they
alluded to the British Treaty, which was as much the instrument of
Congress as of the Executive, and of the people as either, since they
very generally petitioned in favor of it. He then took notice of the
perversions which the gentleman from South Carolina had put upon the
words of Barras, and denied that there was the least ground for them,
and said that the _Gazette of the United States_ might as well be
called a Government paper of this country, as the _Redacteur_, that of
France. If, said Mr. G., it be our intention to declare war at once,
then there might be some propriety in taking hold of every word which
would bear to be construed into an insult, but if we wished for peace,
it was unwise to do so. Besides, he said, this Speech was not
communicated in an official manner, nor could it be so communicated. It
was sent by Mr. Pinckney in a newspaper, from which the copy sent to
them was translated, but the translation was not even authenticated, as
usual. He did not dispute the fact, but it was a thing which they were
not bound to notice; indeed, an error with respect to a name appeared on
the face of the paper; and being delivered to Mr. Monroe, who was no
longer Minister, it could not be officially communicated. He therefore
thought it was not worth their notice.

Mr. OTIS thought it right to pay respect to what was recommended by the
PRESIDENT. The question was whether they should notice the insult
generally, or in reference to the Directory. He was in favor of the
first; but as this was the only opportunity given in the Address of
expressing their opinion of the conduct of the French Government, he
wished the Address to stand as reported.

Mr. O. remarked upon Barras' Speech. He did not know what was meant by
granting peace. When parties were at war, one granted the other peace;
or sometimes a stronger power suffered a weaker to be at peace. He
supposed the French meant it in the latter sense towards this country.
On condition that we respect her sovereignty! What was meant here? If it
was sovereignty over their own nation, we had nothing to do with it; if
it was any other, it must be the sovereignty they had over us. He
concluded by remarking, that if there were any members in that House
upon whom any imputation could rest of their being unduly attached to
the French cause, he thought it a good opportunity to come forward and
convince the world that the charges were unjust.

Mr. LIVINGSTON took notice of what had fallen from the gentleman last
up, and showed the folly of adopting an irritating tone; as, if we
charged a foreign government with making use of one disrespectful
expression, they would have no difficulty in retorting the complaint, as
in the course of that debate, the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
HARPER) had called the King of Spain the humble vassal of France, and
had not been sparing of his epithets to other powers; and the gentleman
from Massachusetts (Mr. THATCHER) had termed Barras drunk or mad. He
also noticed the constructions put upon the words "granting peace," and
"sovereignty," as very extravagant. The Speech, he allowed, was bad
enough, but he saw no reason for torturing it in this manner.

Mr. GILES said the gentleman from Massachusetts had called upon persons
who might lie under imputation of being friends to France, to come
forward, and show the imputation false. He informed that gentleman that
he did not feel his reputation hurt by any imputation which he or any
other person might throw upon him. He would rather the gentleman would
convince them they were wrong, than call them names.

Mr. OTIS explained. He declared he meant only to say that they had been
unjustly charged with those imputations, and that such a conduct would
show it.

Mr. W. SMITH again urged the propriety of retaining the words in the
Address as reported, as the amendment proposed had no reference to the
PRESIDENT's Speech, as that referred to an official act; whereas the
amendment had no relation to France, but would apply to the people of
China, or the people of this country, as well as to those of France. He
believed the discussion had been of some use, because it was now on all
sides acknowledged that the Speech of Barras was an insult, which was
not allowed at the beginning of the debate. He could only say that
gentlemen died hard; to use the expression of his friend from
Pennsylvania, (Mr. SITGREAVES,) they seem determined to _die in the last
ditch_. The objections to the words of the present Address, were like
the objections of _Thomas Paine_ to the writings of Moses. He denied
that there was any similarity between expressions used in debate in that
House, and expressions used by an Executive authority. No notice, he
said, ought to be taken of what fell from members in that House, whilst
they were allowed to be in order; and if foreign Ministers attended to
hear their debates, and heard things which they did not like, they ought
not to take exceptions at it, since they came there uninvited, and it
was their duty to say what appeared to them right at the time.

The question was put on the amendment, when there appeared 49 votes for
it, and 49 against it. The Chairman declared it carried in the
affirmative.


WEDNESDAY, May 31.

_Answer to the President's Speech._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
Answer to the PRESIDENT's Speech, Mr. DAYTON's amendment being under
consideration.

Mr. HARTLEY was persuaded there was but one wish in the House with
respect to peace, notwithstanding insinuations to the contrary; but he
could not agree with the proposed amendment, as he wished the
negotiation to be left wholly to the PRESIDENT. The treaty entered into
with France provided for their being placed on the same footing with
other nations, and wished that right to be recognized by negotiation,
and he doubted not the PRESIDENT would do it; for as he must see that
peace was the desire of all, he would take such steps as would be best
calculated to lead to it. He was against encroachments on the Executive,
as, if they once begun, there was no knowing where they could stop. He
thought there was no danger of war; it would be a disagreeable thing
for men who fought in the Revolutionary war, to be obliged to unsheathe
their swords against France; but he trusted before they rose, means
would be taken for putting the country into a state of defence.

The question was then taken on the Address as amended, and resolved in
the affirmative--yeas 62, nays 36, as follows:

      YEAS--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Abraham Baldwin, David
      Bard, James A. Bayard, Theophilus Bradbury, David Brooks,
      John Chapman, Christopher G. Champlin, James Cochran,
      Joshua Coit, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, James
      Davenport, John Dennis, George Dent, George Ege, Thomas
      Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman,
      Nathaniel Freeman, jr., Albert Gallatin, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon, Roger Griswold, William
      B. Grove, John A. Hanna, Robert Goodloe Harper, Carter B.
      Harrison, Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, David Holmes,
      Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera,
      Samuel Lyman, James Machir, John Milledge, Daniel Morgan,
      John Nicholas, Harrison G. Otis, Elisha R. Potter, John
      Read, John Rutledge, jr., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall,
      William Shepard, Thompson J. Skinner, Thomas Sinnickson,
      Jeremiah Smith, Nathaniel Smith, Samuel Smith, William
      Smith, (of Charleston,) George Thatcher, Richard Thomas,
      Mark Thomson, Abram Trigg, John E. Van Allen, Peleg
      Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS--Thomas Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Samuel J.
      Cabell, Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton,
      Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, William
      Findlay, John Fowler, William B. Giles, James Gillespie,
      Andrew Gregg, Jonathan N. Havens, Walter Jones, Edward
      Livingston, Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon,
      Blair M'Clenachan, Joseph McDowell, Anthony New, Josiah
      Parker, Samuel Sitgreaves, William Smith (of Pinckney
      District), Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas
      Sumter, John Swanwick, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.

_Resolved_, That Mr. SPEAKER, attended by the House, do present the said
Address; and that Mr. VENABLE, Mr. KITTERA, and Mr. NATHANIEL FREEMAN,
Jr., be a committee to wait on the President, to know when and where it
will be convenient for him to receive the same.

And then the House adjourned.


SATURDAY, June 3.

A report was received from the Commissioners of the Federal City, which
was ordered to be printed.

_Answer to the President's Speech._

Mr. VENABLE, from the committee appointed to wait on the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, to know when and where it will be convenient for him
to receive the Address of this House, in answer to his Speech to both
Houses of Congress, reported that the committee had, according to order,
waited on the PRESIDENT, who signified to them that it would be
convenient to him to receive the said Address, at twelve o'clock this
day, at his own house.

Mr. LYON said he yesterday voted against the appointment of a committee
to wait upon the PRESIDENT to know when and where he would receive their
Address, because he believed the PRESIDENT should always be ready to
receive important communications. He wished to make a motion, which was,
"that such members as do not choose to attend upon the PRESIDENT to
present the Answer to his Speech, shall be excused." He wished to be
understood. He thought the motion a reasonable one, because it proposed
to leave them at liberty to do as they pleased. And by the rules he saw,
he was obliged to attend, except sick, or leave of absence was obtained;
now, as he hoped not to be sick, he wished to put himself out of the
power of the Sergeant-at-Arms, if he did not attend. He had been told he
might stay behind without being noticed; but this was not enough for
him, as he was a timid man, and the House had the law on their side, as
he recollected something of a reprimand which had been given to Mr.
WHITNEY. [The SPEAKER reminded him it was out of order to censure the
proceedings of the House on any former occasion.] He said he stood
corrected, and proceeded.

He had spoken, he said, to both sides of the House (_as they were
called_) on the subject. One side dissuaded him from his motion, and
laughed at it; the other side did not wish to join him in it, because it
would look like disrespect to the person lately elected, who was not a
man of their choice; but he trusted our magnanimous PRESIDENT would,
with the enlightened yeomanry of America, despise such a boyish piece of
business. This, he said, was no new subject with him, he had long heard
the folly of the wise made a matter of wonder in this respect. It was
said this was not the time to abolish the custom; but this was the cant
used against every kind of reform. No better time could ever arrive, he
said, than this, which was the threshold of a new Presidency, at a time
when the man elected to the office was beloved and revered by his
fellow-citizens; he was as yet unused to vain adulation; he had spent a
great part of his life amongst a people whose love of a plainness of
manner forbids all pageantry; he would be glad to see the custom done
away. Were he acting in his own personal character, he perhaps might
conform to the idle usage, but acting as he was for eighty thousand
people, every father of a family in his district would condemn him for
such an act.

Mr. BLOUNT said he had seconded the motion of the gentleman from
Vermont, in order to give him an opportunity of stating his reasons for
making it, and not from any desire to rescind the rule.

Mr. DANA observed that the House would not wish to do violence to the
gentleman's feelings. It was true some of the most respectable men in
the United States had waited upon the PRESIDENT in a similar way, yet,
if the gentleman thought it would not comport with his own dignity to do
it, he hoped he would be excused.

The motion was put, and carried unanimously.

The SPEAKER informed the House the hour was arrived at which the
PRESIDENT had appointed to receive them.

Mr. MACON moved that the House do now adjourn. He should wait upon the
PRESIDENT; but it seemed to be understood that members were obliged to
go. He thought, however the power of the House might extend to bringing
a member into the House, there was no power to carry him out.

The motion was negatived without a division.

The House then withdrew, and waited upon the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES with the following Address:

      _To the President of the United States_:

      Sir, the interesting detail of those events which have
      rendered the convention of Congress, at this time,
      indispensable, (communicated in your Speech to both
      Houses,) has excited in us the strongest emotions. Whilst
      we regret the occasion, we cannot omit to testify our
      approbation of the measure, and to pledge ourselves that no
      considerations of private inconvenience shall prevent, on
      our part, a faithful discharge of the duties to which we
      are called.

      We have constantly hoped that the nations of Europe, whilst
      desolated by foreign wars, or convulsed by intestine
      divisions, would have left the United States to enjoy that
      peace and tranquillity to which the impartial conduct of
      our Government has entitled us; and it is now, with extreme
      regret, we find the measures of the French Republic tending
      to endanger a situation so desirable and interesting to our
      country.

      Upon this occasion we feel it our duty to express, in the
      most explicit manner, the sensations which the present
      crisis has excited, and to assure you of our zealous
      co-operation in those measures which may appear necessary
      for our security or peace.

      Although it is the earnest wish of our hearts that peace
      may be maintained with the French Republic, and with all
      the world, yet we will never surrender those rights which
      belong to us as a nation; and whilst we view with
      satisfaction the wisdom, dignity, and moderation, which
      have marked the measures of the supreme Executive of our
      country, in its attempts to remove, by candid explanations,
      the complaints and jealousies of France, we feel the full
      force of that indignity which has been offered our country
      in the rejection of its Minister. No attempts to wound our
      rights as a sovereign State will escape the notice of our
      constituents; they will be felt with indignation, and
      repelled with that decision which shall convince the world
      that we are not a degraded people, that we can never submit
      to the demands of a foreign power without examination and
      without discussion.

      Knowing as we do the confidence reposed by the people of
      the United States in their Government, we cannot hesitate
      in expressing our indignation at any sentiments tending to
      derogate from that confidence. Such sentiments, wherever
      entertained, served to evince an imperfect knowledge of the
      opinions of our constituents. An attempt to separate the
      people of the United States from their Government, is an
      attempt to separate them from themselves; and although
      foreigners, who know not the genius of our country, may
      have conceived the project, and foreign emissaries may
      attempt the execution, yet the united efforts of our
      fellow-citizens will convince the world of its
      impracticability.

      Sensibly as we feel the wound which has been inflicted by
      the transactions disclosed in your communications, yet we
      think with you, that neither the honor nor the interest of
      the United States forbid the repetition of advances for
      preserving peace. We, therefore, receive with the utmost
      satisfaction your information that a fresh attempt at
      negotiation will be instituted; and we cherish the hope
      that a mutual spirit of conciliation, and a disposition on
      the part of France to compensate for any injuries which may
      have been committed upon our neutral rights; and, on the
      part of the United States, to place France on grounds
      similar to those of other countries in their relation and
      connection with us, if any inequalities shall be found to
      exist, will produce an accommodation compatible with the
      engagements, rights, duties and honor of the United States.
      Fully, however, impressed with the uncertainty of the
      result, we shall prepare to meet with fortitude any
      unfavorable events which may occur, and to extricate
      ourselves from their consequences with all the skill we
      possess, and all the efforts in our power. Believing with
      you that the conduct of the Government has been just and
      impartial to foreign nations, that the laws for the
      preservation of peace have been proper, and that they have
      been fairly executed, the Representatives of the people do
      not hesitate to declare that they will give their most
      cordial support to the execution of principles so
      deliberately and uprightly established.

      The many interesting subjects which you have recommended to
      our consideration, and which are so strongly enforced by
      this momentous occasion, will receive every attention which
      their importance demands; and we trust that by the decided
      and explicit conduct which will govern our deliberations,
      every insinuation will be repelled which is derogatory to
      the honor and independence of our country.

      Permit us, in offering this Address, to express our
      satisfaction at your promotion to the first office in the
      Government, and our entire confidence that the pre-eminent
      talents and patriotism which have placed you in this
      distinguished situation, will enable you to discharge its
      various duties with satisfaction to yourself and advantage
      to our common country.

To which the PRESIDENT returned the following answer:

      _Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      I receive with great satisfaction your candid approbation
      of the convention of Congress; and thank you for your
      assurances that the interesting subjects recommended to
      your consideration shall receive the attention which their
      importance demands; and that your co-operation may be
      expected in those measures which may appear necessary for
      our security or peace.

      The declaration of the Representatives of this nation, of
      their satisfaction at my promotion to the first office in
      the Government, and of their confidence in my sincere
      endeavors to discharge the various duties of it, with
      advantage to our common country, have excited my most
      grateful sensibility.

      I pray you, gentlemen, to believe, and to communicate such
      assurance to our constituents, that no event which I can
      foresee to be attainable by any exertions in the discharge
      of my duties, can afford me so much cordial satisfaction as
      to conduct a negotiation with the French Republic, to a
      removal of prejudices, a correction of errors, a
      dissipation of umbrages, an accommodation of all
      differences, and a restoration of harmony and affection,
      to the mutual satisfaction of both nations. And whenever
      the legitimate organs of intercourse shall be restored, and
      the real sentiments of the two Governments can be candidly
      communicated to each other, although strongly impressed
      with the necessity of collecting ourselves into a manly
      posture of defence, I nevertheless entertain an encouraging
      confidence that a mutual spirit of conciliation, a
      disposition to compensate injuries, and accommodate each
      other in all our relations and connections, will produce an
      agreement to a treaty consistent with the engagements,
      rights, duties, and honor of both nations.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, June 3, 1797.


MONDAY, June 5.

_Defensive Measures._

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, and the Speech of the PRESIDENT, at the opening of
the session, having been read,

Mr. W. SMITH said, he wished to lay upon the table a number of
resolutions, which it appeared, if it should not be found advisable to
carry the whole of them into effect, were at least worthy of discussion.
He did not, however, at present, pledge himself to support the whole:
they were as follow:

      "1. _Resolved_, That further provision ought to be made by
      law, for fortifying the forts and harbors of the United
      States.

      "2. _Resolved_, That further provision be made by law, for
      completing and manning the frigates United States,
      Constitution, and Constellation.

      "3. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, for
      procuring by purchase a further naval force, to consist of
      ---- frigates of ---- guns, and ---- sloops of war of ----
      guns.

      "4. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, for
      empowering the President to employ the naval force of the
      United States, as convoys to protect the trade thereof.

      "5. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, for
      regulating the arming of the merchant vessels of the United
      States.

      "6. _Resolved_, That the existing Military Establishment
      ought to be augmented by an addition of one regiment or
      corps of artillerists and engineers, and ---- companies of
      dragoons.

      "7. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, for
      empowering the President to raise a provisional army, to
      consist of ---- regiments of infantry, one regiment of
      artillery, and one regiment of dragoons, by commissioning
      the officers, and by volunteers or enlistments, whenever
      the circumstances of the country shall, in his opinion,
      render the said army necessary for the protection and
      defence of the United States: _Provided_, That neither the
      officers nor soldiers shall receive any pay or emoluments
      until called into actual service.

      "8. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, to authorize
      the President to borrow, on the credit of the United
      States, a sum not exceeding ---- dollars, to defray the
      expense which may arise in providing for the defence and
      security of the United States.

      "9. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, to raise a
      revenue adequate to the reimbursement, within ---- years,
      of such sum as may be borrowed, as aforesaid.

      "10. _Resolved_, That provision be made by law, to
      prohibit, for a limited time, the exportation of arms,
      ammunition, and military and naval stores."

The resolutions having been read from the chair,

Mr. W. SMITH moved the first of them.

Mr. GILES wished the gentleman would reverse his propositions, and let
the one for raising money come first. He did not know whether they were
prepared to meet this expense. He did not mean to oppose the present
motion; he supposed it would pass. But he thought they were about to be
too precipitous in their measures. At a time when all Europe seemed to
be tired of war, and about to make peace, we seemed to be disposed to
rush into it. He did not believe that much good would be done by this
system of fortification. He did not think the United States were more
secure now, than before they had a single work of the kind. We have,
said he, an extensive sea-coast, and it was not to be expected that an
enemy would choose to come to precisely the place where a fortification
stands. It was his opinion that the interests of the country would be
served, by letting this matter lie over till next session.

Mr. WILLIAMS observed, that the sense of the committee should be first
taken upon the propriety of going into the measure; if there was a
majority in favor of it, (and he could not doubt it,) the matter would
be referred to a select committee, who would make their report upon it.

Mr. S. SMITH was in favor of going into this measure; for if the war
continued in Europe, he thought it probable we might be drawn into it.

Mr. SWANWICK should not be opposed to the present motion, because he
agreed with the gentleman from Maryland, that whilst the war continued
in Europe there was a probability of this country being drawn into the
vortex. But he thought there was some weight, also, in the observation
of the gentleman from Virginia, with respect to the ways and means;
because, if, after they should agree to carry into effect certain
measures, they should disagree about the means, their time would have
been spent to no purpose.

The question was put and carried, there being 62 votes in favor of it.

_Completing and Manning the Frigates._

Mr. GALLATIN said, if the question was to determine the principle of
manning the frigates, the resolution stood right as it was. But if it
were not intended, by adopting this resolution, to commit any man, but
only to say that they would take the business into consideration, and if
found useful and necessary, and funds were attainable, they would carry
it into effect, then the amendment of the gentleman from New York (Mr.
LIVINGSTON) would be proper. As to the committee's rising, he could see
no ground for it, as these propositions were not new--they had had them
before them for three weeks in the Speech of the PRESIDENT. Of course,
so far as related to the frigates, gentlemen must have formed an
opinion; yet he agreed that it was desirable to see some documents on
the subject, before a decided affirmative or negative was given. He was,
therefore, in favor of the amendment for a committee to be appointed. He
wished all those subjects which were of a doubtful nature to be then
determined. On the other hand, those upon which members were ready to
decide at once, either by an acceptance or rejection, might be voted
upon in the form in which they were introduced.

Mr. PARKER read the motion which was entered into last year, and thought
it would be a good model for the present.

Mr. W. SMITH was of a different opinion. He thought the committee should
first decide the abstract principle. He thought it would be wrong to
refer to a select committee a business in which every member was so
intimately interested, and he doubted not gentlemen were ready to decide
upon this abstract question. With regard to expense, he was of opinion
that if the situation of the country required it, that should be no
object. If gentlemen thought differently, they would of course negative
the proposition. Any information on the subject could be got before the
business was finished. He thought they should first say what were the
necessary objects of expense, and then provide the money, which might be
done by borrowing or by taxes. If there was a necessity for the expense,
there was no doubt the money would be raised. If gentlemen were not
prepared to discuss the subject, he had no objection to the committee's
rising, and, in the House, the Secretary of War might be called upon for
information.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought the question was not fairly presented. It was
whether they should man the frigates. But when they were called upon to
determine this, they should know when they would be ready to receive the
men. The probability was that the frigates would not be ready to receive
the men before the next session of Congress.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) was in favor of the original proposition. He
wished to provide for manning all the frigates which could be got ready
before the next session of Congress. He believed if they adopted this
plan, unnecessary delay would be prevented.

Mr. PARKER was ready to vote for the proposition of the gentleman from
South Carolina. He believed the frigate in Philadelphia might be
equipped, rigged, and manned, in three months. The only reason why he
varied his motion was, that he might include the next proposition; but
he believed it would be better for them to stand separate, as, before he
voted for the additional vessels, he should wish to know how the means
were to be got, and for what purpose they were to be used. The vessel
at Boston, he said, would not be ready so soon, but it would be in
readiness before the next meeting of Congress; that at Baltimore would
be in readiness to receive her men in four months.

Mr. S. SMITH said, the frigate building at Baltimore would be launched
on the 4th of July, and the equipments were in greater forwardness than
those for the frigate at Philadelphia.

Mr. BALDWIN was against referring this proposition to a select
committee. It would be desirable, indeed, to know what the cost of doing
the business would be, but every one knew how little to be relied upon
were estimates of this kind. He was ready to vote for manning the
frigates; indeed there was no question upon which he was so ready to say
aye, as upon this.

The question was about to be put on Mr. LIVINGSTON's motion, when

Mr. VARNUM said he thought the wording of the resolution improper, as
the word "completing" would clash with the act of last session.

The question was put and negatived, 50 to 34.

Mr. MACON wished the frigates to be completed, but not manned, he
therefore moved to strike out the words "and manning."

The question was put and negatived; there being only twenty-four votes
in favor of it.

Mr. GILES moved to strike out the word "completing;" but, after some
conversation, the motion was withdrawn, and the original resolution was
carried.

The third proposition next came under consideration.

Mr. NICHOLAS hoped the gentleman who introduced this motion, would tell
them for what purpose these additional vessels were wanted. He supposed
this resolution to be connected with the next, and if so, he thought
they should be considered together. What, he asked, were to be the
instructions given to the commanders of these vessels? He thought it a
very embarrassing business, and one that would certainly lead to war;
nay, indeed, the thing seemed to be a war operation in itself.

Mr. W. SMITH wished the gentleman had made his inquiries before. They
would have come more properly when the frigates were under
consideration, as the same objection would be against both; and the next
resolution had no more connection with this than with that already
agreed to. The gentleman seemed to have let go the opportunity of
calling upon him; as, however, he did not wish to evade his call,
(though he was not willing to say he would himself vote for the
measure,) he would say that it appeared to him, from the present state
of the commerce of this country, to be necessary to provide convoys for
our vessels. These vessels might not, indeed, be employed as a regular
convoy, but partly confined to the coasts and harbors.

Mr. NICHOLAS expected the gentleman from South Carolina would have
acknowledged that the two resolutions were connected. Indeed he must
have intended those vessels to be employed in this way, or such a
resolution would not have been introduced. With respect to Sweden's
treaty for a reciprocal convoy, there was some ground for it, as there
was a difference between the Northern Powers of Europe, as to the
principle of free ships making free goods; but where there was no
difference as to the principle, no such thing could take place.

Mr. GALLATIN said the present resolution was certainly in some degree
connected with the next. It was understood that the purchasing of
frigates and sloops of war, was for the purpose of convoying our trade.
Under the present circumstances of this country, he should be opposed to
this proposition; not that he denied the right of neutral powers to
afford convoys to their merchant vessels; but, because under present
circumstances it was impolitic to adopt the measure, not only for the
reasons urged by the gentleman from Virginia, but on account of our
situation with respect to France at the present moment. By our treaty
with France, enemy's property was to be respected on board of American
vessels, and certain articles used in the building of ships were not
considered as contraband; the PRESIDENT would, of course, be obliged to
give orders to have our vessels protected in this situation, and who
could not see that this would be the source of war; and if the convoy
were not to be employed to enforce these two privileges, he did not see
what use it could be of. He knew that depredations without number had
been committed in the West Indies; but he was led to believe that this
was done by pirates more than by any other vessels. But suppose it were
practicable to distinguish between those vessels which were regularly,
and those which were piratically taken; yet, he must confess he would
not be for running the risk of a rupture, by sending out armed vessels
to contest the point, especially when we have reason to believe that
these attacks are unauthorized by the French Government.

Mr. G. thought it would only be necessary to extend our navy in case of
war, and were this unhappily to be our situation, vessels might easily
be purchased without delay; but whilst we were at peace, he did not
think the advantages which could be derived from a convoy would be a
sufficient inducement to go into the measure. Besides he was induced by
another motive to give this proposition his negative. He knew the
depredations upon our commerce had been great; but he did not look upon
this loss as falling only upon merchants. There was not an individual
who did not bear a part of it.[17] For instance, if a merchant paid ten
or fifteen per cent. additional upon his cargo, he will put a
proportionably high price upon his commodities, which must eventually be
paid by the consumer. Therefore, so far as an argument might be drawn
from this circumstance, it became a question of expediency, and he
thought it would be granted, that the loss to individuals would be less
in this way than if they had to support a navy to protect our trade.

Mr. W. SMITH acknowledged that there was considerable weight in the
arguments of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, though he did not find
sufficient weight in them to change his opinion of the propriety of the
measure. The gentleman from Virginia had endeavored to show that, as
there was no difference of opinion as to principle between France and
this country, the regulations entered into with Sweden did not apply;
whilst the gentleman from Pennsylvania had produced arguments to show
that we were in that situation. With respect to the treaty articles in
dispute, it would be an easy matter for the President to give the
commanders of our vessels proper instructions on that head. And would
any gentleman say it was not right to defend our vessels against
pirates? Would not the French say, if they were applied to for redress,
"You knew these were pirates; why did you not defend yourselves against
them?" The expense, which seems so much to alarm gentlemen, should be
put out of the question. The only question, said he, is, if your
property is unjustly attacked, will you defend it?

But it was said the loss did not fall upon the merchant, but upon the
consumer. Mr. S. asserted it fell upon the country; and so far from the
expense of the proposed armament being equal to the loss sustained by
captures, it would not, in his opinion, be a tenth part of the amount,
for whatever the plunderers got this country lost. Mr. S. said he had
made a rough calculation of what would be the expense of three frigates,
of 32 guns, and six sloops of war of 16 guns, and found it to be
$926,000, including the equipment and manning for one year.

Mr. GILES said, the gentleman from South Carolina talked of defensive
measures, but his plans were offensive. That gentleman had undertaken to
doubt the right of France to declare her ports rebel ports. Was this
defensive? Every nation had this right. It was not long since Great
Britain exercised it against us. Yet, aided by a convoy, he wished to
push our trade to these ports. This would not only be hazarding the
peace of the country, but taking the direct road to war.

Besides, said Mr. G., could it be expected that six or ten frigates
could convoy all our vessels? No; not a twentieth part of them. They
could, therefore, be of little use, but might be the means of producing
the greatest evil to the country.

Mr. BALDWIN said, in all their determinations with respect to a naval
force, however great the emergency, it has always been determined to
build, rather than purchase vessels, and he saw no reason for departing
from this mode in the present instance.

After some objections from Mr. W. SMITH to the building plan, which he
said would take three or four years to furnish the proposed vessels,
whereas merchant vessels might be immediately purchased, which would
answer the purpose of small frigates, the committee rose, reported the
two resolutions, which the House took up and agreed to, and committees
were appointed to report upon them by bills or otherwise.


WEDNESDAY, June 7.

_Defensive Measures._

ARMING MERCHANT VESSELS.

The 5th, which was in the following words, having been read,

      "_Resolved_, That provision be made, by law, for regulating
      the arming of merchant vessels of the United States,"

Mr. SWANWICK inquired, with what view these vessels were to be provided?
Against whom they were to be employed? and in what cases they were to
defend themselves? The information which he might receive on these
inquiries, he said, would have considerable weight in influencing his
vote.

Mr. HARPER said the detail would be brought forward in the bill; the
principle was now only to be determined. He had not thought of all the
modifications which might be given to it, though he had thought of many;
but it would be best discussed in its general form. The gentleman, if he
thought proper, might introduce into the resolution any principle which
he might wish to have inserted in it.

Mr. WILLIAMS said it was well known that a number of our merchantmen
were arming in different ports of the Union, and it was, therefore,
necessary to regulate this business, to prevent mischief being done.
Gentlemen might differ in opinion with respect to the marine law or laws
of nations on this subject; but all would wish, since vessels were
arming, that they should be put under some restraint. When he voted for
manning the frigates, he did it with a view to have them employed in the
defence of our coasts, and not as a convoy. Our situation, he said, was
truly critical, and he was undetermined how far it would be proper to
arm the merchant vessels of the United States; but to prevent mischief,
he wished the resolution might be agreed to, reserving to himself the
right of voting ultimately for or against it. It might afterwards
undergo such modifications as should be found necessary.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said the gentleman from Pennsylvania had very properly
inquired what was the scope of the present resolution, and he expected
some answer would have been given. The gentleman from South Carolina had
said they must vote for the principle, and the detail would come of
course. So that without knowing its object, whether it was defensive or
offensive, they were called upon to agree to the principle. This
deficiency had been supplied in some degree by the gentleman from New
York. He says the merchants have undertaken to arm their vessels. He
wished to know whence he derived his information? The only information
before them was in the PRESIDENT's Speech, where he says he has
forbidden such armament, except in the East India trade. He therefore
supposed the fact not well founded. What, he asked, was intended to be
done with these armed vessels? He said they must argue hypothetically.
He supposed they were intended to protect our trade. He did not believe
they were meant to operate offensively. But he would ask if this were
the case, if it would not lead directly to war? since individuals would
be left to determine the laws of nations, and of course the peace of the
country would be placed at their disposal, and all precautions, on the
part of Government, would be in vain, since individuals, who might have
an opposite interest to that of the Government, might be continually
committing acts of hostility.

Mr. S. SMITH acknowledged that the present was a very delicate subject;
but had not the PRESIDENT forbidden the arming of merchant vessels, he
should have been of opinion that the merchant vessels of a neutral power
had always a right to arm for their own defence. But he believed it was
necessary that something should be done. Merchants would arm their
vessels from the right given to them by the law of nations, and, if not
restrained, might go on to do acts which could not be justified. Though
he believed merchants possessed the right of arming their vessels, yet,
rather than do any thing which would involve the country in war, he
believed they would desist from the practice, and bear the losses which
they might, for the want of arms, suffer. He moved to strike out the
word "regulating," and to insert in the place of it "restricting in
certain cases."

Mr. GALLATIN said it seemed as if the motion of the gentleman from South
Carolina was susceptible of any shape, since the amendment now
incorporated into it seemed to have a different view from the original.
At present he would state his objections to the principle of the
resolution itself. The first inquiry was, whether the law of nations
permitted the merchant vessels of neutral nations to arm? If they had
not a right to permit it, whether they are not bound to prohibit it? He
had examined the law of nations on this subject, and found no such
authority, nor did the practice of modern times justify the practice. He
took a view of the different stages of society, to show that whenever
regular governments were established, the public defence was always
placed in them, and it was their duty to protect individuals, since they
did not give them leave to protect themselves.

Mr. G. said he knew of no exception but in case of letters of marque and
reprisal, and he did not know a single instance within the last century
where these had been granted, but war had been the consequence, so
repugnant were they to the present state of society. It was true,
nations might be in such a state as to find it necessary to grant such a
power; as when a nation with which it has to do is unable to support the
common relations of intercourse. Two instances of this kind presented
themselves, viz: the East India trade and the Mediterranean trade. In
carrying on our trade with the East Indies, our vessels were met by
those of a number of uncivilized powers, upon whom no restraint could be
had, so that no remedy was left to us, but immediate resistance. Nearly
of the same nature was the situation of the Barbary Powers in the
Mediterranean; and, although we enter into a treaty with them, we have
not a perfect reliance upon their observing their engagements; our
merchant vessels are therefore permitted to trade to those parts armed.
He knew it might be said that, at present, the West Indies were in a
similar situation. He believed, in some respects, they were; and this
could be the only plea for adopting a measure like the present. If it
were to be understood that there was to be an end of the negotiation
with France, or that the privilege of arming would not be abandoned, it
might be proper to authorize the arming of merchant vessels; but he
believed, if it were considered that such a permission would be almost
certain to involve us in war, it would appear to be much more wise to
await the event of the negotiation with France; not that he was afraid
of offending France by a measure of this kind, but he was afraid of
involving our country in a war.

Mr. S. SMITH conceived that Congress were called together to adopt such
measures as were best calculated to preserve the peace of the country,
by means of negotiation, and to fix upon such means of defence as would
not be injurious to the country. It was his opinion that the President
was not authorized by law to prevent the vessels of merchants being
armed; but the merchants of the United States would readily submit to
any loss rather than go to war. He knew that this was the opinion of the
Philadelphia merchants: he had seen many of them. Nor had he met with
one native American who wished to go into this arming plan; they believe
it would infringe our neutrality, and throw us into a war. When he came
here, his mind was scarcely made up on the subject. He did not like to
give up his right to defend his property; but he had found this to be
the general opinion, and therefore he brought forward the amendment,
which had been well amended by the gentleman from Connecticut. The
gentleman from South Carolina had since added _West Indies_, and this
brought them to an issue; for it was war or no war.

If the latter amendment was agreed to, he should be for striking out the
whole, leaving it general; because, with West Indies in it, it would be
particularly pointed.

They had been told of the loss sustained by spoliations, and where it
fell. He believed it fell upon the great body of the people of America,
and that the fall in the price of produce had been occasioned
principally by the British Admiral having forbidden the carrying our
provisions to Hispaniola. The British fleet in the West Indies, he said,
was supplied with provisions from Ireland, whilst the French depended
upon this country for supplies; so that they were our best customers
there.


FRIDAY, June 9.

STEPHEN BULLOCK, from Massachusetts, appeared, produced his credentials,
was qualified, and took his seat.

_Defensive Measures._

NAVAL FORCE.

Mr. W. SMITH said, he had waived a consideration of the third and fourth
resolutions, in order to pass to the fifth, because he thought it was
probable the committee would have determined upon arming our merchant
vessels; and if so, it might have influenced the votes of members on
those; but, as the committee had just decided against arming merchant
vessels, he should propose another resolution to the committee. It was
well known that the three frigates which had been agreed to be manned,
would not be ready for sea for several months; in the mean time there
might be occasion for some armed vessels; he should, therefore, submit
to them the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      the _President of the United States_ ought to be authorized
      by law to provide a further naval force, whenever, in his
      opinion, the circumstances of the country shall require the
      same; and that ---- dollars be appropriated for that
      purpose."

The CHAIRMAN said the resolutions of the gentleman from North Carolina
were first in order.

Mr. W. SMITH said he had no objection to the proposition of the
gentleman from North Carolina, as a part of a plan of defence, but he
thought it also necessary to attend to the protection of our commerce.

Mr. BLOUNT said, it was perfectly indifferent to him whether the
gentleman from South Carolina considered his plan as a part or the whole
of a system. That gentleman had accused those who voted against his
proposition, with being unwilling to place the country in a posture of
defence. Now, he had voted against, and should continue to vote against,
his proposition--but he was willing, notwithstanding (as he believed all
those who voted with him were) to put the country in a state of defence.
It was his opinion that internal defence only was necessary. He thought
the system which he had proposed would be sufficient. When they had
adopted this resolution, it might be considered whether any thing more
was necessary. He had no idea of creating a naval force for defence; on
the contrary, he believed it would be the means of plunging us into
fresh difficulties. For this reason, if the resolution he had proposed
were passed into a law, he should go home satisfied, with a belief that
he had done all that was necessary. And he was convinced that his
constituents would believe that he never wanted a disposition to defend
his country when in danger.

Mr. W. SMITH did not think these propositions could be of any use at
present; they would be very proper in case an invasion was apprehended.
He thought the principal object, at this time, was to defend our
commerce, and thereby secure the revenue arising from it, either by an
effectual naval armament, or by an embargo; and he thought he was
correct in saying, in reference to this defence, that the gentleman
opposed every thing, and proposed nothing. Gentlemen, he said, were very
ready to propose things which would cost the public nothing: the militia
measure proposed would cost no more than the passing of the law; but, if
ever any expense was to be incurred, then all was opposition.

The commerce of the country could not be defended, without calling upon
the people for revenue; and he thought those gentlemen who stepped
forward to advocate such measures as involved expense, and which were
consequently in some degree unpopular, deserved the gratitude of their
constituents. He had never hesitated to do this, when he thought it
necessary. He should not, however, object to the passing of this
proposition; he only rose to say, he did not think it immediately
necessary.

Mr. W. SMITH called for the reading of a similar resolution passed in
1794; which being read, and a wish expressed that the present might be
made conformable to it, Mr. BLOUNT gave his consent; and, after a few
observations from Mr. WILLIAMS in favor of the resolution, though he
denied that it could be carried into effect without expense, the
resolution was agreed to.


SATURDAY, June 17.

A bill was reported forbidding citizens of the United States from
entering into the service of any foreign Prince or State in a state of
war, which was read twice and committed to a Committee of the Whole on
Monday.


_Stamp Duties._

Mr. W. SMITH, from the Committee of Ways and Means, reported a bill for
laying a stamp duty on vellum, parchment, and paper, viz:

      For a license to practice as a counsellor, attorney, &c.,
      five dollars.

      For every grant, or letters patent, four dollars.

      For every exemplification or certified copy of
      letters-patent, two dollars.

      For every receipt or discharge for any legacy of fifty
      dollars and not more than one hundred dollars, twenty-five
      cents; above one hundred and not more than five hundred
      dollars, fifty cents; and for every additional five hundred
      dollars, one dollar; but not to extend to legacies left to
      a wife, children, or grand-children.

      For every policy of insurance of vessels or goods from one
      district of the United States to another, twenty-five
      cents.

      For every such policy of insurance to a foreign port, for a
      sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, twenty-five cents;
      if it exceeds five hundred dollars, one dollar.

      For every exemplification, of what nature soever, fifty
      cents.

      For every bond, bill, or note, (except the note of the
      chartered banks which may be now or hereafter in
      existence,) not exceeding one hundred dollars, ten cents;
      above one hundred dollars, and not exceeding five hundred
      dollars, twenty-five cents; above five hundred dollars, and
      not exceeding one thousand dollars, fifty-cents; above one
      thousand dollars, seventy-five cents. (If payable within
      sixty days, they will be chargeable with only two-fifths of
      these duties.)

      For every protest of a note, twenty-five cents.

      For every letter of attorney, twenty-five cents.

      For every certificate or debenture, for drawing back any
      duty on the re-shipping of goods, one dollar.

      For every note or bill of lading, for goods from one
      district to another, within the United States, (not in the
      same State,) ten cents.

      For ditto to a foreign port, twenty-five cents.

      For every inventory or catalogue of furniture, goods, or
      effects, in any case required by law, (except in the case
      of distraining for rent, or an execution,) fifty cents.

      For every certificate of a share or shares in the Bank of
      the United States, or other bank, ten cents.

The bill was twice read, and ordered to be committed to a Committee of
the Whole on Monday.


WEDNESDAY, June 21.

_Expatriation._

The SPEAKER having informed the House that the unfinished business of
yesterday, viz: the bill prohibiting citizens of the United States from
entering into the military or naval service of any foreign Prince or
State, had the priority.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to have it postponed, in order to take up the bill
respecting an additional naval armament. This motion was supported by
Mr. GILES, and opposed by Mr. W. SMITH, and negatived, 35 to 34.

The bill respecting foreign service was then taken up, and, on motion of
Mr. HAVENS, it was agreed to leave the time for its taking place a
blank.

Mr. COIT moved to strike out the sixth section.

      [It defined the mode in which a citizen of the United
      States might dissolve the ties of citizenship, and become
      an alien.]

Mr. SEWALL hoped it would be struck out. In every country in the world
where civil society was established, the citizens of that society owed a
certain duty to their Government, which they could not readily get rid
of; but they were about to establish a principle to put it in the power
of the citizens of the United States, at their will, and without any
pretence, to say they would be no longer subject to the Government; and
this is at a moment of danger, when citizens of other countries might
be called home from this country. He thought this would be extremely
wrong; it would be giving an opportunity for insult to our courts and
country, and he was sure no nation would show us so much complaisance in
return.

Mr. CLAIBORNE thought it no more binding for citizens born in the United
States to continue citizens of the United States, than it was for a
Roman Catholic or Protestant to continue of that opinion, when he
arrived at the years of maturity and could judge for himself. He
insisted upon it, men had a natural right to choose under what
government they would live; and they had no reason to fear our citizens
leaving us whilst our Government was well executed. He did not wish
citizens of the United States to be in the situation of subjects of
Great Britain, who, though they had left the country forty years ago,
were liable to be considered as subjects of that Government. He trusted
the rights of man would not be thus infringed, but that they should
allow the right of expatriation unclogged.

Mr. SEWALL said, there was a great difference between the two cases
which the gentleman had stated. A man born and educated in a country
certainly owed it obligations, which were not to be shaken off the
moment he chose to do so. The different societies of the world, he said,
were like so many families independent of each other; and what family,
he asked, would suffer any of its members to leave it and go into
another when they pleased? He thought it unreasonable that it should be
so.

Mr. W. SMITH said, that the doctrine of perpetual allegiance was derived
from Great Britain, and, though it might be good in theory, was not so
in practice. They had departed from many doctrines derived from that
country, and the time was come, he believed, for departing from this.
The idea of a man being compelled to live in this country, contrary to
his will, seemed to be repugnant to our ideas of liberty. He thought
when a man was so disgusted with a country as to resolve to leave it,
for the purpose of becoming a citizen of another country, he should be
at liberty to do so on his complying with certain formalities, and
should never again be re-admitted. It was upon this principle that this
section is founded, and he thought it valuable.

Mr. S. thought this section essential, as it would be a means of
preventing quarrels with foreign countries. For instance, if a citizen
of this country took command of a French ship of war, and were to commit
hostilities on the property of citizens of the United States, if he were
taken he might allege that he was a citizen of the French Republic, and
that Government might claim him as such; but if this bill passed, no man
could cover himself under this pretence who had not complied with the
requisitions in this act. He mentioned the case of Mr. Talbot.

Mr. S. said they held out inducements for persons to come to this
country. We did not allow they owed allegiance to any other country
after they had become citizens of this. To grant this would be a fatal
doctrine to this country. It would be to declare that, in case we were
at war with another country, that country might recall persons from
this, who formerly came from thence. Many persons of that description
were amongst us. At present they enjoy all the benefit of our laws and
vote at our elections; and yet, if this doctrine were admitted, these
persons might be recalled as aliens; and if they were not recalled, they
would be considered as qualified aliens, and not as real citizens.

This law, Mr. S. said, was necessary, as at present there was not
sufficient energy in the Government to punish persons serving on board
foreign ships of war. This bill would cure the evil, and give an
opportunity for turbulent, discontented characters to leave the country
for ever. He believed it was the general opinion of the citizens of this
country that they had the right to expatriate themselves, and he thought
it was now a proper time to pass some regulations on this subject.

Mr. SITGREAVES thought this one of the most delicate and important
subjects that ever came before Congress. He saw a number of
difficulties, but he thought they were not of a nature to discourage
them from considering the bill. He trusted they should meet them with
firmness.

The evil, he said, which gave rise to this bill was a great and growing
one. In the first war which had taken place in Europe since our
independence, they found this doctrine of expatriation, as claimed by
our citizens, endangering our peace with a foreign nation, and if this
principle were admitted he feared we should always be liable to similar
embarrassments.

Mr. S. took notice of the different objections made to this section. He
observed there seemed to be much doubt on the subject, which he thought
ought to be removed by passing a law of this sort. He wished he could
agree in the opinion that no citizen had a right to expatriate himself
from this country. He thought it a doctrine essential to the peace of
society. He wished it was generally recognized; but he believed the
major opinion in this country was different; and, though not directly,
it had in a great degree been recognized by the Executive and Judiciary
in the cases of Hinfield and Talbot. He feared, therefore, it was too
late for them to say the right did not exist. It was time, however, for
Congress to declare an opinion on the subject. If the proposition in the
bill was not a proper one, it should be made so.

In the State of Virginia this doctrine was legalized, and in the
constitution of Pennsylvania it was strongly indicated, as it said
"emigration should not be prohibited." It was a favorite idea of a
republican Government not to forbid it. He did not agree with the
principles of the clause in all its parts. He thought citizens ought not
to be allowed to expatriate in time of war, as their assistance would
be wanted at home. It was his intention to have moved an amendment
allowing expatriation only in the time of peace, and an express
provision against it in time of war. He thought the doctrine of the
gentleman from Maryland, viz: that our citizens ought to go into other
countries to learn the art of war, was chimerical. When they had
obtained rank and wealth in a foreign country, it would be in vain to
call them back; they would not return. He hoped, therefore, the section
would not be struck out, but that they should proceed to amend it.

Mr. N. SMITH was sorry that the committee who reported this bill had
thought it necessary to report the sixth and seventh sections. The
doctrine of expatriation on one hand, and perpetual allegiance on the
other, were subjects they had all heard much about; but expatriation,
under limitation and restraint, was a new business. From its novelty it
became doubtful. This being the case, he wished the subject had been
deferred to an ordinary session; particularly as it appeared to be no
more connected with other parts of the bill than with many other laws
now extant. If we were to have a law on this subject, he should wish to
have it in a separate bill. For his part, he could not see how the
committee could suppose it to be a part of their duty to report these
sections. If he had thought it had, he should not have voted for
appointing a committee on the occasion.

Gentlemen advocating these clauses, say they would not allow of
expatriation in time of war. He would go further and say he would not
allow of it when there was a prospect of war, for it is idle to prohibit
it in one case and not in the other. He then asked if this was not the
very state in which we now were? If it were, why pass such a bill at
this time, when it could not go into operation? He thought this a good
reason for rejecting these clauses.

There was a mutual obligation, Mr. S. said, between a Government and all
its citizens. The Government owed protection to its citizens, and
citizens owed obedience to their Government. These duties were mutual
and co-extensive; and they might as well say that Government could
abandon its citizens when it pleased as that citizens could desert their
Government when they pleased. Yet he would allow that Government might,
on certain occasions, legalize expatriation, but not on the ground of a
citizen's having a right to expatriate when he pleased. He should have
no objection to take up the subject at a time when they could do justice
to it, but he thought the present was not that time.

The question for striking out the 6th section was put and carried, 45 to
41.

The committee accordingly rose, and the House took up the amendments.
Having come to that part for striking out the 6th and 7th sections,

Mr. DENT called for the yeas and nays, which were agreed to be taken.

Mr. VENABLE said, it seemed to be admitted that a right of expatriation
existed in our citizens; and if so, he thought there should be some mode
of exercising that right. He had no particular objection to the mode
marked out in these clauses. It had been said this was not the proper
time; but he thought it was, since it was in some degree connected with
the present bill. The gentleman from Connecticut had stated allegiance
and protection to be mutual. He did not think they were so, to the
extent which he stated. This Government was not bound to protect
citizens who went into foreign service, as in doing so they chose the
protection of another Government.

Mr. HARPER asked for an instance in which the Executive and Judiciary
had countenanced the doctrine of expatriation.

Mr. W. SMITH, in answer to his colleague, produced the case of Talbot,
and the opinion given by the Secretary of State and the Judiciary Court,
on that occasion, in favor of the right of expatriation.

Mr. GILES thought there could not be a doubt in the minds of Americans
on the subject of expatriation. Indeed, he said, this was the foundation
of our Revolution; for they were not now to be told they owed allegiance
to a foreign country. It had not only been the ground of the Revolution,
but all their acts had been predicated upon this principle. He referred
to the act respecting the rights of naturalization, which makes every
new citizen swear to support the Constitution of the United States, and
to renounce all other allegiance.

Mr. GALLATIN was opposed to these sections. With respect to
expatriation, having himself exercised the right, he could not be
supposed to be opposed to that right. Perpetual allegiance was too
absurd a doctrine to find many advocates in this country. The question
was not whether citizens had a right to expatriate, but whether they
should in this law prescribe a mode of doing it. The right seemed to
have been recognized by the Executive and Judiciary. He was against
going into this business, because he thought it unnecessary. He believed
the determination of who were citizens, and who were not, might be
safely left with the Judiciary. He had also his doubts whether the
United States had a right to regulate this matter, or whether it should
not be left to the States, as the constitution spoke of the citizens of
the States. It was a doubtful matter, and ought to undergo a full
discussion. The emigrants from this country to foreign countries were
trifling; but from ten to twelve thousand of our citizens had gone to
Canada, and upwards of five thousand beyond the Mississippi, four
thousand of whom would be got back by the running of the lines. A number
of these men hold lands in the United States; some have sold their lands
and become citizens under another Government. This subject would,
therefore, require considerable deliberation at a future day. He wished
the amendment of the Committee of the Whole to be adopted.

Mr. SITGREAVES confirmed his former statement, with respect to the
question of the right of expatriation having been settled by the
Judiciary. In order to do this, he read a note from one of the counsel
in the cases of Henfield and Talbot, giving an account of the opinions
of the court on the occasion.

Mr. SEWALL insisted upon the policy of preventing the renunciation of
allegiance, without control. The Treaty of Peace with Great Britain, he
said, had dissolved our allegiance to that country, and acknowledged our
independence.

Mr. GILES believed the evil apprehended from individuals having the
right to expatriate themselves when they pleased, was more imaginary
than real. Only two citizens had taken advantage of that right in the
State of Virginia, where it was allowed in all its extent, in twelve
years. But if there were any citizens so detached from the Government as
to wish to leave the country, he should wish them gone. To suppose this,
would be to suppose a real division between the people and Government,
which he did not believe had existence. It was said Great Britain did
not allow the doctrine of expatriation; but, he said, she had not any
naturalization law. He was in favor of excluding citizens who once
expatriated themselves from ever returning to this country.

Mr. OTIS said, that when this bill was first reported, these clauses
struck him unfavorably; but a little reflection had convinced him of the
propriety of retaining them. The passing of this provision, he said,
would not affect the constitutional right with respect to expatriation,
whatever it might be. This bill did not relate to persons emigrating
into the Spanish or English territories, but to persons expatriating
themselves, and engaging in the service of foreign countries.

The question on agreeing to the reports of the Committee of the Whole to
reject the sixth and seventh sections of the bill was taken, and
stood--yeas 34, nays 57.

All the amendments having been gone through, Mr. S. SMITH moved to
postpone the further consideration of the bill till the first Monday in
November.

This motion was supported by Messrs. VARNUM, N. SMITH, BALDWIN,
GOODRICH, and COIT, as involving a question of too delicate and
important a nature to be passed over in this hasty manner, and because
there was no pressing necessity to go into the measure at present.

It was opposed by Messrs. OTIS, WILLIAMS, W. SMITH, and CRAIK, on the
ground of the provision of the bill being necessary, and that to
postpone the business, after so ample a discussion, would be undoing
what they had been doing for two or three days.

The question for postponement was taken, and decided in the
affirmative--yeas 52, nays 44.

The bill being thus lost, Mr. W. SMITH proposed a resolution to the
House for appointing a committee to report a new bill without the two
last clauses, which, it was evident, had been the cause of the negative
given to the bill. As he supposed no opposition would be made to the
bill so reported, it might be got through without loss of time.

After some conversation on a point of order, whether or not this
resolution could be admitted, the SPEAKER declared it in order, but Mr.
COIT wishing it to lie on the table till to-morrow, it lay accordingly.


THURSDAY, June 22.

_Expatriation._

Mr. W. SMITH called up the resolution which he yesterday laid upon the
table, for appointing a committee to bring in a bill for prohibiting
citizens of the United States entering on board foreign ships of war,
without the expatriating clauses.

This resolution was opposed by Messrs. BALDWIN, GILES, and VENABLE, and
supported by the mover and Mr. HARPER. It was negatived--49 to 46.

_Depredations on Commerce._

A message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, of which
the following is a copy, with the titles of the documents accompanying
it:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      Immediately after I had received your resolution of the
      10th of June, requesting a report respecting the
      depredations committed on the commerce of the United
      States, since the first of October, 1796, specifying the
      names of the vessels taken, where bound to or from, species
      of lading, the value, when it can be ascertained, of the
      vessel and cargo taken, and by what power captured,
      particularizing those which have been actually condemned,
      together with the proper documents to ascertain the same, I
      directed a collection to be made of all such information as
      should be found in the possession of the Government. In
      consequence of which, the Secretary of State has made the
      report and the collection of documents, which accompany
      this Message, and are now laid before the House of
      Representatives, in compliance with their desire.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _June_ 22, 1797.

Report of the Secretary of State to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
respecting the depredations committed on the commerce of the United
States:

      1. Abstract of two cases of capture made by the British
      cruisers of vessels belonging to citizens of the United
      States since the first of October, 1796, and wherein
      documents have been received at the Department of State;
      also a copy of a memorandum filed by S. SMITH, Esq.,
      relating to captures made by the British of vessels in the
      property of which he was concerned. No documents accompany
      the two cases of capture above mentioned, they having been
      sent to London, in order that compensation might be
      obtained for the damages suffered.

      2. A correct copy of the decree of the Executive Directory
      of March 2, 1797.

      3. Copies of documents remaining in the Department of
      State, relative to American vessels captured or condemned
      by the French, since the first of October, 1796.

      4. Extracts from communications from the Consuls of the
      United States, relative to depredations committed on the
      commerce of the United States by the French.

      5. Schedule of the names of American vessels captured by
      the French, and of the circumstances attending them,
      extracted from the Philadelphia Gazette, and Gazette of the
      United States, and commencing with July, 1796.

      6. Extract of a letter from Rufus King, Esq., Minister,
      &c., enclosing the protest of William Martin, master of the
      Cincinnatus, of Baltimore, relative to the torture
      inflicted on the said Martin by a French cruiser.

Mr. GILES moved that the above papers should be referred to a select
committee, to print such as would be useful to the House.

This question was negatived--50 to 46, and a motion carried for printing
the whole.

_Day of Adjournment._

Mr. GILES called up the motion which had some days ago been laid on the
table respecting an adjournment.

Mr. GALLATIN wished to modify his motion, by making the proposed day of
adjournment the 27th instead of the 24th instant.

Mr. SITGREAVES moved for the yeas and nays on the question.

Mr. MACON moved to make the day the 28th, which was consented to by the
mover.

Mr. DENT proposed to make it the 30th.

The question was taken on adjourning on the 30th, and negatived--there
being only 28 votes in favor of it.

The question on the resolution for the 28th was carried--yeas 51, nays
47.


SATURDAY, June 24.

_Protection of Trade._

NAVAL ARMAMENT.

The bill for providing for the protection of the commerce of the United
States was read a third time, and the blank for filling up the number of
men to be employed in the cutters, was filled up with thirty; on the
question being about to be put on the passing of the bill,

Mr. NICHOLAS said some statements had been received from the War
Department, and ordered to be printed. He had not seen a copy of them,
but was informed there were yet wanting $197,000 to complete the
frigates. He wished information on the subject.

Mr. PARKER read an extract from the account which had been printed.

Mr. NICHOLAS wished to know how it happened that in four months so great
a mistake could have occurred as to the expense of finishing these
vessels. When the last appropriation of $170,000 was made, they were
told that sum would be sufficient to make them fit to receive the men on
board, but now they were called upon for $197,000 more. He thought this
matter ought not to pass over without inquiry, as he did not like to be
drawn from step to step to do what, if the whole matter had been seen at
first, they might not have consented to. He trusted this was not
intentionally done, but he owned it looked very suspicious.

Mr. PARKER believed the estimate of last session was only to make the
vessels ready to receive the guns on board, and did not include the
guns.

Mr. GALLATIN said, as he meant to vote against the passage of the bill,
he would briefly state his reasons for doing so. He knew only of two
arguments in favor of the bill; the first, that it was necessary during
a time of peace to lay the foundation of a navy; the other was, that,
the frigates being built, it would be proper to man them. As to the
propriety of having a navy, he did not mean to go generally into the
subject, but he would make a few observations as to our situation for
engaging in an establishment of this kind. Suppose that navies were
necessary in European nations, to increase their power or to protect
their commerce, these considerations did not apply to our present
circumstances. In order to prove this, it was only necessary to take a
view of our revenue, and the expense of a fleet.

The amount of revenue from the 1st of April, 1796, to the 1st of April,
1797, received into the Treasury, was $7,400,000--a sum which by far
exceeded that of any former year; and he did not think that the
permanent revenue of the United States could be well extended beyond
that sum. For instance, he did not think that nine millions could be
raised from the people without oppression. Indeed, by the best
calculations on the quantity of circulating medium in the country, it
was not allowed to exceed eight millions: and he did not believe that
any nation could raise a larger sum in taxes than was equal to the
amount of their circulating specie.

      [Here Mr. Gallatin produced a detailed statement to show
      the expense of building the three frigates, to wit:
      $1,014,450, and the sum of $350,000 for the yearly expense
      of keeping them in service, repairs inclusive.]

This statement showed, Mr. G. said, that these frigates had cost about
£2,000 sterling a gun, though the common calculation in Great Britain
was only half that sum. If, from building the frigates, they turned to
the expense of manning them, the same conclusion would be drawn. They
found that the pay of an able-bodied seaman in the British navy had
lately been raised from 26s. 6d. to 30s. sterling a month, which was $6
66-2/3; but, by the present law, $15,000 a month were allowed for the
pay of the petty officers, midshipmen, seamen, ordinary seamen, and
marines, which averaged from 16 to 17 dollars a man.

When he heard gentlemen stating the advantages of the naval strength of
Denmark and Sweden to those countries, he could not agree with them
altogether, though he agreed they had some weight; but it was well known
that the Grand Navy of Portugal had no weight whatever in the scale of
the large navies of Europe; it did not even enable her to protect her
trade: for, if either France or Great Britain had the superiority in the
Mediterranean, she was under their control. He believed Denmark and
Sweden had thirty sail of the line each, and he wished gentlemen to
calculate how much it would cost us to have such a navy. A fleet of a
few vessels would not then be able to afford protection to our trade;
and it was wholly out of our power to have a fleet equal to that of
Denmark or Sweden.

Mr. SWANWICK believed the expense of these frigates had been much
greater than any future ones would be. When they were told they had cost
£2,000 sterling a gun, it was evident there must have been great
extravagance in the expense, as merchant vessels might be built as
cheaply in this country as in any other. He supposed the extra expense
had been owing to the want of some regular establishment to overlook the
business, and because it had been undertaken at a time when other
nations were at war, and of course when materials were very high.
Sixteen thousand dollars worth of hemp had indeed been burnt by accident
at Boston. As to the terms of seamen, though they might at first be
high, when the service was known he doubted not they would fall.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said, he had always opposed the establishment of a navy,
and was the question now whether or not we should commence a navy he
should certainly be against it; but, as the frigates were so far
advanced, he thought they ought to finish them, especially when they
considered the present critical situation of our affairs; for, if a
general peace did not take place in Europe, the war would probably
become a maritime war, and we might be involved in it. But he was still
of opinion that if we must go into an expensive naval establishment for
the protection of our commerce, we had better have none. But, say
gentlemen, where will you find revenue? He believed, though we had no
armed force, a considerable commerce would still be carried on,[18] and
those who declined it would turn their attention to agriculture and
manufactures, from which any deficiency of revenue would readily be
supplied.

It was true, as had been stated, that they had been called upon from
time to time for additional sums to complete these frigates, and he knew
not when these calls would end.

Mr. GILES was obliged to the gentleman last up for his speech against
the present bill, though he meant to vote for it; he would rather,
however, that he had _spoken_ in favor, and _voted_ against the bill.
Mr. G. said he should vote against the passing of the bill, and for the
reasons assigned by that gentleman. He thought a navy would be a great
evil for this country. Our great interests lay in the soil; and if ever
the vitals of the country were to be drawn together for the purpose of
protecting our commerce on the sea, he should greatly lament it. He
believed the despotism of nations kept pace with the ratio of expense of
their Governments. He was sorry to say that he was more and more
convinced that it was the constant aim of some gentlemen in that House
to increase the expenses of our Government. The propriety of
establishing a navy had scarcely ever been seriously considered; it was
first begun under an alarm, and it had been continually carried on by
the same means.

Mr. HARPER said gentlemen seem to abandon their objections to this bill
by admitting that there was no probability it would not pass. But why?
Because a majority of the House either think the measure is proper in
itself, or from the particular circumstances of this country. It was
surely a singular instance of modesty in gentlemen, after this
concession, to argue against the passing of the bill.

Mr. H. did not admit that these frigates were commenced from an idea of
laying the foundation of a large Navy Establishment, but from particular
circumstances; and, said he, shall we, at a time when we are threatened
with danger, abandon them? He trusted not; such conduct would be absurd
in the extreme, and imply a character of imbecility which he hoped their
councils would never deserve.

Mr. ALLEN said, he had some objection to the passing of the bill, but
his objections were to the amendments which had been introduced into it,
yet he did not know but he should vote for it. He thought there was a
provision in the bill which went to prostrate this Government. He
alluded to that part of it which directed the manner in which this force
should be used. He considered this as a violation of the constitution,
besides carrying upon the face of it an idea that one of the branches of
this Government could not be trusted with the exercise of its power. Was
it possible, he asked, for a Government to exist, when this confidence
was refused to one of its branches? What were the people of the United
States, and abroad, to think of this? Would not the people of this
country think it their duty to destroy a power which could not be
trusted; and would not foreigners despise it? It seemed as if this were
the intention of gentlemen.

Mr. A. also objected to the clause limiting the duration of this bill;
since this went to say that they not only distrusted the other branches
of the Government, but themselves. A thing which must in its nature be
perpetual, was there limited. He deprecated the idea of expense being an
objection to this measure. Our emancipation from the chains of Great
Britain, he said, was attended with a great expense; but was it not
believed that the liberty and independence of this country were of
superior value to money? He trusted they were. He could only suppose,
therefore, that men who objected against the expense, must themselves
be sordid and avaricious. If these frigates had been provided four years
ago, he believed all our present difficulties would have been prevented,
and a sum vastly less than that of which we had been robbed would have
done the business. Mr. A. denied that ships of war could now be built in
England for £1,000 a gun; that was formerly the price, but they now cost
£1,500 per gun.

Mr. NICHOLAS had always been of opinion, that the expense of these
frigates was a useless expense; he did not believe a case could happen,
except within our own jurisdiction, where these vessels could be of
advantage to us; but notwithstanding this was his opinion, he should
vote for the passing of this bill, because he saw the sentiments of that
House and the public were strongly in its favor, from a persuasion that
the measure was necessary, and that the thing would be a continual topic
of dispute until it was carried into effect.

He was willing, therefore, to let the vessels go to sea, believing that
nothing short of actual experience would convince the supporters of this
measure that it was useless, expensive, and injurious; and hoping that
by one year's experience of the plaything, finding that money was of
greater value than the frigates, all parties would concur in
relinquishing it.

The question was then taken on the passing of the bill, and decided in
the affirmative--yeas 78, nays 25, as follows:

      YEAS--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Theophilus Bradbury,
      David Brooks, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Christopher G.
      Champlin, James Cochran, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana,
      James Davenport, Thomas T. Davis, John Dennis, George Dent,
      George Ege, Lucas Elmendorph, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster,
      Dwight Foster, John Fowler, Jonathan Freeman, Nathaniel
      Freeman, jr., James Gillespie, Henry Glenn, Chauncey
      Goodrich, William Gordon, Roger Griswold, William B. Grove,
      John A. Hanna, Robert Goodloe Harper, Carter B. Harrison,
      Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, David Holmes, Hezekiah L.
      Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Edward
      Livingston, Samuel Lyman, Matthew Lyon, James Machir,
      William Matthews, John Milledge, Daniel Morgan, John
      Nicholas, Harrison G. Otis, Josiah Parker, Elisha R.
      Potter, John Read, John Rutledge, jr., James Schureman,
      Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel
      Sitgreaves, Jeremiah Smith, Nathaniel Smith, William Smith,
      of Charleston, Richard Sprigg, jr., John Swanwick, George
      Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thomson, Abram Trigg, John
      Trigg, John E. Van Allen, Philip Van Cortlandt, Peleg
      Wadsworth, John Williams, and Robert Williams.

      NAYS--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Thomas Blount, Richard
      Brent, Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Joshua
      Coit, John Dawson, Albert Gallatin, William B. Giles,
      Andrew Gregg, Jonathan N. Havens, Walter Jones, Matthew
      Locke, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell,
      Anthony New, Tompson J. Skinner, William Smith, (of
      Pinckney District,) Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Joseph
      B. Varnum, and Abraham Venable.

The title was altered from "An act for the protection of the trade of
the United States," to "An act providing a Naval Armament."


MONDAY, June 26.

LEWIS R. MORRIS, from Vermont, and LEMUEL BENTON, from South Carolina,
appeared, produced their credentials, were qualified, and took their
seats.

_Stamp duties_: _Naturalization certificates_: _Lawyer's licenses_:
_Conveyances_.

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for laying
duties on stamped vellum, parchment, and paper; when, the first section
being under consideration,

Mr. KITTERA moved to add, "any certificates of naturalization ----
dollars," as he thought foreigners, who were admitted to all the rights
of citizens under this Government, could not be against paying a small
tax on their admission to this right.

Mr. MACON thought this tax would fall very heavy upon persons who came
into this country to live by their labor--many of whom were not able to
pay their passage, but were indented by those who brought them for a
number of years; and who, if this tax were paid, would have so much
longer to serve.

Mr. BROOKS did not see this objection, as such persons might labor all
their lives without becoming naturalized.

Mr. GORDON said, that by the naturalization act, no foreigner could be
admitted to the rights of a citizen until he had been five years in the
country, and therefore the objections of the gentleman from North
Carolina could not have any weight.

The amendment was carried.

Mr. SWANWICK moved to strike out five dollars, and insert ten, for
licenses to practise as a counsellor, attorney, &c. He thought, if these
gentlemen were taxed at all, ten dollars would be as low a sum as they
could well fix upon for the purpose.

Mr. VARNUM thought the tax should be much higher, if imposed at all. He
spoke of the high tax laid upon the professors of the law in
Massachusetts.

The amendment was carried, there being 53 in favor of it.

Mr. COCHRAN wished the tax to extend to lawyers who practised in the
State Courts, as well as to those who practised in the Courts of the
United States.

Mr. NICHOLAS objected to this proposition. The lawyers, in some of the
States, were already very highly taxed; besides, he doubted the right of
the United States to tax the lawyers of the State Courts, as they were
necessary in the State Governments.

Mr. SWANWICK did not expect any objection could have been made to a tax
so reasonable, especially when the bill proposed to tax merchants so
heavily; they would not be able to turn themselves without a stamp, and
surely the lucrative profession of the law could not think much of
paying this low tax. It was said, indeed, that the merchant did not
ultimately pay the duty, but the consumer; and he doubted not the
lawyers would not fail to find out a way of making their clients pay the
duty.

Mr. DENNIS objected to this tax on the same ground with the gentleman
from Virginia. If a tax of this kind, he said, were laid upon the
lawyers of the State Courts, it might be extended to any other officer
of the Government, and thereby annihilate the State Governments.

Mr. LIVINGSTON was in favor of the amendment, because he thought the
State lawyers a fair object of taxation. He denied that it would be
unconstitutional, or that it would operate hardly upon a particular
class of men. It was not laid upon any particular class; but upon an
instrument which, indeed, to exercise their professions, lawyers would
be obliged to have; but it might as well be said that the tax upon rum
and sugar would fall heavily upon the sellers of those articles, and
that therefore no rum or sugar would be sold. The one tax fell upon the
consumer, and the other upon the client. In the State of New York, Mr.
L. said, the lawyers were not taxed at all.

Mr. MCDOWELL said, when he seconded the motion for striking out "five"
for the purpose of inserting "ten" he did not intend the tax to be
extended to the practisers in State Courts; nor did he think the
constitution would warrant such an extension of it.

Mr. SITGREAVES was in favor of the amendment; he wished to fix the
principle. He thought that the State lawyers were a fair object of
taxation, and that the profits of their business would very well bear
it. But there was reason for making a distinction between the two cases.
He thought there would be a hardship in extending the tax to practisers
in county courts, as that would cause it to fall in some places very
heavily. For instance, in Pennsylvania, there must be a separate
admission into every court of every county; so that one man would
probably have to pay to the amount of from two to three hundred dollars
on account of this tax. He hoped the motion would be postponed for the
present, and modified. He would do it himself, if time were given.

The motion was withdrawn.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he understood that deeds for the conveyance of
lands would have been amongst the articles taxed. He thought such a tax
would be an eligible one, and in order to learn what were the objections
to it, he proposed to add to the bill, "any deed for the conveyance of
real estate ---- dollars."

Mr. R. WILLIAMS said, this proposition had been rejected in the
Committee of Ways and Means, on the ground that such a tax would clash
with the jurisdiction of the States. He had the same objection to this
that he should have to laying a tax upon the State lawyers. To say a
deed, which was legal by the laws of a State, could not be received in
evidence, except it was stamped, would be tantamount to the repealing of
a State law.

Mr. W. SMITH said, this subject had been frequently under discussion,
both in the Committee of Ways and Means, and in that House. On this
occasion, the majority of the Committee of Ways and Means was against
laying a tax on deeds. He was in the minority. There was a provision,
Mr. S. said, which declared that no paper upon which a duty was imposed
by this act should be admitted in evidence; but there was afterwards a
clause which allowed them to be admitted, on payment of ten dollars over
and above the duty thereupon payable. He thought the tax would be a very
good and a very profitable one.

Mr. COIT thought this was a tax which should be gone into with great
caution, since, if it were carried, it might be the means of losing the
whole bill. He thought the bill would be better passed without this
provision; and if it were found expedient, it might be added hereafter.

Mr. GILES was opposed to this amendment, as interfering with the
governments of the several States. All lands (except such as had been
sold by the United States) were held from the States; and if this tax
were to be agreed to, he believed the State courts would not refuse to
admit a deed in evidence which was not stamped. Nothing would give so
much alarm to the States as a subject of this sort.

Mr. SEWALL did not understand the distinction made between titles to
land and titles to money. He thought the objection made to a tax on a
deed, might be made with equal propriety to a tax on a bond or note. If
they had a right to say these should not be received in evidence in a
State court, unless they were stamped, they had a right to say the same
with respect to a deed. Except it could be shown that the farmer was
less able to pay than the merchant, he thought no other objection had
any weight.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS thought there was a great difference between a note of
hand and a deed. The State had nothing to do with the former, but much
with the latter; since every State held grants of its lands, and a man
must show his title from the original grant, before his title could be
said to be a good one. He did not doubt the people being able to pay the
tax; it was the principle which he contended against, which, if carried
into effect, would cause a clashing of the authorities of the two
Governments. If the United States could lay a tax of this sort, they
might lay a tax upon every commission issued by a State.

Mr. NICHOLAS did not see the smallest difference between the two cases
which had been stated. And when they came to the 13th section, he should
endeavor to prove that to say a piece of paper should not be received in
evidence in a court, which was lawful to be received by the laws of the
State, would be a violation of State sovereignty. He was not of
opinion, with the gentleman from Connecticut, that they should take up
the subject partially, rather than not pass the bill. He thought it best
to consider a tax upon its broadest basis. It was not fair to exclude
any thing which stood upon the same ground. He wished the principle to
be thus fairly tested. He should, therefore, vote for the tax on deeds.

Mr. LYON hoped, that if this tax was agreed to, purchases of a small
amount would be excluded.

Mr. SWANWICK said there would doubtless be a difference made in the duty
between large and small purchases. He also disagreed with the gentleman
from Connecticut. The principle, he said, was either right or not; if it
were right, it should be made general: if not, it ought not to be
adopted.

The question was put, and negatived--47 to 32.

On motion, the committee rose, and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, June 27.

_Stamp duties._

BANK NOTES.

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
laying duties on stamped vellum, parchment, and paper, when

Mr. NICHOLAS moved to strike out the clause exempting bank notes from
duty, as he could see no reason why notes upon which a profit was made,
should be exempted from duty more than others. He trusted all notes
would be placed on the same footing.

Mr. W. SMITH hoped gentlemen did not mean, by moving to strike out this
exemption, to destroy the bill. He thought the observation of the
gentleman from Connecticut yesterday, against embarrassing the bill by
doubtful objects, had weight. On this ground, though he was before of
opinion deeds ought to have been inserted, he did not vote for inserting
them. He trusted the gentleman had not fully considered the subject, and
that when he did so, he would not persist in his motion.

Mr. NICHOLAS believed if the favorite object of every gentleman were to
be exempted, there would be nothing left upon which to lay a tax. If to
oppose this, were to defeat the bill, he meant to defeat it; as he
wished the tax to go to all objects of the same kind. He had no idea of
favoring one interest at the expense of another; he hoped, therefore,
his amendment would be agreed to.

Mr. LYON expected the gentleman from South Carolina was about to have
given some reasons why bank notes ought not to be taxed as well as
others; but he was disappointed. He believed those who issued these
notes got a good profit from them, and that it was, therefore,
reasonable they should pay their proportion towards the support of
Government.

Mr. W. SMITH thought the tax an improper one. Banks were taxed in
another part of the bill, on the transfer of their shares. A tax on
bank notes, he said, would introduce a vast deal of confusion throughout
the country. As for himself he did not care any thing about it; but he
believed, if it were agreed to, it would produce so many objections
against the bill as to prevent its passing.

Mr. BROOKS was against stamping bank notes, as they were not stamped in
any country whatever.[19] Indeed they were different from other notes,
as they were the representatives of specie; they might, therefore, as
well stamp dollars or guineas. In short, the subject was too important
and intricate to be gone into at this late period of the session.

Mr. VENABLE said, in proportion as the tax was general, it would be
just. What was the object of the bill? It was to tax that right which an
individual possesses in society, of transferring his property, and the
evidences of it; it was also to tax him for the right he had of using
his credit. Though the argument of the gentleman last up might appear
specious, that a bank note was the representative of specie, it was not
very solid; it was the representative of the credit of the bank, and
circulated for its interest. An individual, if he had sufficient credit,
might issue notes as well as a corporation; and, in that case, his notes
would be charged with the duty, whilst those of a corporation would not.
From whence, said Mr. V., is this reasoning drawn? It was drawn from the
doctrine of favoritism--it was meant to favor the moneyed interest,
which was already sufficiently encouraged by their incorporation. There
seemed to be no objection to the principle; but merely to the
convenience of the thing. If it could be shown that the tax would
materially operate upon the circulation of bank notes, so as to injure
the operation of money transactions, it might have some weight with him;
but it was none, to say this bill must pass, and therefore let us avoid
any thing in which there may be any difficulty. Such assertions went
only to this, where you can tax the property of an individual, do it;
but do not meddle with corporations, as this would be attended with some
difficulty. He wished, if the bill passed, that it should operate
equally.

Mr. COIT wished the gentleman from Virginia would withdraw his motion,
until he took the sense of the committee upon one which he proposed to
make, and which was calculated, if agreed to, to supersede the one he
had made. He would state what it was. It was his opinion that small
notes should be exempted from duty. He should propose, therefore, that
there should be charged on all notes exceeding fifty dollars and not
exceeding one hundred dollars, ten cents, and that all of less value
should go free.

After a few remarks upon this motion, in which it was observed that it
would defeat the bill entirely, as it would only be to make so many
more notes at fifty dollars, if the sum were larger, Mr. Coit consented
that the fifty should be struck out and left blank; when the question
was taken and negatived, there being only twenty-five votes for it.

Mr. NICHOLAS renewed his motion.

Mr. SITGREAVES hoped it would not prevail. It had been admitted that if
it could be proved that the stamping of bank notes would embarrass their
circulation, it would be a good objection to the tax. He believed he
could easily show that it would not only impede their circulation, but
depreciate their value. The tax would not certainly be made to operate
upon notes already issued, but upon those issued after the act took
place; so that it would be necessary that every citizen throughout the
United States should be acquainted with the date of their law, which
would do away all confidence in bank paper. The result of this
uncertainty would be that the banks would have to call in all their
outstanding notes, which would cause an immediate depreciation of their
value. He trusted, therefore, that so objectionable a measure would not
be entered upon.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he had had his doubts with respect to the propriety
of stamping bank notes; he was not sure whether it might not have a
dangerous effect on their circulation. On a further consideration of the
subject, however, all his doubts had vanished. He now thought this
amendment essential, just, and right. Indeed, when they proposed to lay
a stamp duty upon all bills and notes, there appeared to be no good
reason why the notes of any incorporation whatever should be excepted.
He had heard only one objection; which was, that these notes differed
essentially from others, because they were the real representatives of
specie kept in the bank from whence they were issued. He could not see
the distinction endeavored to be drawn. Private notes were always given
for some consideration, whether for cash or other property, was of no
consequence to them. Indeed, if they turned their attention to the
nature of bank notes, they would be found to be a very fair object of
taxation.

Where an individual gave his note, it was not likely that he would
derive any profit from it; many of such notes were what was called
"accommodation notes;" all were acknowledgments of debt, and therefore
no proofs of wealth; but bank notes were never issued except to produce
a profit to the bank; therefore, to exempt them from duty, would be to
exempt those which were best entitled to pay.

The only objection would be, any inconvenience which might take place to
counterbalance the benefit to be derived from the tax. It had been
supposed that a depreciation would take place in the value of the notes
in consequence of this tax. In order to show that this was not probable,
he supposed the tax would be laid.

Bank notes were issued and re-issued; but when an individual gave a
note, after it was paid, there was an end of it. Bank notes might be
issued twenty-times, or oftener; it was necessary, therefore, to tax
them in a different way from other notes. He supposed the same provision
might be adopted here as was adopted in England. They might be allowed
to be issued for a certain number of years--say three. This would remedy
every kind of inconvenience arising from reissuing. As to notes now in
circulation, the way to prevent inconvenience would be to fix the time
after which all notes should be renewed by stamped notes. The
consequence would be, that all notes would, by degrees, be returned to
the bank, and no difficulty would arise from doing so. Six or nine
months might be allowed for this purpose. This was the way in which all
the banks in England, except the Bank of England, were subject to the
stamp duty; that bank, he believed, had paid a certain sum to be excused
from the tax. Perhaps the same privilege might be allowed here.

Mr. NICHOLAS noticed what had fallen from the gentleman from
Pennsylvania on the subject of depreciation, and showed by the
regulations under which the tax would be paid, that it could not take
place.

Mr. RUTLEDGE thought bank notes a proper object of taxation, and had not
heard one good reason why they should be exempted from the proposed
duty. The arguments of his colleague (Mr. SMITH,) that bank notes now in
circulation would be affected, and their currency checked, he would
answer, by observing that the duty could not operate upon notes now in
circulation; it was not proposed to have them called in, but to have
those stamped which shall be issued after a certain day. He did not
think the weight and importance which generally attach to the
observations of the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SITGREAVES) attach
to those now offered by him. With respect to the circulation of bank
notes being embarrassed by the necessity there would be for the people
at large being acquainted with the date of the law, the objection would
apply to private as well as bank notes. The people throughout the
country must inform themselves, and the most ignorant will inform
themselves of the date of the act; and whenever a bank note or a private
note shall be offered to them, they will always inquire if it was issued
subsequent or previous to a certain day. The gentleman from New York
(Mr. BROOKS) was certainly incorrect in saying that "bank paper was not
stamped in any country whatever." In Great Britain, Mr. R. said, the
paper of all private banks is stamped; that of the Bank of England has
been exempted from the stamp duty, by the bank having paid the
Government a sum, in gross, by way of commutation. Although the moneyed
interest has always been well and largely represented in England, yet
bank notes are taxed there, and the circulation of them has not been
embarrassed by this duty; on the contrary, the system of banking has
been wonderfully extended throughout that kingdom. In every part of it
bank notes are current; every town and village has its banks; they are
as universal as their churches. Mr. R. asked, where would be the
propriety of taxing notes issued by fifty individuals in their
individual capacity, and exempting those issued by them when they
associated, called themselves a Banking Company, and issued notes to
three times the amount of their capital? The measure seemed to him
unwise, and he was sure it would be unpopular. He could not conceive why
people who had no other property than stock, which, in many instances,
yielded an interest of fifteen per cent., should not contribute to the
support of Government.

Mr. SWANWICK.--The greatest objection which the banks in England seemed
to have to the tax, was, that it might ascertain the quantity of notes
they had in circulation. In order to prevent this, the Bank of England
commuted with Government for a certain sum; but the notes of all the
private banks were stamped. He thought it reasonable that this kind of
notes should be stamped as well as others, though he would have the tax
low; for he saw no reason why merchants should pay, and bankers be
excused from the duty, since great emolument was derived from these
notes, by the consent of the community, and the community, in return,
had a right to expect assistance from the banks.

Mr. W. SMITH believed, if an original proposition had been brought
forward to tax bank notes, it would have been thought a very serious
thing, and they should have paused before they consented to the
proposition. Gentlemen who advocated this proposition, allowed it would
require many provisions to carry it into effect. What those provisions
were he could not pretend to say. He thought bank notes had been too
much confounded with notes of individuals, and they were quite different
things. Those of individuals were mostly larger, the greatest part of
bank notes were for five dollars. Notes of individuals, if not stamped,
could not be received in evidence; but he did not know what must be the
penalty on bank notes being issued without stamp. Besides, he said, to
lay a duty upon the notes issued by the Bank of the United States would
be a violation of its charter, for, by that charter, it was said, the
notes of that bank should be received at the custom-house in payment of
duties. It had been said a commutation might be allowed, but that would
be equally contrary to the charter; besides, if such a thing were to be
done, he did not know who could do it; it would not be the proper
business of the PRESIDENT, and that House would have difficulty in
saying what would be a proper sum to be paid for the purpose. He again
feared the introduction of this principle would destroy the bill.

Mr. COIT did not think it was quite so clear a thing as some gentlemen
seemed to think it, that bank notes ought to be stamped. He did not
believe the analogy between the bank and private notes was so strong as
had been represented. If the facts were as represented, that every bank
note was to be considered as producing a profit to the banker, there
would be good ground for the tax; but he was of opinion this was not the
case. For instance, if the bank gave their note for one hundred dollars,
it was equal evidence with the note of an individual, that they had
received the value of one hundred dollars. But if they went further, it
would be found the analogy did not hold. The note of the individual was
at a certain date, but that of the banker was on demand; and they were
every day liable to be called upon for the money of which the note was
the representative; so that they were obliged to keep the money, or
money at least to a great amount, ready to take up their notes whenever
presented. Banks could not, therefore, be considered as receiving a
profit on all the notes they issued; but only upon the difference
between the amount of notes issued, and the cash they are obliged to
keep by them to answer their demands. The analogy, therefore, did not
hold; and, if bank notes were taxed, it must be upon a different
principle from that on which the notes of individuals are taxed.

Mr. POTTER was in favor of the amendment, and he trusted that gentlemen
who were always ready to go into every species of expense, would not
flinch when the object was to raise money. He had this morning voted for
a bill laying additional tax on licenses, which he believed would be
found in some degree oppressive, but he did it because he knew revenue
was wanted. He hoped the gentleman from South Carolina would, on this
occasion, concur in the proposed tax. He doubted not unexceptionable
means might be devised for collecting it; if not, it might be given up.

Mr. HARPER was against the amendment, not because he was satisfied bank
notes were not a proper object of taxation, but because he did not wish
to embarrass the bill with a subject which they had not time to
consider.

Mr. SWANWICK again spoke in favor of the tax.

Mr. OTIS was against the amendment; not because he thought such a tax
would be improper, but from the difficulties which would attend the
carrying it into effect. Besides, he said, if the notes were to revert
to the bank every two or three years, it would cause a run upon them for
cash, instead of renewed notes, which might be very inconvenient.

Mr. VENABLE did not think the run upon the bank which the gentleman had
mentioned could take place, as the notes would have to be renewed three
years from the time issued, and all their notes would not be issued on
one day. Mr. V. again insisted that this tax should be general; and if
they had not time to make it so, it ought to be put off till they had.
Not to include bankers would be to lay a tax upon the people whose
complaints of its hardships could not be heard. He deprecated this as
unjust.

Mr. HARPER could not conceive that the great body of merchants and
farmers throughout the United States were people who could not make
their complaints heard, if they had them to make. The proprietors of
banks, Mr. H. said, already paid taxes in a variety of shapes; many of
them were merchants, and would, of course, pay the tax imposed on the
notes of individuals.

Mr. BROOKS was against going into a tax on bank notes at present, but
denied that there would be any cause of complaint from the people on
account of the taxes imposed by this bill. He wished to make a beginning
with a stamp tax at present; it might not be completed these seven
years. Gentlemen might as well go on and propose a tax on newspapers,
which, whatever might be said against it, he believed might be laid
without infringing the liberty of the press; but a thing of this kind
would require a great deal of detail.

Mr. CLAIBORNE was in favor of including bank notes; not to do this, he
said, would be to catch _small fish_, and let the _large ones_ pass.

Mr. GALLATIN said that the provisions for laying this tax would be by no
means difficult. Indeed, three-fourths of the bill was copied from the
British statute, and that part respecting bank notes could be as easy
copied as any other part. The observations respecting the charter of the
Bank of the United States, were not deserving of a reply. There was only
one of two things which could be done, either to tax bank notes, or to
excuse all other notes from the tax.

Mr. SITGREAVES could not submit to hear that it was the intention of
those who opposed this motion, to screen the moneyed interest of this
country from paying a tax. He had no such views. He had no objection to
tax the banks in proportion to the amount of their business; but he
could not agree to its being done in this way. If gentlemen would
estimate how much the stamp duty of a bank would produce to the United
States, he would vote for a sum of this kind by way of commutation.
Charges could rarely be made against the side of the House with whom he
generally acted, for not being willing to vote for revenue; a contrary
charge was more frequently made. He trusted the amendment would not be
agreed to; but that if the tax were laid, it would be by way of
commutation.

The question was taken and carried, there being 55 votes in favor of it.

The committee rose and had leave to sit again.

The resolution respecting an adjournment was received from the Senate,
and disagreed to. The disagreement being read, Mr. GILES moved the same
resolution filled with Monday next; but Mr. WILLIAMS opposed it, and
moved to adjourn.


THURSDAY, June 29.

_Stamp Duties._

BANK NOTES.

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for imposing
stamp duties, when the clause of Mr. GALLATIN yesterday proposed to the
committee, on the subject of bank notes, being under consideration,

Mr. OTIS supposed that at least two-thirds of the whole amount of paper
issued by the banks, returned and were re-issued every year, and thus
the banks must pay tax upon two-thirds of their capital in the first
year after the law passed, and which, according to a rough calculation,
relation being had to the different denominations of notes, amount to
nearly one per cent. on their capital. The tax ought to be levied upon
such new notes only as should be issued hereafter; all that were now in
existence were protected by the charter, and any law relating to them
would be retrospective; and as one-fifth of the whole number of notes
would be renewed every year, a tax upon them would be found to bear as
hard as upon other notes and bills, which seldom comprised more than the
fifth part of the transactions of an individual. It ought also to be
considered, that the paper issued by the bank generally became worn and
dirty, and incapable of receiving a stamp, so that in less than two
years the whole amount of paper must be re-issued, and the entire tax
assessed in the same period. This plan would also be inconsistent with
that of a commutation, which had been proposed.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) did not think that this proposition precluded
the provision of a commutation. He was in favor of taxing bank notes,
but he wished also to hold out a commutation, and such a one as should
induce all the banks to embrace it; for, if this were not the case, they
would not be taxed equally, as the notes of banks did not bear a just
proportion to the amount of their dividends. This clause would not,
therefore, preclude the commutation, but render it proper, and a clause
could be brought in excusing such banks from the duty as came into the
proposed plan.

Mr. GALLATIN said, his ideas corresponded exactly with those of the
gentleman who had just spoken. The scheme suggested by the gentleman
from Massachusetts, of not taxing the notes at present in circulation,
would excuse bank notes from all tax, as, according to his own account,
only about one-fifth of the notes issued came in in the course of a
year, so that it would be five years before a new tax could operate upon
all their notes, and it was probable the bill might not pass for more
than three or four. That gentleman supposed that bankers' notes ought
not to be charged more than others; if this were the case, they might be
reckoned to run for four or five years, while those of individuals were
at six and twelve months. The note of an individual, for fifty dollars,
was to pay ten cents; he calculated a bank note, therefore, for a like
sum, which he supposed, upon an average, to run four years, thirty
cents.

With respect to the notes at present in circulation, Mr. G. said, they
ought all to be called in before a certain time, and after that day no
note should be negotiable which was not stamped.

The gentleman from Massachusetts was not correct when he said that this
tax would amount to one per cent. upon the capital employed in banks.
The calculation of the amount of the tax upon a bank which he had made,
would amount to $10,000 a year, whereas one per cent. upon the capital
of the Bank of the United States would amount to $200,000; but he said
(as he had before stated) that the notes issued by a bank were not equal
to its capital, or any thing like it. He could not, indeed, say what the
amount of the notes of the Bank of the United States might be which were
received for duty, from one end of the United States to the other; but
he knew banks in general, in large cities, did not employ more than
two-fifths of their capital in this way. He knew it to be a fact with
respect to a bank of the largest property in the United States, except
the Bank of the United States. He thought of proposing the commutation
to be one per cent. upon the amount of the dividend paid by each bank,
which he supposed would be deemed a reasonable sum.

Mr. OTIS explained.

Mr. SEWALL thought the observation of the gentleman from Connecticut
yesterday, as to the nature of bank notes, had weight. He agreed with
him that they were very different from the notes of individuals, as they
were always obliged to keep cash in readiness to take up their notes,
while individuals, knowing exactly the time when the money for theirs
would be wanted, could make use of it in the mean time. Therefore, if
they taxed bank notes, they ought not to tax them in the same proportion
with those of individuals at a certain date. Notes of individuals, under
twenty dollars, were to be exempt from duty, while every note issued by
a bank was proposed to be taxed.

Every banker's note of fifty dollars was to be charged with thirty
cents, while those of individuals, which might run for two or three
years, were charged only with ten cents. Every three or four years they
would have to pay this sum. If a fair commutation were to be made, they
should first fix the tax upon just principles.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought if there was no objection to the commutation, there
could not reasonably be any made to the tax, because if the commutation
were reasonable they would not choose to pay the tax; but, if they
should choose to pay the tax, instead of the commutation, it would be
evidence that the tax was too low.

Mr. W. SMITH did not see the force of the argument of the gentleman last
up. As the commutation was to bear some proportion to the rates of
duty, it became necessary to fix the rates upon a fair basis. If the
rates were fixed too high, they ought to reduce them. He did not see the
propriety of selecting moneyed corporations for the purpose of laying a
high duty upon them. He moved to strike out the three cents for every
five dollars, and leave it a blank.

Mr. DAYTON hoped this proposition would be agreed to, as by a vote upon
the question in blank they would fix the principle whether or not bank
notes were to be taxed, and the scale could be afterwards fixed. If
there was the difference alleged between bank notes and the notes of
individuals, it would be sufficiently considered in the commutation. He
should not, indeed, be willing to agree to any scale without a
commutation, for the reason he had before mentioned. For, said he, take
the Bank of the United States and the Bank of North America, and the
notes issued by them bear no sort of proportion to their respective
capitals. If the tax were to be laid upon the notes issued, the Bank of
the United States would pay a much larger sum than the other in duty.

Mr. GALLATIN observed that the gentleman from South Carolina had said
they were about to select moneyed corporations as objects on which to
lay a high duty. He had made a calculation to show that this was not the
case, but that what was proposed was no more than just and reasonable,
and that instead of the tax being one per cent. upon their capital, it
was not more than one twentieth or one twenty-fifth part of one per
cent.

He would state the facts, and beg gentlemen to correct him where he was
mistaken. In the first place he would state the capital of all the banks
of the United States at $20,000,000; the whole amount of bank notes at
less than $8,000,000. He would divide these $8,000,000, one-half into
notes under fifty dollars, and one-half above that sum as follows:

$4,000,000 in notes under fifty dollars,
  which would give about
  eighty thousand notes, (for though
  they would be of different sizes
  they paid in the same proportion,)
  at thirty cents,                         $24,000
$2,000,000 of one hundred dollars
  and upwards, at fifty cents,              10,000
$2,000,000 of three hundred dollars
  and upwards,                               4,000
                                           -------
                                           $38,000
Allow for mistakes,                          2,000
                                           -------
Which includes all the notes in circulation
  in the United States,                    $40,000

As to the principle of taxation itself, that bank notes of fifty dollars
should pay thirty cents when notes of individuals only pay ten cents,
justice requires the difference, on the same principle that notes of
sixty days had been charged with only two-fifths of the duty charged
upon others.

Mr. G. stated the following account of a bank in Philadelphia, whose
capital was $2,000,000, and to which Government owed nothing; which, he
said, would apply to every other bank in the same circumstances, with
little variation:

To the original fund,    $2,000,000
To deposits, about          900,000
To bank notes,              600,000
                         ----------
Total debts,             $3,500,000
                         ----------
By notes discounted,     $3,000,000[20]
By cash in vault,        500,000
                         ----------
Total credits,           $3,500,000
                         ----------

As banks were thus able to transact business to the amount of three
millions of dollars, though their original fund was only two millions,
he accounted for their sharing dividends of nine per cent. on their
stock. It would be observed that the two millions capital were not
touched for notes, and yet they were charged with selecting these bodies
of men upon whom to lay a heavy tax.

Mr. G. concluded by saying he had no prejudice against banks. He knew
they were liable to abuse, but, upon the whole, he believed them to be
useful. He believed the scale he had formed was correct, but should
withdraw it for the present, in order to give an opportunity of trying
the principle.


FRIDAY, June 30.

_Duties on Stamps._

The proposition of Mr. GALLATIN for admitting of a composition from the
banks in lieu of the tax, came next under consideration--the blank in
which was moved to be filled with one per cent.; when

Mr. W. SMITH said, if the gentleman from Pennsylvania was right in his
calculation yesterday, the whole amount of duties arising from the banks
would be $8,000 a year, and therefore they ought not to go farther in
fixing the composition, whereas one per cent., according to the same
statement, will produce more than double that sum; for, if the whole
capital of the banks in the United States be twenty millions, and their
average dividend ten per cent., that will produce two millions, which at
one per cent. will give $20,000. He therefore moved, in order to bring
the matter nearer to a fair equivalent, to strike out one per cent. and
insert one-half per cent.

Mr. NICHOLAS said what the duty would produce was uncertain; they could
with more correctness say, that one per cent. was a reasonable
composition on the dividends, than what might be produced by the duty.
He knew of no tax laid upon property that could be made for less than
five per cent. to clear the expense of making it.

Mr. W. SMITH thought they should first fix the rates to be paid on bank
notes before they determined upon the composition.

Mr. GALLATIN said, when the rates were before under consideration, the
gentleman from South Carolina objected to it, because, if fixed too
high, he said it would influence the composition. He therefore moved to
have it struck out; but now, when a composition was under consideration,
he turns round and says it would be better first to fix the rates. He
thought one per cent. a reasonable composition, and that it would be
best first to fix that.

Mr. SMITH denied that he wanted first to fix the composition; it was his
wish to strike out the rates, to reduce them, that he moved to leave the
sum blank.

The question was put and carried, there being 54 votes in favor of it.

Mr. GALLATIN then renewed his motion for fixing the scale of duty to be
paid on bank notes. It was, on notes not exceeding fifty dollars, three
cents for every five dollars; those not exceeding one hundred dollars,
fifty cents; those above one hundred dollars, and not exceeding five
hundred dollars, one dollar; for all above five hundred dollars, two
dollars.

Mr. DAYTON said there were many notes under five dollars, for which
there was no provision.

Mr. GALLATIN thought "the rate of" would have included the small ones;
and, to dissipate every doubt on the subject, he moved to replace "three
cents for every five dollars," with "three-fifths of a cent for every
dollar."

Carried, 39 to 24.[21]


MONDAY, July 3.

The bill for laying a stamp duty was read a third time, and the blanks
filled up, viz: that for fixing the time of the act taking effect, with
the 31st day of December next; the fine and imprisonment for
counterfeiting stamps, &c., with $1,000 and seven years' imprisonment;
and the time for which the duration of the act was limited, with five
years.

The yeas and nays being taken on the passage of the bill, were--yeas 47,
nays 41, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, James A. Bayard, David Brooks, James
      Cochran, Joshua Coit, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, James
      Davenport, John Dennis, Geo. Dent, Thomas Evans, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, James Gillespie,
      Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon, Roger
      Griswold, John A. Hanna, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas
      Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, Samuel Lyman,
      James Machir, William Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R.
      Morris, Harrison G. Otis, Elisha R. Potter, John Read, John
      Rutledge, jun., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William
      Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Jeremiah
      Smith, Nathaniel Smith, William Smith, (of Charleston,)
      George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thomson, John E. Van
      Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--George Baer, jr., Abraham Baldwin, David Bard,
      Lemuel Benton, Thos. Blount, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges,
      Samuel J. Cabell, Christopher G. Champlin, Thomas
      Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Thomas T. Davis,
      John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, John Fowler, Albert
      Gallatin, Jonathan N. Havens, David Holmes, Walter Jones,
      Edward Livingston, Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel
      Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge,
      Anthony New, John Nicholas, Josiah Parker, Thompson J.
      Skinner, William Smith, (of Pinckney District,) Richard
      Sprigg, jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg,
      John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham
      Venable, and Robert Williams.


TUESDAY, July 4.

_Duty on Salt._

Mr. ALLEN called up the resolution he yesterday laid upon the table, for
laying an additional duty on salt.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to postpone the consideration of this resolution
until the second Monday in November.

Some debate took place on this question; and, when it came to be taken,
the House was equally divided, there being 43 votes for the
postponement, and 43 against it. The SPEAKER decided against the
postponement, and the resolution was referred to a Committee of the
Whole immediately.

The House accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
this resolution; when

Mr. ALLEN moved the blank cents per bushel be filled with twelve.

Mr. SWANWICK wished the sum to be seven.

Mr. ALLEN consented to make it eight.

Mr. SITGREAVES hoped it would be twelve.

The question was first taken upon twelve, and negatived, there being
only 30 votes for it. It was next taken upon eight, and carried, 47 to
42, and then upon the resolution as amended, and carried by the same
numbers.

The committee rose, and the House took up the resolution.

After a few words from Mr. LYON against the tax, and from Mr. WILLIAMS
in favor of it,

Mr. W. SMITH went at considerable length into a defence of the measure,
in the course of which, he said, they had already agreed upon
appropriations to the amount of $700,000 or $800,000, and were not
certain of any revenue to meet the expenditure. The license act, he
believed, might produce from $50,000 to $60,000, and the stamp act from
$100,000 to $150,000, if they should be passed; but he considered this
as doubtful. But if these laws were passed, this tax on salt was
necessary to keep up the equilibrium of taxation;[22] for the stamp act
would almost exclusively fall upon commerce and large cities; this would
principally be felt by the agricultural part of the Union; and, if it
were not agreed to, they must have a land tax.

Mr. SHEPARD said, no tax would operate so equally as a salt tax, as
every citizen must make use of it in a smaller or larger quantity.

Mr. GALLATIN opposed this tax on the same ground which he heretofore
opposed it, as oppressive to certain parts of the Union, and no way
affecting others, and therefore wholly unequal, and particularly as it
bore heavy on the poorer classes of society. He was against it also,
because it was not proposed that the amount of this tax should go
towards a reduction of the public debt, but merely to encourage expense
in the Government; for he believed if they filled the Treasury with
money, means would be found to expend it. Indeed, if the Treasury had
not been at present in rather a low state, he believed they should have
gone into most of the expensive measures proposed to them this session.
He allowed the tax would be productive, as a tax upon bread, air, or any
necessary of life, must be productive. If this tax, however, were to be
agreed to, he should wish to make an amendment to the present
proposition. At present the drawback allowed to the New England States,
on account of salt used in the fisheries, amounted to about $90,000 a
year, though by the statements it appeared there should only have been
allowed $50,000. To rectify this, he proposed the following proviso to
be added to the resolution, viz:

      _Provided_, That the allowance now given upon vessels
      employed in the fisheries, shall not be increased.

This amendment was opposed by Messrs. HARPER, SEWALL, DANA, and KITTERA,
on the ground of its being an unfair way of introducing the proposition,
as no one expected it; they were not prepared to meet it; the
correctness of the statement was doubted; and, if it were correct, it
was said, the proper way of doing the business would not be to pass the
present law without a drawback, but to reduce the former drawback and
make it less on this occasion.

The motion was supported by the mover, and Messrs. VENABLE and
LIVINGSTON; but, after some discussion, Mr. GALLATIN withdrew it, in
order to give gentlemen time to make themselves acquainted with the fact
he had stated; but he expressed his intention of renewing the
proposition when the bill came in.

The question then returned upon the original resolution; when

Mr. HARPER went at length into a defence of the measure, (in the course
of which he charged Mr. GALLATIN with being mistaken $12,000 as to the
amount of the drawback allowed,) and insisted that it was a fair and
proper tax, and that so small an advance upon the present duty could not
operate oppressively upon any part of the community.

Mr. NICHOLAS followed in opposition. He dwelt considerably on the unjust
and unequal manner in which this tax would operate. He said he did not
view this question as deciding merely whether an additional tax of eight
cents should be laid upon salt; but whether that necessary of life
should be called upon for every thing Government should want. He was in
favor of a direct tax, which should fall equally, though it might, in
the origin, be attended with some considerable expense; but, if they
went on raising partial sums in this way by indirect means, the expense
of instituting a direct tax would always be an obstacle, and indirect
taxes would always be had recourse to. He did not believe it to be
absolutely necessary to provide a revenue this session, as he believed
money might as well be borrowed without as with additional revenue, and
at the next session, the subject could be fully gone into.

Mr. LYON spoke of the discontent which had always been shown in the part
of the country from whence he came, which, he said, would be greatly
increased by this addition. It was not only a duty of eight cents, every
cent would be made four before the salt reached them. There was no kind
of tax which his constituents would not sooner bear. It had been said
that a land tax would cost twenty-five per cent. to collect it; but what
was twenty-five compared with three hundred per cent.? Nor did he
believe this tax would prevent a land tax. He believed they should go on
taxing the people until they would be greatly dissatisfied. He would
much rather a tax of eight cents was laid upon tea, which would produce
an equal sum.

The question was taken by yeas and nays, and decided in the
affirmative--47 to 41.


WEDNESDAY, July 5.

_Duty on Salt._

The House went into Committee of the Whole on the bill for laying an
additional duty on salt; when

Mr. GALLATIN moved to strike out all that related to the allowing of a
drawback to vessels employed in the fishing trade, on the ground that he
yesterday stated, viz: that the allowance at present made was too large
by $40,000 a year, taking the year 1794 for his data; but it appeared
that in the year 1795 there was a deficiency in that trade, owing
principally, it was supposed, to the great demand for seamen in the
merchant service. He, therefore, would take the calculation of the
gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. HARPER,) made yesterday, and,
instead of calling the amount of drawback allowed $90,000, he would
state it to be $78,000; and even then, he said, the drawback at present
allowed would exceed by two thousand dollars the drawback to which they
would be entitled, if the present duty took place.

He spoke generally against the tax as oppressive to the back country;
but if the gentleman from Massachusetts, and others, were determined to
increase the tax, he should wish their part of the country to pay their
share of it.

This motion was supported by Messrs. VENABLE, NICHOLAS, CLAY, MCDOWELL,
and MACON.

It was opposed by Messrs. SEWALL, OTIS, HARPER, COIT, BROOKS, KITTERA,
J. WILLIAMS, and DAYTON.

The calculation of the quantity of salt estimated to be necessary to be
used for a quintal of fish, (one bushel,) was said to be stated too low;
that the sum allowed was not only meant as a drawback of the duty, but
also as a bounty on the fishing trade--as being a nursery for seamen,
and serving as a kind of naval militia for the United States.

If it should appear, however, that the present allowance was too great,
(which, by some gentlemen in favor of this motion, which was in blank,
seemed to be acknowledged,) a less allowance might be made in this bill;
but they could not consent to the bill passing without a drawback.

The question for striking out the clause was taken, and negatived--49 to
41.

Mr. COIT moved to fill the blank with 50 per cent., instead of 66-2/3,
which was the drawback allowed by the present law.

Mr. HARTLEY thought this sum too high.

Mr. WILLIAMS moved 33-1/3 per cent. which was carried without a
division.

Mr. NICHOLAS moved a limitation clause, to continue the act in force for
two years, and from thence to the end of the next session of Congress.

This motion was carried--42 to 39.

The committee rose, and the House agreed to the amendments. The yeas and
nays were called upon the limitation clause, and were taken, and
stood--yeas 47, nays 43.

The bill was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading this day; and
before the House rose, it received it, and passed. The yeas and nays on
its passage stood 45 to 40, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, James A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen
      Bullock, John Chapman, Christopher G. Champlin, Joshua
      Coit, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, James Davenport, John
      Dennis, George Dent, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight
      Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich,
      Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper, William Hindman,
      Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera,
      Samuel Lyman, William Matthews, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison
      G. Otis, Elisha R. Potter, John Read, John Rutledge, jun.,
      James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Jeremiah Smith, Nathaniel
      Smith, William Smith, (of Charleston,) John Swanwick,
      George Thatcher, Mark Thompson, John E. Van Allen, Peleg
      Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Samuel
      J. Cabell, Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton,
      Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, John
      Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Wm. B. Grove,
      John A. Hanna, Jonathan N. Havens, David Holmes, Walter
      Jones, Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Daniel Morgan,
      Anthony New, John Nicholas, Thompson J. Skinner, William
      Smith, (of Pinckney District,) Richard Sprigg, jun.,
      Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, John Trigg,
      Joseph B. Varnum, and Robert Williams.


SATURDAY, July 8.

_Laws in the German Language._

Mr. HOLMES said that he thought it necessary, in order to enforce a
general compliance with the laws of the United States, that they should
be printed in the German language, as well as in the English, since
there were very many inhabitants in this country who could read no
other. He therefore proposed a resolution to the following effect:

      "_Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of
      the United States_, That a number of copies of the laws of
      this session, not exceeding eight thousand copies, shall be
      printed in the German language, and distributed by the
      Secretary of State amongst the Executives of the several
      States, for the information of the German inhabitants of
      each State respectively."

Mr. LYON thought it would be proper to pass a resolution of this kind.
He did not know what number might be necessary. He also thought that
some measures should be taken for a general publication of their laws in
the English language; at present, it was merely by chance if the people
in his district came to a knowledge of them. He thought all laws of
general import should be inserted in every newspaper throughout the
Union.

Mr. COIT said if they were to promulge their laws in the German
language, it would be necessary that they should all become critically
acquainted with it, for if they were to authorize any translation, great
mischiefs might arise from its not being correct.

Mr. GALLATIN said that the weight of the objection urged by the
gentleman last up, had always been thought sufficient in the
Legislature of Pennsylvania, in which State there was a greater
proportion of Germans than in any other. There was also another
objection to the measure. If it were to be passed, it must be
accompanied with an appropriation law, which the advanced state of the
session would not admit.

The resolution was put and negatived.


MONDAY, July 10.

On motion of Mr. DENT, a committee was appointed to wait upon the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in conjunction with a like committee
from the Senate, to inform him the two Houses were about to adjourn. The
committee waited upon the PRESIDENT accordingly, and reported his
acquiescence, and his good wishes for the safe arrival of the members at
their several homes.

On motion of Mr. SITGREAVES, the resolution entered into some time ago,
calling upon the PRESIDENT for an account of the quantity of arms in the
possession of the United States, and at what place they were lodged, was
suspended.

Mr. S. said, he wished to make a report upon a subject which would
require the galleries to be cleared. He, therefore, moved that they be
cleared, and the doors were closed for the remainder of the sitting, at
the conclusion of which the House adjourned till the second Monday in
November next.[23]




FIFTH CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, NOVEMBER 13, 1797.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, November 13, 1797.

The second session of the fifth Congress of the United States commenced
this day, at the city of Philadelphia, conformably to law; and the
Senate assembled accordingly in their Chamber.

PRESENT:

SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire.
THEODORE FOSTER, from Rhode Island.
URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.
ELIJAH PAINE, from Vermont.
WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.
HUMPHREY MARSHALL, from Kentucky.
ALEXANDER MARTIN and TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH, from North Carolina.
JACOB READ, from South Carolina.

The number of members present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, the Senate adjourned to 11 o'clock to-morrow morning.


TUESDAY, November 14.

JOHN LAURANCE, from the State of New York, and HENRY LATIMER, from the
State of Delaware, severally attended.

The number of members present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, the Senate adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 15.

BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from the State of Massachusetts, attended.

The number of members present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, the Senate adjourned.


THURSDAY, November 16.

The Senate assembled, and the number of members present not being
sufficient to constitute a quorum, the Senate adjourned.


FRIDAY, November 17.

JOHN LANGDON, from the State of New Hampshire, attended.

The number of members present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, the Senate adjourned.


SATURDAY, November 18.

No quorum being present, the Senate adjourned.


MONDAY, November 20.

JAMES GUNN, from the State of Georgia, attended.

No quorum being present, adjourned.


TUESDAY, November 21.

RAY GREENE, appointed a Senator by the State of Rhode Island, in the
place of WILLIAM BRADFORD, resigned, produced his credentials.

RICHARD STOCKTON, from the State of New Jersey, attended.

No quorum being present, the Senate adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 22.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a
President _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides; and JACOB READ
was duly elected.

JOSEPH ANDERSON, appointed a Senator by the State of Tennessee, for the
remainder of the term which the late Senator WILLIAM BLOUNT had drawn,
and was entitled to have served, produced his credentials; which were
read.

NATHANIEL CHIPMAN, appointed a Senator by the State of Vermont, in the
place of ISAAC TICHENOR, elected Governor, produced his credentials;
which were read.

The credentials of RAY GREENE were read.

ANDREW JACKSON, appointed a Senator by the State of Tennessee, produced
his credentials; which were read.

The oath required by law was administered by the PRESIDENT, to Messrs.
ANDERSON, CHIPMAN, GREENE, and JACKSON, they having severally taken
their seats in the Senate.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that a
quorum of the House is assembled, and ready to proceed to business.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives that
a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and are ready to proceed to
business; and that, in the absence of the VICE-PRESIDENT, they have
elected JACOB READ, President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

_Resolved_, That each Senator be supplied, during the present session,
with copies of three such newspapers, printed in any of the States, as
he may choose, provided that the same are furnished at the rate of the
usual annual charge for such papers.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House have appointed a joint committee on their part, together with
such committee as the Senate may appoint, to wait on the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, and notify him that a quorum of the two Houses is
assembled, and ready to receive any communications that he may be
pleased to make to them.

_Resolved_, That the Senate do concur in the appointment of a joint
committee, and that Messrs. BINGHAM and TRACY be the committee on the
part of the Senate.

_Resolved_, That two Chaplains be appointed to Congress for the present
session, one by each House, who shall interchange weekly; and that the
Right Rev. Bishop WHITE be Chaplain on the part of the Senate.

Mr. BINGHAM reported, from the joint committee, that they had waited on
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and had notified him that a quorum
of the two Houses is assembled; and that the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES acquainted the committee that he would meet the two Houses, in
the Representatives' Chamber, at 12 o'clock to-morrow.


THURSDAY, November 23.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House are now ready to meet the Senate in the Chamber of that House, to
receive such communications as the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall
please to make them.

The Senate then repaired to the Chamber of the House of Representatives
for the purpose above expressed.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and a copy of the Speech of
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, this day addressed to both Houses of
Congress, was read:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      I was for some time apprehensive that it would be
      necessary, on account of the contagious sickness which
      afflicted the city of Philadelphia, to convene the National
      Legislature at some other place. This measure it was
      desirable to avoid, because it would occasion much public
      inconvenience, and a considerable public expense, and add
      to the calamities of the inhabitants of this city, whose
      sufferings must have excited the sympathy of all their
      fellow-citizens. Therefore, after taking measures to
      ascertain the state and decline of the sickness, I
      postponed my determination, having hopes, now happily
      realized, that, without hazard to the lives or health of
      the members, Congress might assemble at this place, where
      it was next by law to meet. I submit, however, to your
      consideration, whether a power to postpone the meeting of
      Congress, without passing the time fixed by the
      constitution, upon such occasions, would not be a useful
      amendment to the law of one thousand seven hundred and
      ninety-four.

      Although I cannot yet congratulate you on the
      re-establishment of peace in Europe, and the restoration of
      security to the persons and properties of our citizens from
      injustice and violence at sea, we have nevertheless
      abundant cause of gratitude to the Source of Benevolence
      and Influence, for interior tranquillity and personal
      security, for propitious seasons, prosperous agriculture,
      productive fisheries, and general improvements; and, above
      all, for a rational spirit of civil and religious liberty,
      and a calm, but steady determination to support our
      sovereignty, as well as our moral and religious principles,
      against all open and secret attacks.

      Our Envoys Extraordinary to the French Republic embarked,
      one in July, the other early in August, to join their
      colleague in Holland.[24] I have received intelligence of
      the arrival of both of them in Holland, from whence they
      all proceeded on their journey to Paris, within a few days
      of the nineteenth of September. Whatever may be the result
      of this mission, I trust that nothing will have been
      omitted on my part, to conduct the negotiation to a
      successful conclusion, on such equitable terms as may be
      compatible with the safety, honor, and interests of the
      United States. Nothing, in the mean time, will contribute
      so much to the preservation of peace, and the attainment of
      justice, as a manifestation of that energy and unanimity of
      which, on many former occasions, the people of the United
      States have given such memorable proofs, and the exertion
      of those resources for national defence, which a beneficent
      Providence has kindly placed within their power.

      It may be confidently asserted, that nothing has occurred
      since the adjournment of Congress, which renders
      inexpedient those precautionary measures recommended by me
      to the consideration of the two Houses, at the opening of
      your late extraordinary session. If that system was then
      prudent, it is more so now, as increasing depredations
      strengthen the reasons for its adoption.


      Indeed, whatever may be the issue of the negotiation with
      France, and whether the war in Europe is or is not to
      continue, I hold it most certain that perfect tranquillity
      and order will not soon be obtained. The state of society
      has so long been disturbed; the sense of moral and
      religious obligations so much weakened; public faith and
      national honor have been so impaired; respect to treaties
      has been so diminished, and the law of nations has lost so
      much of its force; while pride, ambition, avarice, and
      violence, have been so long unrestrained, there remains no
      reasonable ground on which to raise an expectation, that a
      commerce, without protection or defence, will not be
      plundered.

      The commerce of the United States is essential, if not to
      their existence, at least to their comfort, their growth,
      prosperity, and happiness. The genius, character, and
      habits of the people are highly commercial; their cities
      have been founded, and exist, upon commerce; our
      agriculture, fisheries, arts, and manufactures, are
      connected with and depend upon it; in short, commerce has
      made this country what it is, and it cannot be destroyed or
      neglected without involving the people in poverty and
      distress; great numbers are directly and solely supported
      by navigation--the faith of society is pledged for the
      preservation of the rights of commercial, and seafaring, no
      less than of the other citizens. Under this view of our
      affairs, I should hold myself guilty of a neglect of duty,
      if I forbore to recommend that we should make every
      exertion to protect our commerce, and to place our country
      in a suitable posture of defence, as the only sure means of
      preserving both.

      I have entertained an expectation, that it would have been
      in my power, at the opening of this session, to have
      communicated to you the agreeable information of the due
      execution of our treaty with His Catholic Majesty,
      respecting the withdrawing of his troops from our
      territory, and the demarkation of the line of limits; but
      by the latest authentic intelligence, Spanish garrisons
      were still continued within the limits of our country, and
      the running of the boundary line had not been commenced.
      These circumstances are the more to be regretted, as they
      cannot fail to affect the Indians in a manner injurious to
      the United States; still, however, indulging the hope that
      the answers which have been given, will remove the
      objections offered by the Spanish officers to the immediate
      execution of the treaty, I have judged it proper that we
      should continue in readiness to receive the posts, and to
      run the line of limits. Further information on this subject
      will be communicated in the course of the session.

      In connection with the unpleasant state of things on our
      western frontier, it is proper for me to mention the
      attempts of foreign agents to alienate the affections of
      the Indian nations, and to excite them to actual
      hostilities against the United States; great activity has
      been exerted by these persons, who have insinuated
      themselves among the Indian tribes, residing within the
      territory of the United States, to influence them, to
      transfer their affections and force to a foreign nation, to
      form them into a confederacy, and prepare them for war,
      against the United States.

      Although measures have been taken to counteract these
      infractions of our rights, to prevent Indian hostilities,
      and to preserve their attachment to the United States, it
      is my duty to observe, that, to give a better effect to
      these measures, and to obviate the consequences of a
      repetition of such practices, a law, providing adequate
      punishment for such offences, may be necessary.

      The Commissioners appointed under the fifth article of the
      Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, between the
      United States and Great Britain, to ascertain the river,
      which was truly intended, under the name of the St. Croix,
      mentioned in the Treaty of Peace, met at Passamaquoddy Bay
      in October, 1796, and viewed the mouths of the rivers in
      question, and the adjacent shores and islands; and being
      of opinion, that actual surveys of both rivers to their
      sources, were necessary, gave the agents of the two nations
      instructions for that purpose, and adjourned to meet at
      Boston in August; they met; but the surveys, requiring more
      time than had been supposed, and not being then completed,
      the Commissioners again adjourned to meet at Providence, in
      the State of Rhode Island, in June next, when we may expect
      a final examination and decision.

      The Commissioners appointed in pursuance of the sixth
      article of the treaty, met at Philadelphia in May last, to
      examine the claims of British subjects, for debts
      contracted before the peace, and still remaining due to
      them, from citizens or inhabitants of the United States.
      Various causes have hitherto prevented any determinations;
      but the business is now resumed, and doubtless will be
      prosecuted without interruption.

      Several decisions on the claims of the citizens of the
      United States, for losses, and damages, sustained by reason
      of irregular and illegal captures, or condemnations, of
      their vessels or other property, have been made by the
      Commissioners in London, conformably to the seventh article
      of the treaty; the sums awarded by the Commissioners have
      been paid by the British Government; a considerable number
      of other claims, where costs and damages, and not captured
      property, were the only objects in question, have been
      decided by arbitration, and the sums awarded to the
      citizens of the United States have also been paid.

      The Commissioners appointed agreeably to the 21st article
      of our Treaty with Spain, met at Philadelphia in the summer
      past, to examine and decide on the claims of our citizens
      for losses they have sustained in consequence of their
      vessels and cargoes having been taken by the subjects of
      His Catholic Majesty, during the late war between Spain and
      France; their sittings have been interrupted, but are now
      resumed.

      The United States being obligated to make compensation for
      the losses and damages sustained by British subjects, upon
      the award of the Commissioners acting under the sixth
      article of the Treaty with Great Britain, and for the
      losses and damages sustained by British subjects, by reason
      of the capture of their vessels and merchandise, taken
      within the limits and jurisdiction of the United States,
      and brought into their ports, or taken by vessels
      originally armed in ports of the United States, upon the
      awards of the Commissioners acting under the seventh
      article of the same treaty, it is necessary that provision
      be made for fulfilling these obligations.

      The numerous captures of American vessels by cruisers of
      the French Republic, and of some by those of Spain, have
      occasioned considerable expenses, in making and supporting
      the claims of our citizens before their tribunals. The sums
      required for this purpose have, in divers instances, been
      disbursed by the Consuls of the United States; by means of
      the same captures, great numbers of our seamen have been
      thrown ashore in foreign countries, destitute of all means
      of subsistence, and the sick, in particular, have been
      exposed to grievous suffering.

      The Consuls have, in these cases also, advanced moneys for
      their relief; for these advances they reasonably expect
      reimbursements from the United States. The Consular act
      relative to seamen requires revision and amendment; the
      provisions for their support in foreign countries, and for
      their return, are found to be inadequate, and ineffectual.
      Another provision seems necessary to be added to the
      Consular act; some foreign vessels have been discovered
      sailing under the flag of the United States, and with
      forged papers. It seldom happens that the Consuls can
      detect this deception, because they have no authority to
      demand an inspection of the registers and sea letters.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      It is my duty to recommend to your serious consideration
      those objects which, by the constitution, are placed
      particularly within your sphere--the national debt and
      taxes.

      Since the decay of the feudal system, by which the public
      defence was provided for, chiefly at the expense of
      individuals, a system of loans has been introduced. And as
      no nation can raise, within the year, by taxes, sufficient
      sums for its defence, and military operations in time of
      war, the sums loaned and debts contracted have necessarily
      become the subjects of what have been called funding
      systems. The consequences arising from the continued
      accumulation of public debts in other countries, ought to
      admonish us to be careful to prevent their growth in our
      own. The national defence must be provided for as well as
      the support of Government; but both should be accomplished,
      as much as possible, by immediate taxes, and as little as
      possible by loans. The estimates for the services for the
      ensuing year will, by my direction, be laid before you.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      We are met together at a most interesting period; the
      situations of the principal powers of Europe are singular
      and portentous: connected with some by treaties and with
      all by commerce, no important event there can be
      indifferent to us; such circumstances call with peculiar
      importunity, not less for a disposition to unite in all
      those measures on which the honor, safety, and prosperity
      of our country depend, than for all the exertions of wisdom
      and firmness.

      In all such measures you may rely on my zealous and hearty
      concurrence.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _November_ 23, 1797.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. STOCKTON, LAURANCE, and LIVERMORE, be a
committee to report the draft of an Address to the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, in answer to his Speech, this day, to both Houses of
Congress; and that the Speech be printed for the use of the Senate.


FRIDAY, November 24.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House have agreed to so much of the resolution of the Senate, of the
22d instant, relative to the appointment of Chaplains, as is contained
in the words following, to wit:

"_Resolved_, That two Chaplains be appointed to Congress for the present
session, one by each House, who shall interchange weekly."

"The House have proceeded, by ballot, to the appointment of a Chaplain
on their part; and, upon examining the ballots, a majority of the votes
of the whole House was found in favor of the Rev. ASHBEL GREEN."


SATURDAY, November 25.

Mr. STOCKTON, from the committee, reported the draft of an Address to
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in answer to his Speech to both
Houses of Congress, at the opening of the session; which was read.

On motion, that a number of copies be printed, under an injunction that
no more should be struck off than may be necessary for the use of the
Senate, it passed in the negative.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary furnish such Senators as request it, with
copies of this report.


MONDAY, November 27.

HENRY TAZEWELL, from the State of Virginia, attended.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee, of
the draft of an Address in answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, to both Houses of Congress, at the opening of the
session; which, being read in paragraphs, and amended, was adopted, as
follows:

      _To the President of the United States_:

      SIR: The communications you thought proper to make in your
      Speech to both Houses of Congress on the opening of their
      present session, afford additional proofs of the attention,
      integrity, and firmness, which have always marked your
      official character.

      We cannot but approve of the measures you had taken to
      ascertain the state and decline of the contagious sickness
      which has so lately afflicted the city of Philadelphia, and
      the pleasing circumstance that Congress is now assembled at
      that place, without hazard to the health of its members,
      evinces the propriety of your having postponed a
      determination to convene the National Legislature at
      another place. We shall take into consideration the law of
      1794, on this subject, and will readily concur in any
      amendment which may be deemed expedient.

      It would have given us much pleasure to have received your
      congratulations on the re-establishment of peace in Europe,
      and the restoration of security to the persons and property
      of our citizens from injustice and violence at sea. But,
      though these events, so desirable to our country and the
      world, have not taken place, yet we have abundant cause of
      gratitude to the Great Disposer of human events for
      interior tranquillity and personal security, for propitious
      seasons, prosperous agriculture, productive fisheries, and
      general improvement; and, above all, for a rational spirit
      of civil and religious liberty, and a calm, but steady
      determination to support our sovereignty against all open
      and secret attacks.

      We learn, with satisfaction, that our Envoys Extraordinary
      to the French Republic had safely arrived in Europe, and
      were proceeding to the scene of negotiation; and, whatever
      may be the result of the mission, we are perfectly
      satisfied that nothing on your part has been omitted, which
      could, in any way, conduce to a successful conclusion of
      the negotiation, upon terms compatible with the safety,
      honor, and interest, of the United States; and we are fully
      convinced that, in the mean time, a manifestation of that
      unanimity and energy of which the people of the United
      States have given such memorable proofs, and a proper
      exertion of those resources of national defence, which we
      possess, will essentially contribute to the preservation of
      peace and the attainment of justice.

      We think, sir, with you, that the commerce of the United
      States is essential to the growth, comfort, and prosperity
      of our country; and that the faith of society is pledged
      for the preservation of the rights of commercial and
      seafaring, no less than of other citizens. And even if our
      negotiation with France should terminate favorably, and the
      war in Europe cease, yet the state of society, which
      unhappily prevails in so great a portion of the world, and
      the experience of past times, under better circumstances,
      unite in warning us that a commerce so extensive, and which
      holds out so many temptations to lawless plunderers, can
      never be safe without protection; and we hold ourselves
      obliged, by every tie of duty which binds us to our
      constituents, to promote and concur in such measures of
      marine defence, as may convince our merchants and seamen
      that their rights are not sacrificed, nor their injuries
      forgotten.

      We regret, that, notwithstanding the clear and explicit
      terms of the treaty between the United States and His
      Catholic Majesty, the Spanish garrisons are not yet
      withdrawn from our territory, nor the running of the
      boundary line commenced. The United States have been
      faithful in the performance of their obligations to Spain,
      and had reason to expect a compliance equally prompt on the
      part of that power. We still, however, indulge the hope
      that the convincing answers, which have been given to the
      objections stated by the Spanish officers, to the immediate
      execution of the treaty, will have their proper effect; and
      that this treaty, so mutually beneficial to the contracting
      parties, will be finally observed with good faith. We
      therefore entirely approve of your determination to
      continue in readiness to receive the posts, and to run the
      line of partition between our territory and that of the
      King of Spain.

      Attempts to alienate the affections of the Indians; to form
      them into a confederacy, and to excite them to actual
      hostility against the United States, whether made by
      foreign agents, or by others, are so injurious to our
      citizens at large, and so inhuman with respect to our
      citizens inhabiting the adjacent territory, as to deserve
      the most exemplary punishment; and we will cheerfully
      afford our aid in framing a law, which may prescribe a
      punishment adequate to the commission of crimes so heinous.

      The several objects you have pointed out to the attention
      of the Legislature, whether they regard our internal or
      external relations, shall receive from us that
      consideration which they merit; and we will readily concur
      in all such measures as may be necessary, either to enable
      us to fulfil our engagements at home, or to cause ourselves
      to be respected abroad. And, at this portentous period,
      when the powers of Europe, with whom we are connected by
      treaty or commerce, are in so critical a situation, and
      when the conduct of some of those powers towards the United
      States is so hostile and menacing, the several branches of
      the Government are, in our opinion, called upon, with
      peculiar importunity, to unite, and, by union, not only to
      devise and carry those measures on which the safety and
      prosperity of our country depend, but also to undeceive
      those nations who, regarding us as a weak and divided
      people, have pursued systems of aggression inconsistent
      with a state of peace between independent nations. And, sir
      we beg leave to assure you, that we derive a singular
      consolation from the reflection that, at such a time, the
      Executive part of our Government has been committed to your
      hands, for, in your integrity, talents, and firmness, we
      place the most entire confidence.

                          JACOB READ,

                          _President of the Senate pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the committee who prepared the Address wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES and desire him to acquaint the Senate at
what time and place it will be most convenient for him that it should be
presented.

On motion, _Ordered_, That Messrs. TRACY, BINGHAM, and GREENE, be a
committee, to inquire what business remained unfinished at the close of
the last session of Congress, which, in their opinion, is proper for the
Senate to take into consideration the present session, and, also, what
laws will expire before the next session of Congress, and report thereon
to the Senate.


TUESDAY, November 28.

Mr. STOCKTON reported, from the committee, that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and that he would receive the Address of
the Senate this day at 12 o'clock, at his own house.

The Senate accordingly waited on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and
the PRESIDENT _pro tempore_, in their name, presented the Address agreed
to yesterday.

To which the PRESIDENT made the following Reply:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      I thank you for this Address.

      When, after the most laborious investigation, and serious
      reflection, without partial considerations, or personal
      motives, measures have been adopted or recommended, I can
      receive no higher testimony of their rectitude, than the
      approbation of an assembly, so independent, patriotic, and
      enlightened, as the Senate of the United States.

      Nothing has afforded me more entire satisfaction, than the
      coincidence of your judgment with mine, in the opinion of
      the essential importance of our commerce, and the absolute
      necessity of a maritime defence. What is it, that has drawn
      to Europe the superfluous riches of the three other
      quarters of the globe, but a marine? What is it that has
      drained the wealth of Europe itself into the coffers of two
      or three of its principal commercial powers, but a marine?

      The world has furnished no example of a flourishing
      commerce, without a maritime protection; and a moderate
      knowledge of man and his history will convince any one,
      that no such prodigy ever can arise. A mercantile marine
      and a military marine must grow up together; one cannot
      long exist without the other.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _November_ 28, 1797.

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 29.

The PRESIDENT laid before the Senate the memorial and address of the
people called Quakers, from their yearly meeting, held in Philadelphia,
in the year 1797, requesting the attention of Congress to the oppressed
state of the African race, and the general prevalence of vice and
immorality; and the same was read and ordered to lie on the table.


THURSDAY, November 30.

_Ordered_, That the memorial and address of the people called Quakers,
presented yesterday, be withdrawn.


FRIDAY, December 1.

JAMES HILLHOUSE, from the State of Connecticut, attended.


MONDAY, December 11.

THEODORE SEDGWICK, from the State of Massachusetts, attended.


WEDNESDAY, December 13.

THOMAS JEFFERSON, Vice President of the United States and President of
the Senate, attended.


FRIDAY, December 22.

JOHN E. HOWARD, from the State of Maryland, attended.


THURSDAY, December 28.

JOHN BROWN, from the State of Kentucky, attended.


FRIDAY, December 29.

STEPHENS THOMPSON MASON, from the State of Virginia, attended.


MONDAY, January 8, 1798.

JAMES ROSS, from the State of Pennsylvania, attended.


THURSDAY, January 11.

JAMES LLOYD, appointed a Senator by the State of Maryland, in the place
of John Henry, elected Governor of said State, produced his credentials;
and, the oath required by law being administered, he took his seat in
the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, January 17.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The situation of affairs between the United States and the
      Cherokee Indians having evinced the expediency of a treaty
      with that nation, for the promotion of justice to them, as
      well as of the interests and convenience of our citizens, I
      have nominated, and, by and with the advice and consent of
      the Senate, appointed Commissioners to hold conferences,
      and conclude a treaty, as early as the season of the year
      and the convenience of the parties will admit.

      As we know very well, by experience, such negotiations
      cannot be carried on without considerable expenses, I
      recommend to your consideration the propriety of making an
      appropriation, at this time, for defraying such as may be
      necessary for holding and concluding a treaty.

      That you may form your judgments with greater facility, I
      shall direct the proper officer to lay before you an
      estimate of such articles and expenses as may be thought
      indispensable.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _January_ 17, 1798.


MONDAY, January 22.

JOSIAH TATTNALL, from the State of Georgia, attended.


FRIDAY, February 2.

JOHN SLOSS HOBART, appointed a Senator by the State of New York, in the
place of Philip Schuyler, resigned, produced his credentials, and, the
oath required by law being administered, he took his seat in the Senate.


MONDAY, February 5.

_French Outrage._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES; which was read:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      I have received a letter from his Excellency Charles
      Pinckney, Esq., Governor of the State of South Carolina,
      dated the 22d October, 1797, enclosing a number of
      depositions and witnesses to several captures and outrages
      committed within and near the limits of the United States,
      by a French privateer belonging to Cape Francois, or Monte
      Christo, called the Vertitude or Fortitude, and commanded
      by a person of the name of Jordan or Jourdain, and
      particularly upon an English merchant ship named the
      Oracabissa, which he first plundered and then burned, with
      the rest of her cargo, of great value, within the territory
      of the United States, in the harbor of Charleston, on the
      17th of October last. Copies of which letter and
      depositions, and also of several other depositions relative
      to the same subject, received from the Collector of
      Charleston, are herewith communicated.

      Whenever the channel of diplomatical communication between
      the United States and France shall be opened, I shall
      demand satisfaction for the insult and reparation for the
      injury.

      I have transmitted these papers to Congress, not so much
      for the purpose of communicating an account of so daring a
      violation of the territory of the United States, as to show
      the propriety and necessity of enabling the Executive
      authority of Government to take measures for protecting the
      citizens of the United States and such foreigners as have a
      right to enjoy their peace, and the protection of their
      laws, within their limits, in that as well as some other
      harbors which are equally exposed.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _February_ 5, 1798.

_Ordered_, That the Message and papers referred to lie for
consideration.


MONDAY, February 19.

JOSHUA CLAYTON, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
Delaware, in the place of John Vining, resigned, produced his
credentials, which were read, and, the oath required by law being
administered, he took his seat in the Senate.


MONDAY, March 5.

_Affairs with France._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The first despatches from our Envoys Extraordinary, since
      their arrival at Paris, were received at the Secretary of
      State's office at a late hour the last evening. They are
      all in a character which will require some days to be
      deciphered, except the last, which is dated the 8th of
      January, 1798. The contents of this letter are of so much
      importance to be immediately made known to Congress and to
      the public, especially to the mercantile part of our
      fellow-citizens, that I have thought it my duty to
      communicate them to both Houses without loss of time.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _March_ 5, 1798.

The Message and paper therein referred to were read, and ordered to lie
for consideration.


MONDAY, March 19.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The despatches from the Envoys Extraordinary of the United
      States to the French Republic, which were mentioned in my
      Message to both Houses of Congress, of the fifth instant,
      have been examined and maturely considered.

      While I feel a satisfaction in informing you that their
      exertions, for the adjustment of the differences between
      the two nations, have been sincere and unremitted, it is
      incumbent on me to declare, that I perceive no ground of
      expectation that the objects of their mission can be
      accomplished, on terms compatible with the safety, the
      honor, or the essential interests of the nation.

      This result cannot, with justice, be attributed to any want
      of moderation on the part of this Government, or to any
      indisposition to forego secondary interests, for the
      preservation of peace. Knowing it to be my duty, and
      believing it to be your wish, as well as that of the great
      body of the people, to avoid, by all reasonable
      concessions, any participation in the contentions of
      Europe, the powers vested in our Envoys were commensurate
      with a liberal and pacific policy, and that high confidence
      which might justly be reposed in the abilities, patriotism,
      and integrity, of the characters to whom the negotiation
      was committed. After a careful review of the whole subject,
      with the aid of all the information I have received, I can
      discern nothing which could have insured or contributed to
      success, that has been omitted on my part, and nothing
      further which can be attempted, consistently with maxims
      for which our country has contended at every hazard, and
      which constitute the basis of our national sovereignty.

      Under these circumstances, I cannot forbear to reiterate
      the recommendations which have been formerly made, and to
      exhort you to adopt, with promptitude, decision, and
      unanimity, such measures as the ample resources of the
      country afford, for the protection of our seafaring and
      commercial citizens; for the defence of any exposed
      portions of our territory; for replenishing our arsenals,
      establishing foundries and military manufactures; and to
      provide such efficient revenue, as will be necessary to
      defray extraordinary expenses, and supply the deficiencies
      which may be occasioned by depredations on our commerce.

      The present state of things is so essentially different
      from that in which instructions were given to the
      collectors to restrain vessels of the United States from
      sailing in an armed condition, that the principle on which
      those orders were issued has ceased to exist. I therefore
      deem it proper to inform Congress, that I no longer
      conceive myself justifiable in continuing them, unless in
      particular cases, where there may be reasonable ground of
      suspicion that such vessels are intended to be employed
      contrary to law.

      In all your proceedings, it will be important to manifest a
      zeal, a vigor, and concert, in defence of the national
      rights, proportioned to the danger with which they are
      threatened.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _March_ 19, 1798.

The Message was read and referred to the committee appointed on the 29th
November last, who have under consideration that part of the Speech of
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, at the commencement of the session,
which relates to the protection of commerce, to consider and report
thereon to the Senate.


TUESDAY, April 3.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      In compliance with the request of the House of
      Representatives, expressed in their resolution of the
      second of this month, I transmit to both Houses those
      instructions to, and despatches from, the Envoys
      Extraordinary of the United States to the French Republic,
      which were mentioned in my Message of the nineteenth of
      March last, omitting only some names, and a few expressions
      descriptive of the persons.

      I request that they may be considered in confidence, until
      the members of Congress are fully possessed of their
      contents and shall have had opportunity to deliberate on
      the consequences of their publication; after which time I
      submit them to your wisdom.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _April_ 3, 1798.

The galleries being cleared, the Message and documents were read.

_Ordered_, That they lie for consideration.


MONDAY, April 16.

The VICE PRESIDENT communicated a letter from JOHN SLOSS HOBART,
resigning his seat in the Senate, in consequence of his appointment to
be Judge of the New York district; which letter was read.

_Ordered_, That the VICE PRESIDENT be requested to notify the Executive
of the State of New York that JOHN SLOSS HOBART hath accepted the
appointment of Judge of the New York district, and that his seat in the
Senate is of course vacated.


TUESDAY, April 17.

The bill authorizing the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to raise a
provisional army was read the second time.


WEDNESDAY, May 2.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee
authorizing Thomas Pinckney, late Envoy Extraordinary to the King of
Spain, and Minister Plenipotentiary to the King of Great Britain, to
receive the customary presents to foreign Ministers at those courts.

On the question to agree to the first resolution reported, to wit:

      "_Be it resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives
      of the United States of America in Congress assembled_,
      That Congress doth consent that Thomas Pinckney, Esq., who,
      as Envoy Extraordinary of the United States, negotiated the
      Treaty of Friendship, Limits, and Navigation between the
      United States and the King of Spain, may receive from the
      said King such present as it is customary for His Catholic
      Majesty to make to such persons as negotiate treaties with
      him:"

It passed in the affirmative--yeas 17, nays 5, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bingham, Bloodworth, Clayton,
      Foster, Goodhue, Greene, Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer,
      Laurance, Livermore, Martin, Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, and
      Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Brown, Langdon, Marshall, Mason, and
      Tazewell.

And the other resolution reported was agreed to, in the words following:

      _And be it further resolved_, That Congress doth consent
      that the said Thomas Pinckney, Esq., lately Minister
      Plenipotentiary from the United States to the King of Great
      Britain, may receive from the said King such present as it
      is customary for His Britannic Majesty to make to Ministers
      Plenipotentiary on taking leave of him.


THURSDAY, June 21.

_Affairs with France._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      While I congratulate you on the arrival of General
      Marshall, one of our late Envoys Extraordinary to the
      French Republic, at a place of safety, where he is justly
      held in honor, I think it my duty to communicate to you a
      letter received by him from Mr. Gerry, the only one of the
      three who has not received his _congé_. This letter,
      together with another, from the Minister of Foreign
      Relations to him, of the third of April, and his answer of
      the fourth, will show the situation in which he remains;
      his intentions and prospects.

      I presume that, before this time, he has received fresh
      instructions, (a copy of which accompanies this message,)
      to consent to no loans, and therefore the negotiation may
      be considered at an end.

      I will never send another Minister to France without
      assurances that he will be received, respected, and
      honored, as the representative of a great, free, powerful,
      and independent nation.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _June_ 21, 1798.

The Message and documents were read.

_Resolved_, That five hundred copies thereof be printed for the use of
the Senate.


MONDAY, June 25.

The bill to declare the treaties between the United States and the
Republic of France void and of no effect, was read the third time; and
the final passage of the bill was determined in the affirmative--yeas
14, nays 5, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Foster, Goodhue,
      Hillhouse, Howard, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, North,
      Paine, Read, Sedgwick, and Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Brown, Langdon, Martin, Mason, and Tazewell.

_Resolved_, That this bill pass: that it be engrossed; and that the
title thereof be, "An act to declare the treaties between the United
States and the Republic of France void and of no effect."


WEDNESDAY, June 27.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a
President _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides, and THEODORE
SEDGWICK was duly elected.

The bill to define more particularly the crime of treason, and to define
and punish the crime of sedition, was read the second time.

On motion that this bill be committed, it passed in the
affirmative--yeas 15, nays 6, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Foster, Goodhue,
      Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer, Laurance, Lloyd, North, Paine,
      Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, and Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Brown, Langdon, Livermore, Martin,
      and Mason.

_Ordered_, That this bill be referred to Messrs. LLOYD, TRACY, STOCKTON,
CHIPMAN, and READ, to consider and report thereon to the Senate.


FRIDAY, June 29.

The bill to authorize the PRESIDENT to prevent and regulate the landing
of French passengers, and other persons who may arrive within the United
States from foreign places, was read the third time.

On motion, to amend the proviso to the fourth section to read as
follows:

      "_Provided_, That nothing in this act shall be construed to
      prohibit the migration or importation of such persons as
      any State may think proper by law to admit, nor to such
      persons whose admission may be prohibited by the respective
      States:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 3, nays 17, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Mason, and Tazewell.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Foster, Goodhue, Hillhouse, Howard,
      Langdon, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, Martin,
      North, Paine, Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, and Tracy.

On motion by Mr. MASON, to strike out these words from the preamble:

      "The peculiar circumstances of the United States, in
      relation to the Republic of France, and the citizens
      thereof, require that, whilst the United States have
      afforded hospitality and protection to Frenchmen who have
      sought an asylum in this country, they should, on the other
      hand, guard against the arrival and admission of such
      evil-disposed persons as by their machinations, may
      endanger the internal safety and tranquillity of the
      country;" in order to insert the following words: "It is
      represented that, on the evacuation of Port au Prince by
      the British troops, a number of French white men and
      negroes were put on board of vessels bound to the United
      States, some of which have arrived, and others may be
      shortly expected, and it is deemed dangerous to admit
      indiscriminately such persons into the United States:"

It was agreed to divide the motion, and that the words should be struck
out; and, on the question to agree to the substitute, it was determined
in the negative--yeas 10, nays 10, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bingham, Langdon, Laurance,
      Livermore, Martin, Mason, North, Read, and Tazewell.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Foster, Goodhue, Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer,
      Lloyd, Paine, Sedgwick, Stockton, and Tracy.

So the amendment was lost.

And the bill being further amended, by striking out the remainder of the
preamble,

_Resolved_, That the consideration of this bill be postponed until
to-morrow.


SATURDAY, June 30.

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill to authorize the
PRESIDENT to prevent or regulate the landing of French passengers, and
other persons who may arrive within the ports of the United States from
foreign places.

On motion, by Mr. MARTIN, one of the majority in favor of the exception
yesterday agreed to, namely, "except children under the age of twelve
years, and women, in cases especially authorized by the PRESIDENT," and
that it be reconsidered, it was determined in the negative--yeas 6, nays
15, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Hillhouse, Howard, Lloyd, Martin, and Read.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Brown, Chipman, Foster, Goodhue,
      Langdon, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, North, Paine,
      Sedgwick, Stockton, Tazewell, and Tracy.

_Resolved_, That this bill pass; that it be engrossed; and that the
title thereof be "An act to authorize the PRESIDENT to prevent or
regulate the landing of French passengers, and other persons, who may
arrive within the ports of the United States from foreign places."

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill, sent from the House
of Representatives, entitled "An act to provide for the valuation of
lands and dwelling houses, and the enumeration of slaves, within the
United States."

On motion, by Mr. PAINE, to agree to the following amendment to the
proviso in the eighth section, "And all uncultivated lands, except such
as make part or parcel of a farm; and except wood lots, used or reserved
for the purposes of fuel, fencing, lumber, or building:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 10, nays 11, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Brown, Chipman, Goodhue, Latimer,
      Laurance, Livermore, Paine, Sedgwick, and Stockton.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Foster, Hillhouse, Howard, Langdon, Lloyd,
      Martin, Mason, North, Read, Tazewell, and Tracy.

On motion, by one of the majority, to reconsider and restore the
following words, struck out from the end of the proviso to the eighth
section: "or which, at the time of making the said valuation or
enumeration, shall not have been assessed for, nor be then held liable
to, taxation under the laws of the State wherein the same is, or may be,
situated or possessed, shall be exempted from the aforesaid valuation
and enumeration:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 6, nays 14, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Foster, Howard, Latimer, Laurance,
      and North.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Brown, Chipman, Goodhue, Hillhouse, Langdon,
      Livermore, Lloyd, Martin, Mason, Paine, Read, Sedgwick,
      Tazewell, and Tracy.

On motion, by Mr. MASON, to add the following words to the end of the
eighth section: "except such as, from fixed infirmity or bodily
disability, may be incapable of labor:"

It was determined in the affirmative--yeas 11, nays 8, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Howard, Langdon, Latimer, Livermore, Lloyd,
      Martin, Mason, Paine, Read, Sedgwick, and Tazewell.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Brown, Foster, Goodhue, Hillhouse,
      Laurance, North, and Tracy.

On motion, by Mr. BROWN, to strike out of that part of the eighth
section which respects the enumeration of slaves these words "above the
age of twelve, and under the age of fifty years:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 10, nays 11, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Brown, Chipman, Goodhue,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Lloyd, North, and Sedgwick.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Foster, Howard, Langdon, Livermore, Martin,
      Mason, Paine, Read, Stockton, Tazewell, and Tracy.

The report of the committee having been agreed to, and the bill amended
accordingly,

_Resolved_, That it pass to the third reading as amended.


MONDAY, July 2.

JOHN RUTHERFORD, from the State of New Jersey, attended.


TUESDAY, July 3.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee to
whom was referred the bill to define more particularly the crime of
treason, and to define and punish the crime of sedition; and having
agreed to the report, the bill was amended accordingly; and the question
to agree to the third reading of the bill, as amended, was determined in
the affirmative--yeas 18, nays 5, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Clayton, Foster, Greene,
      Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Martin,
      North, Paine, Read, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, and
      Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Brown, Langdon, Mason, and
      Tazewell.


WEDNESDAY, July 4.

_Treason and Sedition._

BILL TO DEFINE.

On motion to expunge the following words from the second section
reported as an amendment:

      "Or shall, in manner aforesaid, traduce or defame the
      PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, or any Court or Judge
      thereof, by declarations, tending to criminate their
      motives in any official transaction:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 8, nays 15, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Brown, Howard, Langdon, Martin,
      Mason, North, and Tazewell.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Chipman, Clayton, Foster, Goodhue,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, Paine,
      Read, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, and Tracy.

On motion to expunge the whole of the second section reported by the
committee, in the words following:

      "SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That if any person
      shall, by any libellous or scandalous writing, printing,
      publishing, or speaking, traduce or defame the Legislature
      of the United States, by seditious or inflammatory
      declarations or expressions, with intent to create a belief
      in the citizens thereof, that the said Legislature, in
      enacting any law, was induced thereto by motives hostile to
      the constitution, or liberties and happiness of the people
      thereof; or shall, in manner aforesaid, traduce or defame
      the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES or any Court or Judge
      thereof, by declarations tending to criminate their
      motives, in any official transaction; the person so
      offending, and thereof convicted, before any court of the
      United States having jurisdiction thereof, shall be
      punished by a fine, not exceeding two thousand dollars, and
      by imprisonment, not exceeding two years:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 6, nays 18, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Brown, Howard, Langdon, Mason, and
      Tazewell.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Chipman, Clayton, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, Martin,
      North, Paine, Read, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, and
      Tracy.

The question on the final passage of the bill was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 18, nays 6, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Chipman, Clayton, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, Martin,
      North, Paine, Read, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, and
      Tracy.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass; that it be engrossed; and
that the title thereof be "An act in addition to the act, entitled 'An
act for the punishment of certain crimes against the United States.'"


WEDNESDAY, July 11.

The bill for encouraging the capture of French armed vessels, by armed
ships or vessels owned by a citizen or citizens of the United States,
was read the third time; and the final passage of the bill was
determined in the affirmative--yeas 16, nays 4, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bingham, Chipman, Goodhue, Greene,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Martin, North,
      Paine, Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, and Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Brown, Langdon, Mason, and Tazewell.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass; that it be engrossed; and
that the title thereof be "An act for encouraging the capture of French
armed vessels, by armed ships or vessels owned by a citizen or citizens
of the United States."


THURSDAY, July 12.

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, entitled "An act
making further appropriations for the additional Naval Armament;" and
the question on the final passage of the bill, as amended, was
determined in the affirmative--yeas 13, nays 3, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Clayton, Foster, Goodhue,
      Greene, Hillhouse, Latimer, Laurance, Livermore, Martin,
      North, Paine, Read, Rutherford, Sedgwick, Stockton, and
      Tracy.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Mason, and Tazewell.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill do pass as amended.


FRIDAY, July 13.

Mr. READ, from the committee to whom was referred the bill, sent from
the House of Representatives, entitled "An act providing for the
enumeration of the inhabitants of the United States," reported the bill
without amendment.

On motion, by Mr. LIVERMORE, to postpone the further consideration of
this bill to the next session of Congress, it was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 11, nays 7.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      A resolution of both Houses of Congress, authorizing an
      adjournment on Monday, the 16th of this month, has been
      laid before me. Sensible of the severity of the service in
      so long a session, it is with great reluctance that I find
      myself obliged to offer any consideration which may operate
      against the inclination of the members; but certain
      measures of Executive authority which will require the
      consideration of the Senate, and which cannot be matured,
      in all probability, before Monday or Tuesday, oblige me to
      request of the Senate that they would continue their
      session until Wednesday or Thursday.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _July 13, 1798_.

The Message was read, and ordered to lie for consideration.


MONDAY, July 16.

The Senate took into consideration the report of the committee to whom
was referred the Message of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES of the
13th instant, and which is as follows:

      "That as, in the opinion of the PRESIDENT, certain measures
      of Executive authority will acquire the consideration of
      the Senate, and which could not be matured before Monday or
      Tuesday, it is the opinion of the committee, that the
      Senate should adjourn in their Executive capacity to meet
      to-morrow at the Senate Chamber, at ten o'clock in the
      forenoon, on Executive business."

And the report was adopted.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House have appointed a joint committee on their part to wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and notify him, that, unless he may have
any further communications to make to the two Houses of Congress, they
are ready to adjourn; and desire the appointment of a committee on the
part of the Senate.

The Senate took into consideration this resolution of the House of
Representatives.

_Resolved_, That they do concur therein, and that Messrs. CHIPMAN and
GREENE be the committee on the part of the Senate.

Mr. CHIPMAN reported, from the joint committee, that they had waited on
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, who informed them that he had
nothing further to communicate to Congress, except what might result
from the last enrolled bill now under his consideration.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives
therewith; and that the Senate, having finished the Legislative business
before them, are about to adjourn.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House having finished the business before them, are about to adjourn
to the first Monday in December next.

The Senate then went into the consideration of Executive business--after
which,

The PRESIDENT declared the Senate, so far as respects its Legislative
functions, adjourned to the time by the constitution prescribed; and, in
its Executive capacity, until to-morrow morning at ten o'clock.


TUESDAY, July 17, 1798.

Agreeably to the adjournment of yesterday, as stated at large in the
Legislative proceedings, the Senate assembled.

PRESENT:

THEODORE SEDGWICK, President _pro tempore_, from the State of
Massachusetts.

BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from Massachusetts.

NATHANIEL CHIPMAN, from Vermont.

JAMES HILLARY and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

THEODORE FOSTER and RAY GREENE, from Rhode Island.

JOHN LAURANCE and WILLIAM NORTH, from New York.

JOHN RUTHERFORD, from New Jersey.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.

HENRY LATIMER, from Delaware.

JOHN E. HOWARD, from Maryland.

HENRY TAZEWELL, from Virginia.

JOHN BROWN, from Kentucky.

JOSEPH ANDERSON, from Tennessee.

ALEXANDER MARTIN, from North Carolina.

JACOB READ, from South Carolina.

_Ordered_, That the following summons, directed to the Senators of the
United States, respectively, be entered on the journals:

      _The President of the United States to ----, Senator for
      the State of ----._

      Certain matters touching the public good, requiring that
      the session of the Senate, for Executive business, should
      be continued, and that the members thereof should convene
      on Tuesday, the 17th day of July, inst., you are desired to
      attend at the Senate Chamber, in Philadelphia, on that
      day, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, then and there to
      receive and deliberate on such communications as shall be
      made to you on my part.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _July 16, 1798_.


WEDNESDAY, July 18.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      Believing that the letter received this morning from
      General Washington, will give high satisfaction to the
      Senate, I transmit them a copy of it, and congratulate them
      and the public on this great event--the General's
      acceptance of his appointment as Lieutenant General and
      Commander-in-Chief of the Army.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _July 17, 1798_.

                          MOUNT VERNON, _July 13, 1798_.

      DEAR SIR: I had the honor, on the evening of the 11th
      instant, to receive from the hands of the Secretary of War,
      your favor of the 7th, announcing that you had, with the
      advice and consent of the Senate, appointed me Lieutenant
      General and Commander-in-Chief of all the armies raised or
      to be raised for the service of the United States.

      I cannot express how greatly affected I am at this new
      proof of public confidence, and the highly flattering
      manner in which you have been pleased to make the
      communication; at the same time I must not conceal from you
      my earnest wish that the choice had fallen upon a man less
      declined in years, and better qualified to encounter the
      usual vicissitudes of war.

      You know, sir, what calculation I had made relative to the
      probable course of events on my retiring from office, and
      the determination I had consoled myself with, of closing
      the remnant of my days in my present peaceful abode; you
      will, therefore, be at no loss to conceive and appreciate
      the sensations I must have experienced to bring my mind to
      any conclusion that would pledge me, at so late a period of
      life, to leave scenes I sincerely love, to enter upon the
      boundless field of public action, incessant trouble, and
      high responsibility.

      It was not possible for me to remain ignorant of, or
      indifferent to, recent transactions. The conduct of the
      Directory of France towards our country; their insidious
      hostility to its Government; their various practices to
      withdraw the affections of the people from it; the evident
      tendency of their acts and those of their agents to
      countenance and invigorate opposition; their disregard of
      solemn treaties and the laws of nations; their war upon our
      defenceless commerce; their treatment of our ministers of
      peace; and their demands, amounting to tribute; could not
      fail to excite in me corresponding sentiments with those my
      countrymen have so generally expressed in their
      affectionate addresses to you. Believe me, sir, no one can
      more cordially approve of the wise and prudent measures of
      your Administration. They ought to inspire universal
      confidence; and will, no doubt, combined with the state of
      things, call from Congress such laws and means as will
      enable you to meet the full force and extent of the crisis.

      Satisfied, therefore, that you have sincerely wished and
      endeavored to avert war, and exhausted, to the last drop,
      the cup of reconciliation, we can with pure hearts appeal
      to Heaven for the justice of our cause, and may
      confidently trust the final result to that kind Providence
      who has heretofore, and so often, signally favored the
      people of these United States.

      Thinking in this manner, and feeling how incumbent it is
      upon every person, of every description, to contribute at
      all times to his country's welfare, and especially in a
      moment like the present, when every thing we hold dear and
      sacred is so seriously threatened, I have finally
      determined to accept the commission of Commander-in-Chief
      of the Armies of the United States; with the reserve only
      that I shall not be called into the field until the Army is
      in a situation to require my presence, or it becomes
      indispensable by the urgency of circumstances.

      In making this reservation, I beg it to be understood, that
      I do not mean to withhold any assistance to arrange and
      organize the Army, which you may think I can afford. I take
      the liberty also to mention, that I must decline having my
      acceptance considered as drawing after it any immediate
      charge upon the public, or that I can receive any
      emoluments annexed to the appointment, before entering into
      a situation to incur expense.

      The Secretary of War being anxious to return to the seat of
      Government, I have detained him no longer than was
      necessary to a full communication upon the several points
      he had in charge.

      With very great respect and consideration, I have the honor
      to be, dear sir, your most obedient and humble servant,

                          G. WASHINGTON.

      JOHN ADAMS, _President of the United States_.

The Message and letter were read, and five hundred copies thereof
ordered to be printed for the use of the Senate.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      I nominate Alexander Hamilton, of New York, to be Inspector
      General of the Army, with the rank of Major General.

      Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, of South Carolina, to be a
      Major General.

      Henry Knox, of Massachusetts, to be a Major General.

      Henry Lee, of Virginia, to be a Major General of the
      Provisional Army.

      Edward Hand, of Pennsylvania, to be a Major General of the
      Provisional Army.

      John Brooks, of Massachusetts, to be a Brigadier General.

      William Washington, of South Carolina, to be a Brigadier
      General.

      Jonathan Dayton, of New Jersey, to be a Brigadier General.

      William Stevens Smith, of New York, to be Adjutant General,
      with the rank of Brigadier General.

      Ebenezer Huntington, of Connecticut, to be a Brigadier
      General of the Provisional Army.

      Anthony Walton White, to be a Brigadier General of the
      Provisional Army.

      William Richardson Davie, of North Carolina, to be a
      Brigadier General of the Provisional Army.

      John Sevier, of Tennessee, to be a Brigadier General of the
      Provisional Army.

      James Craik, of Virginia, to be Physician General of the
      Army.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      JULY 18, 1798.

The Message was read, and ordered to lie for consideration.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      I nominate William Winder, of Maryland, to be Accountant of
      the Navy.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      JULY 18, 1798.


THURSDAY, July 19.

The Senate took into consideration the Message of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, of the 18th instant, and the nomination contained
therein, of William Winder, to office. Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That they do advise and consent to the appointment agreeably
to the nomination.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary lay this resolution before the PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.

The Senate took into consideration the Message of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, of the 18th instant, and the nominations contained
therein, of Alexander Hamilton, and others, to military appointment.
Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That they do advise and consent to the appointments,
agreeably to the nominations, respectively; except to that of William
Stevens Smith, of New York, to be Adjutant General, with the rank of
Brigadier General, to which they do not advise and consent.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary lay this resolution before the PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.

_Ordered_, That Mr. BINGHAM and Mr. LAURANCE be a committee to wait on
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and notify him, that having finished
the Executive business before them, they are ready to adjourn, unless he
may have any further matters for their consideration.

Mr. BINGHAM reported, from the committee last mentioned, that the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES informed them that he had a further
communication to make to the Senate.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_:

      I nominate William North, of New York, to be Adjutant
      General of the Army, with the rank of Brigadier General.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _July 19, 1798_.

The Message was read.

On motion, it was agreed, by unanimous consent, to dispense with the
rule, and that the said nomination be now considered. Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That they do advise and consent to the appointment,
agreeably to the nomination.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary lay this resolution before the PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES. Whereupon,

The PRESIDENT adjourned the Senate to the first Monday in December next,
to meet in this place.




FIFTH CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES In THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, November 13, 1797.

This being the day appointed by law for the meeting of Congress, the
House of Representatives assembled in their Chamber, and the following
members answered to their names, to wit:

_From New Hampshire._--ABIEL FOSTER.

_From Massachusetts._--STEPHEN BULLOCK, SAMUEL LYMAN, JOHN READ, WILLIAM
SHEPARD, GEORGE THATCHER, JOSEPH B. VARNUM, and PELEG WADSWORTH.

_From Connecticut._--JOHN ALLEN, JOSHUA COIT, ROGER GRISWOLD, and
NATHANIEL SMITH.

_From New York._--LUCAS ELMENDORPH, HENRY GLENN, JONATHAN N. HAVENS,
HEZEKIAH L. HOSMER, JOHN E. VAN ALLEN, and JOHN WILLIAMS.

_From New Jersey._--JONATHAN DAYTON, (Speaker,) and THOMAS SINNICKSON.

_From Pennsylvania._--JOHN CHAPMAN, ALBERT GALLATIN, THOMAS HARTLEY, and
JOHN SWANWICK.

_From Maryland._--GEORGE BAER, junior, WILLIAM CRAIK, GEORGE DENT, and
RICHARD SPRIGG, junior.

_From Virginia._--JOHN DAWSON, D. HOLMES, JAMES MACHIR, DANIEL MORGAN,
and ANTHONY NEW.

_North Carolina._--MATTHEW LOCKE, NATHANIEL MACON, and RICHARD STANFORD.

_South Carolina._--ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER, and JOHN RUTLEDGE, junior.

Several new members, to wit: ISAAC PARKER, from Massachusetts; THOMAS
TILLINGHAST, returned to serve as a member of this House, for the State
of Rhode Island, in the room of Elisha R. Potter, who has resigned his
seat; and WILLIAM EDMOND, returned to serve in this House, as a member
for Connecticut, in the room of James Davenport, deceased, appeared,
produced their credentials, and took their seats in the House.

But a quorum of the whole number not being present, the House adjourned
until to-morrow morning, eleven o'clock.


TUESDAY, November 14.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, HARRISON G. OTIS;
from Rhode Island, CHRISTOPHER G. CHAMPLIN; from Connecticut, SAMUEL W.
DANA and CHAUNCEY GOODRICH; from Vermont, MATTHEW LYON; from
Pennsylvania, BLAIR MCCLENACHAN and RICHARD THOMAS; from Delaware, JAMES
A. BAYARD; from Virginia, RICHARD BRENT; from North Carolina, ROBERT
WILLIAMS; from South Carolina, WILLIAM SMITH; and from Georgia, ABRAHAM
BALDWIN, appeared, and took their seats in the House.

But a quorum of the whole number not being present, the House adjourned
until to-morrow morning, eleven o'clock.


WEDNESDAY, November 15.

Several other members, to wit: from New Jersey, JAMES H. IMLAY; from
Pennsylvania, WILLIAM FINDLAY; and from Maryland, WILLIAM HINDMAN,
appeared, and took their seats in the House.

And a quorum, consisting of a majority of the whole number, being
present, the oath to support the Constitution of the United States was
administered, by Mr. SPEAKER, to the following new members, to wit:

ISAAC PARKER, THOMAS TILLINGHAST, and WILLIAM EDMOND, who took their
seats in the House on Monday last.

A message was then sent to the Senate, to inform them that a quorum of
the House is assembled, and were ready to proceed to business.


THURSDAY, November 16.

Several other members, to wit: from Vermont, LEWIS R. MORRIS; from New
York, JAMES COCHRAN, and EDWARD LIVINGSTON; from Virginia, MATTHEW CLAY,
THOMAS EVANS, WALTER JONES, ABRAM TRIGG, and JOHN TRIGG; and from North
Carolina, WILLIAM BARRY GROVE, appeared, and took their seats in the
House.

And then the House adjourned until to-morrow morning, eleven o'clock.


FRIDAY, November 17.

Two other members, to wit: from New Jersey, MARK THOMSON; and from
Pennsylvania, JOHN A. HANNA, appeared, and took their seats in the
House.


MONDAY, November 20.

Several other members, to wit: from New Hampshire, JONATHAN FREEMAN and
WILLIAM GORDON; from New Jersey, JAMES SCHUREMAN; from Maryland, WILLIAM
MATTHEWS; and from Virginia, ABRAHAM VENABLE, appeared, and took their
seats in the House.


TUESDAY, November 21.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, DWIGHT FOSTER; from
New York, PHILIP VAN CORTLANDT; and from Virginia, CARTER B. HARRISON,
appeared, and took their seats in the House.


WEDNESDAY, November 22.

Two other members, to wit: from Pennsylvania, DAVID BARD, and SAMUEL
SITGREAVES, appeared and took their seats.


THURSDAY, November 23.

Two new members, to wit: WILLIAM C. C. CLAIBORNE, from the State of
Tennessee; and THOMAS PINCKNEY, returned to serve as a member of this
House for the State of South Carolina, in the room of William Smith,
appointed Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States to the Court of
Lisbon, appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats in
the House; the oath to support the Constitution of the United States
being first administered to them by Mr. SPEAKER, according to law.

Two other members, to wit: from Virginia, THOMAS CLAIBORNE and JOHN
CLOPTON, appeared, and took their seats in the House.

_President's Speech._

The hour of twelve being near at hand, the SPEAKER announced it, and a
message was sent to the Senate to inform them that they were met, and
ready to receive the communications of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, agreeably to his appointment.

The members of the Senate attended accordingly, and about a quarter
after twelve the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES (after visiting the
Senate Chamber) entered the House, accompanied by his Secretary and the
Heads of Departments, and being seated, rose and delivered the following
Address. (See Senate proceedings, _ante_.)

Having concluded his Speech, and delivered copies of it to the PRESIDENT
_pro tem._ of the Senate, and to the SPEAKER of the House of
Representatives, the PRESIDENT retired, the SPEAKER resumed the chair,
and the House being come to order, he, as usual, read the Speech from
the chair. This being done, on motion, it was referred to a Committee of
the whole House, and made the order for to-morrow. It was ordered also
to be printed.


MONDAY, November 27.

A new member, to wit: BAILEY BARTLETT, returned to serve in this House
as a member for Massachusetts, in the place of Theophilus Bradbury, who
has resigned his seat, appeared, produced his credentials, and took his
seat in the House; the oath to support the Constitution of the United
States being first administered to him by Mr. SPEAKER, according to law.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, SAMUEL SEWALL; from
New York, DAVID BROOKS; from Maryland, JOHN DENNIS; from Virginia, JOHN
NICHOLAS and JOSIAH PARKER; and from North Carolina, THOMAS BLOUNT,
appeared and took their seats in the House.

_Address to the President._

Mr. OTIS, from the committee appointed to draft an Address in answer to
the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, reported the
following, which was twice read, and referred to a Committee of the
Whole for to-morrow:

      SIR: While our sympathy is excited by the recent sufferings
      of the citizens of Philadelphia, we participate in the
      satisfaction which you are pleased to express, that the
      duration of the late calamity was so limited, as to render
      unnecessary the expense and inconvenience that would have
      been incident to the convention of Congress in another
      place: and we shall readily attend to every useful
      amendment of the law which contemplates the event of
      contagious sickness at the seat of Government.

      In lamenting the increase of the injuries offered to the
      persons and property of our citizens at sea, we gratefully
      acknowledge the continuance of interior tranquillity, and
      the attendant blessings of which you remind us, as
      alleviations of these fatal effects of injustice and
      violence.

      Whatever may be the result of the mission to the French
      Republic, your early and uniform attachment to the interest
      of our country; your important services in the struggle for
      its independence, and your unceasing exertions for its
      welfare, afford no room to doubt of the sincerity of your
      efforts to conduct the negotiation to a successful
      conclusion, on such terms as may be compatible with the
      safety, honor, and interest of the United States. We have
      also a firm reliance upon the energy and unanimity of the
      people of these States, in the assertion of their rights,
      and on their determination to exert, upon all proper
      occasions, their ample resources in providing for the
      national defence.

      The importance of commerce, and its beneficial influence
      upon agriculture, arts, and manufactures, have been
      verified in the growth and prosperity of our country. It is
      essentially connected with the other great interests of
      the community. They must flourish and decline together; and
      while the extension of our navigation and trade naturally
      excites the jealousy, and tempts the avarice of other
      nations, we are firmly persuaded, that the numerous and
      deserving class of citizens engaged in these pursuits, and
      dependent on them for their subsistence, has a strong and
      indisputable claim to our support and protection.

      The delay of the Spanish officers to fulfil the treaty
      existing with His Catholic Majesty is a source of deep
      regret. We learn, however, with satisfaction, that you
      still indulge hopes of removing the objections which have
      been made to its execution, and that you have continued in
      readiness to receive the posts. Disposed to perform, with
      fidelity, our national engagements, we shall insist upon
      the same justice from others which we exercise towards
      them.

      Our abhorrence cannot be too strongly expressed of the
      intrigues of foreign agents to alienate the affections of
      the Indian nations, and to rouse them to acts of hostility
      against the United States. No means in our power should be
      omitted of providing for the suppression of such cruel
      practices, and for the adequate punishment of their
      atrocious authors.

      Upon the other interesting subjects noticed in your
      Address, we shall bestow the requisite attention. To
      preserve inviolate the public faith, by providing for the
      due execution of our treaties; to indemnify those who may
      have just claims to retribution upon the United States for
      expenses incurred in defending the property and relieving
      the necessities of our unfortunate fellow-citizens; to
      guard against evasions of the laws intended to secure
      advantages to the navigation of our own vessels; and
      especially, to prevent, by all possible means, an
      unnecessary accumulation of the public debt, are duties
      which we shall endeavor to keep in view, and discharge with
      assiduity.

      We regard, with great anxiety, the singular and portentous
      situation of the principal powers of Europe. It was to be
      devoutly wished that the United States, remote from this
      seat of war and discord; unambitious of conquest;
      respecting the rights of other nations; and desirous,
      merely, to avail themselves of their natural resources,
      might be permitted to behold the scenes which desolate that
      quarter of the globe with only those sympathetic emotions
      which are natural to the lovers of peace and friends of the
      human race. But we are led by events to associate with
      these feelings a sense of the dangers which menace our
      security and peace. We rely upon your assurances of a
      zealous and hearty concurrence in such measures as may be
      necessary to avert these dangers; and nothing on our part
      shall be wanting to repel them, which the honor, safety,
      and prosperity of our country may require.


TUESDAY, November 28.

SAMUEL SMITH, from Maryland, appeared and took his seat.

_Address to the President._

Mr. COIT moved for the order of the day on the reported Answer to the
PRESIDENT'S Speech.

The motion being agreed to, the House accordingly resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole upon that subject, and the Address having been
read through by the Chairman, it was again read by paragraphs. The first
four were read, without any objection being offered to them. The fifth
being gone through,

Mr. PINCKNEY said, he had to propose a small alteration to this clause:
he wished to make the latter part of it a little less harsh. Instead of
saying, "we shall insist upon the same justice from others," &c., he
thought it would have the same effect, and the terms would be less
objectionable, if the passage ran thus: "Nothing shall be wanting on our
part to obtain the same justice from others," &c. The expression used,
he said, might be perfectly justifiable, but, if we could obtain what we
wished without the possibility of giving offence, he thought that mode
ought to be preferred. It was on this account that he wished the
phraseology to be changed.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, as a member of the committee who reported the
Address, he did not feel tenacious as to the wording of it. At first, he
thought with his colleague, who proposed the amendment, that the word
_insist_ was rather harsh; but, upon a little reflection, his objections
to the phrase were removed. Indeed, he thought the proposed amendment
would make the passage stronger than it was in the original. They might
insist, he said, in argument; looking upon the treaty as a good one,
they might insist upon its execution; but if it were not to be effected
without going to war, they might afterwards relinquish it. The amendment
he thought more forcible. It said "nothing shall be wanting to obtain,"
&c.; which would be to say, we look upon the treaty as a good one, and
nothing shall be wanting on our part to obtain its fulfilment. The words
might even be considered to say, that we are determined to have the
treaty carried into effect, though war should be the price of the
determination.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) approved of the amendment of the gentleman from
South Carolina, but not from the reasons which that gentleman had urged
in support of it, but for those which his colleague had produced against
it; not because it was more smooth, but because it contained more of
decision and firmness. He thought, in this respect, this country had
been trifled with, and any opinion expressed by them upon this subject
ought to be done with a firmness of tone.

The question on Mr. PINCKNEY'S amendment was put and carried, there
being sixty-two members in the affirmative.

The remainder of the Address was then gone through, without further
observation.

Mr. OTIS, from the committee appointed to wait upon the PRESIDENT, to
know when and where it would be convenient for him to receive the
Address in answer to his Speech, reported that they had attended to that
service, and that it would be convenient for him to receive it at his
house to-morrow at twelve o'clock.


WEDNESDAY, November 29.

_Address to the President._

Mr. LYON said, when the motion was proposed yesterday on the subject of
waiting upon the PRESIDENT, he should have opposed it, only that he did
not wish to deprive some gentlemen of the gratification of attending the
ceremony; and now he hoped those gentlemen would consent to gratify him
by agreeing to a similar resolution to that of last session, excusing
him from an attendance upon the occasion.

Mr. MACON observed, that whether the resolution was agreed to or not,
the gentleman might doubtless remain behind if he chose, as he had no
idea that the House could compel members to go about parading the
streets of Philadelphia. The gentleman might have conscientious
scruples, and if the ceremony were meant to be respectful to the
PRESIDENT, members should attend it freely, or not at all. He should
wish, therefore, that gentlemen disinclined to do the service, would not
join it.

Mr. OTIS hoped the motion would not prevail. He presumed no gentleman
there was particularly anxious for the society of the gentleman from
Vermont on this occasion. No doubt he would grace the procession, but it
would be sufficiently long without him, and if he chose to remain
behind, he need be under no apprehensions of being called to account for
his conduct. It was not becoming the dignity of the House to pass the
resolution in question. It appeared to him that the gentleman was in
full health and spirits, and every way fit for business; and as the
House had resolved the thing should be done, he had no idea of admitting
the protest of an individual upon their journals against the measure.

Mr. GALLATIN said he should be in favor of the previous question, but
not for the reasons assigned by the mover of it, but for those offered
by the gentleman from North Carolina, (Mr. MACON,) viz: because he did
not believe there existed any power in that House to compel any member
to wait upon the PRESIDENT with the Address; therefore it would be
improper to grant an indulgence to a member from doing what there was no
obligation upon him to do. He did not recollect the words of the
resolution which had been agreed to. [The SPEAKER repeated them. They
were, "that the SPEAKER, attended by the House of Representatives, shall
wait upon the PRESIDENT, &c."] This, Mr. G. said, must be understood in
a qualified sense, as the House of Representatives had no existence out
of those walls. When the SPEAKER presented the Address, the House was
not present; they could not debate nor do any act as a House. The
Address was, therefore, strictly speaking, presented by the SPEAKER,
followed by the members of the House of Representatives--as he did not
conceive the House had any power without the walls of the house. They
could, indeed, appoint committees to do business out of doors, but could
not call out the members as a body. Upon this ground he was, therefore,
in favor of the previous question.

Mr. LYON said, understanding the matter in the light in which it had
been placed by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, he would withdraw his
motion.

The SPEAKER announced the arrival of the hour which the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES had appointed to receive the Address of the House in
answer to his Speech; and the SPEAKER, attended by the members,
accordingly waited upon the PRESIDENT, at his house, and presented to
him the Address: to which the PRESIDENT made the following reply:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      I receive this Address from the House of Representatives of
      the United States with peculiar interest.

      Your approbation of the meeting of Congress in this city,
      and of those other measures of the Executive authority of
      Government communicated in my Address to both Houses, at
      the opening of the session, afford me great satisfaction,
      as the strongest desire of my heart is to give satisfaction
      to the people and their representatives by a faithful
      discharge of my duty.

      The confidence you express in the sincerity of my
      endeavors, and the unanimity of the people, does me much
      honor, and gives me great joy.

      I rejoice in that harmony which appears in the sentiments
      of all the branches of the Government, on the importance of
      our commerce and our obligations to defend it, as well as
      in all other subjects recommended to your consideration,
      and sincerely congratulate you and our fellow-citizens at
      large on this appearance, so auspicious to the honor,
      interest, and happiness of the nation.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _November 29, 1797_.

The SPEAKER and members then returned to the House, and order being
obtained, the SPEAKER, as usual, read the Answer of the PRESIDENT from
the chair.


THURSDAY, November 30.

THOMPSON J. SKINNER, from Massachusetts, appeared, and took his seat.

_Memorial of Quakers._

Mr. GALLATIN presented the following memorial of certain citizens,
called Quakers, in the name of the annual meeting of that body, lately
held in Philadelphia.

      _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
      States in Congress assembled_:

      The memorial and address of the people called Quakers, from
      their yearly meeting held in Philadelphia, by adjournments
      from the 25th of the 9th month, to the 29th of the same,
      inclusive, 1797, respectfully showeth:

      That, being convened, at this our annual solemnity, for the
      promotion of the cause of truth and righteousness, we have
      been favored to experience religious weight to attend our
      minds, and an anxious desire to follow after those things
      which make for peace; among other investigations the
      oppressed state of our brethren of the African race has
      been brought into view, and particularly the circumstances
      of one hundred and thirty-four in North Carolina, and many
      others whose cases have not so fully come to our
      knowledge, who were set free by members of our religious
      society, and again reduced into cruel bondage, under the
      authority of existing or retrospective laws; husbands and
      wives, and children, separated, one from another; which, we
      apprehend to be an abominable tragedy, and with other acts,
      of a similar nature, practised in other States, has a
      tendency to bring down the judgments of a righteous God
      upon our land.

      This city and neighborhood, and some other parts, have been
      visited with an awful calamity, which ought to excite an
      inquiry in the cause and endeavors to do away those things
      which occasion the heavy clouds that hang over us. It is
      easy with the Almighty to bring down the loftiness of men
      by diversified judgments, and to make them fear the rod and
      Him that hath appointed it.

      We wish to revive in your view the solemn engagement of
      Congress, made in the year one thousand seven hundred and
      seventy-four, as follows:

      "And, therefore, we do for ourselves, and the inhabitants
      of the several colonies, whom we represent, firmly agree
      and associate, under the sacred ties of virtue, honor, and
      love of our country, as follows:

      "Article 2. We will neither import nor purchase any slaves
      imported after the first day of December next, after which
      time we will wholly discontinue the slave trade, and will
      neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire our
      vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those
      who are concerned in it.

      "Article 3. And will discountenance and discourage every
      species of extravagance and dissipation, especially
      horse-racing, and all kinds of gaming, cock-fighting,
      exhibitions of shows, plays, and other expensive diversions
      and entertainments."

      This was a solemn league and covenant, made with the
      Almighty in an hour of distress, and He is now calling upon
      you to perform and fulfil it; but how has this solemn
      covenant been contravened by the wrongs and cruelties
      practised upon the poor African race, the increase of
      dissipation and luxury, and the countenance and
      encouragement given to play-houses, and other vain
      amusements! And how grossly is the Almighty affronted on
      the day of the celebration of Independence! What rioting
      and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness! to the great
      grief of sober inhabitants, and the disgrace of our
      national character.

      National evils produce national judgments; we therefore
      fervently pray the Governor of the Universe may enlighten
      your understandings and influence your minds, so as to
      engage you to use every exertion in your power, to have
      these things redressed.

      With sincere desires for your happiness here and hereafter,
      and that, when you come to close this life, you may
      individually be able to appeal as a ruler did formerly:
      "Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
      before thee, in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
      done that which is good in thy sight."

      We remain your friends and fellow-citizens.

      Signed in and on behalf of the said meeting, by

                          JONATHAN EVANS,

                          _Clerk to the meeting this year_.

The memorial having been read by the Clerk,

Mr. GALLATIN moved that it be read a second time.

Mr. HARPER hoped not. This was not the first, second, or third time,
that the House had been troubled with similar applications, which had a
tendency to stir up a class of persons to inflict calamities which would
be of greater consequence than any evils which were at present suffered;
and this, and every other Legislature, ought to set their faces against
remonstrances complaining of what it was utterly impossible to alter.

Mr. THATCHER hoped the petition would have a second reading, and be
committed. It appeared to him that this would be the regular way of
getting rid of the difficulty which was apprehended. The gentleman who
had just sat down said, that this was not the first, second, or third
time, that the House had been troubled with similar petitions. This, he
said, was natural. If any number of persons considered themselves
aggrieved, it was not likely they should leave off petitioning, until
the House should act upon their petition. He thought this was what they
ought to do. If the Quakers thought themselves aggrieved, it was their
duty to present their petition, not only three, five, or seven times,
but seventy times, until it was attended to.

Mr. RUTLEDGE should not be opposed to the second reading and reference
of this memorial, if he thought the strong censure they deserved would
be the report of a committee. This censure, he thought, this body of men
ought to have; a set of men who attempt to seduce the servants of
gentlemen travelling to the seat of Government, who were incessantly
importuning Congress to interfere in a business with which the
constitution had said they had no concern. If he was sure this conduct
would be reprobated, he would cheerfully vote for a reference of the
present petition; but not believing this would be the case, he should be
for its laying on the table, or under the table, that they might not
only have done with the business for to-day, but finally. At a time when
some nations were witnesses of the most barbarous and horrid scenes,
these petitioners are endeavoring to incite a class of persons to the
commission of similar enormities. He thought the matter of the greatest
importance, and that the reference ought by no means to be made.

Mr. SWANWICK was sorry to see so much heat produced by the introduction
of this petition. He himself could see no reason why the petition should
not be dealt with in the ordinary way. If the petitioners asked for any
thing which it was not in the power of the House to grant, it would be
of course refused; but this was no reason why their petition should not
be treated with ordinary respect. In this memorial, he said, sundry
things were complained of; not only slavery, but several other
grievances. For instance, play-houses were complained of, whether justly
or not, he was not about to decide. With respect to the grievance
mentioned in North Carolina, something perhaps might be done to remedy
it, without affecting the property which gentlemen seemed so much
alarmed about. He could not suppose there was a disposition in the
House to violate the property of any man; there was certainly as strong
a disposition in the Middle States as in the Southern, to hold
inviolable the right of property; nor could he see any reasonable ground
for throwing this petition under the table. If these people were wrong
in their understanding of this subject, it would be best to appoint a
committee to set them right.

Mr. GALLATIN said it was the practice of the House, whenever a memorial
was presented, to have it read a first and a second time, and then to
commit it, unless it were expressed in such indecent terms as to induce
the House to reject it, or upon a subject upon which petitions had been
lately rejected by a large majority of the House. In no other case were
petitions rejected without examination and without discussion. He said,
without examination and without discussion, because it was impossible,
upon a single reading of a petition, to be able to form a sound judgment
upon it. Indeed, seeing the way in which the gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. RUTLEDGE) had treated the subject, no cool examination
could be expected at present; in the moment of passion it would be best
not to decide, but to send the petition to a committee. What was the
objection to this mode of proceeding? It was that the subject would
shake a certain kind of property. How so? A petition that reminds us of
the fate of certain blacks in this country, which did not refer to
slaves, but to free men. This petition was to shake property! In the
same manner it might be said that the law of Pennsylvania for the
gradual abolition of slavery had also a tendency to destroy that
property; or that the Legislative decision of the State of Massachusetts
that there shall be no slaves under their Government, would have that
effect. But it was said the characters of the petitioners was such as
they ought to brand with the mark of disapprobation.

In support of this charge, it was alleged that they were not satisfied
with petitioning, but they attempted to debauch and seduce servants--to
rob gentlemen of their property. He did not know to what the gentleman
who made this assertion alluded; but he believed, if the matter was
fairly stated, whatever may have been done in the State of Pennsylvania,
has been no more than an endeavor to carry into full effect the laws of
the State, which say, that "all men are free when they set their foot
within the State," excepting only the servants of Members of
Congress.[25] As to the moral character of this body of people, though a
number of their principles were different from those which he professed,
he believed it could not be said, with truth, that they were friends to
any kind of disorder; and he was surprised to hear gentlemen suppose
that they could or would do any thing which would throw into disorder
any part of the Union. On the contrary, he believed them to be good
friends of order. Mr. G. said he wished to have avoided a discussion of
the merits of the memorial; but when they were told it was improper to
do any thing on the subject, it became necessary. He knew it was in
their power to do something. They might lay a duty of ten dollars a head
on the importation of slaves; he knew a memorial had been presented at a
former session respecting the kidnapping of negroes, which had been
favorably reported upon. Finally, the present memorial did not apply
only to the blacks, but to other objects. With respect to plays, they
had a motion last session before them for laying a tax upon them, which
had a reference to the subject. By committing this memorial, they should
give no decision. If the committee reported they could do nothing in the
business, and the House agreed to the report, the matter would be closed
in a much more respectful way than by throwing the petition under the
table.

Mr. SEWALL said, the gentleman last up had stated two cases in which
petitions had been received without a commitment. He might have added a
third, more applicable to the present memorial. This was when a petition
was upon matter over which this House had no cognizance, especially if
it were of such a nature as to excite disagreeable sensations in one
part of the House, who were concerned in property which was already held
under circumstances sufficiently disagreeable. In such cases, they ought
at once to reject the memorial, as it would be misspending time to
commit it. If, for instance, a petition should be presented, complaining
that a person had refused to discharge an obligation to another, it
would be at once acknowledged that the House could not enforce the
obligation; but application must be made to a court of justice. So in
this case; the petitioners complain of a law of North Carolina. This
House, he said, could not change that law. If any thing was done there
contrary to right, the courts of that State, as well as those of the
United States, were open to afford redress. It was their business, and
not the business of that House. They did not come there to act upon
subjects agreeable to their feelings, but upon such as the constitution
had placed in their hands.

Mr. MACON said, there was not a gentleman in North Carolina who did not
wish there were no blacks in the country. It was a misfortune--he
considered it as a curse; but there was no way of getting rid of them.
Instead of peace-makers, he looked upon the Quakers as war-makers, as
they were continually endeavoring in the Southern States to stir up
insurrections amongst the negroes.[26] It was unconstitutional, he said,
in these men to desire the House to do what they had no power to do; as
well might they ask the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to come and take
the SPEAKER'S chair. There was a law in North Carolina, he said, which
forbade any person from holding either a black or white person as a
slave after he had been set at liberty. The one hundred and thirty-four
negroes alluded to in the petition, he knew nothing of. In the war, he
said, the Quakers in their State were generally Tories. They began to
set free their negroes, when the State passed a law that they should not
set them free. If these people were dissatisfied with the law, they had
nothing to do but transport their negroes into Pennsylvania, where, the
gentleman from that State had told them, they would be immediately free.
This subject had already been before the House, but they declined doing
any thing in it. It was extraordinary that these people should come,
session after session, with their petitions on this subject. They had
put play-houses into their memorial; but they had nothing to do with
them. In this State, he believed, the Legislature had passed a law
authorizing them. It was altogether a matter of State policy. The whole
petition was, indeed, unnecessary. The only object seemed to be to sow
dissension. A petition could not come there touching any subject on
which they had power to act, which he should not be in favor of
committing; but this thing being wrong in itself, it was needless to
commit it, as no single purpose could be answered by it.

Mr. ISAAC PARKER was of opinion with the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
(Mr. GALLATIN,) with respect to the disposal of petitions. But it
appeared to him that the subject matter of all petitions should be
within the view and authority of the House; if not, to refer them would
certainly be a waste of time. He had attended to the petition, and he
did not think there was a single object upon which it was in their power
to act. Nothing was prayed for. The petitioners speak of the slave
trade, and, in general terms, of the immorality of the times, as
injurious to the state of society; and wish some means may be taken to
prevent the growth of them. To refer a petition of this sort, therefore,
to a committee would answer no purpose. He did not think they were more
obliged to take up the business than if they had read the address in a
newspaper.

Mr. BAYARD said it might be inferred, from the anxiety and warmth of
gentlemen, that the question before them was, whether slavery should or
should not be abolished. The present was, however, very remote from such
a question, as it was merely whether a memorial should be read a second
time. The contents of this memorial, he said, were right or wrong,
reasonable or unreasonable; if right, it was proper it should go to a
committee; and if wrong, if so clearly absurd as it had been
represented, where would be the evil of a reference for a report
thereon? He did not like things to be decided in the moment of passion,
but from the fullest consideration. In some countries they knew persons
accused of crimes were condemned without a hearing; but there could be
but one sentiment as to the injustice of such a proceeding. There could
be no objection, therefore, upon general principles, to the reference of
this petition. But it was said it was not to be sent, because of the
general habits of this society. He believed there was no body of men
more respectable; they were obedient, and contributed cheerfully to the
support of Government; and, either politically or civilly speaking, as
few crimes could be imputed to that body as to any other.

This memorial, he said, had been treated as coming from an Abolition
Society--it was a memorial of the General Meeting of the people called
Quakers; and if only out of respect to that body, it ought to be
referred. But it was said it did not contain matter upon which the House
could act. Gentlemen seemed not to have attended to the subject-matter
of the petition. He did not believe that the House had the power to
manumit slaves, but he believed there was not a word in the petition
which had a reference to slavery. The petitioners state, indeed, that a
number of negroes, not slaves, for negroes may be free, had been taken
again into slavery, after they had been freed by their masters. He
wished to know whether the House had not jurisdiction over this matter?
He was warranted by the constitution in saying they had, because that
instrument says that no State shall make _ex post facto_ laws. It
belonged to that House, therefore, to see that the constitution was
respected, as it could not be expected from the justice of the
individual States, that they would repeal such laws. It rested,
therefore, with the Government of the United States to do it. Mr. B.
read the clause of the constitution touching this matter, and concluded
by reminding the House that this was not an ultimate decision, but
merely a reference.

Mr. JOSIAH PARKER said he was always inclined to lend a favorable ear to
petitioners of every kind, but when a memorial was presented to the
House contrary to the nature of the government, he should consent to its
lying on the table or under it. No one, he said, could say they had a
right to legislate respecting the proceedings of any individual State;
they, therefore, had no power to decide on the conduct of the citizens
of North Carolina in the matter complained of. Petitions had frequently
come from Quakers and others on the subject; whereas this Government had
nothing to do with negro slavery, except that they might lay a tax upon
the importation of slaves. He recollected, when the subject was brought
before the House in the first Congress held at New York, wishing to put
a stop to the slave trade as much as possible, being a friend of
liberty, he took every step in his power, and brought forward a
proposition for laying a tax of ten dollars upon every slave imported.
It was not agreed to; but there was only one State (Georgia) in which
the importation of slaves was admitted. Since the establishment of this
Government, Mr. P. said, the situation of slaves was much ameliorated,
and any interference now might have the effect to make their masters
more severe. He knew of no part of the constitution which gave them
power over horse-racing and cock-fighting, nor could they interfere with
respect to play-houses; and where they had no right to legislate, they
had no right to speak at all. As the session had begun harmoniously, he
hoped that harmony would not be broken in upon by such applications as
the present. Mr. P. produced a precedent from the journals of 1792,
where a memorial of Warner Mifflin, a Quaker, after being read, was
ordered to lie on the table, and two days afterwards returned to the
memorialist.

Mr. NICHOLAS felt as much as other gentlemen from the Southern States on
the subject of the present petition, but his feelings did not produce
the same effect. He was not afraid of an interference from the United
States with their property, nor of any investigations or discussions
respecting it. He believed it would be to the honor of people holding
property in slaves, that the business should be looked into. He thought
such an inquiry would rather secure than injure their property. He did
not think it was the interest of slaveholders to cover improper
practices. He was satisfied, that in the part of the country where he
lived, there was no disposition to protect injuries--no disposition to
reject an inquiry, or to refuse to understand a complaint. They had been
told that the state of the negroes, whose cases were mentioned in the
memorial, might be produced by the fugitive law; they had before heard
that this law had operated mischievously. It ought, therefore, to be
inquired into. On inquiry, Mr. N. said, it would not be found the fault
of the Southern States that slavery was tolerated, but their misfortune;
but to liberate their slaves at once, would be to act like madmen; it
would be to injure all parts of the United States as well as those who
possess slaves. It was their duty, however, to remedy evils; they were
unfortunately placed in a situation which obliged them to hold slaves,
but they did not wish to extend the mischief. He should, indeed, be
sorry if his possessing property of this kind, obliged him to cover the
violation of another man's right; if this were the case, he should think
it necessary that his property should be taken from him. He did not
think it necessary, and he doubted not, if a fair investigation took
place, that this kind of property would be brought into the situation in
which every man of sense would place it. He was firmly of an opinion,
that to appear to be afraid of an inquiry would do more harm to this
property than a fair investigation. He trusted, therefore, the petition
would be committed.

Mr. BLOUNT hoped this memorial would not be committed. As this was not
the first time the society of Quakers had come forward with petitions to
the House, seemingly with no other view than to fix an odium on the
State of North Carolina, he thought it his duty positively to contradict
a fact stated in this memorial. It was stated that 134 persons, set free
from slavery in North Carolina, had been since enslaved by cruel
retrospective, or _ex post facto_ laws; they alleged that certain
members of their society had done what no person was permitted to do.
Mr. B. read part of a law of North Carolina, stating "that no negro or
mulatto slave shall be set free, except for meritorious services,
acknowledged by a license of the court; and when any person shall be set
free contrary to this law, he may be seized and sold as a slave," &c. He
also read a clause from another law, passed afterwards, stating that
several persons having set at liberty their slaves contrary to law, and
persons having taken up and sold them, are doubtful of the validity of
the sale, and that this law is passed to do away all doubts of such
validity. Mr. B. said these extracts proved the assertion untrue.

Mr. GORDON lamented that this discussion had taken place, as it was
certain that wherever interest is concerned, some degree of warmth will
be produced; and when a petition was brought forward which might affect
the property of many gentlemen in this House, and their constituents, it
could not be expected they would hear it with the same calmness with
persons wholly unconcerned about it. All that had been advanced in favor
of the second reading of the petition was, the respectability of the
persons presenting it, the opinion that would be entertained of the
petitioners, if their petition was not referred, and the merits of the
petition itself.

With respect to the persons of the petitioners, he felt inclined to do
them every justice; but he did not think this any reason for acting upon
their memorial, unless some good consequence could arise from it, any
more than if they were the vilest persons on earth. As to the opinion
that might be entertained out of doors, as the petition was not
examined, he was not afraid that the citizens of the United States would
believe that the House could be so far lost to its duty as not to look
into a question of this kind, but that it would be conceived, if
rejected, that they had nothing to do with it. The other reason, the
only material one, was to the merits of the petition. The gentleman from
Delaware, (Mr. BAYARD,) who had examined the business with much coolness
and ability, had stated that a certain _ex post facto_ law of North
Carolina had occasioned grievances. Admitting there was such a law, what
could the House do? Could they declare a law of North Carolina null and
void? There would be no utility in this; but if there was a law in North
Carolina that violated the constitution, there was a clear remedy in the
law which organizes the Judical department of the United States, in
which it is said, if any law of an individual State interferes with a
law of the United States, a person has a right to take advantage of the
law of the United States. There was no necessity, therefore, to call
upon Congress for a remedy against this law. Indeed, he saw nothing in
this memorial which called for their interference, and he was therefore
against a reference, as a further discussion of it would only produce
uneasiness in certain parts of the United States, without producing any
good.

Mr. RUTLEDGE observed, that notwithstanding all that had been said,
considering the present extraordinary state of the West India Islands
and of Europe, he should insist that "sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof," and that they ought to shut their doors against any thing
which had a tendency to produce the like confusion in this country. If
this were not done, the confidence of a great part of the Union in the
General Government would be weakened. In the Southern States, where most
of their property consisted of slaves, and where the rest was of no
value without them, there was already a prejudice existing that the
Northern and Eastern States were inimical to this kind of property,
though they were bound by the constitution from an interference with it;
but when they heard of the House giving countenance to a petition like
the present, it would increase their uneasiness. He referred to what had
fallen from the gentleman from Delaware respecting _ex post facto_ law,
and thought a court of justice the proper tribunal to settle that
business. Mr. R. said he was indisposed, notwithstanding the high
panegyrics which had been passed upon the body of Quakers, to withdraw
the censures he had cast upon them. The gentleman from New York had
doubted the charges which he had produced, and said such things could
never be attempted by the body. It was true, they did not come in a body
into his lodging to seduce his servant, but individuals did it. But why,
he asked, do these men come here in a body? Because they believe that
their presence will give more weight to their petition; so that they
appeared in bodies, or as individuals, to answer their purposes.
Gentlemen had charged the opposers of the petition with heat; he thought
there was as much heat on one side as the other.

Mr. EDMOND did not believe there was any real ground of irritation in
the question; as no gentleman could suppose they were about to do any
thing which was either unconstitutional, or which would affect their
property. Whether the persons who presented the memorial are virtuous or
vicious, was of no consequence, since justice was due to both classes of
men. They had brought a petition before them, and they ought to consider
it. It was addressed to their honesty or justice; if the facts were
claims upon their honesty or justice they should be attended to; and not
only attended to, but, if possible, relief granted. It was stated that
there were a number of persons held in bondage who were justly entitled
to liberty.

This fact called for examination; and a question arose, if it were
established, whether that House could afford redress. A gentleman from
North Carolina (Mr. BLOUNT) had stated that the fact was not true; it
was certainly, therefore, worth while to be inquired into. Another
gentleman had said, if the fact were as stated, they had no power to
act; and a third was of opinion that, by the constitution, redress might
be afforded. This diversity of opinion showed the necessity of an
investigation of the subject, in order to determine the jurisdiction of
the House. He wished it for another reason. It had been stated, that if
this petition were attended to, it would open a door to faction and
mischief. Can it have this effect? These people bring forward a petition
stating a number of facts; they certainly do not come forward for the
mere design of exciting disorder in any quarter. If the House say they
will throw their petition under the table, would not such treatment give
the factious some ground of clamor by which to sow dissension? But if,
on the contrary, they coolly looked into the petition, and reported
thereon, would it not stop the mouths of these people? It certainly
would; since they could not then say common justice was refused to the
petitioners. Again; having once investigated the subject fully, if
petitions of a similar kind should hereafter come forward, it would be
reasonably said, this matter has already been taken up and fully decided
upon; and, therefore, we will not again go into it. Until this was done,
the factious would doubtless have cause of complaint.

Mr. BLOUNT said, several gentlemen who had spoken on this subject seemed
to express themselves as if they believed there was no punishment for
individuals reducing to slavery persons who had been manumitted. He read
an extract from a law, passed in 1779, in North Carolina, by which the
punishment of death is awarded against such an offence.

Mr. MACON read the proceedings of the House on the petition respecting
the kidnapping of negroes, in order to show that the gentleman from New
York (Mr. LIVINGSTON) had misstated the issue of the business. The last
report on the subject was that it would be best to leave the regulation
of the subject to the Legislatures of the several States. Mr. M. allowed
that his reflections upon the whole body of Quakers were too general,
and he had no hesitation in retracting them; but he believed a number of
them were guilty of the charges brought against them by the gentleman
from South Carolina.

Mr. THATCHER said, if, when the motion was first made, he had been
against it, from what had fallen from gentlemen on the subject, he
should now be in favor of it; for, notwithstanding they opposed the
second reading of the petition, they were filing off in squads to read
it, and ready to fight for a sight of it. He believed, therefore, they
had some reasons for opposing the second reading, which did not appear.
He referred to what had been said by the gentleman from North Carolina,
as to the fact stated in the petition, and said that, notwithstanding
the laws which he had read, the fact might be true; but that this very
doubt about the fact was an additional reason for going into the
inquiry.

Gentlemen had said, however good and virtuous the petitioners might be,
it ought to have no effect upon the petition; if this were true, he
hoped when they were represented as the worst of men, that
representation was not meant to influence their decision on the
question. Mr. T. could not conceive for what purpose they were carried
to Europe, to witness the scenes which had taken place there for the
last ten years. Was this, he asked, the state of society? If he thought
so, if it had the faintest resemblance of what was taking place there,
he would fly from it to the uttermost parts of the earth, and there make
his habitation. Mr. T. wished an inquiry to take place; there was a part
of the United States in which slavery was tolerated--some of the members
from those parts thought it not right; there were other parts of the
Union which disclaimed it. These two opposing principles were like two
opposite powers in mechanism, which produced rest; but, the more
frequently the subject was looked into, the more mitigated would be its
effects.

The question was taken for the second reading of the petition, and
carried--53 votes being in the affirmative.

Mr. GALLATIN moved that it be referred to a select committee.

Mr. COIT wished it to be referred to the Committee of the Whole, to whom
was referred the petition on the subject of kidnapping negroes, &c.

Mr. RUTLEDGE thought a select committee would be best, as stage-plays,
cock-fighting, horse-racing, and other evils, would, of course, be
considered.

The question for reference to a select committee was put and carried--59
members being in the affirmative.

Five members being agreed upon to form the committee, the SPEAKER named
Messrs. SITGREAVES, NICHOLAS, DANA, SCHUREMAN, and S. SMITH, for the
purpose.

The House adjourned.


FRIDAY, December 1.

A new member, to wit: JOSEPH HEISTER, returned to serve in this House as
a member for the State of Pennsylvania, in the room of George Ege, who
has resigned his seat, appeared, produced his credentials, and took his
seat in the House.

Several other members, to wit: from Pennsylvania, ANDREW GREGG; from
Kentucky, THOMAS T. DAVIS; and from North Carolina, NATHAN BRYAN, and
DEMPSEY BURGES, appeared and took their seats in the House.

The Clerk then informed the House that he had heard from a member of the
Senate that the SPEAKER was indisposed; so much so that he was not able
to communicate his indisposition to the House in writing.

Mr. DENT said, this being the case, he should move that the orders for
this day be further postponed till Monday; which motion being agreed to,
the Clerk, on motion, adjourned the House till Monday morning, at 11
o'clock.


MONDAY, December 4.

THOMAS SUMTER, from South Carolina, appeared, and took his seat.

_Publication of Debates._

Mr. DWIGHT FOSTER presented the petition of Thomas Carpenter, stating
that he was the editor of the _American Senator_, published during the
session of Congress ending in March last; that, at the commencement of
that session, he presented a memorial to the House, praying its support
of his work; that the House had declined supporting it as a body, but
receiving individual assurances of support from many of the members, he
had been induced to engage in the work; but the event had proved
unfavorable to him. He hoped now, therefore, that he should be
recompensed, by the House engaging to take three copies for each member
of the work he proposed to publish this session, (provided he met with
the support he prayed for,) which, computing the session at eighteen
weeks, he supposed would not amount to more than $2,250.

Mr. D. FOSTER moved that this petition be referred to a select
committee.

Mr. COIT objected to a reference. The House, he said, had so often
determined to have nothing to do with the publication of the debates,
that he thought it time to have done with the subject. He hoped,
therefore, the petition might lie upon the table.

Mr. FOSTER and Mr. THATCHER spoke in favor of the committal; and the
motion was put and carried, and a committee of three members appointed
to report thereon.


THURSDAY, December 7.

_Amy Dardin._

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE said, that during the last Winter, a report had been
made by the Committee of Claims, on the petition of Amy Dardin,
unfavorable to the petitioner, which, after full discussion, had been
disagreed to by the House; and on the 24th of February a motion for
appointing a committee to bring in a bill for her relief was made and
committed to a Committee of the Whole, but for want of time had not been
acted upon. He now wished to bring the matter before the House, and for
that purpose moved that a committee be appointed to bring in a bill for
the relief of Amy Dardin.

This motion met with opposition. It will, perhaps, be recollected that
this, though a strong claim, in point of justice, is directly in the
face of the Limitation Act. Messrs. MACON, SITGREAVES, and HARPER,
wished the matter to go again to the Committee of Claims, as many
members now in the House were unacquainted with the merits of the claim;
and the latter gentleman, because he thought the House had been
surprised into a decision, contrary to fifty other determinations on
similar questions, which ought now to be reversed.

Mr. CLAIBORNE opposed this course, and trusted the House would again be
influenced by the justice of the claim, to act as they had heretofore
done, by passing a bill for the relief of the petitioner.

Mr. GALLATIN thought it would be best to commit the business to the same
Committee of the Whole to which they had yesterday referred a report of
the Committee of Claims on the subject of excepting a certain
description of claims from the operation of that act.

The business was, however, closed by Mr. CLAIBORNE'S withdrawing his
motion for the present.


MONDAY, December 11.

Two other members, to wit: JAMES GILLESPIE and JOSEPH MCDOWELL, from the
State of North Carolina, appeared and took their seats.


TUESDAY, December 12.

_Acts of Limitation._

Mr. GALLATIN called for the order of the day on the report of the
Committee of Claims, to whom it was referred to inquire into and report
on the expediency or inexpediency of designating certain claims against
the United States to be excepted from the operation of the acts of
limitation; which being agreed to, the House accordingly resolved itself
into a Committee of the Whole on the subject, Mr. DENT in the chair. The
report was read, as follows:

      The Committee of Claims who were "instructed to inquire
      into, and report on, the expediency or inexpediency of
      designating certain claims against the United States, to be
      excepted from the operation of the acts of limitation,"
      report:

      That, in obedience to the orders of the House, they have
      made all the inquiries which to them appear necessary; that
      they have attentively and deliberately considered the
      subject referred to them; and are of opinion that it would
      not be expedient to designate any species of claims against
      the United States which are now affected by the acts of
      limitation, to be excepted from the operation of those
      acts.

      In considering this subject, a review of the situation of
      the United States, as respected their finances, during the
      period when most of the demands originated, was requisite.
      It was also necessary to ascertain what measures had been
      adopted by Congress, both under the old and under the
      present government, to bring all the demands against the
      States to a liquidation and settlement.

      It will be recollected, that, at the commencement of the
      war, the United States were destitute of money; and during
      a long period of years afterwards, were obliged to rely
      principally on credit, for carrying on all their important
      operations.

      Having, at that time, no settled National Government, a
      regular system for conducting public business, especially
      money transactions, depending on credit, was not to be
      expected.

      Great numbers of individuals were necessarily invested with
      the power of binding the public by their contracts. Almost
      every officer of the Army, whether in the Commissary's
      Department or otherwise, in different stages of the war,
      had it in his power to contract debts legally or equitably
      binding upon the United States. We find Congress, at
      various times, during the war, endeavoring to make
      arrangements which should prevent an undue use of the
      powers vested in individuals, and the dangerous
      consequences to which the Government was thereby
      necessarily exposed. The acts of the 5th of March, 1779,
      and of the 23d of August, 1780, were calculated to limit
      the public responsibility in such cases. After the peace,
      and under the old Government, periods were prescribed,
      within which claims of certain descriptions, and finally
      all unliquidated claims, were to be exhibited for
      settlement, or to be for ever thereafter barred.

      It must be acknowledged by all, that during those periods
      every provision which could rationally have been expected
      was made for the accommodation of individuals having claims
      against the public, to enable them to obtain proper
      settlements of their demands. The journals of Congress
      under the confederation will abundantly justify this
      remark.

      Commissioners were appointed, with special or general
      powers, to settle the claims of individuals in all the
      departments; and, in every instance, the powers given were
      plenary and explicit. Sufficient time was given for every
      one to obtain information and pursue his remedy; and ample
      opportunity was given for all to substantiate their claims,
      or, at least, to present abstracts of them, which would
      have prevented their being foreclosed by the acts designed
      eventually to operate upon them. The cases cannot be
      numerous, in which the want of opportunity to bring forward
      claims can be justly pleaded as an excuse for the omission.

      By the act of the 17th of March, 1785, all persons having
      unliquidated claims against the United States were
      required, within twelve months, to exhibit particular
      abstracts of such claims, to some of the Commissioners in
      the State in which they respectively resided, who were sent
      and empowered to settle accounts against the United States,
      under the penalty or condition that accounts not so
      presented, should be thereafter settled only at the
      Treasury.

      By another act of Congress, of the same year, viz: November
      2d, 1785, all persons having claims for services performed
      in the military department, were directed to exhibit the
      same for liquidation to the Commissioners of Army accounts,
      on or before the first day of August, then ensuing. By that
      act it was expressly resolved, that all claims, under the
      description above mentioned, which might be exhibited after
      that period, should be for ever thereafter precluded from
      adjustment and allowance.

      And it was provided, by the act of July 23d, 1787, that all
      persons having unliquidated claims against the United
      States, pertaining to the late Commissaries',
      Quartermaster's, Hospital, Clothier's, or Marine
      department, should exhibit particular abstracts of such
      claims to the proper Commissioner appointed to settle the
      accounts of those departments, within eight months from the
      date of the said act; and all persons having other
      unliquidated claims against the United States, were to
      exhibit particular abstracts thereof to the Comptroller of
      the Treasury of the United States, within one year from the
      date thereof; and all accounts not exhibited as aforesaid,
      were to be precluded from settlement or allowance.

      These regulations were adopted by Congress under the old
      Government. Great care was taken to have them extensively
      published, so that every individual who was interested
      might be informed of their existence and operation.

      Under the present constitution there has not been wanting a
      disposition to relieve certain individuals whose claims
      were considered as peculiarly meritorious, which had been
      affected by the acts above recorded.

      With this view, in March, 1792, two several acts of
      Congress were passed, suspending for two years the
      operation of the resolutions of Congress of November 2d,
      1785, and July 27th, 1787, so far as they had barred or
      might be construed to bar the claims of the widow or
      orphans of any officer of the late army, to the seven
      years' half pay of such officer; or the claims of any
      officer, soldier, artificer, sailor, and marine, of the
      Army of the United States, for personal services rendered
      to the United States in the military or naval departments.

      In consequence of these suspensions, many claims were
      exhibited, and allowed against the Government. There is
      reason to apprehend, in some instances, the public were
      defrauded for want of proper pre-existing checks and
      evidences of payments being made. This suspension continued
      for the term of two years, which was till March, 1794. In
      the mean time, viz: on the 12th of February, 1793, the act
      "relative to claims against the United States, not barred
      by any act of limitation, and which had not been already
      adjusted," was passed by Congress, after a serious and
      attentive consideration of the subject.

      By that law it was provided, "that all claims upon the
      United States for services or supplies, or for other cause,
      matter, or thing, furnished or done, previous to the 4th
      day of March, 1789, whether founded upon certificates,
      written documents from public officers, or otherwise, which
      had not already been barred by any act of limitation, and
      which should not be presented at the Treasury before the
      first day of May, 1794, should for ever after be barred and
      precluded from settlement or allowance." But this was not
      to be construed as affecting Loan Office certificates,
      certificates of final settlements, indents of interest,
      balances entered on the books of the Register of the
      Treasury, registered certificates, foreign loans, or
      certificates issued under the act making provision for the
      public debt of the United States.

      One other act, passed the 3d day of March, 1795, provided
      that Loan Office certificates, final settlements, and
      indents of interest, then outstanding, should be presented
      at the office of the Auditor of the Treasury, on or before
      the first day of January, in the present year, 1797, or be
      for ever after barred or precluded from settlement or
      allowance.

      The summary contains a general view of the principal acts
      of limitation, by which claims against the public have been
      affected.

      From an attentive consideration of them, and of the
      circumstances under which they were enacted, the committee
      are fully impressed with an opinion that it would not be
      expedient to suspend their operation.

      Some remarks extracted from a report heretofore made to
      Congress, are subjoined by the committee, as pertinent to
      the subject.

      It was essential to the public administration that the
      extent of just demands upon the Government should be,
      within a reasonable period, definitely ascertained. It was
      essential to public safety and to right, in relation to the
      whole community, that all unsettled claims should be made
      known within a time when there were yet means of proper
      investigation, and after which the public responsibility
      should terminate, and the possibility of charging the
      Government by collusive and fictitious contracts, should be
      at an end.

      The justice as well as policy of acts of limitation, under
      such circumstances, cannot be doubted.[27]

      The situation of no country ever presented a more clear
      necessity for, or a more competent justification of,
      precautions of that nature. And all the reasons for
      adopting them operate to recommend unusual caution in
      departing from them, with the additional force of this
      circumstance, that the subsequent lapse of time has
      increased the difficulties of a due examination.

      The accounts of a considerable number of officers, who had
      it in their power to bind the public by their contracts,
      and who were intrusted with large sums of money for
      fulfilling their engagements, remain unsettled. Some of
      those persons are dead; others have absconded; the business
      has been conducted by others with so little order as to
      put it out of their power to render a proper statement of
      their transactions. The books and papers of others, who had
      extensive trusts, have been destroyed, so as to preclude
      the possibility of settlement. Hence it must appear that
      the Government would, in a great number of cases, be
      destitute of the means of repelling unfounded and even
      satisfied claims, for want of documents and vouchers, which
      only could have resulted from a due settlement with those
      officers, and from the possession of their books and
      papers.

      It might be inferred without proof, and it has appeared in
      the course of business at the Treasury, that it was a
      practice with certain public officers, on obtaining
      supplies, to give receipts and certificates for them, and
      when they made payments, either partially or totally, to
      take distinct receipts from the parties, without either
      endorsing the payment upon the original vouchers or
      requiring a surrender of them.

      Hence it would often happen that parties could produce
      satisfactory vouchers of their having performed services
      and furnished supplies, for which, though satisfaction may
      have been made, the evidences of it would not be in the
      possession of the Government. And hence, from relaxations
      of the limitation acts, there would be great danger that
      much more injustice would be done to the United States than
      justice to individuals.

      The principles of self-defence, therefore, require and
      justify an adherence to those acts generally; and there are
      not any particular species of claims, which, in view of the
      committee, ought to be exempted from their operation.

      Those which have been most frequently referred to by some
      members of the House, are such claims as include the
      arrearages of pay and other emoluments to officers and
      soldiers of the late army, &c.

      Pursuant to an order of the House at the first session of
      the present Congress, a report was made to them, having
      special reference to this subject. It was considered in
      Committee of the Whole, and agreed to by the House on the
      fifth day of February, 1796. To that report and the
      documents accompanying the same, the committee ask leave to
      refer the House, and respectfully submit the whole subject
      to their consideration.


WEDNESDAY, December 13.

JOHN WILKES KITTERA, from Pennsylvania, appeared, and took his seat in
the House.


FRIDAY, December 15.

A new member, to wit, PELEG SPRAGUE, from New Hampshire, in place of
Jeremiah Smith, resigned, appeared, produced his credentials, was
qualified, and took his seat.


THURSDAY, December 24.

_Amy Dardin._

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE moved that the report of the Committee of Claims, on
the petition of Amy Dardin, be referred to a Committee of the Whole.

The SPEAKER said, that the report having been negatived at a former
session, and a bill brought in for her relief, but not decided upon, the
proper motion would be to appoint a committee to bring in a bill.

Mr. CLAIBORNE made that motion, which Mr. COIT moved to be referred to
the Committee of Claims, in order that they might report the facts
relative to the case, which were not generally known.

Mr. CLAIBORNE objected to this; and

Mr. BALDWIN suggesting the propriety of committing it to the same
Committee of the Whole, to whom were referred the subject of considering
the expediency of excepting certain claims from the operation of the
limitation acts, this course was adopted.


FRIDAY, December 22.

_General Kosciusko._

Mr. DAWSON wished to call the attention of the House to a subject,
which, he doubted not, would interest the feelings of every member. The
subject he alluded to was the situation of General Kosciusko. It was a
fact well known to every man in this country, it was a fact known to the
world, that this brave man entered into the service of the United
States, at an early period of our Revolutionary war. When this service
was ended, he received from the Government a certificate of what was due
to him. He returned to Poland, his native country; there, animated by
the same spirit which had led him to take a part in our struggle for
independence, he endeavored to overthrow the existing tyranny, and to
introduce in its place liberty and independence. For some time his
attempt seemed likely to be crowned with success; but, on the fatal 10th
of October, 1794, overpowered by numbers, he was defeated and taken
prisoner. Covered with wounds and with glory, he was conducted to the
prison of Petersburgh. When he was released from thence, he immediately
set out to this country, here to spend the remainder of his life. He was
now within this city; but, from the wounds he had received in his
arduous but unsuccessful conflict, he was unable to walk or to attend to
any business. The unfortunate day on which he was taken prisoner, he
lost his all, and with it the certificate of the services rendered to
the United States. He was unable, therefore, to obtain a settlement of
his account at the Treasury. To set aside all difficulty in the matter,
Mr. D. proposed to offer a resolution to the consideration of the House;
and as it was justice only which he sought for this brave man, he
doubted not that a spirit of justice would ensure its adoption. It was
to the following effect:

      "_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire and
      report whether any, and, if any, what provisions are
      necessary, to obtain payment of the claim of Gen. Kosciusko
      on the United States."

Mr. J. PARKER seconded the motion. He hoped the resolution would be
agreed to, and that immediate attention would be paid to the unfortunate
gentleman, as he believed, except he made use of the grant made to him
by the Emperor of Russia, which, he believed, he was disinclined to do,
for considering his predecessor as the chief cause of his own
misfortunes, and those of his country, he did not wish to be under
obligations to him. The certificate given to the General on his
departure from hence, was for $12,800, upon which he had received only
one year's interest. He hoped, therefore, as he had the misfortune to
lose his certificate, at the time he was taken prisoner, that the House
would take such measures as should enable him to receive the amount of
his certificate, with the interest due thereon.

Mr. COIT moved that the resolution should be committed to the Committee
of Claims, but afterwards changed his motion so as to make that
committee the committee to inquire and report, instead of a select
committee. He professed to have no other object in these motions than
that this claim should take the same course with other claims.

The motion was supported by Messrs. ALLEN, J. WILLIAMS, MACON, and
EDMOND. It was opposed by Messrs. J. PARKER, LIVINGSTON, GALLATIN,
BROOKS, NICHOLAS, HARPER, SHEPERD, OTIS, PINCKNEY, SWANWICK, S. SMITH,
T. CLAIBORNE, and MCDOWELL.

The motion for a reference to the Committee of Claims was lost--59 to
33.

Mr. PINCKNEY said, that as this claim was different from most others
which came before that House, and having himself had something to do in
the business, he would state to the House what he knew of it. Previous
to General Kosciusko's return to Poland, whilst he was in Germany, he
applied to the Polish Ambassador in London, by letter, requesting him to
make application to the American Minister there for payment of a part of
the money due to him from the United States. The mode of transacting
this business was this: The interest arising from the certificate
granted to the General, was made payable in Paris; but from the change
which took place in the French Government, the General did not know how
to receive it there, which was the reason of his making application,
through the Polish Minister, to him (Mr. P.) in London. Mr. P. wrote to
the American Minister in Paris for an order on the bankers of the United
States in Holland, but having in the mean time received a letter from
Gen. Kosciusko, requesting the money to be sent for him to Ratisbon or
Leipsic, he (Mr. P.) sent an order to Amsterdam, requesting the bankers
there to transmit the money either to Ratisbon or Leipsic, as the
exchange should be most advantageous. In the interim General Kosciusko
returned to Poland, and he supposed he then had no time to attend to
this business. He never heard any more upon the subject until he saw the
General in Philadelphia, when he found this money had not been received
by him; so that he supposed it yet lay in the hands of the Leipsic or
Ratisbon banker.

Finding this to be the case, Mr. P. immediately wrote to the banker at
Amsterdam, requesting him to redraw the money, and to transmit it here
for the General's use. But, as he might, in the mean time, stand in
need of it, it might be proper in the United States to anticipate its
return, by settling the account with the General. He hoped in whatever
way this business was effected, it would be in such a way as not to
wound the feelings of a man who had deserved so well of this country.

On a suggestion of Mr. SITGREAVES, instead of appointing a committee,
the Secretary of the Treasury was directed to make a report what
"Legislative provision was necessary, &c."

This motion was carried by 49 to 40; but whatever difference of opinion
there was in the House, as to the mode of doing the business, there
seemed to be but one sentiment, as to the propriety of complying with
the spirit of the resolution.


WEDNESDAY, December 27.

SAMUEL JORDAN CABELL, from the State of Virginia, appeared, and took his
seat.

_Count de Grasse._

Mr. LIVINGSTON, from the committee to whom was referred the petition of
the daughters of the late Count de Grasse, made a report, which stated
that the sum heretofore allowed by Congress was intended only as a
temporary provision, until the events of the war should permit them to
take possession of an estate in St. Domingo; that the facts formerly
stated showed that the most important services were rendered to the
United States by their father, from motives the most honorable, under
the greatest responsibility, and at a risk the most hazardous that could
be encountered by an officer of rank and reputation; that, with a
recollection of these services, it would consist neither with the honor
nor justice of the United States to refuse an adequate provision for the
orphan children of the man who rendered them. The committee, therefore,
recommended that a certain sum should be granted to each of them,
annually, for their lives. The report was twice read, and committed for
Monday.


THURSDAY, December 28.

_Gen. Kosciusko._

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter and report from the Secretary
of the Treasury, in pursuance of a resolution of the House, of the 23d
instant, relative to the claim of General Kosciusko. The report states,
that the accounts of the General were settled at the Treasury in 1784,
when a certificate was issued to him for $12,280 49, bearing an interest
of six per cent. from the 1st of January, 1784, which was stipulated by
a resolution in February following, in common with the interest due to
all the foreign officers, to be paid annually at Paris; that in May,
1792, moneys were granted by Congress to discharge the principal and
interest of these debts, at which time it was supposed that all the
officers had received their interest to the 1st of January, 1789; but it
now appears by the banker's account at Paris, that no interest had been
received by General Kosciusko for four years, viz.: from 1785 to 1788.
Sufficient funds to pay the interest from 1789 to 1792, were, in 1792,
placed in Amsterdam, subject to the disposal of our Minister at Paris;
that by his direction a bill for the amount was remitted to Mr. Pinckney
in London; but, pursuant to the direction of General Kosciusko, Mr.
Pinckney wrote to the banker at Amsterdam to remit the amount to Leipsic
or Dresden. That in September, 1792, a notification was published, that
provision had been made for paying the principal of the debt due to
foreign officers, on application at the Treasury, after the 15th of
October following, and that the interest upon their demands would cease
after the last day of December in that year. That though the certificate
issued to the General is stated by him to have been lost or destroyed,
yet the powers of the officers of the Treasury are competent to the
payment of $12,280 54, the principal, and $2,947 33 interest, for the
years from 1785 to 1788, on receiving a bond of indemnification from the
General: but that they cannot advance the interest supposed to have been
remitted to Leipsic or Dresden, though payment will be immediately made
for any sum which may be hereafter redrawn, and credited to the United
States at Amsterdam; nor is it in the power of the Treasury to allow any
interest on said principal since the 1st January, 1793.

On motion of Mr. DAWSON, this report was referred to a Committee of the
Whole for Monday.


TUESDAY, January 2.

JOHN FOWLER, from the State of Kentucky, appeared and took his seat.

_General Kosciusko._

Mr. DAWSON moved the order of the day on the report of the Secretary of
the Treasury on the claim of Gen. Kosciusko; which motion being acceded
to, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. KITTERA
in the chair, and the report having been read,

Mr. DAWSON said, when he had the honor of presenting this business to
the House, he hoped the proposition he then submitted would have been
agreed to in that way, which, in his opinion, would have been most
honorable to the United States, and most agreeable to the person
concerned. In this hope he had been disappointed; but, though they
differed as to the mode of doing the business, there was but one opinion
as to the business itself. He had now a resolution to submit to the
consideration of the House, which he trusted would meet with no
opposition. It would be found, by the report of the Secretary of the
Treasury, that the accounting officers were ready to pay to General
Kosciusko $12,280 principal, and $2,947 interest, from 1785 to 1788. To
recover those two sums, therefore, there would have been no occasion for
application to that House. It also states, that a bill had been
remitted to our Minister at London, for the interest from 1789 to 1792,
but which money was afterwards, by direction of the General, ordered to
be remitted to Leipsic or Dresden; but it did not appear that this order
had been complied with. It was clear, however, it was never received by
him, nor had he given any person a right to receive it. He hoped,
therefore, as the money lay at Amsterdam, Leipsic or Dresden, and could
at any time be got by the United States, there would be no objection to
pay the General that sum at this time. It was further stated in the
report, that in September, 1792, a notification was published, informing
all the foreign officers that provision was made at the Treasury for the
payment of the principal of their debts, and that the interest thereon
would therefore cease after the last day of December in that year. Upon
examination he did not find that this arrangement was founded upon any
law; it was, therefore, a regulation agreed upon by the Treasury
Department, and ought not to operate to the injury of persons who were
ignorant of it. It was well known, that, from the peculiar situation of
General Kosciusko at the time, that he could not hear of it; and the
truth was, he never did hear of it until he arrived in this city. He
hoped, therefore, there would be no objection to the payment of the
amount of the certificates, with interest to the present time. To effect
this purpose, he proposed the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      the Secretary of the Treasury be authorized and directed to
      pay to General Kosciusko, the interest of six per cent. per
      annum, on $12,280 54, the amount of the certificate
      received by him from the United States, and now lost, from
      the 1st of January, 1789, to the 31st day of December,
      1797."

This resolution was opposed by Messrs. MACON, COIT, and J. WILLIAMS.
They were opposed to interest being paid up to the present time, and
wished, if any provision were made for paying interest beyond the time
fixed by the notification of the Treasury, that the regulation should be
a general one, and extend to all other foreign officers. They were also
against paying the interest, which had been transmitted to Paris for
General Kosciusko's use, and which, by his direction, was afterwards
remitted to Leipsic or Dresden, as it most probably lay there, and would
be paid to his order without their interference.

The motion was advocated by Messrs. VENABLE, PINCKNEY, J. PARKER,
HARPER, GALLATIN, and T. CLAIBORNE, and was finally agreed to without a
division.


WEDNESDAY, January 3.

_Duties on Distilled Spirits._

PEACH BRANDY.

Mr. HARPER moved the order of the day on the bill to amend the several
acts for laying a duty on spirits distilled within the United States,
and on stills; which motion being agreed to, the House resolved itself
into a Committee of the Whole on the subject, Mr. KITTERA in the chair.
The bill having been read,

Mr. MACON said, that the report of the Committee of Ways and Means, on
the proposition for allowing distillers to take licenses for a week,
having been referred to that committee, if it were taken up at all, this
was the proper time. He should, therefore, propose an additional section
to the bill, to embrace this objection.

Mr. M. accordingly presented a section to allow of weekly licenses.

This motion produced a considerable debate. It was opposed by Messrs.
SEWALL, GRISWOLD, GALLATIN, GORDON, and BROOKS, on the ground that the
duty now paid upon spirits distilled from fruit (which description of
distillers the regulation was avowedly intended to accommodate) was not
equal to that paid by distillers of grain, as the duty on spirits
distilled from fruit was not more than two and a half cents per gallon,
whilst that on spirits distilled from grain paid seven cents; and if the
amendments were agreed to, this inequality would be increased--for
persons who took a license for a week, by preparing their materials
beforehand, and working night and day, would finish their business
within that time, which otherwise would have required a fortnight; by
which means the duty would be reduced from six cents per gallon, on the
capacity of their stills, to four; that it would increase the temptation
to fraud, as that temptation was strong, or the contrary, in proportion
to the length of time for which a license was taken; as a person taking
a license for a fortnight, by working his still one day past the time
specified in his license would gain half a cent a gallon on the capacity
of his still, whilst he who took out a license for six months would only
gain half that sum. If licenses for a week were allowed, the temptation
would therefore be increased; that such a regulation would greatly
augment the duties of excise officers, without rendering any material
advantages to individuals--since, if the owner of a still of fifty
gallons took out a license for a fortnight, when a week might have
served, he would only pay a dollar more than he would have paid for a
week; that when this scale of duties was made, reference was had to the
situation of persons who would be obliged to take out a license for a
fortnight, though they might not have fruit to employ a still more than
a few days, and a rate proportionably low adopted; that the same reasons
which were urged for allowing licenses for a week might be urged for
allowing one for two days; that, though there might be some
inconveniences experienced by the distillers of fruit, (as it was not
doubted there might be in other parts of the law,) yet, as it was only
just got into operation, it would not be right to enter into the
proposed regulation, but defer it to the period when it would most
probably be necessary to go into a review of the whole law.

The motion was supported by Messrs. MACON, HARRISON, HARPER, J. PARKER,
NICHOLAS, VENABLE, R. WILLIAMS, NEW, DENNIS, T. CLAIBORNE, and CLAY. It
was asserted that the law as it now stood excluded four out of five of
the owners of orchards, in the Southern States, from distilling their
early fruit at all; that their peaches ripened hastily, and as hastily
rotted, if not made use of. Persons who had only fruit to employ their
stills for three or four days, sooner than take a license for a
fortnight, suffered their fruit to rot; and to allow licenses for a week
would produce a considerable augmentation of the revenue, since those
persons only would take such a license, who, if that privilege were not
allowed, would not take out a license at all, or such as had occasion to
distil a few days longer after their two weeks' license was expired. It
was unjust to require a man, who had only a small orchard, and occasion
to use a still but a few days, to pay a much higher duty upon his brandy
than his more opulent neighbor. It was not so inconsiderable an object
as gentlemen supposed, since it had not reference to one license
only--farmers in the Southern States having occasion to take out
separate licenses for their early, their middle, and their latter
fruits; and this regulation would not open a door to fraud, as was
supposed. It was an undeserved imputation upon the characters of persons
concerned in this business, to suppose they could be tempted to defraud
the revenue for the sake of half a cent per gallon upon what they could
distil in a day. The penalties consequent upon fraud, if the virtue of
the persons concerned could not be relied upon, were sufficient to guard
against them; and, if they were not, it could not be expected, as some
gentlemen seemed to suppose, that the excise officers should overlook
the conduct of every distiller. If they were to be so inspected and
scourged, an attempt to defraud the revenue could scarcely be blamed;
and, except it were the intention of gentlemen to crush this domestic
manufacture, no reasonable objection could be urged against the
proposition. The objections which had been urged proved the ignorance of
gentlemen in respect to this branch of business; for though the excise
officers would have some trouble in issuing licenses, it was believed
they would be well satisfied to encounter it, since their profits were
in proportion to the quantity of spirits distilled; and though this law
had been but a short time in being, the last season, having been a
scarce fruit season, had given a good opportunity of trying it. As the
application for this amendment was seconded by the whole of the Southern
country, it was entitled to respect, and ought not to be branded with
being a fraudulent design upon the revenue.

In the course of the debate, Mr. GALLATIN called upon gentlemen
acquainted with the subject, to say what was the quantity of spirits
which could be distilled from peaches in a week by a still of the
capacity of thirty, forty or fifty gallons, with a view to show that
this species of spirits paid less at present than spirits distilled from
grain.

Mr. CLAY answered this inquiry, by saying, that a still of fifty gallons
would distil from five to seven gallons of brandy a day. If the weather
was wet, and the peaches rotted quickly, not more than five; but when
the weather was dry, and the peaches sound, seven gallons might be
produced.

The question on the amendment was at length put and carried--45 to 37.

Mr. DENNIS said, he wished to try another principle in this bill. The
law at present required an annual entry of stills, whether they were
used or not, which occasioned persons frequently to ride twenty or
thirty miles to make the entry, when they had no intention to make use
of their still; and not unfrequently, from not meeting with the officers
at home, this journey was taken two or three times over. Indeed, he
believed, more penalties had been incurred on account of this regulation
than any other, and he looked upon it as a useless regulation. When a
still was once entered, he thought it was sufficient, and no future
entry ought to be required, except when a still was about to be made use
of, or when it was transferred into other hands. Mr. D. proposed a
section to this effect; but after some objections to the introduction of
so important a provision into this bill, (which before it could be
decided upon would require considerable discussion,) by Messrs. HARTLEY,
GALLATIN, and HARPER, he agreed to withdraw it for the present.

It having been agreed to fill the blank of the sum per gallon to be paid
on the capacity of a still, when a license was taken for a week, with
_four cents_, the committee rose; the House took up the amendments,
agreed to them, and the bill was ordered to be engrossed for a third
reading to-morrow.


FRIDAY, January 5.

_Count de Grasse._

Mr. LIVINGSTON called for the order of the day on the bill for granting
an annuity to the daughters of the late Count de Grasse; which being
agreed to, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the subject, Mr. DENT in the chair; and, after a number of desultory
observations, the blanks were filled up, viz: the time for which the
annuities should continue was fixed at five years, and the sum per annum
to be allowed at $500 each. The first question was determined by a
considerable majority, there being 57 votes in favor of it; the latter
was carried--46 to 38.

The committee then rose and reported the amendments. They were all
agreed to without a division, except the sum to be allowed per annum.
When that question was put,

Mr. J. WILLIAMS hoped it would not be agreed to. When the subject was
before under discussion, the question on $500 and $400 had been
negatived. $500 a year for the four daughters for five years, he said,
would be $10,000. He thought this a very serious sum. He again adverted
to the situation of many of our own citizens, and called for the yeas
and nays upon the question.

Mr. HARPER asked whether, if, when the Count de Grasse was solicited to
remain with the fleet under his command in the Chesapeake, at his own
risk and responsibility, he had asked as a condition that on some future
day $10,000 should be granted to his daughters, would it not have been
complied with, if it had been ten times that sum? And ought his
descendants to be more hardly dealt with because their father had the
generosity and magnanimity not to make the demand? He trusted not.[28]

After some observations in favor of concurring with the Committee of the
Whole in their vote, by Messrs. THATCHER, BROOKS, LIVINGSTON, and
GORDON; and against it by Messrs. VARNUM, MCDOWELL, and MACON--the
former of whom said that the clergy, in his part of the country, had not
more than three hundred and thirty dollars a year; and the latter
gentleman produced three cases of our own citizens who had lost their
lives in the service of the United States, whose families had been much
more hardly dealt with, viz: the family of a Lieutenant Colonel, who had
four hundred and fifty dollars a year granted them; that of a Major,
three hundred dollars a year; and that of the Marshal of Georgia, whose
family had a grant of two thousand dollars. The yeas and nays were
taken--40 to 43.

The question for allowing five hundred dollars a year being negatived,
four hundred was proposed and carried--46 to 34.

The question being on the bill being engrossed for a third reading, Mr.
BLOUNT called for the yeas and nays upon it. It was carried--55 to 25.


MONDAY, January 15.

LEMUEL BENTON, from the State of South Carolina, appeared, and took his
seat.

_Expenditure for Naval Service._

Mr. LIVINGSTON called up for consideration and decision the resolution
which he had laid upon the table a few days ago, for the appointment of
a committee of inquiry into the expenditure of money which had been
appropriated for the naval service.

The House having agreed to take up this business--

Mr. HARPER said, he believed that the appointment of such a committee
was very unusual, without having some ground stated to the House for the
proceeding. A vote of this kind would imply a censure upon the conduct
of our public officers, which certainly ought not to be done hastily, or
without first having, at least, some ground of suspicion laid before
them upon which to act. The House had not yet received the statements
which had been called for relative to this business; they were directed
to be laid before the House in the last week in January, and might,
therefore, be soon expected.

[Several gentlemen said it was the first, and not the last week in
January, in which the accounts had been ordered to be laid before the
House.]

Mr. H. said the delay, he supposed, had been occasioned by the officers
having been obliged to remove from the city during the fever. He had,
however, been informed that these statements would be ready in a few
days. And would it not be extraordinary, he asked, if, before they
received these statements, they were to appoint a committee of inquiry?
He thought it would. He believed the officers of this department of
Government were very desirous of the inquiry taking place; but this was
not a sufficient reason for the House to proceed in the business without
having first some ground to suppose the money had been misapplied, and
this he believed could not be ascertained until the expected statements
were before the House. When these were looked into, it was possible the
House might be satisfied with respect to the expenditure of the money,
and it would, therefore, be improper to appoint a committee to inquire
into a matter which might so shortly appear satisfactory. If, on the
other hand, these accounts should not be satisfactory, he would readily
concur in the appointment of a committee of inquiry.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said, the gentleman from South Carolina ought to
recollect that the inquiry was produced by a further appropriation being
called for. It might be best to defer the inquiry until the accounts
which had been called for were laid before the House; and he should have
been satisfied with the business taking that course, if a further
appropriation had not been called for in the mean time. But when they
are called upon to appropriate a further sum of money for any object, it
was natural to inquire what was become of that already voted; and the
only way of doing this was to appoint a committee who would look into
all the different statements which had from time to time been laid
before the House, and those which might shortly be communicated, and
state their opinion thereon to the House. He thought those gentlemen who
were most friendly to the frigates ought not to oppose the appointment
of a committee; because, if it should appear that the money had been
justly expended, there would be little objection to a further
appropriation.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, from the full discussion of this subject, which,
though incidentally produced, had taken place on a former occasion, he
did not think it would either have been becoming or necessary to have
again stated the reasons which gave rise to this resolution, especially
as he felt an aversion to say any thing which might be unnecessary, or
which might tire those who heard him. Mr. L. said, that he had before
observed that the patience of the House had been worn out by the
repeated applications which had been made for money for this object;
that the expense had exceeded all belief; that the most extended
imagination could not have conceived an amount like that which Congress
had from time to time been blindly led to appropriate. But the
proposition was objected to, because it would cast an odium upon our
officers. This he was perfectly indifferent about. Whatever might be the
private opinion he had of the characters of these officers, however
incapable he might believe them of doing wrong, or of acting corruptly,
yet, when his duty called upon him to make an inquiry into the
expenditure of public money, he was deaf to all considerations of a
private nature. But, in this case, he did not see the necessity for this
remark. The House had been told (he believed by the gentleman from South
Carolina himself) that the extraordinary expense had been occasioned by
our inexperience in business of this kind, by the high price of labor,
materials, &c. If this were the case, the result of the inquiry would be
honorable to those concerned, and highly satisfactory to the House. It
was a proceeding which our public officers ought to wish for; nay,
gentlemen say they do wish for it.

But, Mr. L. said, it had been alleged, that the statements ordered a
year ago to be laid before the House during the first week in this
month, should be waited for before any inquiry took place. He would
reply, if these officers had not, in the mean time, called upon the
House for a fresh supply of money, this inquiry would not have been
thought of. Besides, the accounts asked for last year would not give the
satisfaction required. The request only extended to all the expenditures
previous to the 1st of January, 1797. The House would wish to know what
had been expended since, and they had no reason to expect further
information than was asked for. Mr. L. said every member who was present
at the time must remember that whenever the House had been applied to
for further appropriations, they had been told that the frigates would
be ready for sea at such and such a time; and that they would then bear
our flag triumphantly over the ocean. And yet, though the House had been
four or five times deceived by these representations, they were told
there was no ground for inquiry. For his part, he should consider
himself as neglecting his duty were he not to call for this inquiry
immediately; for, if the House were to wait a week for the statements
called for, they might wait another for their being printed; they might
then be found to be deficient, fresh statements might be necessary, and
the session might expire without effecting the wished-for inquiry. He
thought all parts of the House ought to favor the inquiry; for, he
believed, if it should appear that frigates could not be built for less
than $500,000 a piece, the project of a navy ought to be given up; but
if, on the other hand, difficulties and expenses had occurred in the
commencement of this business, which would not return, and their
frigates may in future be built for half the sum, (which was his
opinion,) there would be some encouragement to proceed in the business.

Mr. SEWALL was sorry that the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER)
had given the occasion, and that the gentleman last up had so eagerly
seized it, to thwart any measures which might be necessary for the
general defence, by ridiculing the resources of the country. The
present, he said, was a time of danger and apprehension, and thus to
talk of the resources of the United States added to the apprehension and
the danger. The gentleman from South Carolina had said, that to pass
this resolution would be to pass an odium upon our public officers. He
did not think so. He thought an inquiry of this kind at all times proper
where there was any doubt as to the expenditure of money. He agreed with
the gentleman from New York, that the inquiry (if it had a favorable
issue, which he did not doubt) would forward the design of providing a
navy; as it would appear that the extraordinary expenses had been such
as it would not be necessary to incur in future. He was, therefore,
sorry to hear the gentleman from New York first up (Mr. WILLIAMS) say he
should be disinclined to vote any further appropriation until he saw how
the last had been expended. However improvidently the money already
appropriated had been expended, yet, in order to secure what had been
voted, and to keep the work in progress, they ought to vote a further
sum, as soon as wanted, whether the statements called for were received
or not.

Mr. LIVINGSTON desired to know wherein he had attempted to ridicule the
resources of this country? The gentleman from Massachusetts must excuse
him when he asserted he had never made a more hasty or unfounded charge.
If he had either ridiculed the resources, or thwarted any measures for
the general defence of the United States, it must have arisen from a
weak judgment, and not from any intention of doing so. But he was
certain nothing which had fallen from him could be so construed.

Mr. SEWALL acquitted the gentleman from New York of any intention of
lowering the appearances of the resources of this country; but he
appealed to the House whether he had not spoken of this fleet with a
degree of ridicule, when he represented it as governing the ocean. It
appeared so to him at least.

Mr. HARPER again insisted upon the impropriety of going into this
measure, from reasons similar to those which he had already given.

Mr. GALLATIN said, that the ground taken by the gentleman from South
Carolina (Mr. HARPER) would prevent any inquiry whatever; for he stated
that the House ought not to pass the present resolution, because certain
statements had not been received, and because to pass it would be to
imply a censure on our officers. So that on this ground no inquiry could
be gone into without statements, as the House could not obtain
statements without passing a resolution, that resolution would be
construed into a censure, and therefore ought not to be passed. This Mr.
G. thought a very improper doctrine. It would never be in the power of
the House to decide upon the propriety of statements by barely having
them laid upon the table.


MONDAY, January 15.

_Naval Expenditure._

Mr. GALLATIN stated the different estimates which had been made to the
House. In 1794, he said, they were told that $688,000 would be
sufficient to build six frigates. In 1796, they were informed there had
been a mistake in the matter, but that with $80,000 more three would be
finished. In January, 1797, the House was again called upon for
$172,000; in July, in the same year, for $200,000, and now for $150,000
more. Such calculations, he thought, wholly unaccountable.

Mr. NICHOLAS did not understand what the gentleman from Connecticut
meant by saying that this was wholly Executive business. He did not
believe, because the PRESIDENT had told the House that he was about to
hold a treaty, that the money must be granted, and that the House had no
choice whether they would appropriate it or not. From what had already
been said upon the subject, he doubted not there was a pretty general
disposition to grant the money; but it was not proper that the Message
should be sent to the Committee of Ways and Means, as if an
appropriation was a thing of course; to do this, would be to act at the
_command_ of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES; whereas the House could
only act upon the full exercise of its discretion. He therefore moved
that the Message be referred to the Committee of the Whole, which had
already this subject under consideration.

Mr. GALLATIN believed the gentleman from Connecticut had not considered
this subject with his usual correctness. That gentleman had said that
the Message before them ought to go to the Committee of Ways and Means,
and that an appropriation should follow as a thing of course. It must be
known that this was contrary to the practice of that House, or of any
former Legislature of the United States. On the contrary, it was usual,
first to authorize an expense, and in the next place to appropriate; and
in no case had the business been reversed. If the Message were referred
to the Committee of Ways and Means, all they could do, would be to bring
it back to the House, and ask for an authority for the expense. He
believed the gentleman from Connecticut had been led into this mistake
by considering the Message announcing the intention of the PRESIDENT to
hold a treaty as a treaty made; and had that been the case, according to
that gentleman's known opinion, he would consider the House as bound to
make the necessary appropriation; but he desired him to recollect that
no treaty was yet made; and, therefore, that that doctrine could not
apply in the present case.

Mr. RUTLEDGE did not believe it was necessary or proper for that House
to authorize the PRESIDENT to hold a treaty; but if it were necessary
for him to hold a treaty, the concurrence of that House was necessary to
enable him to do it, as it could not be done without money. It was
requisite, therefore, to pass a bill, not to authorize the PRESIDENT to
hold a treaty, but to enable him to do it. It was best, therefore, for
the communication first to go to the Committee of the Whole, and
afterwards to the Committee of Ways and Means, in order for them to say
where the money could be got. There was something in this case which
pointed out this mode as peculiarly proper, as there seemed to be a
disposition in the House, if the treaty should not succeed agreeably to
the wishes of the PRESIDENT, to afford temporary relief to the persons
now suffering from being driven from their land. The gentleman from
Connecticut had said, that the Committee of Ways and Means could report
an estimate of the probable expense which would be incurred in holding
the treaty; but if he attended to the Message of the PRESIDENT, he would
find that this estimate was to be laid before the House by the proper
department, so that there was no necessity of a reference to any
committee for that purpose.

The motion for a reference to the Committee of the Whole was carried,
without a division.

_William Alexander._

On motion of Mr. GREGG, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on
the report of the Committee of Claims on the petition of William
Alexander, surveyor of Army lands. After reading a number of papers
relative to the subject, the report, which went to authorize the
Treasury to settle the accounts of the petitioner, was agreed to, the
committee rose, the House concurred, and a bill was directed to be
brought in accordingly.

_General Kosciusko._

Mr. PINCKNEY, from the committee appointed to confer with the Senate on
the disagreement between the two Houses on the bill for the payment of
interest to General Kosciusko, reported, that finding the business could
be settled in a manner equally advantageous to the General, by agreeing
to the amendment of the Senate, as by the mode originally proposed, the
committee recommend it to the House to recede from their disagreement to
the Senate's amendment.

The recommendation was concurred in by the House.

_Civil Appropriation for 1798._

On motion of Mr. HARPER, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the report of the Committee of Ways and Means for providing
for the expenses of the civil department for the year 1798, and the
blanks being filled (except in a few cases, in which they were left in
blank) according to the estimate which had been laid before the House,
the committee rose, the House concurred, and the bill was ordered to be
reported accordingly.


THURSDAY, January 18.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a communication from the Secretary of
War, enclosing an estimate of the appropriations necessary for holding a
treaty with the Cherokee Indians, which was in substance as follows:

For three commissioners, ninety days, at
  eight dollars per day                       $2,160
Incidental expenses of do.                       360
Secretary, at four dollars per day               360
Rations of two thousand Indians               15,000
Presents to the Indians                        5,000
Stores for the commissioners                   2,000
Incidental expenses                            1,200
                                              ------
                                              25,880
                                              ======

This statement was referred to the Committee of the Whole to whom was
referred the former Message of the President on this subject.

_Persons Imprisoned for Debt._

The following Message, with the papers to which they refer, was received
from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      A representation has been made to me, by the Judge of the
      Pennsylvania district of the United States, of certain
      inconveniences and disagreeable circumstances, which have
      occurred in the execution of the law passed on the 28th day
      of May, 1786, entitled "An act for the relief of persons
      imprisoned for debt," as well as of certain doubts which
      have been raised concerning its construction; this
      representation, together with a report of the Attorney
      General on the same subject, I now transmit to Congress,
      for their consideration, that if any amendments or
      explanations of that law may be thought advisable, they may
      be adopted.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _January 18, 1798_.

This Message, with the papers accompanying it, was referred to the same
Committee of the Whole to whom was referred the report on the petition
of William Bell.

_Diplomatic Intercourse Bill._

Mr. NICHOLAS inquired with what sums the blanks in the bill were to be
filled.

Mr. HARPER said he proposed to fill the first with $40,000, and the last
with $28,650.

Mr. NICHOLAS conceived this to be a good time for the House to attempt
to bring back the establishment of the diplomatic corps to the footing
on which it was settled at the commencement of the Government, and
continued down till the year 1796; and to prevent in future the probable
increase which he apprehended from the recent examples, he thought it
necessary to take a view of this subject, not only from the increase of
expense, but from a variety of other considerations. It is not the
manner in which a Government is constituted which makes its operations
easy and certain. But the execution of the powers of the Government
itself is no more to be considered than the nature of its formation; for
I do believe there is a tendency in all Governments like ours to produce
a union and consolidation of all its parts into the Executive
department; and that the limitation and connection of the parts with
each other, as settled in the constitution, would be destroyed by the
influence I have mentioned, unless there is a constant operation on the
part of the Legislature to resist this overwhelming power. I think we
have the most convincing proofs that a representative Government can be
made most oppressive and burdensome, and yet preserve all the forms
which are given to it by a constitution; and the Legislature shall
appear to act upon its own discretion, whilst that discretion shall have
ceased to exist. Where the Executive has an influence over the
Legislature, and the Government is a representative one, the Executive
is capable of carrying its views into effect in a manner superior to
what can be accomplished even in the most despotic monarchy; the
mischief will be carried farther in the former case than in the latter,
because the people will be more inclined to submit to the decisions of a
Government of its own choosing than to one which rules them by
hereditary right; monarchs cannot carry their oppressions so far,
without resistance, as republics. Under this general view of the
subject, he conceived it to be the duty of the Legislature to guard
cautiously its own independence, and to limit, as far as consistent with
the general welfare, the influence of Executive patronage.

He conceived that this extension of influence of one branch of the
Government over another was strictly guarded by the constitution, which
was framed on the principle of checks and balances--of departments
acting and controlling each other; but he was sorry to see the idea of
patronage drawn into a closer compass than it had formerly been, as it
increased the evil. He was sorry for it, because it tended to manifest a
circumstance which had been sought to be concealed. Every insinuation
that there was a division between the Government and the people had been
repelled as an insidious and malignant design; but the Administration,
by acting on a new principle, which he was too well assured was the
fact, had established the idea that there was a division between it and
a considerable portion of the people. The evidence of this fact had been
long shown, and he feared the operation of circumstances of this nature
on the public mind.

He gave it as his opinion on our foreign intercourse, that the United
States would be benefited by having no Ministers at all. He did not
think that we could be benefited by any sort of compact these foreign
agents could form for us, for we only bound ourselves by any treaty we
entered into, as we are totally incapable of enforcing the execution of
the stipulations made by other nations by any offensive measures. It
might be thought necessary to make commercial arrangements with some
European powers; but, he asked, if they had the force to make a foreign
country conform to its engagements? No gentleman would say that they
had; therefore such regulations only tended to entangle ourselves,
without rendering commerce any efficient aid. He would, therefore, leave
our commerce to seek its own markets totally disembarrassed. All the
protection we could furnish it with, consisted in officers of another
grade than those mentioned in this bill: Consuls who should reside in
the seaports, and not Ministers Plenipotentiary residing in the
interior.

He did not intend by the motion he was about to make, that the whole
diplomatic establishment should be destroyed at this time, but merely to
reduce it to what it had been before the late increase. With this view
he proposed to alter the bill so as to direct that there should be
appropriated $9,000 for a Minister Plenipotentiary at London, and $9,000
more for another near the French Republic, and that the PRESIDENT be
left at liberty to reduce the Ministers Plenipotentiary at Berlin,
Madrid, and Lisbon, to Ministers resident, which would diminish their
salaries one-half--a resident Minister being of a lower grade has only
$4,500 per annum. He then went into a detail of the proceedings of the
first Congress, in order to show that it was admitted on all sides by
that body, that the constitution vested the power of specifying and
limiting the salaries of foreign Ministers and Consuls; he read the
speeches of Mr. LAWRENCE, Mr. SHERMAN, Mr. W. SMITH, of South Carolina,
Mr. SEDGWICK, Mr. HUNTINGTON, and several others, from the Congressional
Register, by which it appeared, that there was but one opinion on their
powers under the Constitution; and showed from hence, that the only
reason why the House did not undertake to enumerate and fix the salaries
of foreign Ministers in detail, arose merely from the want of
information as to the places where they should be fixed, and the sum
necessary to cover their expenses. As his construction corresponded with
that of the gentleman who fixed the principles upon which the Government
was put in motion, he was encouraged to expect his motion would succeed,
seeing that the House had now had sufficient experience to enable them
to say what were the regulations proper to be made.

Mr. HARPER supposed it would be remembered by all those gentlemen who
had attended to the business of Congress for several years past, that
the doctrine of the gentleman from Virginia was by no means new. The
subject of foreign intercourse was never taken up, without that
gentleman, or some other who agreed with him in sentiment, advancing
these opinions; they never failed to speak of the danger to be
apprehended from Executive influence, from its power to appoint foreign
Ministers; that foreign intercourse was unnecessary; that our public
affairs abroad were not to be attended to, and that commerce ought to be
given up, or left to shift for itself. Nor was this a doctrine confined
to this country, or this age. Whenever a set of gentlemen in any country
found their views opposed by the measures of Government, they became
vexed, and attributed the proceedings of those who differed from them in
opinion to any motive rather than the public good. The desire of
Executive favor, or Executive offices, was an usual charge, and it was
at this day well understood. It would also be remembered, that whenever
the subject of foreign intercourse had been discussed, though these
objections had been constantly made to it, they had been as constantly
disregarded by the Congress of the United States. The good sense of the
country had weighed these objections in the balance, and declared them
wanting; and he trusted the same fate would now meet them as heretofore.

In aid of the $40,000 per annum, originally granted for this purpose,
Mr. H. said, various supplementary appropriations had been made. First,
a sum of $20,000, then a sum of $23,000, and, in March last, $17,000,
and, in addition to this, $14,000 for a particular appointment. The
House had, therefore, not only deemed it expedient to continue the
original act, but to make additional appropriations from year to year.
He thought the good sense of the country had never been more firmly
shown than on this subject. But now a new course was to be taken, and
all former proceedings declared to have been wrong. But it was said this
country had no need of foreign ministers, and that commerce might be
left to itself. He did not believe the House would think so. Did not the
United States trade with all the nations of the earth? How, then, was it
possible to do without accredited agents to attend to our concerns in
foreign countries? Were we to give up our commerce? There were
gentlemen, he knew, who would answer, Yes. They would tell the House,
commerce was a bad thing, and that it rather ought to be outlawed than
protected. But was this the sense of the country? Was it the sense of
that House? Would they discard the property of that class of citizens
who depended upon it for their support and their wealth? Or would they
be ready to forfeit the revenue arising from it? Mr. H. said he had
often heard of the dangerous nature of foreign intercourse; but it was
the discovery of a few men who believed that every thing which had been
done by this Government had been radically wrong. He trusted, however,
the House would adhere to what it had so frequently sanctioned, and that
the proposed amendment would not be agreed to.

Mr. GALLATIN believed that there were a number of people in the United
States--people otherwise enlightened, and who, upon all common subjects,
possessed sound understandings--who were fully convinced that there was
a faction existing within the United States, and even within the walls
of that House, who wished to demolish the Government; and he further
believed that this opinion was supported by such declarations as had
been made by the gentleman from Connecticut. He should be sorry that
such a belief should be considered as dangerous to the safety of the
community. Nor could he consider the determination of the Executive to
employ only such persons as are of the same political opinions with
themselves, as of such a nature as to produce fatal consequences, and
that Government, on that account, was unworthy of confidence. He
believed that such a line of conduct must flow from the present state of
parties in America, divided as the people were upon many important
occasions. To say, therefore, that the Executive employed persons of
consonant political opinions to its own, was not to say the Government
did not deserve confidence. But if the committee turned their attention
to the amendment proposed, it only went to declare that ministers to
London and Paris should not have a salary of more than $9,000 a year;
and that ministers to other parts of Europe should not have more than
$4,500. In support of this amendment, it was said that this was the
ground upon which this Government first fixed the business of foreign
intercourse. He believed this statement correct. Until the year 1796,
there was no minister plenipotentiary except at Paris and London; at
other places there were no higher grades than ministers resident. Hence
the committee might be led to argue the propriety of bringing back our
foreign political intercourse to what it was before that period. He said
foreign political intercourse; because he thought the gentleman from
South Carolina (Mr. HARPER) had blended two subjects together, viz:
foreign commercial intercourse, and foreign political intercourse. He
did not believe it was the opinion of any gentleman in that House that
commerce ought to be left to shift for itself, unattended to. He
believed it was well understood that our commerce in foreign countries
was attended to by our consuls and not by our ministers plenipotentiary;
and consuls would exist if we had no ministers at all. Therefore, all
that gentleman's arguments, which tended to show that the amendment
would affect our commercial intercourse, had no foundation whatever.

Returning to the question of foreign political intercourse: Was it
proper to bring it back to what it was eighteen months ago? And, before
he proceeded further, he would observe that, though the gentleman from
South Carolina had been tolerably correct in his statements of the
business, he was mistaken in one point, in which he would set him right.
He had stated that the first additional appropriation was $20,000; but
this sum was not appropriated for foreign intercourse, but for defraying
the expense of the suits of our merchants in London. On the first of
January, 1796, there remained a balance of unexpended appropriation for
this object, of $30,000. To that day no extraordinary appropriation had
been made; the whole allowance was $40,000 a year, which was found to be
more than sufficient. On the 28th of May, 1796, an estimate was sent by
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, stating the sums already
appropriated for foreign intercourse, and that $23,500 were yet wanting,
in order to change the establishment which had till that day existed, by
sending Ministers Plenipotentiary to Madrid and Lisbon, instead of
Ministers Resident. This estimate, he just stated, was received on the
28th of May, and the law received the signature of the PRESIDENT on the
first of June, so that it could not have received a very full discussion
(being passed just as the session was about to close) and he thought
there was good reason for examining the thing again. The next
appropriation was made in the second session of the fourth Congress. In
that session, he allowed, the additional appropriation was passed after
full discussion. It was made upon an estimate stating $17,900 wanted;
and, during last session, an appropriation was made for a Minister to
Berlin, of $13,500.

The committee had been told that it would evince great versatility if
they were all at once to change what had already been done. But it must
be recollected, than when the change in the system was first made, it
underwent little discussion; and he would venture to say, that our
business abroad was as well done from the year 1786 to 1796, as it had
been done since. As the question was whether a larger or a smaller sum
of money should be appropriated, he would call upon gentlemen in favor
of the larger sum, to show what benefit was derived from Madrid and
Lisbon by the change; what necessity there was for a Minister at Berlin,
and what good was to be derived from giving a larger salary than $4,500.
The gentleman from Connecticut had said, why send a Minister
Plenipotentiary to London or Paris, any more than the other Courts? This
was done at first, and the mover, he supposed, wished not to innovate
upon the law as originally passed.

But they were told it was improper, upon this floor, to say any thing
about patronage, and that all arguments of that kind are well
understood, and are by no means novel in their nature; that such
complaints are made under all forms of Government by discontented people
out of office. To say that these complaints are well understood, was
the same as to say that the ground upon which they complained was also
well understood: it was to acknowledge, that persons who were in the
favor of the Executive had some advantages which persons in the other
party desired or envied. To admit of one position, was to admit of the
other. But, if no particular advantage was to be derived from
Governmental patronage, then the cause of jealousy, according to this
doctrine, must cease.

Our Government, he said, was in its child-hood; and if this patronage
had any existence, it could not of course be as yet alarming. But he
desired gentlemen to look at all Governments where this power was placed
in the Executive, and see if the greatest evil of the Government was not
the excessive influence of that department. Did not this corruption
exist in the Government which was constituted most similarly to ours, to
such a degree as to have become a part of the system itself, and without
which, it is said, the Government could not go on? Was it not,
therefore, prudent to keep a watchful eye in this respect? He did not,
however, speak against the power itself; it was necessary to be placed
somewhere. The constitution had placed it in the Executive power. If the
same power had been placed in the Legislature, he believed they would
have been more corrupt than the Executive. He thought, therefore, the
trust was wisely placed in the Executive; and though it was right to
keep grants of money within proper bounds, in order to prevent the abuse
of power, yet it was proper to grant all that was necessary.

Mr. G. concluded, by saying, that if he thought it was proper that our
political intercourse should be extended, he should not support the
amendment; but as the conviction was strong upon his mind that our
foreign political intercourse had at least been as expensive as it ought
to be; that it was owing, in a great degree, to our political
intercourse with foreign nations, that our present critical situation
was produced; that this intercourse produced more evil than good to us;
that he wished to bring the business back to the state in which it stood
in 1796. If the wisdom of future Legislatures shall think proper to
abolish the establishment of foreign political intercourse altogether,
it must be left to them to decide. He himself thought it would be going
too far to do so at present. He believed, situated as we were, it was
necessary to have some political intercourse; but he believed it would
be best, by degrees, to decline it altogether.

Mr. SITGREAVES.--The constitution and laws of the country had made
certain offices necessary, and left it to the Executive to fill them as
he pleased; and was it for that House to attempt to control this
discretion? If it were executed to the injury of the people, the
constitution had pointed out the remedy to be by impeachment. But where
was the crime, the offence, or the impropriety, of the conduct ascribed
to the Executive, if it had been adopted? Would gentlemen say that the
Executive ought to appoint persons to office who professed an opinion
contrary to its own? Did gentlemen suppose that there was such a want of
integrity in this department of Government, that it adopted a political
opinion which it did not believe to be right? And, if it were believed
to act from principle, would it be prudent or right to admit to a
participation in the execution of the important duties of Government
persons whose sentiments were not in unison with those of the Executive,
and who could only create discord and confusion, where nothing but
harmony and union ought to prevail? If the Executive acted upon just
principles, it would endeavor to give singleness of design to its
operations, and it could only do this by admitting persons into the
Government who thought with it. This would be a right, prudent, and
honorable conduct; and where it had been deviated from (as he had before
observed), Government had received an awful lesson for its future
conduct.

The question whether that House had the power to interfere with the
Executive authority, by withholding appropriations, had been fully
discussed in a former Congress, and the opinion of the country was not
now to be fixed on this subject. For that part of the House who thought
the constitution had not vested them with the authority of controlling
the Executive, it was sufficient to say that the Executive had thought
it necessary to introduce the change in the diplomatic department, which
was complained of, and that they felt themselves bound to carry his
determination into effect; but those who think that the House of
Representatives may control the Executive in this respect, will of
course act accordingly.

Mr. BALDWIN said he perceived there was a real difference of opinion
between the gentleman last up and himself. The gentleman supposed the
diplomatic establishment was fixed by the Executive, and the Legislature
had nothing to do with it but to provide the money. Every person must
see, even from a cursory view of the constitution, that this was
designed to be a Government of departments, Legislative, Executive, and
Judicial, to be kept distinct as far as possible. It was the business of
the Legislature to establish offices by law; it was the business of the
Executive to fill those offices. It would appear, from tracing back the
law, now proposed to be continued, that it originated in this manner. He
had not been notified of the subject as being likely to be called up
to-day, and was not prepared to be as particular as he could wish as to
facts. He had endeavored to refresh his recollection since it had been
under discussion, and he found that it originated from the Speech of the
PRESIDENT, at the opening of the second session of the first Congress,
in which he said, "that the interests of the United States required that
our intercourse with other nations should be facilitated by such
provisions as will enable me to fulfil my duty in that respect; and to
this end, that the compensations to be made to the persons who may be
employed, should, according to the nature of their appointments, be
defined by law." This part of the Speech was referred to a committee,
and from that originated this law. Want of information, at that early
time in the Government, prevented their being as particular as they
wished. They fixed a sum to each grade, and a sum beyond which the whole
amount should not extend; limited the law to a short period, that it
might be open to be corrected by experience. The present motion, if he
had understood it, proposed now to be a little more particular in the
establishment, by fixing the sum for particular places--to do the very
thing then recommended by the PRESIDENT. The same has always been the
intention of every succeeding Congress, which was the reason why they
continued it only for short periods, leaving it open to such amendments
as should be suggested by experience. These ideas of the offices being
first to be established by law, appeared not only to be the sense of the
former PRESIDENT, and of each succeeding Congress, as he had stated, but
appeared also to be the opinion of the present PRESIDENT. At the last
session he thought that a higher grade of office was necessary at
Algiers: this he stated in a message to Congress--that as there were
great expenditures of money on that coast, he thought it necessary that
an establishment should be made which would enable him to appoint a very
confidential person, on whom the other officers there should be
dependent, and who should control their proceedings and expenditures.
Congress concurred in this opinion, passed a law for the establishment
of the office, and then the Executive appointed the officer. For these
reasons he considered the question within their proper powers, and
fairly open to their deliberation.

At the close of the revolutionary war, the disposition of forming many
treaties, and having extensive diplomatic connections with European
powers, was carried even further than it has been since. It was among
their first national acts, and discovered marks of youth and
inexperience; a few years convinced them that they had gone too far,
that this country had little to expect from treaties, and much to lose,
and that many diplomatic connections were more frequently the cause of
perplexity and embarrassment, than of any national advantage. The
Congress under the articles of confederation were extricating themselves
from that policy as fast as possible; as these expired in course, they
were careful not to renew them. For several of the last years of that
Congress he well recollected that clusters of candidates for these
appointments, supported by powerful interests and connections, were
uniformly resisted; and, if he mistook not, when this Government came
into operation, this country had but one Minister in Europe. The
conviction on this subject was so strong, and experience had so fully
settled it as the true policy, that it remained immoveable for some time
after organizing the present Government. All appropriations for foreign
Ministers were refused at the first session, as far as he recollected.
At the second session it was urged, in the Speech of the PRESIDENT, as
before stated, and enforced by more particular explanations to
individuals, as designed to be for temporary purposes, respecting the
Northern forts and the property that was withheld. Under these
explanations a law passed, as before explained. It was true, this policy
had been of late, in some measure, departed from. He thought experience
had already been useful to them in this course also, and ought to
administer caution to them in seeking to intermingle in European
politics. Ambassadors and Ministers cannot be entirely indifferent to
the characters and events with which they are constantly surrounded; the
share they take is very apt to be exchanged between the countries to
which they belong. He did not wish to be too particular on that point;
he was persuaded facts enough presented themselves to the recollection
of every member, to confirm his remark. It might be said that on this
also we have an awful lesson. If evil had been experienced from this
cause, he hoped it would operate as a reason to endeavor to diminish it.
He thought it not unreasonable for the House to interpose their
restraining power as to granting money, and the more particular
establishment of the officers, and thus aid the other departments of the
Government in bringing back, by degrees, this part of our policy to its
former principles, so well sanctioned by experience. Whether the present
motion was well timed, or whether it was best to give it another short
limitation, before we went into a definite establishment, was another
question, on which he was willing to hear more remarks. Informed as he
was at present, he should vote for the motion, and thought they might
make some amendments to the former bill, already suggested by
experience, and which would be useful.

The committee rose, and had leave to sit again.


FRIDAY, January 19.

_Foreign Intercourse._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
bill providing the means of foreign intercourse, when

Mr. PINCKNEY rose. He understood the amendment was intended to confine
our Ministers Plenipotentiary to London and Paris, and that no higher
grade than Ministers Resident should be employed in any other country.
He was opposed to this change at this time, and to the mode proposed of
doing the business, if the time were seasonable. It was proper that at
this juncture our Ministers should remain as they were, as it was
prudent to derive all the influence and advantage we could from the
situation of our agents in Europe, who would not only be enabled to
communicate more correct information from thence, than could be derived
from any other source, but who could also explain the motives and
objects of this Government, and by that means remove any unfavorable
impressions which may be attempted to be given with respect to this
country; and thereby put our business in the best train for securing the
neutral standing which we have taken. He was against it for another
reason. To change the diplomatic intercourse in the way proposed, would
be forcing upon the Executive a measure contrary to its wishes. It would
also be affording testimony to the charge heretofore made, that there
was a division in the Government and the people--a situation in which
many wished to see us. He should be sorry to afford the appearance of
one department of Government having forced upon another a change of
measures of which they are the competent judges, and upon which they
have acted. As it was well known that there was a very intimate
connection between Spain and Holland, and the country with whom we have
at present a misunderstanding, he should be unwilling to deprive this
country of the advantages to be derived from having Ministers at those
places; besides, if our Ministers were to be recalled from thence, it
would be considered as an extraordinary proceeding; and might be
construed as intended to be hostile to them. Whatever influence Spain or
Holland may have in the councils of the country which he had alluded to,
by continuing our Ministers there, it was probable that weight would
operate in our favor. There was an additional reason with respect to
Spain. It was well known that we had points yet to settle with that
country. Our treaty with that power was not yet carried into effect, and
negotiations might at this time be going on in relation to it, which
might be frustrated by the recall of our Ministers.

Mr. NICHOLAS wished to explain his intentions in bringing forward this
amendment. He believed the gentleman last up would find they nearly
corresponded with his own. He had no idea of putting an immediate veto
upon the Ministers at present employed. He considered this bill, though
passed with a limitation, as a permanent system, and a subsequent clause
of the bill would enable the committee to fix the time at which the
salaries of Ministers should cease. His wish was to put a limit to this
extension of Executive power. He reminded the gentleman from South
Carolina that Holland was not concerned in this bill, as we had only a
Minister Resident there. If the subject were further dilated upon, he
should offer some further remarks upon it.

Mr. N. SMITH was surprised to hear the gentleman last up considered that
as a permanent provision which was limited to a duration of two years.
This law was merely temporary in its nature, and if he only contemplated
some future regulations in our foreign intercourse, his amendment was
not now necessary. However competent it was for the Legislature to
settle the salary of Ministers, it was clear the Legislature had no
power, by the constitution either to determine the number of foreign
Ministers to be employed, where they should be sent, or what should be
their grade. Under the general power of making treaties, vested in the
President, he had the power of sending Ministers where he pleased; also
in the power intrusted to him of executing the law (not only the
municipal, but the law of nations) it was necessary he should have this
power.

In a word, all relations were in the hands of the Executive; all our
foreign intercourse was to him, and from him. Of course, he was the only
judge of what was proper in this business. This being the case, it
should seem as if that House had nothing to do with respect to the
propriety of sending a Minister to Berlin, or in relation to other
grades of Ministers, though they had the power of fixing their salaries.
But it was contended by the gentleman from Georgia and others, that, by
regulating these salaries, the Legislature had the power of preventing
the extension of their establishment. This brought up an old question;
but it was a very important one, and he did not regret that it was
frequently drawn into discussion. He thought the great landmarks of our
constitution could not be too well understood. He did not mean, however,
to extend his observations on this subject. It was said, this was a
Government of departments and checks, and of course, that the
Legislature ought to check the Executive in its operations. That this
was a Government of departments and checks, to a certain extent, he
should readily allow; but that it was so to the extent which had been
represented, he did deny. Our Government was divided into three
departments, the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial; each of these had
checks and balances in its own department. The President was checked by
the Senate; the Legislature was checked by the President and Senate; the
Judiciary was checked by having certain appeals, writs of error, &c. So
far from one department checking the other, it was necessary that all
the parts should act in unison like a clock, and the moment one part
declined to act, the Government could not proceed. It was not in the
power of the Legislature to reverse the decision of the lowest court,
and should it then be said that they could judge over the head of the
Executive? This remark was applicable to all the departments. No one
department was a favorite of the constitution. Every act of a department
ought to be considered as well done. This being the case, whenever the
President had appointed a Minister, and done it constitutionally, when
he informed the Legislature thereof, they might do any thing and every
thing but doubt the propriety of establishing the Minister.

Mr. HARPER.--As to the general policy of the present motion, as
connected with the foreign relations of this country, Mr. H. said that
he would add two or three remarks on that subject, and then conclude.

The motion went, he said, to reduce the appointments and salaries of
three ministers: those to Madrid, Lisbon, and Berlin; and in support of
the motion, it was alleged that the last of these Ministers was entirely
unnecessary, and that the other two had been improperly, because
unnecessarily, raised from Ministers Resident to Ministers
Plenipotentiary. To him it was a sufficient answer to these allegations
to say, that the President had thought otherwise; because, the
President, being charged by the constitution with the foreign relations
of the country, must be invested with the means necessary for conducting
them with effect; and was infinitely better qualified by this situation
to judge what those means were, and how they ought to be used, than the
House can pretend to be. One of these means was the appointment of
foreign Ministers, which was expressly vested in the President by the
constitution. When the President, therefore, had thought fit to appoint
foreign Ministers, or to alter their grades, he had exercised a
constitutional power, and it did not lie with the House of
Representatives to object or judge. To him, therefore, Mr. H. said, it
was a sufficient answer to all those objections to say that the
President had thought otherwise. To others, who might hold different
opinions from him on this subject, he thought it was a sufficient answer
to be told that the House of Representatives, as well as the President,
had thought differently, and had sanctioned the changes which he had
thought proper to make in this respect, by voting money to carry them
into effect. This the House had done expressly in all the three cases
contemplated by the present motion.

Mr. GALLATIN said the committee had been told, in the course of the
debate, by some gentlemen, that this attempt to reduce the number of our
Ministers was unconstitutional; by others, that it was inexpedient; and
even some gentlemen, who agreed to the general expediency of the
measure, believed it would be attended with inconvenience from our
present foreign relations.

In relation to the constitutionality of the thing, he did not believe,
whatever doctrine was supported with respect to treaties, that upon this
occasion the committee should be told that they were interfering with
the constitutional power vested in the President. It was true that he
had the general power of appointing Ambassadors, but it was not less
true that the Legislature had the sole and exclusive power to provide
for all the expenses of the Union. Hence arose the idea of ours being a
Government of departments, so formed as to be a check upon each other.
But the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. N. SMITH) said there was no such
thing as a check of departments; that each was distinct; and, though
each had checks within itself, none of them checked the other. And to
illustrate his position, he introduced the simile of a clock, at the
same time that he told them that the Executive Department was the
main-spring which put the clock in motion, whilst Mr. G. supposed he
meant that the other branches were merely the hands, which moved as they
were directed. But if there was any act which could not be done but by
all the branches, each had its share in deciding upon the propriety of
it. When a treaty was made it had been argued that that House had
nothing to do but carry it into effect; but here it was said that the
House were bound to provide for every Ambassador appointed; and if, by
withholding salaries, they obliged the President to send Ministers
Resident where he wished to send Ministers Plenipotentiary, they would
act inconsistently with the constitution. Though gentlemen might make
speeches on this subject, they must know that where the Legislature had
a right to act, it had a right to deliberate and to use its discretion.

It was true treaties had been made, but no treaty had been made since
the adoption of the present Government, by Ministers Resident at any
Court at the time. If any benefits were derived to the country from the
British treaty, they must be attributed to the Envoy Extraordinary, and
not to our Minister at that court. And when our treaty with Spain was
concluded, it was necessary to send a Minister Resident to another Court
to do the business. Since our treaties were always made by special
Envoys, what advantage could it be to have numerous Ministers
Plenipotentiary in Europe? In the present critical situation of the
country, agitated as it was to the centre, was it not to be apprehended
that our Ministers would participate, in some degree, in the party
spirit which there abounded, and rank themselves on one side or the
other, which would have a tendency to draw this country into a vortex
from which we were so happily separated by the Atlantic? We were the
only nation, he said, who possessed a Government on a firm foundation,
in which civil and religious liberty was fully recognized; we,
therefore, enjoyed what the people of Europe were seeking after. We have
nothing to wish, except to remain in our present situation. Why, then,
should we hazard the being involved in European broils? He had before
stated that Consuls were equal to every commercial regulation, and he
had heard nothing to change his opinion. Seeing, therefore, that these
diplomatic agents were rather dangerous than useful, he thought it time
to put a stop to their increase.

Mr. BAYARD began his observations by remarking, that the gentleman from
Virginia had said that it was not his design that his motion should have
an immediate effect upon the Ministers at present employed. If the
gentleman was sincere in his avowal, it was clear that he did not
understand his own motion; for whatever amendment was introduced into
the third section, which the gentleman had intimated might be so amended
as to give the regulation a distant operation, as it only related to the
sum of money to be appropriated, it would not enable the President to
employ a Minister Plenipotentiary, besides those at London and Paris, at
a higher salary than $4,500.

Some gentlemen have said, it was idle talk about this House having the
power to appropriate, without having the power at the same time to use
their discretion. He contended that the power of appointing Ministers
was vested in the President, and the House had no right to believe he
would abuse this power. It had been supposed by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, that he might appoint an indefinite number of Ministers;
and were the House, in that case, he asked, blindly to appropriate for
them? This question was predicated upon an abuse of power, whilst the
constitution supposed it would be executed with fidelity. Suppose he
were to state the question in an opposite light. Let it be imagined that
this country has a misunderstanding with some foreign power, and that
the Executive should appoint a Minister, but the House, in the plenitude
of its powers, should refuse an appropriation. What might be the
consequence? Would not the House have contravened the constitution, by
taking from the President the power which by it is placed in him? It
certainly would. So that this supposition of the abuse of power would go
to the destruction of all authority. The Legislature was bound to
appropriate for the salary of the Chief Justice of the United States,
and though the President might appoint a _chimney-sweeper_ to that
office, they would still be bound. The constitution had trusted the
President, as well as it had trusted that House. Indeed it was not
conceivable that the House could act upon the subject of foreign
Ministers. Our interests with foreign countries came wholly under the
jurisdiction of the Executive. The duties of that House related to the
internal affairs of the country; but what related to foreign countries
and foreign agents was vested in the Executive Department. The President
was responsible for the manner in which this business was conducted. He
was bound to communicate, from time to time, our situation with foreign
powers; and if plans were carried on abroad for dividing or subjecting
us, if he were not to make due communication of the design, he would be
answerable for the neglect.


TUESDAY, January 30.

_Breach of Privilege._

Mr. SEWALL then said, he believed the business which he had to lay
before the House would require secrecy, as it was a subject which would
considerably affect the feelings of the members of the House. He
therefore moved that the galleries might be cleared; which was
accordingly done, excepting the members and Clerk.

Mr. SEWALL then said, that he had been informed, in a manner which left
no doubt of the truth of the fact, that, in the presence of the House
whilst sitting, MATTHEW LYON, a member from the State of Vermont, did
this day commit a violent attack and gross indecency upon the person of
ROGER GRISWOLD, another member of this House; and in order to bring the
subject before the House, that he had prepared a resolution, which he
read in his place, and delivered in at the Clerk's table. A question was
then taken in the following words: Does the matter so communicated
require secrecy?

This motion passed unanimously in the negative, and the galleries were
opened.

The House then proceeded to consider the motion made by the member from
Massachusetts, which was read, as follows:

      "_Resolved_, That Matthew Lyon, a member of this House, for
      a violent attack and gross indecency committed upon the
      person of Roger Griswold, another member, in the presence
      of the House, whilst sitting, be, for this disorderly
      behavior, expelled therefrom."

It was moved that this resolution be referred to a committee to be
denominated a Committee of Privileges, with instruction to inquire into
the whole matter of the said resolution, and to report the same with
their opinion thereon to the House.

The question was taken by yeas and nays, and decided in the affirmative,
49 to 44.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. PINCKNEY, VENABLE, KITTERA, ISAAC PARKER, R.
WILLIAMS, COCHRAN, and DENT, be a committee for the purpose.

A motion was then made that the House come to the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That the House will consider it a high breach
      of privilege if either of the members shall enter into any
      personal contest until a decision of the House shall be had
      thereon."

A motion was made to add the following words to the end thereof:

      "And that the said Matthew Lyon be considered in the
      custody of the Sergeant-at-arms until the further order of
      the House."

The yeas and nays were taken upon this question and decided in the
negative--29 to 62.


THURSDAY, February 1.

_Breach of Privilege._

The SPEAKER informed the House that he had received a letter from a
member from Vermont, which he was requested to lay before them.

Mr. RUTLEDGE thought, that in all cases, when letters were sent to the
SPEAKER to be laid before the House, it would be proper for him to state
the substance of such communications before they are read, otherwise
improper matters might be brought before them.

The SPEAKER allowed that the suggestion was a proper one, and proceeded
to state the contents of the letter in his hand; which having done, the
reading of it was called for, and it was read as follow:

      _To the Speaker of the House of Representatives_:

      SIR:--As the attention of the House of Representatives has
      been called to my conduct in a dispute with Mr. GRISWOLD on
      a suggestion of its being a violation of the order of the
      House, and the respect due to it from all its members, I
      feel it incumbent on me to obviate the imputation of
      intentional disrespect. Permit me, sir, through you, to
      assure the House of Representatives that I feel as much as
      any of its members the necessity of preserving the utmost
      decorum in its proceedings; that I am incapable of an
      intentional violation of its rule; and that, if, in the
      present instance, I am chargeable with a disregard of them,
      it is owing wholly to my ignorance of their extent, and
      that the House of Representatives claimed any
      superintendence over its members when not formally
      constituted, and when they are not engaged in actual
      business. If I have been mistaken in my understanding on
      this subject, I beg the House to believe that my fault has
      been without intention, and that I am very sorry that I
      have deserved its censure. I am, sir, your obedient
      servant,

                          MATTHEW LYON.

      _February 1, 1798._

The reading of the letter having been gone through, a member proposed
that it should lie on the table, when

Mr. MACON said, that as it was an acknowledgment of improper conduct, he
thought it ought to be entered upon the journals.

Mr. NICHOLAS moved that the letter be referred to the committee who have
this subject under consideration. Gentlemen would recollect, he said,
that, on a former occasion, when an offence of the same nature was
committed, a letter written by the offending member was not only
referred, but was also deemed a sufficient apology to the House. He did
not know that this would be the case in the present instance; but that
it might be, was evinced by the case to which he alluded. He hoped,
therefore, it would be referred. Agreed to.


FRIDAY, February 2.

_Breach of Privilege._

Mr. VENABLE from the Committee of Privileges, made the following report:

      The Committee of Privileges, to whom was referred a
      resolution on the 30th of January, charging Matthew Lyon
      with disorderly behavior, with instructions to inquire into
      the whole matter thereof, and to report the same, with
      their opinion thereon, to the House, having examined
      several witnesses on oath touching the subject, report:
      That, during the sitting of the House of Representatives on
      the 30th day of January, 1798, the tellers of the House
      being engaged in counting the ballots for Managers of the
      impeachment against William Blount, the Speaker had left
      his chair, and many members their seats, as is usual on
      such occasions; the Speaker was sitting in one of the
      member's seats, next to the bar of the House, and several
      members near him, of whom Mr. Griswold was one.

      Mr. Lyon was standing without the bar of the House, leaning
      on the same, and holding a conversation with the Speaker.
      He spoke loud enough to be heard by all those who were near
      him, as if he intended to be heard by them. The subject of
      his conversation was, the conduct of the Representatives of
      the State of Connecticut, (of whom Mr. Griswold was one.)
      Mr. Lyon declared that they acted in opposition to the
      interests and opinion of nine-tenths of their constituents;
      that they were pursuing their own private views, without
      regarding the interests of the people; that they were
      seeking offices, which they were willing to accept, whether
      yielding $9,000 or $1,000. He further observed that the
      people of that State were blinded or deceived by those
      Representatives; that they were permitted to see but one
      side of the question in politics, being lulled asleep by
      the opiates which the members from that State administered
      to them; with other expressions equally tending to derogate
      from the political integrity of the Representatives of
      Connecticut.

      On Mr. Lyon's observing, that if he should go into
      Connecticut, and manage a press there six months, although
      the people of that State were not fond of revolutionary
      principles, he could effect a revolution, and turn out the
      present Representatives--Mr. Griswold replied to these
      remarks, and, amongst other things, said that, "If you go
      into Connecticut, you had better wear your wooden sword,"
      or words to that effect, alluding to Mr. Lyon's having been
      cashiered in the army.

      Mr. Lyon did not notice the allusion at this time, but
      continued the conversation on the same subject. Mr.
      Griswold then left his seat, and stood next to Mr. Lyon,
      leaning on the bar, being outside the same.

      On Mr. Lyon's saying he knew the people of Connecticut
      well, having lived among them many years--that he had
      frequent occasion to fight them in his own district, and
      that he never failed to convince them--Mr. Griswold asked,
      if he fought them with his wooden sword, on which Mr. Lyon
      spat in his face.

      The Committee having attentively considered the foregoing
      state of facts, and having heard Mr. Lyon in his defence,
      are of opinion that his conduct in this transaction was
      highly indecorous, and unworthy of a member of this House.

      They, therefore, recommend the adoption of the resolution
      submitted to their consideration by the House, in the words
      following, to wit:

      "_Resolved_, That Matthew Lyon, a member of this House, for
      a violent attack and gross indecency, committed upon the
      person of Roger Griswold, another member, in the presence
      of the House while sitting, be for this disorderly behavior
      expelled therefrom."

The report having been read,

Mr. LYON said, he did not think the evidence was stated in its full
extent in this report. He wished, therefore, before the House proceeded
in the business, they would hear the evidence themselves.

Mr. HARPER inquired of the SPEAKER whether that was the usual mode of
proceeding?

The SPEAKER said, it was necessary first to take up the report for a
second reading.

Mr. MACON observed that this was a very delicate and a very serious
question, as it related to one of the members of that House, and as it
respected the dignity of the House itself. He hoped, therefore, the
report would be printed, that some time would be given to consider it,
and that the House would themselves hear the testimony. The punishment
which the report proposed was equal to death itself. He hoped,
therefore, it would not be acted upon hastily, but made the order of the
day for Monday.

Mr. HARPER did not wish to press the business in an improper manner, as
it was certainly of great importance to a member of that House, to the
House itself, and to the dignity of the country. It was usual to have
all reports of any consequence printed, and a day or two given for
consideration. He was not himself desirous of delay, as he was at
present ready to vote upon the question; but, if other members wished
it, he should not object to the motion proposed by the gentleman from
North Carolina.

Mr. NICHOLAS took it for granted, that, whenever this subject came up,
the House would think it necessary to go into an examination of the
witnesses themselves, and not rely upon the manner in which their
testimony had struck others. He thought it would be best, therefore,
whilst the report was printing, to go on in the examination of
witnesses.

The question for postponing till Monday was put and carried.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, he had no objection to wait for the printing of the
report, before the House proceeded to examine the witnesses, but he
should not waive the right of having them re-examined before the House.


MONDAY, February 5.

Mr. D. FOSTER reported a bill for the relief of Oliver Pollock, which
was committed for Wednesday.

_French Outrages._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      I have received a letter from his Excellency Charles
      Pinckney, Esq., Governor of the State of South Carolina,
      dated the 22d October, 1797, enclosing a number of
      depositions and witnesses to several captures and outrages
      committed within and near the limits of the United States,
      by a French privateer belonging to Cape Francois, or Monte
      Christo, called the Vertitude or Fortitude, and commanded
      by a person of the name of Jordon or Jourdain, and
      particularly upon an English merchant ship named the
      Oracabissa, which he first plundered and then burned, with
      the rest of her cargo, of great value, within the territory
      of the United States, in the harbor of Charleston, on the
      17th of October last. Copies of which letter and
      depositions, and also of several other depositions relative
      to the same subject, received from the Collector of
      Charleston, are herewith communicated.

      Whenever the channel of diplomatical communication between
      the United States and France shall be opened, I shall
      demand satisfaction for the insult and reparation for the
      injury.

      I have transmitted these papers to Congress, not so much
      for the purpose of communicating an account of so daring a
      violation of the territory of the United States, as to show
      the propriety and necessity of enabling the Executive
      authority of Government to take measures for protecting the
      citizens of the United States and such foreigners as have a
      right to enjoy their peace, and the protection of their
      laws, within their limits, in that as well as some other
      harbors which are equally exposed.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _February 5, 1798_.

This Message, with the documents accompanying it, was referred to the
committee for considering on proper measures for the protection and
defence of the country.


_Breach of Privilege._

Mr. SEWALL moved the House to take up the report of the Committee of
Privileges, in order that it might be committed to a Committee of the
Whole.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS wished to know whether evidence could be heard in a
Committee of the Whole.

The SPEAKER said, the House might authorize the Committee of the Whole
to hear evidence.

Mr. SEWALL moved the report to be committed. If gentlemen wished
evidence to be heard before the committee, they would, of course, make
an addition to his motion. For his own part he thought it unnecessary.

Mr. NICHOLAS had no objection to evidence being heard before a Committee
of the Whole, except that it might involve the subject in some
embarrassment; as it was possible that a majority of the committee might
come to a decision which, according to the constitution, it would
require two-thirds of the House to confirm. He saw no reason for going
into a committee, except that the SPEAKER would have to give his
testimony; but he did not see why the SPEAKER might not give his
testimony from his seat, as well as from any other place. By going into
a committee, the subject would take up a longer time than it otherwise
would do, as they should have twice to go over the same ground.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS was in favor of hearing the evidence before the
committee.

Mr. THATCHER was not of opinion, with the gentleman from Virginia, that
this matter should be run over as soon as possible. He thought it of
infinite importance, as it respected the dignity of the House and the
people at large, and he hoped it would go through every form of the
House.

The question for a commitment was put and carried, and it was made the
order for this day.

Mr. NICHOLAS then moved that the Committee of the Whole be authorized to
examine testimony, and called for the yeas and nays upon the question;
which being agreed upon, they were taken, and, so little opposition was
there to this mode of proceeding that the question was carried, 88 to 4.
The negatives were Messrs. GORDON, SEWALL, SITGREAVES, and THATCHER.

Mr. D. FOSTER moved that the committee should be authorized to report
the whole of the evidence, as he thought it was important it should be
entered upon the journals. Carried.

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, Mr. DENT
in the chair, on this subject.

Mr. THATCHER said it would be necessary that a Judge should attend to
administer an oath to the members who should be called upon to give
their testimony.

The CHAIRMAN informed the committee that the Judge of the District Court
was in the House.

Judge PETERS was accordingly called upon.

Mr. RUTLEDGE desired an oath might be administered to the SPEAKER,
Messrs. S. SMITH, BROOKS, HOSMER, COIT, DANA, GOODRICH, and CHAMPLIN;
which was accordingly done.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, if there should be occasion, he should also call upon
Judge CHIPMAN, a Senator from Vermont, as an evidence.

Mr. CHIPMAN was, towards the close of the sitting, also sworn.

Some conversation took place as to the best mode of taking the evidence,
whether, as it was to be reported to the House, it should be received
from the witnesses in writing, leaving them to be questioned afterwards
by the members of the committee, or whether it should be given _viva
voce_, deliberately, and taken down by the Clerk. The latter mode was at
length adopted, and the SPEAKER proceeded to give his testimony.

      [Taking the testimony in this case, and the debates upon
      it, occupied the House until the 12th of February, when, a
      motion having been made to amend the resolution of
      expulsion, by substituting a reprimand, a vote was taken on
      that question, and negatived--52 to 44. The vote was then
      taken on the resolution of expulsion, and stood yeas 52,
      nays 44. The constitution requiring two-thirds of the
      members present to carry a vote of expulsion, the
      Resolution was declared by the Speaker to be not carried.
      The following were the yeas and nays:]

      YEAS.--George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, Jas. A. Bayard,
      David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher G. Champlin,
      John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William Craik,
      Samuel W. Dana, Thomas T. Davis, John Dennis, George Dent,
      Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan
      Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon,
      William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley,
      William Hindman, David Holmes, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H.
      Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, James Machir,
      William Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison
      G. Otis, Isaac Parker, Josiah Parker, John Read, John
      Rutledge, jr., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, Wm. Shepard,
      Thos. Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Peleg
      Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, and Peleg Wadsworth.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Samuel J. Cabell,
      Thomas Claiborne, Wm. Charles Cole Claiborne, Matthew Clay,
      John Clopton, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, Wm. Findlay,
      John Fowler, Nathaniel Freeman, jun., Albert Gallatin,
      William B. Giles, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A.
      Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Walter
      Jones, Edw. Livingston, Matthew Locke, Nathaniel Macon,
      Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony
      New, John Nicholas, Thompson J. Skinner, Samuel Smith,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jun., Richard Stanford,
      Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van
      Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert
      Williams.


WEDNESDAY, February 14.

_Quakers' Memorial._

Mr. SITGREAVES moved the order of the day on the report of a select
committee on the memorial of the people called Quakers; which motion
being agreed to, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on the
subject, Mr. DENT in the chair. The report having been read as follows:

      "That, inasmuch as the said memorial and address presents,
      in general terms only, certain subjects to the
      consideration of the Legislature, without containing any
      definite state of facts, or any specific application for
      its interposition, the memorialists were desired to exhibit
      a particular view of the grievances of which they
      complained, in order that the attention of the House might
      be directed to precise objects, and that it might be better
      discerned whether the complaints of the memorialists were
      of a nature to justify Legislative interference:

      "That, in consequence of this request, the memorialists
      laid before the committee the representation and documents
      which accompany this report:

      "That, on the subject of this representation, the
      memorialists were invited to confer with the committee, and
      were solicited to suggest the remedy which they conceived
      it to be in the power of Congress to apply to the case, as
      stated by them:

      "That the committee, after several conferences with the
      memorialists, and an attentive consideration of the
      subject, are very clearly of opinion that the facts
      disclosed in the said representation are exclusively of
      judicial cognizance; and that it is not competent to the
      Legislative authority of Congress to do any act in relation
      to the matter thereof:

      "Wherefore the committee recommend the following
      resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That the memorialists have leave to withdraw
      the said memorial and address."

Mr. THATCHER could not say that he was perfectly satisfied with the
report of the committee in all its parts. He wished the business
disposed of without coming to any decisive resolution upon it, so as
either to approve or disapprove of it. He was not ready to say that the
facts disclosed in that memorial were exclusively of judicial
cognizance, and that the Legislature of the Union was incompetent to do
any thing in it. It might, however, be true, but it was not clear to
him. He would rather that the subject should not now be acted upon: he
would, therefore, propose an amendment to the report, which might
conclude the business without coming to any resolution upon it, which
had been the course heretofore taken with similar applications. He
moved, therefore, to strike out the resolution giving the petitioners
leave to withdraw their petition; and if his motion was agreed to, he
should wish the committee to rise, and that the House would not act
further upon it at present.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, he, as well as the gentleman from Massachusetts, was
dissatisfied with the report of the select committee. He thought the
report ought to have stated that the peace of certain States in the
Union had been much disturbed by applications of this kind. He had
prepared a resolution to this effect, which he would read in his place.
It was as follows:

      "_Resolved_, That part of the memorial of the people called
      Quakers has a tendency to disturb the tranquillity of some
      of the States of the Union; that this House is not
      competent to act upon it, and therefore they have leave to
      withdraw their memorial."

There could be little difference of opinion on the assertion that the
internal tranquillity of several States had been disturbed by these
applications; and he believed there would be no difficulty in obtaining
a majority of the House to declare it; as, if the Representatives of
three or four States were to rise and declare the fact, it must have
sufficient weight to carry a declaration of this kind. He had, however,
mentioned the matter to some of his friends, and found it was not very
agreeable to them, as they wished to get rid of the business without
debate. But if the present motion were to obtain, he should afterwards
bring forward this resolution.

The CHAIRMAN declared the motion of the gentleman from Massachusetts out
of order.

The question on the resolution, as reported, was put and carried, there
being 74 votes in the affirmative. The committee then rose, and the
House concurred in the report.


THURSDAY, February 15.

_Fracas in the House._

[About a quarter past eleven o'clock, after prayers, whilst the SPEAKER
was in his chair, and many members in their places, but before the House
had been called to order, and before the journal had been read, Mr.
GRISWOLD entered the House, and observing Mr. LYON in his place (who was
writing) he went up to him with a pretty strong walking stick in his
hand, with which he immediately began to beat him with great violence.
Mr. G.'s approach was observed by Mr. LYON, but before he could get from
behind his desk he had received some severe blows. As soon as he got on
the floor of the House he endeavored to lay hold of Mr. G. (having no
stick or weapon in his hand) but he was prevented from doing so by Mr.
G.'s falling back, and the continual blows with which he was assailed.
At length getting behind the SPEAKER'S chair, Mr. L. snatched up the
tongs from the fire; the combatants then closed and came down together
upon the floor, Mr. G. being uppermost. The members in the House, who
till now seemed to look on with amazement at the scene, without an
attempt to put an end to it, got round the parties, and separated them,
but not before Mr. L. had aimed a blow at Mr. G.'s head with the tongs,
but which he parried off. The SPEAKER was now called upon to desire the
members to take their seats and form the House. Whilst this was doing,
the two enraged members met again without the bar, and, but for the
doorkeeper and some gentlemen present, would have renewed the combat.
Order having been obtained (at least as much as it was possible to
obtain from the agitated state of the House) the Clerk proceeded to read
the journal, and the business of the day was entered upon. It continued
till one o'clock, when from the perturbation which was naturally
occasioned by such a scene, and it being evident that business was very
little attended to by a great part of the House, a motion for an
adjournment was made and carried. It will be seen that no notice was
taken of this proceeding in the course of the sitting.]


FRIDAY, February 16.

_Case of Griswold and Lyon._

Immediately upon the journals having been read,

Mr. DAVIS, of Kentucky, rose and proposed the following resolution for
the adoption of the House:

      "_Resolved_, That Roger Griswold and Matthew Lyon, members
      of this House, for violent and disorderly behavior
      committed in the House, be expelled therefrom."

Mr. NICHOLAS hoped the resolution would be permitted to lie on the
table.

Mr. DAVIS saw no reason for delaying a decision upon this resolution. He
thought the conduct of these gentlemen had been so grossly violent, and
so notorious to most of the members of the House, that there need be no
hesitation in deciding upon it. If gentlemen wished, however, to take
the same course which had been adopted on a former occasion, he should
not object to it, though he thought it unnecessary. It was needless, now
to say any thing as to the necessity of preserving the dignity and honor
of that House; enough had already been said, and he thought pertinently
said, on a former occasion on this subject. And as he believed neither
the dignity, the honor, or peace of that House could be preserved whilst
these members remained in it, he hoped the House would be unanimous in
voting their expulsion.

Mr. THATCHER did not see why the innocent should be punished with the
guilty. The gentleman who brought forward this proposition, he supposed,
did not wish this. From what he saw of the affray, he did not think Mr.
LYON deserved to be punished for the part he acted. He certainly
received a severe beating, but he appeared to be passive from the
beginning to the end; and he did not think Mr. LYON ought to be expelled
because he was beaten. As to any investigation of what happened
yesterday, he did not think it necessary, as most of the members of that
House were eye-witnesses to the fact. But the gentleman said there would
be no peace until these members were expelled. He did not know from what
he drew his conclusions. What was done yesterday was done before the
House was in session; and it had already been determined that acts of
violence committed without the bar, during a session of the House, are
not causes of expulsion. He did not know, therefore, how gentlemen
would support the doctrine that a member ought to be expelled for an act
of violence done before the House was in session. It might be necessary,
however, to investigate other facts connected with these.

Mr. J. PARKER seconded the motion for the expulsion of these members,
because he believed there would be no peace in the House until they were
expelled. He was sorry the gentleman from Massachusetts should have said
he saw nothing but what was passive on the part of Mr. LYON. He himself
saw more, and that gentleman must have seen it if he had his eyes about
him. He said, that after the offending members had been separated Mr.
LYON met Mr. GRISWOLD without the bar of the House and began to belabor
him with his cane, when they were again separated. The attack of
yesterday, Mr. P. said, at a time when the House ought to have been in
session though it had not come to order, would fix an indelible stain
upon it; and if these members were not expelled, no member could
consider himself as safe in his seat. Such a transaction would certainly
lower that House in the estimation of their constituents. He had even
heard this morning, as he came to the Hall, persons in the street call
out, "There is nothing to do in Congress to-day--there's no fighting
going on!" In order to get rid of these reproaches, he hoped all parties
would unite in expelling these members. If their constituents chose to
send them back, he hoped no member would associate with or take notice
of them. And if a vote of expulsion should be agreed upon, he would
afterwards move to expunge from the journals all the entries relative to
these disgraceful proceedings.

Mr. NICHOLAS wished the motion to lie upon the table for the present,
because he was not himself prepared to decide upon the subject; he
wished, also, that whenever the motion was taken up, gentlemen might
come with their minds determined upon it, so that a long debate might
not be necessary. He therefore moved to postpone the consideration of
this resolution to Monday.

Mr. GORDON wished to know what part of the resolution the gentleman from
Virginia was not ready to act upon?

Mr. NICHOLAS did not understand the drift of the gentleman's question.
If he meant to ask whether he (Mr. N.) disapproved of the vote which he
had already given, he would answer him _he did not_.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said he should approve of the motion for postponement,
if it were made for to-morrow, instead of Monday; and he hoped the
business would not only be taken up to-morrow, but be concluded before
they rose. He had sat with great patience during the late debate, but he
should be opposed to going into any further lengthy proceedings on so
disagreeable a subject, which would prevent them from doing the business
of the nation, for which they were sent.

Mr. NICHOLAS had no objection to make the question the order for
to-morrow, if the House met.

Mr. THATCHER observed, that he had before said that he had seen nothing
on the part of Mr. LYON, in the affray of yesterday, which ought to
subject him to expulsion; but the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. PARKER)
said, that if he (Mr. T.) had had his eyes about him, he might have seen
something for which he ought to be expelled. If, indeed, he had _eyes
behind_ he might have seen what he alluded to; but this not being the
case, he did not see it. As far as the business respects Mr. LYON, some
inquiry might be necessary, as all he saw was, that Mr. LYON suffered
much, without any offence on his part. He thought, therefore, the
business should be gone into, as on a former occasion, and that they
ought to examine the subject with candor, and then they should doubtless
decide upon it with propriety.

Mr. SITGREAVES was against the postponement, in order that a different
course might be taken. He knew nothing in this case which distinguished
it from a late case, and therefore could not see why the same course
ought not to be pursued as was then pursued. He should therefore vote
against a postponement, in order that the resolution might be referred
to the Committee of Privileges.

Mr. HARPER inquired whether such a motion would not supersede a motion
for postponement.

The SPEAKER said, it would.

Mr. HARPER then made the motion.

Mr. GALLATIN asked whether he understood the SPEAKER rightly, that a
motion for a reference to a committee superseded a motion for
postponement?

The SPEAKER said, it did.

Mr. NICHOLAS asked whether it would not then be in order to postpone the
consideration of the subject?

The SPEAKER answered, it would.

Mr. NICHOLAS renewed the motion for a postponement till to-morrow.

Mr. HARPER, believing that it would be proper to refer this resolution
to a committee, as before, especially as some of the facts did not pass
within the view of the House, he should vote against the
postponement--not because he wished to avoid a vote on the question;
for, if it should be the opinion of the House that it ought not to go to
a committee, he was perfectly ready to give a vote upon the question;
but he thought it better that the business should have this course. With
respect to any discussion being necessary upon this subject, he perhaps
might think it necessary to make some observations upon it, when the
question came before the House for decision; for, though some gentlemen
might be endued with the happy faculty of doing every thing in an
instant, he could not boast of possessing that faculty. But, even if he
were not desirous of discussion for his own information, he wished it
for the information of the public; and, notwithstanding all that the
House had heard about a waste of public money and public time, he
believed they should best serve the public by suffering the business to
take the usual course.

The motion for a postponement was put and negatived.

Mr. SITGREAVES then moved that the resolution be referred to the
Committee of Privileges.

Mr. HARPER moved that the committee have leave to sit during the session
of the House.

Mr. THATCHER thought, as it was probable a number of members might be
wanted to give evidence, the House had better adjourn, as on a former
occasion, as it would not be proper to go on with business when so many
members were absent.

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE hoped leave would not be granted for the committee to
sit immediately. He wished them coolly to deliberate upon the business,
which they could scarcely be expected to do, when their passions were so
strongly affected as they must be at present.

The question for leave to sit during the session was put and carried--46
to 36.

Mr. HARPER moved that the committee be instructed to report to the House
the evidence in writing, upon which they shall found their report.

Mr. KITTERA thought the facts were so notorious that there was no
necessity for this instruction.

Mr. HARPER said if his friend from Pennsylvania could say that every
body would be satisfied with the report of the committee without the
evidence, he would not insist upon this motion. But if the evidence was
not reported, how could he say that all the witnesses might not again be
called before the House? It was his wish to prevent this.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said there was a considerable difference between this
transaction and the one lately under consideration. He thought in this
case it would probably save much trouble to report the evidence.

Mr. BROOKS said it must be recollected that the gentleman from Virginia
was not satisfied with the former report. He wished to hear the
witnesses themselves; and if the evidence was to be reported, he did not
suppose it would be satisfactory.

Mr. NICHOLAS seconded the motion, because it would be likely to shorten
the business; but if, when the testimony came to be reported, there was
any obscurity in it, he should feel it necessary to ask the witnesses
questions by way of elucidation, as every man who was called upon as a
judge, should be in full possession of every fact relative to the
subject.

Mr. BROOKS said the gentleman who had just sat down, would have no
difficulty in pointing out some obscurity, in order to furnish an
apology for rehearing of the witnesses.

Mr. KITTERA said if to report the evidence would prevent the necessity
of hearing the witnesses in the House, he should not object to it; but
he believed this would not be the case.

Mr. VENABLE was before of opinion that it would have been best for
witnesses to have delivered their evidence in writing. He hoped that
course would now be taken, and then there would be no difficulty in
reporting it to the House; and if it should be found necessary, in order
to elucidate any part of it, to put any questions to the witnesses in
the House, the business would be greatly facilitated and shortened by
the evidence being reported.

The question was put and carried.

Mr. OTIS believed that something further was necessary to be done in
respect to the unfortunate business, which had already engaged the
attention of the House. From what had happened in the view of the House,
it appears that the parties are in the habit of conflicting with each
other; and except they are restrained by some authority which shall be
sufficiently imposing upon them, further violence may be expected. In
order, therefore, to secure this House from future violations of its
dignity and order, he proposed the following resolution for adoption:

      "_Resolved_, That Roger Griswold and Matthew Lyon, members
      of this House, be respectively required by the SPEAKER to
      pledge their words to this House, that they will not commit
      any act of violence upon each other during this session;
      and that if either refuse to make such engagements, the
      party refusing shall be committed to the custody of the
      Sergeant-at-arms, until he shall comply with this
      obligation."

Mr. SEWALL understood a motion had been agreed to in relation to the
affair of yesterday, which might produce an expulsion of the members in
question. He thought it would be better, therefore, to alter the wording
of the resolution, and instead of "during this session," say "during the
continuance of the examination of the business before the House."

Mr. SITGREAVES did not think any alterations were necessary. An
expulsion of the members was a possible, but not a necessary result. If
an expulsion does not take place, the resolution will remain in
operation for the remainder of the session, which would be proper; and,
if an expulsion took place, its operation would fall of course.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS thought it best to pass the resolution as it stood. If a
similar resolution had been entered into on a former occasion, it would
probably have prevented what had now taken place.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS called for the reading of the resolution which was
passed on a former occasion. [It was read. It stated "that any personal
contest between the members, before the House had come to a decision
upon the business, would be considered as a high breach of privileges."]
Mr. W. thought this resolution went as far as the House had a right to
go. The resolution proposed by the gentleman from Massachusetts, went
farther, he thought, than they had power to go. It went to imprison one
or both of the parties, if he or they refused to comply with the request
of the House. He had his doubts whether that House had the
constitutional power to imprison a man for a crime, as the law only
would do this. He thought a resolution, similar to that adopted on a
former occasion, would be sufficient at present; and if the mover did
not think proper so to alter it, he would himself move an amendment for
this purpose.

Mr. OTIS flattered himself that his object would have met with the
concurrence of all sides of the House, believing that all wished to
prevent future violations of order and peace. With respect to the doubts
of the gentleman from North Carolina, his politics seemed to be
altogether a system of _doubts_. If this system was common, it would be
extremely difficult to progress with business at all. He believed, on
the present occasion, these doubts were groundless. When an act of
violence was done in the view of the members of the House, they had
certainly the power to obtain some security against a repetition of such
violence. If this was not done, the presumption was, the business of the
session might be continually interrupted; and had they not the right of
securing the peaceful exercise of their legislative functions for the
remainder of the session? He thought this could not be seriously
doubted. With respect to the former resolution, if he had been in his
place, he should have suggested its impropriety; for, by it, it seemed
to be implied that, after the question was decided, though they could
not do it before, the members in question would be at liberty to commit
any act of violence they pleased upon each other. They had seen the
consequence. He hoped, therefore, the House would restrain these
gentlemen in such a manner as that it may not be in their power again to
interrupt their proceedings.

The question was then taken on the resolution, and carried by a large
majority, there being 73 votes in favor of it.

The SPEAKER asked, whether it was the pleasure of the House that the
Sergeant-at-arms should be sent for Mr. LYON?

Mr. SITGREAVES said it might not be convenient for Mr. LYON to attend
the House; he asked whether the resolution might not be sent to him, and
his answer be received in writing?

Mr. NICHOLAS supposed, that if both gentlemen prepared a declaration in
writing, and presented it to-morrow, it would answer the purpose.

Mr. HARPER replied, the mischief intended to be guarded against might in
the mean time be done.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he had just been called out by a member of the House,
who had asked him whether he thought it would be proper for Mr. LYON to
attend the House. He supposed, therefore, if the Sergeant-at-arms was
sent for him, he would immediately attend.

Mr. HARPER hoped the Sergeant-at-arms would be sent.

The SPEAKER said, as soon as the Clerk had made a copy of the
resolution, the Sergeant-at-arms would wait upon Mr. LYON with it.

Mr. LYON having entered,

The SPEAKER said, the members from Vermont and Connecticut being now in
their places, he should proceed to read the resolution which had been
entered into by the House. [He then read the resolution.]

As soon as it was finished reading,

Mr. GRISWOLD rose and said, he should not hesitate to enter into the
proposed engagement.

Mr. LYON also rose and said, he was ready, as it was the wish of the
House, to agree to the proposition.

The SPEAKER said, then you do accordingly agree to this proposition?

Both answered, "I do agree."


MONDAY, February 19.

_Amy Dardin._

Upon motion of Mr. T. CLAIBORNE, the following resolution was agreed
to--45 to 40:

      "_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to bring in a
      bill for the relief of Amy Dardin."

[This claim has been long before Congress, and been several times the
subject of discussion. It is for the value of the famous horse Romulus,
the property of the husband of the petitioner, pressed into the service
of the United States during the war. The case of the widow is evidently
a hard one, and this is the second time a vote has been obtained in her
favor, which has afterwards been reversed.]

The committee rose, reported their agreement to the three resolutions,
and had leave to sit again. The House took up the two first, agreed to
them, and directed the Committee of Claims to bring in a bill or bills
accordingly. When the third resolution came to be considered, the yeas
and nays were called for, and its adoption was strongly opposed by
Messrs. HARPER, NICHOLAS, and BAYARD, on the ground of its throwing open
a door to every claim which had heretofore been determined as barred, as
cutting up by the root all the acts of limitation; that it was also
setting aside these laws in the most objectionable way, by inviting
every person, who had an unsatisfied claim, to petition Congress for
relief, which would of course engage much of their time. If the acts
were to be set aside, it would be much better and less expensive
therefore to authorize the proper department to settle these claims,
than that the time of the House should be engaged in investigating and
settling them.

On the other hand, its adoption was advocated by Messrs. GALLATIN and T.
CLAIBORNE. This was stated as a hard case; that this determination would
not open the acts of limitation to any but such as Congress might deem
extremely hard cases; that it would give the Treasury no power whatever
to settle any claim: the power, therefore, could not be abused, except
they themselves abused it; that whatever policy there might be in acts
of limitation, they were certainly liable to strong objections; they
knew they were honorably indebted a sum of money, but they determine not
to pay it, merely because the paying it might render the accounts at
the Treasury less simple, or because they would be liable to pay more
than is convenient. This policy might be justifiable, but it bore very
hard upon individual sufferers. It was argued, therefore, that without
opening the acts generally, when a strong, unequivocal claim was
presented, which was in the hands of the original holder, and where, of
course, there could be no possibility of fraud, relief might and ought
to be granted.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS was an enemy to acts of limitation, as he thought a debt
once due must always be due until paid; but he would either have them
opened generally, or not at all.

The yeas and nays upon agreeing to this proposition for setting aside
the act of limitation in this case were taken, and decided, yeas 35,
nays 55, as follows:

      YEAS.--David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Samuel J. Cabell, Thomas
      Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne, Matthew Clay,
      John Clopton, Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, George Dent,
      Lucas Elmendorph, John Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James
      Gillespie, William Barry Grove, Carter B. Harrison, David
      Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston, Matthew Locke,
      Matthew Lyon, James Machir, Blair McClenachan, Joseph
      McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New, John Rutledge, jr.,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., Thomas Sumter, Abraham
      Trigg, John Trigg, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and
      Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, James
      A. Bayard, Thomas Blount, David Brooks, Nathan Bryan,
      Stephen Bullock, Dempsey Burges, Christopher G. Champlin,
      John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William Craik,
      Samuel W. Dana, Thomas Evans, William Findlay, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich,
      William Gordon, Andrew Gregg, Roger Griswold, John A.
      Hanna, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley, Jonathan N.
      Havens, Wm. Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay,
      John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, Nathaniel Macon, Wm.
      Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, John Nicholas,
      Harrison G. Otis, Isaac Parker, John Read, James Schureman,
      Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Samuel Sitgreaves,
      Nathaniel Smith, Samuel Smith, Peleg Sprague, Richard
      Stanford, George Thatcher, Mark Thompson, Thomas
      Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John
      Williams.

Mr. HARPER then proposed the following resolution, which was agreed to:

      _Resolved_, That the prayer of the petition of Amy Dardin
      ought not to be granted.


TUESDAY, February 20.

_Case of Griswold and Lyon._

Mr. VENABLE, from the Committee of Privileges, laid the following report
upon the table, together with the evidence relative thereto:

      The Committee of Privileges, to whom was referred a
      resolution in the following words: "_Resolved_, That Roger
      Griswold and Matthew Lyon, members of this House, for
      violent and disorderly behavior committed in the House, be
      expelled therefrom," with instructions to report the
      evidence in writing, have, according to the orders of the
      House, proceeded to take the evidence, which they herewith
      report; and they report further, that it is their opinion
      that the said resolution ought to be disagreed to.


THURSDAY, February 22.

The usual time of calling the House to order being arrived, the Clerk
desired members to take their seats; which being done,

Mr. KITTERA said, the SPEAKER had desired him to inform the House that
he was so much indisposed as to be unable to attend the House to-day.
Mr. K. suggested the propriety, therefore, of adjourning the orders of
to-day till to-morrow.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS did not see a necessity for this. He thought the House
might informally go into a Committee of the Whole on the report of the
Committee of Privileges. He had seen this course taken in other
Legislative bodies, and as it would be the means of saving a day, he
hoped this mode would now be adopted.

Mr. THATCHER hoped gentlemen would not consent to go on with business in
an informal manner, since it was evident they were sufficiently informal
with all their forms.

Mr. HARRISON inquired if there was any probability that the SPEAKER
would be able to attend the House to-morrow. If not, he should be for
choosing a temporary Speaker.

Mr. KITTERA said, the indisposition of the SPEAKER was occasioned by a
severe headache, to which he was subject; that it generally continued
for six or eight hours, and afterwards he was perfectly well.

The question for postponement of the orders of the day till to-morrow
was then put by the Clerk, and carried; and then the House adjourned
till to-morrow.


FRIDAY, February 23.

The bill providing for the widows and orphans of certain deceased
officers, was read the third time, and passed.

_Revenue Statements._

A communication was laid before the House by the SPEAKER, from the
Secretary of the Treasury, enclosing sundry documents prepared by the
late Commissioner of the Revenue, in consequence of a resolution of the
House of the 6th of January, 1798, requiring to be laid before the House
every session, within ten days after its meeting, a statement of the net
produce of the internal revenues, the salaries of the Collectors, &c.,
for the year preceding. The Secretary apologizes for not having made the
communication sooner. It was ordered to be printed.

_Case of Griswold and Lyon._

The House proceeded to consider the report of the Committee of
Privileges, of the twentieth instant; and the same being again read in
the words following, to wit:

      The Committee of Privileges, to whom was referred a
      resolution in the following words, to wit: "_Resolved_,
      That Roger Griswold and Matthew Lyon, members of this
      House, for riotous and disorderly behavior, committed in
      the House, be expelled therefrom," with instructions to
      report the evidence in writing, have, according to the
      order of the House, proceeded to take the evidence, which
      they herewith report; and they report further, that it is
      their opinion that the said resolution be disagreed to.

Mr. DAVIS said he hoped the House would disagree to the report of their
Committee of Privileges; after this was done, the resolution could be
altered in such a manner as gentlemen might think proper.

Mr. DENT called for the yeas and nays. Agreed to be taken.

Mr. SITGREAVES said there were many considerations which should incline
the House to come to a decision upon the present business without
entering into any unnecessary discussion; and there were others which
should lead them to avoid coming to an immediate decision. He should,
therefore, move that the further consideration of this subject be
postponed until the 4th of March, 1799.

Mr. NICHOLAS called for the yeas and nays upon this question; which
being agreed to, were taken, and stood--yeas 38, nays 53.

The motion for postponement being lost, the question on agreeing to the
report of the committee recurred.

Mr. BAYARD believed it would not be in order to call for a division of
the question. The resolution implicated two persons, which he thought
improper. If the report of the committee was, however, disagreed to, he
supposed it would then be in order to move for a division of the
question. He should, therefore, vote against the report, as he wished
the cases to be separately considered, as they stood on distinct ground,
and were not attended with the same circumstances; and, reasoning from
analogy, he knew of no instance in a court of justice, where two persons
had ever been included in the same charge when their crimes were
different. If the situation of both these gentlemen had been the same,
there might have been propriety in coupling them together; but as this
was not the case, he was opposed to taking an opinion upon both
together.

Mr. MCDOWELL thought it would be proper to take the same course in this
business as was taken in a former case. He moved, therefore, that the
report be read a second time, for the purpose of committing it to a
committee of the whole House.

Mr. GORDON was opposed to this mode of proceeding. Every one knew the
question, and were as well prepared to decide upon it now, as they would
be after going into a committee upon it.

Mr. GILES thought it would comport more with the dignity of the House to
decide this business without going into a Committee of the Whole, as he
believed every one had made up his mind upon it. If gentlemen intended
by the course heretofore taken to raise the dignity of the House, he
thought they had deceived themselves; for he believed the House was
never in a less dignified attitude than during that discussion.

Mr. MCDOWELL thought the mode he had pointed out necessary, for the sake
of uniformity; but, as other gentlemen seemed to think it unnecessary,
he would withdraw his motion.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS wished to know whether it would be in order to amend the
report of the Committee of Privileges, or to suggest the propriety of
disagreeing to it, for the purpose of substituting a different
punishment from that proposed, viz: that the offending members should be
reprimanded by the Speaker in the presence of the House? He believed
that a punishment of this kind would satisfy many gentlemen who did not
wish to expel the members, but who, at the same time, did not wish they
should go unpunished.

The SPEAKER said that motion would be in order after the report of the
committee was decided upon.

Mr. GALLATIN remarked, that if the report was agreed to, the resolution
for an expulsion would of course be negatived, and then any other
proposition would be in order; and, on the other hand, if the report was
disagreed to, the resolution would be before them, and open to
amendment. Mr. G. said he rose to make an observation upon what fell
from the gentleman from Delaware (Mr. BAYARD.) That gentleman had said
he would vote against the report, because he wished to distinguish
between the two members. The reason which he gave, though he might have
good reasons for his vote, did not appear to him to be correct. That
gentleman seemed to suppose that the facts for which the two members
were to be expelled, were facts committed at different times, and of a
different nature; whereas the facts for which both were proposed to be
expelled, were offences of the same nature, and committed on the same
day. What related to the previous conduct of the member from Vermont,
was not now under consideration. In order to have that conduct before
them, it would be necessary that a reconsideration of it should be moved
by a member who voted against that member's expulsion, and seconded by
another member who voted on the same side of the question. The argument
of the gentleman from Delaware, therefore, did not apply. He said he
should himself vote in favor of the report of the Committee of
Privileges. He was against expelling either of the gentlemen.

Mr. DANA agreed with the gentleman last up, in his conclusions; but he
did not seem rightly to have understood the argument of the gentleman
from Delaware. If the gentleman from Pennsylvania was acquainted with
legal principles, with established principles relative to punishment, he
must know that no persons can be charged jointly with an offence, except
jointly guilty, and except they had mutually agreed to commit the
offence. The resolution, in its present form, therefore, offended
against established maxims of propriety.

Mr. BAYARD said, the statement of the gentleman from Pennsylvania was
not correct. He had stated that the offences of the two members were the
same in circumstances, and committed at the same time. He apprehended
the two cases were very distinct; as, by the depositions before the
House, it appeared that the offence of the member from Connecticut was
committed _before_ the House was called to order, and that the offence
of the member from Vermont was committed _after_ the House was called to
order. The argument most depended upon in a former case, against the
expulsion of the member from Vermont, was that which insisted that the
act of violence complained of being committed when the House was not in
session, was not a cause of expulsion. If this argument had weight at
that time, it ought also to have weight in the present case. It would,
therefore, be the height of injustice to blend the two cases together;
since there might be cause for expelling one member and not the other.

The SPEAKER observed that every thing which had been said with respect
to a division of the question was out of order, as it could not be
divided. He would also remark, in order to shorten the debate, that the
House was not called to order when the stroke was made by the member
from Vermont upon the member from Connecticut without the bar of the
House.

Mr. HARPER asked, if the report of the committee should not be agreed
to, whether the resolution might not then be agreed to?

The SPEAKER replied, it could not be divided; but a separate resolution
might be brought forward.

The question on agreeing to the report of the committee, which
recommended a disagreement to the resolution for an expulsion of the two
members was then taken, and stood--yeas 73, nays 21.

The resolution for an expulsion having been disagreed to,

Mr. R. WILLIAMS proposed a resolution in the following words:

      "_Resolved_, That Roger Griswold and Matthew Lyon, for
      riotous and disorderly behavior in this House, are highly
      censurable, and that they be reprimanded by the Speaker in
      the presence of this House."

Mr. HARPER moved the previous question upon this resolution. He did it,
he said, upon this ground. The House had just decided, and they had
lately decided in another instance, that disorderly conduct shall not be
punished by expulsion; and it was his opinion that no less punishment
than expulsion ought to be inflicted, as he was unwilling to diminish
the reprehensive power of the House, by inflicting what he thought
inadequate punishment for offences of this nature. If there were any
gentlemen who thought this conduct excusable, and that it ought not to
be punished, they would, of course, vote in favor of the previous
question; and those who thought with him, that both ought to be
expelled, would also vote in favor of it.

Mr. NICHOLAS called for the yeas and nays upon this question. Agreed to
be taken.

Mr. GALLATIN said, by the gentleman from South Carolina having moved the
previous question, he had excluded any discussion upon the merits of the
main question. Mr. G. wished some reasons might be given why the main
question ought not to be put. Those given by the gentleman from South
Carolina were applicable to the resolution itself: they were reasons why
he should vote against the resolution, but they did not strike him as
reasons why the question should not at all be taken.

The previous question was then put in this form: "Shall the main
question (viz: the resolution for reprimanding the offending members)
now be put?" And the yeas and nays were taken, and stood--yeas 47, nays
48, as follows:

      YEAS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Samuel
      J. Cabell, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole
      Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Thomas T. Davis,
      John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, William Findlay, John
      Fowler, Nathaniel Freeman, jun., Albert Gallatin, William
      B. Giles, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna,
      Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph Heister,
      David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston, Matthew
      Locke, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell,
      John Milledge, Anthony New, John Nicholas, Thompson J.
      Skinner, Samuel Smith, William Smith, Richard Sprigg,
      Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, John Trigg,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, George Baer, jun., Bailey Bartlett,
      James A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher
      G. Champlin, John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit,
      William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, George Dent, Thos. Evans,
      Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon, William Barry Grove,
      Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley, William Hindman,
      Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera,
      Samuel Lyman, James Machir, William Matthews, Lewis R.
      Morris, Harrison G. Otis, Isaac Parker, John Read, John
      Rutledge, jun., Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Peleg
      Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thomson,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and
      John Williams.


MONDAY, March 5.

_Diplomatic Intercourse._

[After a protracted discussion the question was taken on Mr. Nicholson's
amendment, to wit, to limit the ministers of the highest grade to the
two Courts of London and Paris, and it was negatived--52 to 48.]

A motion was then made for the committee to rise and ask leave to sit
again, which was negatived.

The bill was proceeded with.

Mr. S. Smith moved, to strike out certain words, and to insert others to
this effect:

      "That the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall not allow to
      any Minister Plenipotentiary to France, Great Britain, or
      Spain, more than $9,000 per annum, nor to any other
      Minister Plenipotentiary more than $6,000."

This amendment was negatived, there being only 48 votes in its favor.

The blanks in the bill were next to be filled; the first, which was the
permanent allowance, was filled with $40,000; the next, which was an
extraordinary appropriation for this year, with $28,650. Before the
latter sum was agreed upon,

Mr. LIVINGSTON inquired whether the sum of between two and three
thousand dollars, which he thought had been lavished away, said to be
expended on persons taking leave from this country, was included in the
incidental expenses which were contained under this head? He thought
such an expenditure of money forbidden by the constitution.

Mr. HARPER believed the incidental expenses mentioned in the estimate
were expenses of our Ministers abroad.

Mr. NICHOLAS understood that three Secretaries were allowed the mission
at present in France. He thought this was as novel as it was
unnecessary; as he believed one Secretary was sufficient for the whole.
The United States had employed a number of missions at different times,
but never allowed more than one Secretary to each. He had thought the
law would not have warranted the practice; but on examining it, he
supposed it did.

Mr. HARPER said every Minister employed was entitled to a Secretary; the
PRESIDENT had accordingly appointed one to each, and he could not see
upon what ground the House could object to appropriating for their
salaries.

Mr. NICHOLAS answered, that as the law admitted of it, he should not
object to the appropriation but he should move an amendment to prevent
more than one secretary to a mission in future.

The committee then rose and reported the bill with the amendments; which
being taken up in the House and agreed to, Mr. NICHOLAS renewed his
amendment to limit the salaries of Ministers Plenipotentiary to London,
Paris, and Madrid, to nine thousand dollars a year, and all others to
four thousand five hundred dollars, and called the yeas and nays upon
it, which were taken and resulted, yeas 48, nays 52.

Mr. S. SMITH then renewed his motion for limiting the salaries of
Ministers to London, Paris, and Madrid, to nine thousand dollars, and
others to six thousand dollars, and called the yeas and nays upon it,
which were taken, and were exactly the same as upon the former question.

Mr. NICHOLAS then made his motion to confine future missions to one
Secretary, which was negatived--50 to 45.

The bill was then ordered to be engrossed for a third reading
to-morrow.


MONDAY, March 19.

_Relations with France._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate_, _and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives_:

      The despatches from the Envoys Extraordinary of the United
      States to the French Republic, which were mentioned in my
      Message to both Houses of Congress, of the fifth instant,
      have been examined and maturely considered.

      While I feel a satisfaction in informing you that their
      exertions for the adjustment of the differences between the
      two nations have been sincere and unremitted, it is
      incumbent on me to declare that I perceive no ground of
      expectation that the objects of their mission can be
      accomplished on terms compatible with the safety, honor, or
      the essential interests of the nation.

      This result cannot, with justice, be attributed to any want
      of moderation on the part of this Government, or to any
      indisposition to forego secondary interests for the
      preservation of peace. Knowing it to be my duty, and
      believing it to be your wish, as well as that of the great
      body of the people, to avoid, by all reasonable
      concessions, any participation in the contentions of
      Europe, the powers vested in our Envoys were commensurate
      with a liberal and pacific policy, and that high confidence
      which might justly be reposed in the patriotism, abilities,
      and integrity, of the characters to whom the negotiation
      was committed. After a careful review of the whole subject,
      with the aid of all the information I have received, I can
      discern nothing which could have ensured or contributed to
      success that has been omitted on my part; and nothing
      further which can be attempted, consistently with maxims
      for which our country has contended, at every hazard, and
      which constitute the basis of our national sovereignty.

      Under these circumstances, I cannot forbear to reiterate
      the recommendations which have been formerly made, and to
      exhort you to adopt with promptitude, decision, and
      unanimity, such measures as the ample resources of the
      country afford, for the protection of our commercial and
      seafaring citizens; for the defence of any exposed portions
      of our territory; for replenishing our arsenals,
      establishing foundries and military manufactures; and to
      provide such efficient revenue as will be necessary to
      defray extraordinary expenses, and supply the deficiencies
      which may be occasioned by depredations on our commerce.

      The present state of things is so essentially different
      from that in which instructions were given to collectors to
      restrain vessels of the United States from sailing in an
      armed condition, that the principle on which those orders
      were issued has ceased to exist. I therefore deem it proper
      to inform Congress that I no longer conceive myself
      justifiable in continuing them, unless in particular cases,
      where there may be reasonable ground of suspicion that such
      vessels are intended to be employed contrary to law.

      In all your proceedings it will be important to manifest a
      zeal, vigor, and concert, in defence of the national
      rights, proportioned to the danger with which they are
      threatened.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _March 19, 1798_.

This Message was referred to the Committee of the Whole on the state of
the Union.


FRIDAY, March 23.

_Georgia Limits._

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY--SLAVERY.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS called for the order of the day on the bill for
organizing and disciplining the militia of the United States.

Mr. GALLATIN thought it better that the House should again go into a
Committee of the Whole on the bill for an amicable settlement of limits
with Georgia, and for the erection of a government in the Mississippi
Territory, as that subject had already undergone some discussion, and
the bill had been reported with the information to obtain which it had
been committed.

The latter business was preferred, and the House accordingly went into a
Committee of the Whole on the subject; when Mr. MILLEDGE'S amendment
being under consideration, for adding to the section for appointing a
provisional Government in the Natchez country, "after the consent of the
Legislature of Georgia shall have been obtained,"

Mr. MILLEDGE observed, that the select committee had now reported all
the documents on which the United States claimed a right to this
territory. As to the title of Georgia, he should not enter into an
inquiry as to that. He would only remark, that the State of Georgia was
as tenacious of her rights as any State in the Union. But he thought it
would not be improper to examine the pretended claim of the United
States to this country. Looking into the journals of the Senate, he
found that on the 3d of March, 1795, a resolution was passed directing
the Attorney General to inquire into and make a report on the subject of
the title of the United States to land in Georgia. No doubt the Attorney
General not only examined the records of the State of Georgia, but those
of the United States, and obtained all the information which he was able
to do in the United States; but not finding sufficient ground upon which
to found a title, he applied to Mr. Bayard, our Commissioner in London,
who obtained a certificate on the subject from a Mr. Chalmers, Secretary
to the Board of Trade and Plantations. Twelve months after he was
directed to do so, the Attorney General made a report on the subject;
but none of the documents which he reported went to establish the claim
of the United States; nor any thing which tends to show that a cession
of West Florida was ever made. But he now found among the papers got
from the Senate, a letter addressed to Mr. Read of the Senate, from Mr.
Livingston of New York, informing him that he encloses an extract from
the instructions given by the King of Great Britain to Governor Chester.
But Mr. Livingston was not known as an official character; and this
document was neither official nor certified. Yet this is the ground upon
which the United States claim this tract of country. Before the General
Government proceeded to erect a temporary government, it ought to have
better information with respect to the nature of its claim; for, to
attempt to establish a government without the consent of Georgia, he
thought would be stepping beyond the constitution, two clauses of which
he quoted. He hoped the general powers placed in Congress for the
defence of the country would not be resorted to in order to sanction the
proceeding. It was said that the inhabitants of the district of country
alluded to were in a situation which called for immediate attention. He
allowed that it would be proper to pay early attention to them; but he
thought, inconvenient as it might be, the erecting of a government might
be deferred until the consent of the Legislature of Georgia could be
obtained. It ought to be remembered that the State of Georgia is a
member of the Union, and that it is her interest to make the cession,
and he had no doubt she would do so. The convention of that State meet
in May, and if application was made to them, he had no doubt the
Legislature would be called together, and consent might be obtained by
the month of July. He was confident the State of Georgia is desirous of
promoting the interests of the United States, and that she is firmly
attached to the Government; all its regulations had been constantly
carried into effect there; and her consent to the establishment of a
provisional government being obtained, every difficulty would be
obviated.

Mr. HARPER did not feel any anxiety to question the desire of the State
of Georgia to promote the interests of the United States, and he was
glad to be informed by her Representative, that she was so well disposed
to the General Government, to which assertion he gave the fullest
credit. He, therefore, should not oppose the motion of the gentleman on
the ground that the State of Georgia would be likely to throw any
obstacles in the way of the proposed temporary government; and he should
be far from supposing, that, by the erection of such a government, the
United States would assume an extra-judicial right to the territory. He
was of opinion that the United States possessed the right to it, and
that the most undeniable evidence of the right existed; but that
evidence was not now before the House, and if it were, they were not the
proper body to decide the question. He believed the amendment ought to
be rejected on the ground of policy. The bill went to provide a
temporary government, but contained an express clause that the
establishment of this government shall not affect the rights of Georgia
with respect to her right of the jurisdiction or soil of this
territory--consequently, the fears of the gentleman are groundless in
this respect. What, then, is the nature of the amendment? It is to
prevent the erection of a temporary government in a district of country
containing upwards of 5,000 souls, lying far beyond the ordinary
jurisdiction of any State, with an immense wilderness intervening, in
which are two nations of Indians, and in the neighborhood of the
territory of a foreign nation, with whom, though we are at present at
peace, when we recollect the connection subsisting between that nation
and another with whom we have differences of a serious nature, we cannot
reckon upon as lasting. Yet this remote and vulnerable corner of the
Union is to be left defenceless for an indefinite period of time, lest
we should possibly give umbrage to the State of Georgia, by providing a
temporary government there before the dispute on the subject of limits
is settled. And whatever may be the good disposition of Georgia towards
the United States, it would require considerable time to obtain the
consent proposed. Their Legislature do not meet till next winter. It was
true, as had been stated, that their convention met in May, and they
might, if they thought proper, call an extraordinary meeting of the
Legislature; but this could not be relied upon. Besides, he saw no
necessity for so much punctilio in this case, for if any State were to
suffer a part of its territory, within its ordinary jurisdiction, to lie
in a defenceless state, the General Government would be warranted in
stepping in to defend it, and certainly they might do it in a case like
the present, where no jurisdiction is exercised. And if this was not
done, the petition of these people set forth, that however unwilling
they should be to do so, they should be obliged to pass over to the
Spanish dominions.

Mr. H. said, he did not wish to have touched upon the question of right;
but as the gentleman from Georgia had said we had none, he felt himself
obliged to say a few words upon that point. He allowed the committee had
not before them evidence of the right which would be admissible in a
court of law; but though it were not such as would be admitted in a
court of law, had it therefore no weight? It was at least equal to what
was every day received by the committees of the House. The question was,
whether the papers before them afforded reason to believe that legal
evidence of the title did exist? It was a copy of a commission and
instructions given by the King of Great Britain to Governor Chester, of
West Florida, in the year 1770, furnished by the gentleman who was
Secretary to the Governor at that time, and whose duty it was to keep
the records of that Government. But the gentleman from Georgia said,
search had been made in the offices of the British Government for the
original, of which this paper was a copy, and it could not be found. But
this was no proof it did not exist. If it does exist, legal evidence may
be obtained from it, and this paper shows that the Natchez country was
included within the territory of West Florida, and that it ceased in the
year 1770 to be a part of Georgia. He believed, however, this question
ought not now to be acted upon; but that from necessity, and the
exigencies of the case, a temporary government ought immediately to be
provided for this district of country, and afterwards settle the point
of right with Georgia by negotiation; and if it was found in the end
that the United States had no title to it, the Government which had been
established could be withdrawn.

But it was stated that the Legislature of Georgia would readily consent
that the United States should become possessed of this country. But what
were the terms upon which they proposed to cede it? They required, as
one of the conditions, a million and a half of dollars in six per cent.
stock, and as another (which was infinitely harder, since it might not
be in our power to comply with it, as it depended upon the will of the
Indians) that the United States will guarantee the relinquishment of the
Indian claim to the land on the east side of the Chatahoochee, within a
certain number of years. There is little hope, therefore, that the State
of Georgia will propose any terms to which the United States can agree,
as it had been seen that the Legislature of that State had rejected a
bill by a great majority, which proposed the price to be one million of
dollars with the other condition. Of course it would be very imprudent
to rest the establishment of a government in this quarter upon an
agreement to terms like these.

Besides, the amendment would affect the right claimed by the United
States. To wait for this consent would be tantamount to confessing we
had no right, and arm Georgia with a strong weapon against us in the
final settlement.

Mr. H. contended that there was nothing in the constitution which could
prevent the proposed measure, since it was absolutely necessary to
preserve the people from falling into anarchy, and to prevent a foreign
Government from putting arms into their hands. It was also a quarter of
the Union which it was necessary to preserve, if we wished to secure the
free navigation of the Mississippi, which we had lately obtained by the
Spanish treaty; for if this country were invaded by the Indians, or
involved in civil war, we could not have the benefit of the navigation
of that river. He hoped, therefore, when so many considerations were
opposed to it, the amendment would be disagreed to.

Mr. NICHOLAS understood from the gentleman from South Carolina, that it
was not intended to insist upon the title of the United States to the
territory in question; and if they were not ripe to decide that the land
is the property of the United States, he thought they ought not to
establish a Government there without paying some respect to the rights
of Georgia, by obtaining her consent, as it might prevent that amicable
settlement of which we had at present the prospect. If that State set
the value upon the land which had been mentioned, would it not excite
the utmost jealousy in that country to take forcible possession of it?
To do this would certainly be to establish an influence in favor of the
United States, which would be fatal to the claim of Georgia. No argument
had been adduced to show the right of the United States to this
territory, but merely to show the convenience of the measure. The
gentleman from South Carolina might as well say that a certain district
in Virginia is not so well governed as it might be, and, as the people
would be happier under the Government of the United States, propose to
take possession of it. But it was said Georgia had not begun to govern
this territory. Neither have the United States. She may, for aught we
know, be preparing to do it now. He thought there was not a shadow of
pretence for taking the course proposed, without first consulting the
Legislature of Georgia. He hoped the amendment would be agreed to.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said it appeared to him, that if this amendment were to
prevail, the bill might as well be voted out altogether. The bill had
two objects, viz: a settlement of limits, and the fixing of a temporary
government. It was clear to him, from the papers before the committee,
that the United States had a clear title to the country in question,
and, if this was not the case, there was a saving clause in favor of the
Georgia claim. He thought that State ought to be happy at the idea of
the United States fixing a government there, as it would assist them in
their defence against the Indians. If gentlemen turned to the acts of
Congress, it would be found what a vast expense the United States had
heretofore been put to in defending the frontier of that country. He
thought that State had been dealt with in a very favorable manner. It
was not long since $100,000 were paid to their militia for defending
their frontier. He complimented the gentleman from Georgia for having
advocated so ably the cause of his State. But he thought that State
ought to come forward and show what title she had to the country. It had
been ceded to the United States by the Spanish Treaty, and the
inhabitants there had a claim upon the General Government for
protection, and surely if the State of Georgia for ever refused to give
its consent to a government being established there, they were not for
ever to be without government. The people there had petitioned Congress
for a government, of which doubtless the State of Georgia was
acquainted; and they ought to come forward in the business. Their
silence proved to him that they had no title to that country. Mr. W.
referred to the manner in which other cessions had been made to the
Union, and said he thought Georgia ought to rejoice at the proposed
establishment, as it would not only be benefiting that State, but the
Union at large.

Mr. MACON said if the bill was intended to be conformable to the title,
the amendment ought certainly to be agreed to; as, if the United States
undertook to establish a government at the Natchez, without the consent
of Georgia, it could not be said to be amicably done. This, he said, was
neither the proper time nor place of deciding to whom this territory
belongs. The great object ought to be to get a government there, and not
to talk about what had been done for Georgia. And if the consent of
Georgia could be obtained previous to the establishment of this
government, it was certainly desirable that it should be obtained. This
would not injure the claim of either. When this was done, some mode
might be agreed upon by which the dispute at present subsisting, might
be settled. This course would prevent any difficulties, and the consent
might be obtained by the time the government could take effect.

Mr. OTIS said if the object of the present bill, could be obtained in a
mode which would preserve the rights of all parties as they at present
stand, such a course would be preferable to that which should appear to
relinquish the right of one of the parties. It struck him that this
might be effected by the bill as it now stands. The United States
assumed their right to the land, yet they do not say they mean to turn a
deaf ear to the claim of Georgia. But, if the amendment were adopted, it
would go to relinquish the title of the United States, and this, he
thought, would be an excess of complaisance to the State of Georgia. The
only plausible reason given in favor of the amendment was, that if the
bill passed without it, it would give offence to, and excite jealousy
in, the State of Georgia. But how? Because Congress passes an act to
settle the interfering claims, and directs the appointment of
commissioners to give them a compensation for what we might take without
it? Or, because we say we will enter upon the territory, to which we
always laid claims, in order to preserve peace and order among the
inhabitants, and to secure it against the attack of the Indians or of a
foreign power? Gentlemen seem to take it for granted that Georgia has
possession of this territory; whereas those who oppose the amendment,
contend it is a vacant possession, and that we have a right to take
possession of it, to hold it, not until an army is raised to take it
from us, but until the legal question of right shall be decided. And it
could not be said that there was any thing offensive in this. If a man,
for instance, were to enter upon a piece of land, and say he would never
give it up until he was driven from it, it would certainly be an act of
violence; but if he enter upon it only to take care of it, until a legal
decision can be had as to his right, such an act was perfectly
justifiable; and this was intended in the present case.

Mr. KITTERA hoped, if the bill passed at all, it would be without the
amendment. This territory was never yet governed either by the United
States or Georgia, but had been ceded to the United States by Spain, in
our late treaty with that power, and we ought to retain possession of it
until the title to it was clear. In this view of the subject, he could
not see how the State of Georgia could take offence at our holding the
territory until the existing dispute was settled.

Mr. BALDWIN said it was to be regretted, as this was the last instance
in which this question of cession could be presented to Congress, that
the situation of the persons settled upon this territory was such as
should seem to constrain gentlemen to depart from the course of their
former proceedings on this subject. He was fully impressed with the
situation of that people; but he thought little delay would be
occasioned by the proposed application to the State of Georgia; nor
would that consent weaken, as had been suggested, the title of the
United States. Or, if there was any force in the objection, it might be
guarded against by adding a few words in the section which speaks of
preserving the claim of Georgia as it now stands.

Mr. B. said, gentlemen who had turned their attention to the map, would
find that the territory in question is situate at the south-west corner
of the United States; the southern boundary is latitude 31, and the
western boundary the Mississippi, which is also the boundary of the
United States. Its extent is about 280 miles north and south, and coming
this way, about 400 miles. That part upon which this bill is bottomed,
is little more than one-third part of the whole of that territory. The
United States now reckon latitude 32-1/2 as the boundary of Georgia; but
in the treaty, and till very lately, it was always reckoned to be 31,
which is also the boundary of the United States. This was, at any rate,
a new discovery--the official documents in support of which he had not
seen. It was now supposed that West Florida extends to latitude 32-1/2,
and not to 31, which is one degree and a half more than formerly
supposed. If this were so, he wondered it had never before been
discovered by England or Spain. Why was the boundary of the United
States always fixed at 31? He feared, that since it became our interest
to extend the boundary, we had suffered that interest to color our
judgment. The instructions drawn out for our Minister by a former
Secretary of State were, "you are to contend for latitude 31." The
ground upon which he had stated this, Mr. B. thought irresistible, and
it was thought we might risk a war upon it. Besides, this bill would not
cure the evil for which it was intended. There might be inhabitants
still further north; this bill provides only for such as are settled
within what had been called the Province of West Florida. Mr. B. said,
he had never seen the documents which authorized this extension. He had,
indeed, seen the remarks of Mr. Chalmers, who, he believed, was
Secretary to the Board of Trade and Plantations in London; but he
believed he had drawn what he had said from the same document which was
now reported, viz: the extract from the copy of the instructions said to
have been given to Governor Chester; but the order of King and Council
for extending it, the Attorney General says, in page 11th of his report,
is not to be found.

Gentlemen had said, why does not the State of Georgia manifest a
disposition to make some arrangements respecting the territory in
question. They had done so. After the Revolutionary war in 1783 or
1784, when there was an expectation that the forts would have been
evacuated, they laid out a county there, and all the titles were
declared good, and where there was no other title occupancy was declared
to be sufficient, and warrants were to be issued accordingly. When he
first came to attend his duty in Congress, the Minister from Spain
arrived about the same time, when he put in the claim of Spain to this
territory, which prevented any thing further from being done; and as
soon as it was found that the arrangements made by Georgia gave umbrage
to the Spanish Government, they were given up.

In the year 1788, the State of Georgia passed an act for making the
cession of this territory to the United States. This act Congress
referred to a committee, which reported that Government ought not to
accept of the cession on the terms proposed. He believed the same
disposition to make the cession which always had existed, now existed.
He believed the disposition of the government of Georgia was as
favorable to the interests of the United States as that of any other
State. He did not rise to speak their praises; but he could not sit to
hear them blamed without notice.

If the proposed government was proceeded with without the consent of
Georgia, it would be a dereliction of principle. He thought some sort of
regulation might be made among the people for their own government,
until Georgia was applied to. This was not a new case. There had been
great settlements in several parts of the country long before any
government was provided for them. Mr. B. said, he did not mean to
undervalue the claim of the United States; they had always a claim in
every case of cession, but he hoped, except there was an absolute
necessity for it, the usual course of proceeding would not be departed
from.

Mr. GORDON said, the gentleman from Georgia complained that a different
course was proposed now to be taken than had been adopted heretofore. In
answer to this, it was sufficient to say, that where the circumstances
of cases differed, different courses were necessary. With respect to the
merits of the bill, he thought it stood right at present. The situation
of the people in the district alluded to, was such as required immediate
attention. If gentlemen were not convinced of this, he saw no necessity
for going into the business before the subsisting dispute between
Georgia and the United States was settled. He believed, however, there
was no doubt of the fact; and surely the gentleman from Georgia would
not wish that these people should live under a military government for
any length of time. Being satisfied of this point, he wished the bill to
pass without the amendment, as that might defeat altogether the purpose
of the bill. The claim of Georgia he looked upon at least as doubtful;
and as he considered the United States as bound to protect all its
citizens, he thought they would not be justified in returning these
people for answer, "we cannot attend to your wants until we have settled
our dispute with Georgia." Georgia might refuse to negotiate the
subject, and by that means protract the business in a manner which would
be very inconvenient, and perhaps drive the people under another
government. Besides, if Georgia should refuse its consent to the
establishment of a government in that quarter, it would, nevertheless,
be proper to establish one. The United States, Mr. G. said, came into
possession of this territory by treaty. But suppose it was now in
possession of a foreign power, would Georgia attempt to drive them from
it? Certainly not. It would amount to the making of war on a foreign
power. Suppose Georgia had a title to this territory, had not the United
States the power of depriving Georgia of it? Suppose, in their treaty
with Spain, the United States had surrendered to Spain one-half of this
land, or the whole of it, Georgia would have been bound by such an act;
and having got this territory by treaty, they had certainly a right to
establish a provisional government over it, until the dispute, as to the
title, was settled.

The question of this amendment was put and negatived by 46 to 24.

Mr. THATCHER rose and said, he should make a motion, touching the rights
of man, by moving to strike out the excepting clause in the 3d section
of the bill. [It appears that in the ordinance establishing a government
in the North-western Territory, slavery is expressly forbidden, and this
section of the bill directs that a government similar in all respects to
that established in the North-western Territory shall be established in
the Mississippi Territory, except that slavery shall not be forbidden.]

Mr. HARPER did not believe his friend's motion would be a proper mode of
supporting the rights of man. In the North-western Territory the
regulation forbidding slavery was a very proper one, as the people
inhabiting that part of the country were from parts where slavery did
not prevail, and they had of course no slaves amongst them; but in the
Mississippi Territory it would be very improper to make such a
regulation, as that species of property already exists, and persons
emigrating there from the Southern States would carry with them property
of this kind. To agree to such a proposition would, therefore, be a
decree of banishment to all the persons settled there, and of exclusion
to all those intending to go there. He believed it could not, therefore,
be carried into effect, as it struck at the habits and customs of the
people.

Mr. VARNUM did not know that the gentleman from South Carolina wished to
promote the rights of man. His observations showed, at least, that he
did not wish to support the rights of all men; for where there was a
disposition to retain a part of our species in slavery, there could not
be a proper respect for the rights of mankind. It was true that this
kind of property is held in the Southern States, because they cannot,
consistent with the safety of the people of those States, liberate them
on account of their very great numbers. But they considered it as a
great burden to be obliged to hold them. He hoped, therefore, Congress
would have so much respect for the rights of humanity as not to legalize
the existence of slavery any farther than it at present exists. He
believed the gentleman from South Carolina was mistaken in saying that
such a regulation would oblige all the inhabitants settled in this
territory to remove. The provision need only extend to the forbidding of
slaves being taken there. What, said he, is the situation of the
North-western Territory at this time? Land there is worth more than in
some of the old settled States; and he believed this high price of land,
and prosperous condition of the country, was entirely owing to the
absence of slavery. And if the Southern States could get clear of their
slaves, the price of their land would immediately double. At any rate,
he hoped the United States would prevent an increase of this calamity;
for he looked upon the practice of holding blacks in slavery in this
country to be equally criminal with that of the Algerines carrying our
citizens into slavery.

Mr. RUTLEDGE wished the gentleman from Massachusetts would withdraw his
motion, not from any apprehension he had that it would obtain; but he
hoped that he would not indulge himself and others in uttering
philippics against a practice with which his and their philosophy is at
war. He submitted to the gentleman's candor whether it was proper, on
every occasion, to do this--to bring forward the Southern States in an
odious light, or to give his neighbor and colleague an opportunity of
bringing them forward, and comparing them with Algerines! He thought
propriety and decency towards other members required that such language
should be checked. He believed, if his friend from Massachusetts had
recollected that the most angry debate which had taken place during this
session was occasioned by a motion on this subject, he would not have
brought forward the present question. One gentleman says, you call these
men property; another, you hold these men in chains; a third, you
violate the rights of man! And are not these men property? Do not the
people in this territory hold them as such? Did they not hold them under
the Spanish Government? And must we thus address these people: "We have
made a treaty which puts you under the mild government of the United
States, but we must take from you your property; or rather, we must set
your blacks at liberty to cut your throats. The rights of man was the
watch-word of the day, and Congress have determined that you shall not
possess this property. They cannot as yet do slavery away
altogether--the day is not yet arrived; but they have determined it
shall not exist in the Mississippi Territory."

These, said Mr. R., are not mere speculative opinions. They lead to
more mischief than gentlemen are aware of; and he trusted if the
gentleman from Massachusetts could be convinced that the discussion of
such questions as the present did much mischief in certain parts of the
Union, he would not bring them forward. He hoped he would withdraw the
present motion.

Mr. GORDON thought that when the gentleman from Massachusetts
recollected that, by the establishment of this government, the United
States do not establish their exclusive right to this territory, he
would consent to withdraw his amendment, as that went to say that we had
the absolute right of jurisdiction, and were determined to exercise it;
and in making a difference between the ground on which property was held
there from that on which it was held in Georgia, they would militate
against the 5th section of the bill.

Mr. OTIS hoped his colleague would not withdraw his motion; and the
reason why he wished this was, that an opportunity might be given to
gentlemen who came from the same part of the Union with him to manifest
that it is not their disposition to interfere with the Southern States
as to the species of property in question. With respect to the existence
of slavery, the House had often heard gentlemen, who are owners of
slaves, declare that it is not their fortune, but their misfortune that
they possess them, but who still keep them, and claim the right of
managing them as they think proper. He thought it was not the business
of those who had nothing to do with that kind of property to interfere
with that right; and he really wished that the gentlemen who held slaves
might not be deprived of the means of keeping them in order.

If the amendment prevailed, it would declare that no slavery should
exist in the Natchez country. This would not only be a sentence of
banishment, but of war. An immediate insurrection would probably take
place, and the inhabitants would not be suffered to retire in peace, but
be massacred on the spot. By permitting slavery in this district of
country, the number of slaves would not be increased--as if emigrants
from South Carolina or Georgia were to remove into this country they
would take their slaves with them; and he could see nothing in this
which could affect the philanthropy of his friend. The North-western
Territory is inhabited by a description of persons who have not been
accustomed to hold slaves, and therefore the restriction is agreeable to
them; but the territory in question will be settled by people from the
Southern States, who cannot cultivate the ground without slaves. He
hoped, however, the motion would be persisted in, and negatived by a
large majority.

Mr. D. FOSTER hoped, if the motion was not withdrawn, that a long debate
might not be had upon it.

Mr. THATCHER said he should not withdraw his motion, and the more it was
opposed, believing his cause to be good, the more obstinate he should
be in its support.

Mr. GILES wished to suggest a single idea. The present motion was
brought forward from the avowed motive of furthering the rights of man.
He did not know whether the tendency of it was calculated to ameliorate
the condition of the class of men alluded to; he believed not. On the
contrary, it was his opinion, that if the slaves of the Southern States
were permitted to go into this Western country, by lessening the number
in those States, and spreading them over a large surface of country,
there would be a greater probability of ameliorating their condition,
which could never be done whilst they were crowded together as they now
are in the Southern States.

Mr. HARTLEY said, he had himself intended to have brought forward an
amendment similar to the present, but, on inquiry, he found so many
difficulties in the way, that he was obliged to abandon it. He found it
would interfere with, and be a serious attack upon, the property of that
country. He was sorry it was not in the power of Congress to gratify the
wishes of philanthropists in this respect, by doing away slavery
altogether; but this could not be done at present, and as he believed
the present amendment, if carried, would be attended with bad effects,
he should vote against it.

Mr. GALLATIN said, if he saw any of the great inconveniences which were
foretold as likely to arise from this amendment, he should certainly
vote against it. He should be extremely averse to the adoption of any
principle which should either directly or indirectly lead to the
production of any commotion or insurgency in any State where there is a
great number of slaves. He did not see how any such effect could be
produced by the present motion; for, notwithstanding what had fallen
from the gentleman from South Carolina, it did not appear to him how a
regulation with respect to another Territory can affect the peace,
tranquillity, or property of any other State. How the forbidding of
slavery in the Mississippi Territory could produce a worse effect than
the same regulation in the North-western Territory, or in Pennsylvania,
or in several other States. The amendment, therefore, could not be
opposed on that ground; it must be on some other. Ought it to be
rejected on the ground of jurisdiction? Certainly not. The United States
intend to exercise jurisdiction over that Territory, and was there any
more reason for excepting this jurisdiction than any other? If we
establish this Government we expect it to be permanent; and if we
believe it is not conducive to the happiness of any people, but the
contrary, to legalize slavery, when we are about to form a constitution
for a Territory, its establishment ought to be prevented. But, if this
amendment is rejected, we establish slavery for the country, not only
during its temporary government, but for all the time it is a State;
for, by the constant admission of slaves, the number will increase to a
certain degree, and when the Territory shall become a State, the
interest of the holders will be such as to procure a constitution which
shall admit of slavery, and it will be thereby made permanent. Having
determined slavery was bad policy for the North-western Territory, he
saw no reason for a contrary determination with respect to this
Territory.

There was, then, only one solitary objection to the amendment, and that
might easily be obviated. It was with respect to the situation of the
people already settled there who are possessed of slaves. It would be
extremely impolitic and unjust to declare by ordinance that the people
settled there, either under the British, Spanish, or Georgia
governments, should be deprived of this kind of property; and if this
was the effect of the amendment, he would vote against it. Such a
regulation would be attended with the worst of consequences; but other
words may be easily introduced to guarantee the property of the persons
already settled there.

By the laws of the different States, Mr. G. said, the importation of
slaves is forbidden; but if this amendment does not obtain, he knew not
how slaves could be prevented from being introduced by the way of New
Orleans, by persons who are not citizens of the United States. He hoped,
therefore, the amendment would be agreed to.

Mr. NICHOLAS believed it not only to be the interest of the Southern
States, but of the United States, that this motion should be rejected.
They were to legislate for the whole of the Union, and ought to consult
the happiness of the whole. It was not for them to attempt to make a
particular spot of country more happy than all the rest. If it was a
misfortune to the Southern States to be overwhelmed with this kind of
property, he asked if it would not be doing service not only to them but
to the whole Union, to open this Western country, and by that means
spread the blacks over a large space, so that in time it might be safe
to carry into effect the plan which certain philanthropists have so much
at heart, and to which he had no objection, if it could be effected,
viz: the emancipation of this class of men? And when this country shall
have become sufficiently populous to become a State, and the Legislature
wishes to discountenance slavery, the increase of slaves may be
prevented, and such means taken to get rid of slavery altogether,
perhaps in conjunction with other parts of the United States, who by
that time may be in such a situation as to admit of it, as shall appear
prudent and proper.

Mr. THATCHER was of an opinion directly opposite to the gentleman who
had just sat down. Indeed, they seldom did agree in sentiment; to-day
they differed very widely. He believed the true interest and happiness
of the United States would be promoted by agreeing to this amendment;
because its tendency was to prevent the increase of an evil which was
acknowledged by the very gentlemen themselves who are owners of slaves.
Indeed the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. NICHOLAS) had frequently
declared in that House, that slavery was an evil of great magnitude. In
this respect they agreed in opinion; for he considered the existence of
slavery in the United States as the greatest of evils, an evil in direct
hostility to the principles of our Government; and he believed the
Government had the right to take all due measures to diminish and
destroy the evil, although in doing it they might injure the property of
some individuals; for he never could be brought to believe that an
individual can have a right in any thing which goes to the destruction
of our Government, viz: that he can have a right in a wrong. A property
in slaves is founded in wrong, and never can be right. He believed
Government must of necessity put a stop to this evil, and the sooner
they entered upon the business the better.

Mr. T. said, he honestly confessed he did not like to hear much said in
that House about the rights of man; because of late there had been much
quackery as to these rights. But, because these rights had been abused,
it did not follow that man has no rights. Where legislators are freely
chosen by the people, and frequently renewed; where a law cannot be
passed without affecting the interests of the persons who pass it, these
rights cannot greatly be abused; but, when we take upon us to legislate
for men against their will, it is proper enough to say something about
the rights of man, and to remind others, who are frequently heard
speaking of these rights, that by nature these enslaved men are entitled
to rights; and on that account it was, when he made this motion, that he
said he would make a motion touching the rights of man.

The reasons offered against the amendment by the gentleman from
Virginia, were a little singular. He contended that certain States were
overflowing with slaves, and if not colonized by opening this wide tract
of country to them, they would not be able to keep or manage them. He
always thought that colonizing these people tended to increase the race
far beyond what it would be when penned closely together.

Mr. GILES explained, by saying, that he had said nothing about
decreasing the number of blacks, but of spreading them over a larger
surface of country.

Mr. THATCHER said, he understood the gentleman's argument perfectly;
though he did not seem to understand it himself. The gentleman wished to
take the blacks away from places where they are huddled up together, and
spread them over this territory; they wished to get rid of them, and to
plague others with them. But they had them, and if they determined to
keep them, he wished only they should be plagued with them.

We are, said Mr. T. about to establish a Government for a new country.
Ours originated from, and was founded on the rights of man, upon which
ground we mean to protect it, and could there be any propriety in
emanating a government from ours, in which slavery is not only
tolerated, but sanctioned by law? Certainly not.

It was used as an argument against this amendment that this Territory
would be peopled by emigrants from the Southern States, who cannot work
for themselves; and on that account they must have slaves to work for
them. If this be true, it makes the people of the Southern States only
fit to superintend slaves. The language of this is, that these people
cannot subsist, except they have slaves to work for them.

For the reason he had stated, he hoped the amendment would be agreed to;
but if gentlemen thought those who at present hold slaves in the
Territory should be protected in them, he should not be opposed to their
holding them for a limited period.

The question was put and negatived, there being only 12 votes in its
favor.

Adjourned till Monday.[29]


MONDAY, March 26.

_Georgia Limits._

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY--SLAVERY.

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
bill for an amicable settlement of limits with the State of Georgia;
when, after striking out the words "claiming under it," in the fifth
section, and adding two new sections, the committee rose, the House
concurred in the amendments, and the bill was ordered to be read a third
time to-morrow.

One of the sections was moved by Mr. MILLEDGE, and was in the following
words:

      "That, from and after the establishment of the said
      government, the people of the aforesaid territory shall be
      entitled to and enjoy all and singular the rights,
      privileges, and advantages, granted to the people of the
      territory of the United States north-west of the river
      Ohio, in and by the aforesaid ordinance of the 13th day of
      July, in the year 1787, in as full and ample manner as the
      same are possessed and enjoyed by the people of the said
      last-mentioned territory."

The other, moved by Mr. HARPER, was to the following effect:

      "That, from and after the establishment of the aforesaid
      government, it shall not be lawful for any person to import
      or bring into the said territory, from any part or place
      without the limits of the United States, any slave or
      slaves, on pain of forfeiting three hundred dollars for
      every slave so brought, one-half to the United States, and
      the other half to the person who shall sue for the same;
      and every person so imported shall be entitled to and
      receive his or her freedom."

When this section was proposed, Mr. THATCHER moved to strike out the
words "without the limits of the United States," so as to have made it
unlawful to have brought any slave there; but the motion was not
seconded.


TUESDAY, March 27.

The bill from the Senate for an amicable settlement of limits with the
State of Georgia, was passed with amendments.

_Relations with France._

Mr. BALDWIN hoped the House would now resolve itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the state of the Union.

After a few observations from Mr. SEWALL against, and from Mr. NICHOLAS
in favor of going into the business of the Union, the House resolved
itself into a Committee of the Whole on that subject, Mr. DENT in the
chair; when the PRESIDENT'S Message of the 19th instant having been
read,

Mr. SPRIGG rose and observed, that every subject which came before the
Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union must necessarily be
important; but he believed there never was any more so than that which
was presented to them by the Message of the PRESIDENT which had been
read. Separated as we are from Europe by an immense ocean, it were to be
wished that we were equally separated from its political concerns, and
that we should have to do with them no farther than what relates to
commerce. This, unhappily, had not been the case, and there now existed
painful differences between this country and the French Republic. The
Message which had just been read was an evidence of this. In this
situation of things, it appeared necessary that the House should declare
whether this country was to have peace or war. This was a subject in
which the best interests of the Union were deeply concerned, and he
hoped the business would be met fully and fairly. The PRESIDENT had
informed the House that the present state of things is changed from what
it was when he prohibited the arming of merchant vessels, and that
therefore he had withdrawn that prohibition. Whether the order formerly
issued by the PRESIDENT for this purpose was in conformity to the spirit
or letter of the law, was not of importance now to inquire; the effect
had been beneficial, and in the same proportion as the prohibition had
been beneficial would be the evils of withdrawing it. In order to
ascertain the sense of the committee upon what measures may be proper to
be taken in the present crisis, he should offer the following
resolutions to their consideration:

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      under existing circumstances, it is not expedient for the
      United States to resort to war against the French Republic.

      _Resolved_, _&c._, That provision ought to be made by law
      for restricting the arming of merchant vessels, except in
      cases in which the practice was heretofore permitted.

      _Resolved_, _&c._, That adequate provision shall be made by
      law for the protection of our sea-coast, and for the
      internal defence of the country.

The first resolution being taken up,

Mr. SITGREAVES said that, for himself, he could not agree to the
proposed resolution. He did not mean, by this disagreement, to express
an opinion, that, at this moment, it was expedient to go to war with the
French Republic; but he thought the formal declaration of the contrary
sentiment was highly improper. The present is a period of menace and of
danger, of injury and outrage, and whatever might be the expediency of
the actual crisis, yet he had no hesitation to avow his belief that the
time is not far distant when war must be resorted to, or the national
honor and interest be abandoned. The conduct of France was calculated to
excite or justify no other expectation; and under such circumstances,
with such prospects, he could by no means consent to a formal
declaration of non-resistance. Besides, it is contrary to the usual and
ordinary course of Legislative proceeding, to pass mere negative
resolutions. The power of declaring war being vested in the Congress, so
long as the Congress shall forbear to declare war, it is a sufficient
expression of their sentiment that such a declaration would be
inexpedient: it is the only proper expression of such a sentiment; and
it can be no more right to resolve that we will not resort to war, than
it would be to pass an act to declare it would be inexpedient to make a
law for the regulation of bankruptcy or any other municipal concern.
However desirable, therefore, he admitted unanimity to be, at a time
like the present, he found it impossible to agree to the resolution.

Mr. BALDWIN did not agree with the gentleman last up; he thought the
resolution proper and free from exception. We were, he said,
twenty-three years ago, when we were about beginning the war with Great
Britain, in a situation similar to the present; but we were then without
many advantages which we now have. We were then without any common tie,
except what arose from common interest. No means existed of holding
conference together, but nature pointed out the course to be taken, and
representatives from different parts of the country were travelling at
the same moment to hold counsel together, and to speak their sentiments.
The gentleman who has just taken his seat apprehends war must be the
consequence of our present situation.

Mr. B. said this was the first time that the question of declaring war
had ever presented itself, and upon which, he believed, there might be a
difference of opinion as to the exercise of that power. He did not mean
to say wantonly that our constitution is imperfect; but every society
which has a written constitution must have recourse to it for direction.
It would be improper therefore to inquire what agency the Legislature
ought to have in the declaring of war; whether it is not proper that all
the circumstances relative to such a state should be before them. He did
not believe it was intended that this House should merely be the
instrument to give the sound of war; the subject seemed to be placed
wholly in the hands of the Legislature. This was the understanding of
the country when there was no Government in existence, and he believed
this was the meaning of the constitution. The country is now every where
agitating this question of peace or war, and he trusted they would not
be left to grope their way in the dark on this important question. The
PRESIDENT had informed the House that all hopes of a negotiation were at
an end. He was willing to take the information as it was given, without
going into the Cabinet of the Executive, and to take measures
accordingly. But when some persons declare that the present state of
things is already a state of war; that the country is going on in it;
that the die is cast, and that we have nothing to do but to go on with
it as well as we can, if the House does not believe this to be a true
position, this resolution ought to be agreed to, which went to say that
the House does not consider the present a state of war, but a state of
peace.

Mr. OTIS said, if the gentleman who made the motion would consent to use
the constitutional words on this occasion, he apprehended there would be
no difference of opinion. He meant that instead of saying "to resort to
war," to say "to declare war."

Mr. SPRIGG said, the resolution which he had proposed had not been the
work of a moment, and he did not feel disposed to make the alterations
proposed.

Mr. OTIS added, then he should propose to strike out the words "resort
to," and insert "declare," as he was of opinion with the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, (Mr. SITGREAVES,) that the only subjects fit for
discussion were active measures, and that it was not regular to declare
when they would not do a thing.

Mr. PINCKNEY was desirous of settling this motion by the previous
question; but he was informed by the Chair that such a motion would not
be in order in a Committee of the Whole.

Mr. DAYTON (the Speaker) said, that he hoped his friend from
Massachusetts would withdraw the motion he had just offered, in order to
make room for one he had to offer, which would render the first
resolution more general, more innocent, and yet equally or more
efficacious, and would test the sincerity of the advocates of that
resolution as to their professed anxiety for the maintenance of peace.
Upon Mr. OTIS withdrawing his motion, Mr. D. moved to strike out the
words "against the French Republic" and declared that although he deemed
the whole resolution unnecessary, and considered it as not naturally
growing out of the PRESIDENT'S Message, which did not call upon us to
declare or make war, yet as it must be the intention of the mover, or of
some other member to follow it up with like declarations in relation to
all other nations with whom the United States had any intercourse,
provided they acted consistently, he thought it better to make the
resolution a general one, even if it should be afterwards negatived. He,
for himself, was as ready to say that, under existing circumstances, it
was as expedient for the United States to go to war with any other
nation as with the French Republic. He saw no reason why that
particular power should be singled out in the manner proposed; and as he
was for cultivating peace, not with one only, but with all the nations
of the world, he was willing so to declare his disposition, if any
declaration was proper on the occasion. It was also to be observed, that
it could not with propriety be objected against the amendment that there
was no other nation with whom we were in danger of entering into
hostility, for the tables of the House had been loaded with
communications relative to the encroachments and unreasonable demands of
another country, which had occasioned an apprehension that the United
States would be driven to the necessity of a war in order to obtain
possession of its own territory. If, therefore, gentlemen were anxious
to cultivate harmony with the French only, then the resolution as first
moved, was proper for their adoption; but if the preservation of peace
with all was their real object, then he trusted that the amendment could
not with propriety be rejected by those gentlemen who had introduced and
advocated a proposition the utility of which, under any modification, he
owned for himself, he could not discern, although he was willing to
render it as unexceptionable as possible before it was decided upon.

Mr. SPRIGG informed the gentleman from New Jersey that the reason why
the French Republic was inserted in the resolution was because it was
founded on the Message of the PRESIDENT, which related solely to the
French Republic. For his part, he was not desirous of war with any power
on earth.

Mr. HARPER seconded the motion of the gentleman from New Jersey, because
he thought it would be better in that shape. He had no particular
objection to the resolution as proposed, only that he thought it a
resolution about nothing; but as it might gratify the mover and some
others, he should not object to it. He was not himself disposed for war,
but for peace, while peace could be preserved. But he never said, and
would not say, that war was the worst thing which could happen to this
country; he thought submission to the aggressions of a foreign power
infinitely worse. If gentlemen meant by agreeing to this resolution, to
prevent the country from being put into a state of defence; if they
meant by it to effect an entering wedge to submission, he trusted they
would find themselves mistaken; for though he believed the true interest
of the country lay in peace, yet he was not disposed to recede from any
measures which he thought proper through fear of war. Or did gentlemen
intend, by this question of peace or war, to enlist the popular
prejudices in favor of peace, in order to prevent proper measures being
taken for the defence of the country? If this was their view he should
be the first to strip off the disguise. He trusted that this was not the
case, as he saw it connected with another resolution which proposed the
taking of measures for the defence of the country. The question at
present, said Mr. H., is not a question of war, but of defence; and no
two questions are more distinct. If gentlemen confound these two
questions, and are determined to take no measures of defence lest they
should lead to war, let them say so. He believed, however, the
distinction was well understood by the American people.

Mr. GILES believed this the proper time to declare whether the country
should remain in peace or go to war. He thought the resolution proper as
it stood, because founded on the Message of the PRESIDENT, in which the
French Republic is only named. There was a part of that Message, he
said, which, in his opinion, amounted to a declaration of war. The
PRESIDENT tells the House, "that the situation of things is materially
changed since he issued his order to prevent the arming of merchant
vessels." As far as he understood the situation of the United States at
that time, it was a state of neutrality. If that state is changed, and
the present is not a state of neutrality, he wished to know what is. He
knew only of two states, a state of neutrality and a state of war; he
knew of no mongrel state between them. Therefore, if the PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, could declare war, we are now in war. Believing,
however, that Congress had alone the power to declare war, he thought it
time to declare what the state of the nation is. He did not know whether
the object might not be answered by the resolution being general, as he
was and always had been (notwithstanding insinuations to the contrary)
against war with any nation upon the earth. He looked upon it as the
greatest calamity which could befal any nation; and whatever may be the
phantoms raised in perspective of national honor and glory in such a
state, they will, in the end, all prove fallacious. He believed no
nation ought to go to war except when attacked; and this kind of war he
should be as ready to meet as any one. Mr. G. said, gentlemen were
continually speaking of the degraded state of the nation, when their own
measures had led to it. (Mr. HARPER denied that he had ever said the
nation was in a degraded state.) Mr. G. was not sure that he had said
it, but he believed he had frequently heard it. He believed we were in a
state which required the utmost vigor; but he thought every measure
should be avoided which might involve the country in war. For if we were
to go to war with the French at present, he knew not what ever could
take place which could produce peace; it must be a war of extermination.
Mr. G. did not know that the present question was very important; but
believing it strictly conformable to the Message of the PRESIDENT, he
should be in favor of it as it stood, and against the amendment.

Mr. NICHOLAS considered this amendment as defeating the resolution. Was
there nothing, he asked, which called for a declaration of the kind
proposed? Was it not clear to every one that the country was going fast
into a state of war, and (in the words of Mr. SITGREAVES) was it not to
be expected? Ought not the Legislature then, (who alone have the power
of declaring war,) to determine the state of the country, and say
whether they mean to go immediately to war or not? He thought the
necessity of the resolution was sufficiently evident, by the motion
which had been made to change the words from "resort to war," to declare
war; in the one case the mischief was met, whilst the other meant
nothing. And if gentlemen were ready to say we were not prepared to
declare war, and at the same were not ready to say it is not expedient
to resort to war, it proved that they thought war might be made without
being declared. He asked whether gentlemen did not believe the Executive
had taken measures which would lead to war? And that if he were at
liberty to act upon a change of circumstances between this country and
others, Congress were not brought into a situation in which they had no
choice? Many discussions had heretofore taken place on the constitution,
but he had never heard it doubted that Congress had the power over the
progress of what led to war, as well as the power of declaring war; but
if the PRESIDENT could take the measures which he had taken, with
respect to arming merchant vessels, he, and not Congress, had the power
of making war. He asked whether, when report went so far as to speak of
an alliance, offensive and defensive, with a foreign country, it was not
time to come to a declaration on the subject? Suppose such an alliance
was formed, would it not be said that Congress are bound to carry it
into effect? He knew it would, though he should resist the doctrine. Mr.
N. said, he should be as unwilling to submit to any foreign country as
the gentleman from South Carolina; but he could not, like that
gentleman, say he was not afraid of war. I am, said he, afraid of it.
This country affords me all the happiness I can wish or hope for, and I
know war will be destructive to it. What was the difference between
himself and that gentleman in this respect, he could not tell; it was to
him surprising that any gentleman should be without fear as to the
mischiefs of war. He was of opinion that the step taken by the
PRESIDENT, with respect to merchant vessels, went to declare that we
rested our cause on arms, which was not calculated to produce any good
effect in our favor. He hoped the amendment would not be agreed to; if
it was, he should vote against the resolution itself; and he did not
think the gentleman from New Jersey, when he read the Message of the
PRESIDENT, could think there was as much danger of a war with any other
country as with the French Republic.

Mr. BROOKS agreed with the gentleman who brought forward this
resolution, so far as it declares we are not prepared to resort to war.
He believed no nation or man who had common understanding could be fond
of war. The people of this country have yet the recollection of the
fatal effects of the late war. But there are two kinds of war,
offensive and defensive. He wished gentlemen to distinguish between
them; for though he was ready to declare against offensive war, and to
submit to small injuries rather than make defensive war; yet he was not
willing to say he should not be ready to defend his country against the
attack of any foreign power whatever. He hoped he should be believed in
this declaration, as he had formerly been employed in the defence of it;
and if gentlemen meant that though foreign nations attempt to invade our
territory, and to reduce us again to the colonies of a foreign power,
they would not repel them, he could not join them in opinion. And though
he should vote for the resolution as moved to be amended, he should feel
himself at perfect liberty to defend his country in case of attack. He
wondered the gentleman from Virginia should object to vote for the
resolution, because it was general, as it included the French Republic
as well as all other nations.

Mr. RUTLEDGE trusted the sentiments which the gentleman from New York
had expressed would govern the committee, and that all were ready to
say, that though we value the blessings of peace, yet we are ready to
resist insult and injury from whatever quarter they come. He hoped this
would be the conduct of this country; and notwithstanding much had been
heard about British parties and French parties, that all would unite in
this determination. This being his opinion, he should vote for the
amendment; and he hoped gentlemen would be satisfied with this
declaration, and that no more would be heard of a party in the House in
favor of war. Though he meant to vote for the resolution, he thought it
unnecessary; but in these days of jealousy and suspicion, if he were not
to vote for it, he should expect to be told he was in favor of war.

Gentlemen asked whether war is not approaching? And whether the
Executive is not hastening it? To the latter question he would answer in
the negative; with respect to the other, he could not answer, as it
depended on France, and so versatile and uncertain is every thing in
that country, that no dependence can be had upon it. Mr. R. said, at the
last session, when we had no intercourse with France, he thought it
necessary we should have it: that intercourse had proved ineffectual;
and though he sincerely wished for peace, yet he saw something in the
conduct of France which almost precluded hope.

The gentleman from Virginia had said, that this country had frequently
been stated as in a degraded state. He did not recollect to have made
the declaration, but this was his opinion. When our national rights had
been violated; when our commerce had been depredated; when the vessels
of belligerent powers, which had sought an asylum in our waters, had
been plundered and burnt, he thought it necessary to go into measures of
defence. He thought our frigates ought not to have remained at the
wharves; that our extensive sea-coast on which is much wealth, should
not be unprotected: he thought our seaports, the principal depots of our
revenue, ought to have been fortified. He joined his friends in their
attempts to have carried these measures, and, when they failed, he could
not help thinking his country was in a degraded state and that she had
lost the spirit which animated her in the year 1775. He hoped, however,
that now, when France had gone to the lengths which she has gone to,
that there would have been only one sentiment as to the propriety of the
measures formerly proposed. But though he thought the nation in a
degraded state, he was not in favor of war. He believed the citizens of
this country were not for it. He believed the Government was averse to
war; and that no part of it was more so than the Executive. War would be
a loss to this country; and to no individual more than the Executive. He
is no warrior, and, consequently, war has no laurels in store for him.

The gentleman from Virginia has spoken of war as having something
dazzling in perspective; something which flattered pride and ambition.
But did the gentleman suppose that a war with France could be flattering
to pride or ambition? It could not; it would be a war of prudence; we
must shut ourselves up, and act on the defensive, and say, "when reason
returns, when an ebb shall take place in the affairs of France, when her
flow of victories shall be over, she will do us justice." In the mean
time, we must defend ourselves. Mr. R. repeated, that he did not believe
any man in that House could wish for war; when he looked around him and
saw gentlemen whose wounds are yet sore from former service; when he saw
them voting for measures of defence, he could not believe, nor could any
believe, that they wished to plunge the country in war. It would sooner
be believed that gentlemen who made the charges were mistaken.

Mr. SEWALL was opposed to the proposition as it now stood, and hoped it
would be amended. What effect it would then have, he left those to judge
who introduced it. Mr. S. said, he and those who, on all questions of
defence, had voted with him, had been endeavoring for some time to go
into some measures of that kind, and to determine whether these measures
should be confined to our own limits or be extended to the ocean. These
measures ought now to be decided upon, as this is a moment in which our
commerce is depredated upon in a most unprecedented manner. We are now,
said he, called upon to consider the hazards of our situation. [Mr. S.
then quoted a part of the PRESIDENT'S Message, as to the situation of
our affairs in France, and as to the decree which was proposed
respecting the taking of English goods on board of neutral vessels, and
the carrying of which was declared to make neutral vessels good prizes.]
This last regulation, Mr. S. said, was a direct violation of the law of
nations, and amounted to a declaration of war on the part of France
against this country. But, instead of making any defence, gentlemen call
upon the committee to declare we are not disposed to resort to war
against the French Republic; so that, after we have been injured and
abused, and denied the common rights of humanity, we are not to
complain, but make a declaration that we will not go to war. Was then,
he asked, a question of war a card of politeness? Did a nation ever make
a declaration that it was not at war? It could not say so, except it
were in so degraded a state that it had no rights capable of injury. To
say we are not at war was to say no more than it is light when the sun
shines; but to call upon the committee to say so at this time, was to
degrade the nation from its independence, and below its character. The
present state of things, Mr. S. said, ought to be considered as a state
of war, not declared by us, but against us, by the French Republic; and
if we want spirit to defend ourselves, let us not say so. We may refrain
from acting, but let us not say we receive injuries with thankfulness.
But this proposition goes still further. In a moment of public danger,
it goes to divide and separate this House from the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES. The gentleman from Virginia had well explained this
resolution, when he said, it was intended to interrupt the views of the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. That gentleman considered the Message of
the PRESIDENT as a declaration of war, and this resolution was to be in
contradiction to it. If this was the sense in which it was to be
understood, it was false in point of fact; for the PRESIDENT had neither
declared war nor called upon Congress to declare war; no such sentiment
could be found in the Message. To agree to the proposition as it stands,
would be to give countenance to the assertion of the French Government,
that we are a people divided from our Government; but, taking it with
the amendment, he looked upon it as a harmless thing. Mr. S. concluded,
by saying, that he considered the conduct of France in the light of war.
How far we would resent it, was the question; whether offensively or
defensively. He was in favor of defensive measures, as we are not equal
to offensive measures, (he wished to God we were.) It was our weakness,
and the division which had appeared in our councils, that had invited
these attacks. He trusted they should now unite and repel them.

Mr. GALLATIN said, before the speech of the gentleman who had just sat
down, he could not discover what was the meaning of the amendment, to
strike out the words "against the French Republic," as, when the House
were in a Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union for
considering the late Message of the PRESIDENT, the resolution was
perfectly consonant. Besides, we have no danger to apprehend from any
other power, since our dispute is settled with Spain. The intention of
the amendment was evidently to render the resolution as unmeaning as
possible.

Every gentleman who had spoken on this subject, had agreed that war is
not a desirable object for the United States. He gave them credit for
the assertion. But this was not the question; but whether we are
prepared to resort to war under existing circumstances. It is a question
of fact. Mr. G. took notice of the different modes which had been
attempted to defeat the resolution; but, though the present amendment
were agreed to, he should still vote in favor of the resolution; for it
would be effectual, in some degree, as it could only apply to the French
nation, though it was not so expressed.

Mr. G. believed the United States had arrived at a crisis at which a
stand ought to be made, in which it was necessary for Congress to say
whether they will resort to war or preserve peace. He was led to this
conclusion from a review of the conduct of France, and of the late
Message of the PRESIDENT.

In respect to France, we know, that some time ago, she declared our
treaty with her to be at an end; though not in words, the result was to
deprive us of the advantages derived from that treaty. In the next
place, she dismissed our Minister Plenipotentiary. Under these
circumstances, the PRESIDENT called the extraordinary session of
Congress, and when met together, after having related the reasons which
induced this call, he concluded with saying, "that it was his sincere
desire to preserve peace and friendship with all nations, and believing
that neither the honor nor the interest of the United States absolutely
forbade the repetition of advances for securing these desirable objects,
he should not fail to promote and accelerate an accommodation," &c. The
PRESIDENT accordingly sent Envoys to France, and the result of the
embassy was given to Congress in the last Message, which was now under
consideration, in which he says, "the object of the mission cannot be
accomplished on terms compatible with the safety, honor, or the
essential interests of the nation." The people of the United States are
therefore informed, that negotiations are at an end, and that we cannot
obtain redress for wrongs, but may expect a continuation of captures, in
consequence of the decree which it was supposed was passed, for seizing
all neutral vessels with British property, manufactures, or produce, on
board. Mr. G. said, he differed in opinion from the gentleman last up,
that this was a declaration of war. He allowed it would be justifiable
ground of war for this country, and that, on this account, it was
necessary to agree to, or reject the present proposition, in order to
determine the ground intended to be taken. For, though there may be
justifiable cause for war, if it is not our interest to go to war, the
resolution will be agreed to.

There was another reason why this resolution ought to be now decided,
which arose from the conduct of our Executive. He has declared that a
change of circumstances has taken place which has occasioned him to
withdraw his order forbidding merchant vessels to arm; which amounts to
this, that he now permits vessels of the United States to use means of
defence against any attack which may be made upon them. Mr. G. thought
it necessary, therefore, to declare, whether we were to pursue measures
of war or peace. Before measures are taken which will lead to war, the
House ought to decide whether it is their intention at present to go to
war.

The gentleman from New York had spoken of the difference between
offensive and defensive war. This related to the motives, more than to
the manner, of carrying on war; because when war is once entered into,
though it may be at first defensive, it cannot remain so. It would be
ridiculous, for instance, to say, that our frigates should prevent our
vessels from being taken; but that they should not take French
privateers.

But it was said, if the resolution was agreed to, it would confirm the
opinion which had been held that Congress and the Executive were divided
in opinion. The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. SEWALL) told the House
that the question was war or peace; that the conduct of France was a
declaration of war, yet as the PRESIDENT had not called upon Congress to
go to war, they ought not to declare that it is not expedient to resort
to war. But if it be assumed as a principle, which that gentleman
asserts, that the conduct of the French is a declaration of war, and the
PRESIDENT has told us we are in war, the resolution could not be
improper. Or if his other principle be assumed, that the information of
the PRESIDENT does not amount to war, then an agreement to the
resolution would show that Congress concurred with him in opinion, that
it is not proper at present to resort to war. So that in both cases, the
resolution is proper.

Mr. G. said he was precluded by the amendment from going into the merits
of the resolution. His arguments went to show the propriety of agreeing
to it in one way or other. Nor did he mean to take any notice of what
had been said about a division of opinion in our councils having invited
the insults and injuries which France had committed against this
country. If he were to do this, he must have recourse to recrimination,
which he did not wish. He wished rather to take a serious view of our
present situation, and either meet it by war, or by measures which shall
avoid war. On both sides are difficulties; but the difficulties and
inconveniences of both ought to be weighed, and the least taken; and,
having determined, measures ought to be pursued accordingly. He did not
wish to adopt the resolution as proposed to be amended, and then go on
and act directly contrary to it. He thought it best to meet the
resolution at once, and say whether we are determined on war or peace.
If we go to war, we must expect to meet all the expense and evils of
such a state; and if we remain at peace, we must, in a certain degree,
_submit_. He meant to say, that we must submit to have a number of our
vessels taken. But whether we shall have more taken in adopting one
course than the other, he left to gentlemen to determine. He thought the
submission he had mentioned, very different from the submission which
had been spoken of by the gentleman from South Carolina, and others.

Mr. G. concluded, by observing, that the conduct of France must tend to
destroy that influence which gentlemen had so often complained of as
existing in this country. Indeed, he was convinced that at the
commencement of her revolution there was a great enthusiasm amongst our
citizens in favor of her cause, which naturally arose from their having
been engaged in a similar contest; but he believed these feelings had
been greatly diminished by her late conduct towards this country. He
thought, therefore, that whether we engaged in war, or remained in a
state of peace, much need not be apprehended from the influence of
France in our councils. The business had come to a mere matter of
calculation, as to what course will be best to be taken for the interest
and happiness of the country. If he could separate defensive from
offensive war at sea, he should be in favor of it; but he could not make
the distinction, and therefore he should be in favor of pursuing
measures of peace.

Several persons rose, but, being about three o'clock, a motion was made
for the committee to rise, which was negatived--46 to 44.

Mr. DANA did not conceive that the construction of language given by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, was to be taken as true, without
examination. He trusted not. The gentleman stated the question to be
peace or war; he could not conceive it to be such. It was unfortunate
that, in this important crisis, the House should be engaged, like a set
of rhetoricians, in disputing the meaning of words. Indeed, the decision
on the present motion, he thought wholly unimportant.

The gentleman last up had said there was no distinction between
offensive and defensive war, and that he was, therefore, opposed to
either. Mr. D. thought the distinction clear; offensive war, is when an
attack is made upon another; and defensive, when a nation has recourse
to war, merely for self-defence. But there was another state of things
which could not have the name of war, which was to have recourse to
measures of defence; to be prepared in cases of attack. It was clear, by
the law of nations, that to prepare for defence, was not to commit
hostility. To say that to take measure of defence is hostility, was a
new definition, and it was the mighty discovery of the gentleman from
Pennsylvania.

Did gentlemen mean that if we should make use of force against lawless
violence, it is war? If not, what did all that had been said amount to?
He thought the proposition perfectly nugatory.

But the gentleman said, that his friend from Massachusetts had said,
that France had already declared war against us, and that, therefore, we
must resort to war. For his part, he did not know what gentlemen meant
by resorting to war. If they had adopted terms which had any legal
meaning, he could have understood them, but the present might mean every
thing, or nothing. If it meant any thing, it meant taking active
measures against France in the first instance. He was not only ready to
say he would not consent to do this with respect to France, but with
respect to every other nation.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania, and two gentlemen from Virginia, had
said that the Message of the PRESIDENT amounted to a declaration that we
were now in war. This idea he thought was stated very incorrectly. They
did not seem to have understood the meaning of the language of the
PRESIDENT. The state of things which existed at the time orders were
issued to prevent the arming of merchant vessels was essentially
different from the present; then there was an evident disposition in the
owners of vessels to cruise against a foreign belligerent nation, and
the order was issued to prevent attack and plunder; but the desire to
arm at present is for the purpose of defence merely, and not to cruise
or plunder. There is a law forbidding vessels to arm for the purpose of
cruising; but none forbidding merchants to arm in their own defence.
This was the fair construction, he believed, of the meaning of the
PRESIDENT.

Mr. OTIS observed, that the opposers of this amendment could assign no
better reason for declaring a desire to keep peace with the French
Republic, to the exclusion of other nations, than their own construction
of the PRESIDENT'S last Message, which they considered as directed
against that Republic only; but the House having resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union, the resolution on the
table had no greater relation to that Message than to any former Speech
or Message, or to the affairs of the Union at large. If it was intended
as an answer to the Message, it should be moved in that form; but unless
it was in a particular manner connected with it, the public could not
connect it more naturally with this Message, than the Speech delivered
at the opening of the session. The House had been heretofore informed,
that France was not the only country with which a rupture was to be
apprehended. Spain might be considered, until lately, as having actually
invaded our territory; and though the presumption at present was, that
the causes of contention with that country were removed, yet they were
not officially informed of that fact, and without such information it
was not less proper to express their desire of maintaining peace with
Spain than with other countries. Again, gentlemen had often intimated
that a war with France would involve us in a war with the nations in
alliance with her. It was therefore inexpedient to show a contempt or
indifference for them, by leaving them out of our pacific manifesto.

He considered the Message in a different view from many gentlemen. But
admitting, for the sake of argument, that the PRESIDENT had declared an
opinion upon the facts stated by him, that war was inevitable; gentlemen
must consider the fact to be true; if they doubted it, they ought to
demand information. How would this resolution then stand? In reply to
assurances that negotiation had failed; that our Commissioners were
treated with neglect and contempt; that letters of marque and reprisal
were issued against our vessels; and that the most hostile appearances
were discernible on the part of France; it was proposed to declare, that
with them, and them only, it was inexpedient to resort to war. Such a
proposal would hardly be found in the annals of the most humble and
degraded nation.

He disapproved of the resolution, though he should vote for the
amendment, and would not, on the present occasion, follow gentlemen who
had gone at large into the merits of the resolution. Upon the extent of
the defensive measures proposed by gentlemen, his feelings inclined him
to enlarge; but this discussion would be more pertinent upon some other
question. He would merely hint, that actual invasion might not be the
worst calamity to this country. He could conceive of a partial invasion
of our territory that would be much less injurious, and attended with
much less loss than the total ruin of our commerce.

The call for the committee to rise being repeated,

Mr. N. SMITH hoped gentlemen would be satisfied to take the question,
which he thought very unimportant. The time consumed in discussing it
was, however, important, as other concerns called for attention. He knew
there were gentlemen who chose rather to address the people of the
United States than to legislate. He thought it better to legislate, than
to preach to the people. He looked upon the present resolution as a text
from which it was intended to alarm the people with respect to war, and
he wished not to indulge gentlemen in their design. He wished the
question to be taken for another reason. It was suggested by the
gentleman from Virginia, that the Message of the PRESIDENT was
considered by the people as a declaration of war, and that reports were
in circulation, that a treaty, offensive and defensive, was concluded
with Great Britain. After this, he would call the attention of the
committee to the resolution, which was, in effect, to say, we must
interfere, or war will be brought upon the country. Did not this go to
sanction a report which was as false and malignant as even jacobinism
could invent? It did; and he hoped, they would not so far sanction the
report, as to let the motion lie before them undecided.

Mr. DAYTON hoped the committee would rise. The gentleman last up began
with saying the proposition was of no importance; but, before he sat
down, showed that he thought differently. Mr. D. thought it was of
importance that the committee should come to a right decision upon it,
and say whether it ought to be agreed to in general terms, or rejected.

Mr. N. SMITH explained.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS thought the question trifling, and hoped a decision
would be had upon it.

Mr. GILES said, the question was a question of peace or war, and yet
gentlemen call it trifling. He did not mean to alarm the people of the
United States, but he wished them to understand their situation. He
acknowledged he was himself much alarmed. Gentlemen were willing to
engage in defensive, but not in offensive war; but when war was once
begun it would not be in the power of the United States to keep it
within the character of defensive war. Indeed the gentleman from
Massachusetts, when he spoke of defensive war, confessed our inability
for offensive war, and uttered a prayer to the Supreme Being that we
were able to engage offensively; and where, he asked, with such
sentiments, is the difference between offensive and defensive war? He
could see none; he deprecated war of every kind.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS hoped the question would be taken. As he before stated,
he thought it trifling, and the debate upon it only calculated to alarm
the people, which seemed to be the object of gentlemen. If the question
was not taken before they adjourned, much debate would be had, and much
time spent to very little purpose. He thought it very extraordinary, as
no one was found to bring forward a resolution to declare war, that a
gentleman would introduce a resolution of its being inexpedient so to
do. He was persuaded that this negative mode of proceeding was
calculated to draw on a debate, to set the people against the Executive.
Time, he said, was precious; they had sat near five months and done but
little, much remained to be done, and as all had declared their aversion
to a war, the people should be undeceived. He had himself seen gentlemen
write upon the late Message of the PRESIDENT, for the purpose of sending
to their constituents, "_A war message against France_."

Mr. MACON wished the gentleman would name who had thus written.

A call of order took place: and a motion was made for the committee to
rise, and carried.


WEDNESDAY, March 28.

_Relations with France._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, when the amendment to the first of Mr. SPRIGG'S
propositions, as to the inexpediency, under existing circumstances, of
resorting to war against the French Republic, being under
consideration; which amendment is to strike out the words "French
Republic,"

Mr. PINCKNEY rose and said, he was in favor of the amendment, because it
tended to make what he thought an improper proposition, in some degree,
nugatory; for he believed to agree to the resolution without it, would
be prejudicial to the interest and welfare of the country, as he did not
think the period had arrived which called for a decision on measures of
war or peace. If such a declaration had been necessary, he should have
expected it to come from gentlemen in favor of a war, declaring, that it
is expedient to go to war, as it was a very uncommon thing to declare we
will not do a thing. His strongest reason against coming to this
resolution, however, was, that at this period the House had not
sufficient information concerning the whole of this business, to enable
them to form a correct judgment upon it. The PRESIDENT told the House,
indeed, that he had little hope of a favorable termination of the
negotiation, but they knew nothing of the train of the negotiation, or
of the circumstances attending it. They knew that our Commissioners had
not been received; but they had not sufficient information as to the
manner in which they had been treated, to enable them to come to the
decision proposed.

The gentleman who proposed the resolution, said it was time to come
forward and declare whether we will have peace or war. Would to God,
said Mr. P., it was in our power, by any such declaration, to avert war,
or maintain peace; but he believed this did not depend upon any
declaration of ours. In questions of war there were always two parties,
one of whom was generally the aggressor, and the other generally
passive. In the present case, he considered this country as the passive
party, and, therefore, any declaration on our part would have little
effect. We know that individuals or nations induced to pursue measures
from interest or passion, are not easily diverted from their purpose. If
the French are actuated by either of these motives, no declaration of
ours will prevent the calamity. Such a proposition would rather
accelerate than prevent the evil. If our declarations could have
availed, they have not been wanting. From the first period of a
misunderstanding between the two countries, declarations have been made
deprecating war in general terms, but particularly with that nation. A
Minister Plenipotentiary had been sent to explain the views of this
Government, and to remove any jealousies which might exist, and to make
such specific propositions as were thought necessary; but our Minister
was rejected without a hearing. The next measure was, to send special
Commissioners, in order to settle our differences and avert the calamity
of war. We have, therefore, made sufficient declarations of our pacific
intentions. Indeed, he thought too much had been rested on these
declarations, as nothing had been done for our defence. When we looked
at our seaports, and saw their defenceless condition, he thought it
evident sufficient attention had not been paid to them, knowing that war
might, at least, be a possible event.

This resolution differed exceedingly from any thing which took place
when we had a misunderstanding with England in 1794. At that time, when
England issued her extraordinary Order of the 4th of November, and our
commerce was depredated upon, measures were spoken of for countervailing
the injuries which our citizens experienced, but no proposition like the
present was produced. We are now aggrieved and injured in a most
extraordinary manner, but we say we will not go to war. On a former
occasion he had heard of a variety of restrictive regulations, proposed
with a view of restraining the injuries committed upon us, and to bring
Great Britain to reason; and he did expect something similar would have
been proposed on the present occasion, but nothing of the kind had
appeared. It was true we had not so great hold of the French nation as
of the British, in this respect, but we had some; and he believed
measures might be taken which would induce the nation to hear reason.
But, instead of this, it was proposed that we should say, we have been
injured and aggrieved; but we will not oppose you, we will not go to war
with you.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) had gone further than
perhaps the resolution on the table would warrant. He says, the adoption
of this resolution will go to prevent the taking of any measures which
may, in their tendency, lead to war. If gentlemen meant by this, that it
was to prevent any measures being taken for the protection of our
commerce, the adoption of the resolution would not only declare that we
will not go to war, but that we will not take any measures for the
defence of our property. It appeared to him that that gentleman had
himself given the best reasons for modifying this resolution, so as to
make it as little mischievous as possible. For he had told the committee
that France had set at naught her treaty with us; but though they have
done this, said Mr. P., they have endeavored to justify their
depredations, by insisting that, according to that treaty, it was
necessary for vessels to carry a _rôle d'equipage_. Mr. P. added, there
was another Order of the French Government which was so contrary to
right, so cruel in its consequences, so degrading to this country, and
so inhuman in its tendency, that he could not avoid noticing it. It was
the decree which declares that every American citizen found on board the
privateer of an enemy, shall be considered and treated as a pirate. They
pretended to found this Order on our treaty with Great Britain; but he
wished gentlemen who thought it justifiable, to turn to that treaty, and
see whether there was any thing there which countenanced so violent a
measure. But this is not all, the gentleman from Pennsylvania allowed
that a decree had lately been passed which violates all the laws of
neutral nations, viz; that if the property, manufactures, or produce,
of an enemy be found on board a neutral vessel, it shall be good prize.
Our Ministers, also, who were commissioned to conciliate, and even to
make concessions, though they had been in Paris three months, cap in
hand, had not been able to get a hearing. Under all these grievances,
what, said he, are we called upon to do? He should not have been
surprised if some one, fired with the injuries we have received, had
brought forward a proposition for war. But, instead of this, smarting as
we are under injuries, our commerce bleeding at every pore, and our
country deeply humiliated, we are called upon to say: You have done
every thing to injure, insult, and degrade us, but we have deserved it:
we will do nothing to oppose you. Though God and nature have given us
power, we will not go to war with you, neither on the present occasion,
nor on any other, whatever injury you may commit upon us.

However humiliating our conduct might be, he repeated, it would have no
effect upon that nation. He did not wish to animadvert upon the conduct
of any country; but there was one instance of the treatment which the
French Republic has exhibited to an independent State, which he could
not help noticing. It was in respect to Venice, which would show, that
no humiliation, no concession, would avert the calamity which threatens
us, if the rulers of the country are determined upon war. If he was not
misinformed, the circumstances of the case were as follows: The
Venetians were at peace, and endeavoring to pursue a line of neutrality.
A tumult arose in one of their towns, and the populace did, in a
barbarous and most unjustifiable manner, massacre a number of French
soldiers. This was an injury which called for and deserved atonement. A
retaliation took place fully commensurate with the crime. The Venetians
made every concession in their power. But the French commander was not
satisfied; he took vengeance upon them by overturning their
Government--a Government which had stood the test of five hundred years.
He should have supposed that the French would now have been satisfied;
but the matter did not stop here. The Government being overturned, the
people were promised a free Government, and an amelioration of their
condition. They were proceeding in the establishment of a Government;
but, when the treaty came to be made between the French Republic and the
Emperor, he supposed it was thought to be for the interest of that
Republic to sacrifice a part of this territory, and to give it up to the
Emperor, to take a part to themselves, and to annex another part to the
Cisalpine Republic. This was done; and he believed the very part which
had committed the offence against the French Government, had been
rewarded by being joined to a free Government.

This division of the Venetian territory was not the work of a young
officer, elated by victory and conquest, or enraged by the treatment
which his soldiers had received. The French Directory had come forward,
and, by their decree, had applauded the whole conduct of their General
in the most unqualified terms, particularly as to Venice and Genoa. He
would not take up the time of the committee by citing the conduct of the
French towards the latter Republic. The case of Venice was sufficient to
show how little was to be expected from a humiliating conduct.

Mr. GILES thought the gentleman who had just sat down had been less
correct in his statements than he usually was. He would allude
particularly to one instance. That gentleman says, whatever aggressions
and insults may be heaped upon us, the supporters of the resolution will
not go to war. The proposition held a directly contrary language. It
says: "That, under present circumstances, the United States deem it
advisable to remain in a state of peace." [Mr. PINCKNEY said the reason
why he had made this remark was, that yesterday the gentleman himself
had said, he should not be for going to war, unless the country was
invaded. He, therefore, connected the resolution and this declaration
together.] Mr. G. said, he still repeated the same thing; that we ought
not to resort to war beyond the limits of the United States. But he drew
a contrary inference from this, from that which that gentleman had
drawn, because he had accompanied the declaration with another, that he
was perfectly ready to prepare to that extent for defence. He would
explain the grounds of this opinion. Within our own limits we are
capable of making something like exertion, and there, he believed,
exertions might be made to advantage. Indeed, one of the propositions,
which is connected with the present, goes to this purpose, and therefore
with what propriety could the gentleman say, he and those who were of
his opinion were not for preparing for defence till the enemy is at the
door? Nor could he see any thing like humiliation in this. Nay, he was
convinced, if we carried our preparations for defence beyond our own
limits, instead of gaining glory or honor, we shall meet with nothing
but disgrace, as we are not prepared to make a defence at sea. Indeed,
the moment we get beyond our jurisdictional line, defence will become
offence, because there will be no evidence by which it can be
ascertained by whom the attack commenced. It would, therefore, be unwise
to permit ourselves to be placed in this situation. If any object was to
be effected by going out to sea, it must be the protection of our
commerce with Great Britain; but it was known that the two acts of the
British Parliament which took place in January last, if peace continues,
may take that trade in a great measure from us. He did not think,
therefore, that this was a sufficient object for which to incur so much
risk.

At present, said Mr. G. there is a pretty general opinion in the country
(and he thought there was much ground for the opinion) that there is a
disposition in a part of this House, and in part of the Government, for
war; and he thought it was proper to come to a declaration upon the
subject. This would not only have a good effect upon our own citizens,
but it would convince European powers, that though we were preparing for
defence, we were not preparing for war.

Mr. G. said, he was not satisfied with the construction which the
gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. DANA) had given to that part of the
Message which speaks of our situation being changed. He did not believe
the PRESIDENT had any reference to the dispositions of the people, but
to the state of things generally.

The apprehension of war had already begun to produce disagreeable
effects in his part of the country. He had received information that
produce had fallen in price, and that the sale was very dull. He was of
opinion, therefore, that the proposed declaration, if agreed to, would
appease the minds of the people. It was said it would have no good
effect upon the Executive Directory. He did not know that it would. But
it could have no bad effect; and it might have a good one, for he did
not think that body quite so abandoned as some gentlemen thought them.

The gentleman last up had spoken of the partition of Venice. He himself
saw it with concern; but where was the difference in crime between the
French Republic and the Emperor? Each took a part. But what was all this
to the United States? Were they to go to war to avenge this partition?
We heard nothing of this kind some years ago, when a partition of Poland
took place. For his own part, he wished to leave the powers of Europe to
themselves, and to draw ourselves within our own boundary, where we
should be fully equal to our defence against any power on earth.

Mr. HARPER.--When this resolution was first proposed, it appeared to him
to be one of those nugatory measures which might either be agreed to or
rejected, without producing any effect; and, until he saw the resistance
which was given to the amendment, he remained of the same opinion; but
now he found it was to say to the French nation, "you may commit against
us injury after injury, and insult after insult, we never will resist
you."

If this were not the intention, why resist the amendment? Taking this to
be the intention, he should bestow some observations upon it. Gentlemen
preached about peace. They cry, "peace, peace," as if we, holding the
scale of the world, had the power to preserve it. Do not gentlemen know
that peace or war is not in our power? They do know it, and that all in
our power is to resist, or submit. Was not the clamor which was heard
about peace, in so many words, saying, you must submit, not only to what
injuries you have received, but to what you may hereafter receive? Was
not every advance, on our part, for an adjustment of differences, met
with new injuries and new insults? It would not be denied. If peace was
all that gentlemen wanted, they would take the resolution in general
terms, as proposed to be amended; but their opposing it shows that they
have no objection to hostility, if it be not against the French
nation--he would not say whose servants they were desirous of being, but
against those whom they dread they are afraid to lift up their finger.
And this was the spirit of peace which they wished to preserve--a spirit
which he deemed vile submission--a spirit which was afraid to complain,
and which met every new insult without murmur.

Mr. H. rejoiced that this amendment was made, because it had unmasked
the intentions of the mover and supporters of the original proposition.
They were now obliged to avow, it is not peace with all the world which
we want, but peace with France--a servile and abject submission to one
nation; a nation in behalf of whom they have heretofore been eager of
war; for, notwithstanding all their cries at present for peace, peace,
when there is no peace, they have on a former occasion been equally
zealous for war. All their efforts were then used to involve this
country in war, upon the side of the French Republic; but now, when
measures of resistance are called for--not against France, but to
prevent her from wounding her enemy through our sides--their cry is
turned from war to peace. This he repeated, and, if they denied it, he
would refer to written accounts of their discourses at that time, which
would prove that they had sought war against England, and an alliance,
offensive and defensive, with the French Republic. At that time, he and
those who generally vote with him, desired peace; and it required all
their skill and firmness to preserve it, and much obloquy was thrown
upon them on account of their exertions. The ground which he and his
friends then took was--let us first try negotiation; if that fail, we
will then join you in the war. But these gentlemen were, at that time,
all in favor of war measures in the first instance. Whence now this
change of spirit? What has become of the spirit of 1794, when it was
said to be disgraceful to negotiate, and that it would be base to
surrender the independence of our country to a foreign power? He wished
he could see the breasts of gentlemen now glow with the patriotism which
then animated them; but, instead of this, what do we see? A spirit of
the most abject kind; a spirit that would leave all our property
unprotected beyond the limits of our territory, so that our commerce,
from which is derived five-sixths of our revenue, is to be abandoned,
lest, in defending it, we should give offence to the French Republic.

The committee were now told it would be time enough to prepare for war
when an invasion of our country was attempted. And why were they told
this? Because such an event is not likely to take place. Gentlemen know
that all the hostility which France wished to commit against this
country may be done by destroying our commerce. But they are disposed to
surrender this part of our rights, rather than resist; and what
security had we that, if the country were invaded, these gentlemen would
then resist? He apprehended that the same spirit which led them now to
submit, would continue to actuate them.

Last year gentlemen were opposed to doing any thing which should alter
the state of things. If this negotiation, said they, fail, we will then
join you in active measures. But now, when that time is come, they tell
us we must still sink lower, and become more degraded. We are to be
contented, not only to see our ships captured, our property destroyed,
our sailors led in chains, our revenue annihilated, but we must see the
army of the enemy attempt to land, before we will resist.

Mr. H. said he would bring his proofs, to show that those gentlemen who
are now so loud in their calls for peace, were heretofore the supporters
of a war system. For this purpose, he adduced Mr. Monroe's view of the
conduct of the Executive of the United States, which, he said, was a
publication which had met with the most unbounded and enthusiastic
applauses from all the party; and he read from it an extract of a letter
from Mr. Monroe to our Secretary of State, dated Paris, September 10,
1796, pages 209 and 210 of the book, in which he states it to be his
opinion, "that if a suitable attempt be made to engage the aid of the
French Government in support of our claims upon England, it may be
accomplished; and that to secure success, it will be necessary to take
the posts and invade Canada."

Would any man, said Mr. H., who shall read this passage, say that the
system of these gentlemen is a peace system? And besides this
proposition for taking the posts and invading Canada, the same gentleman
proposes an advance to France of five millions of dollars. Yet these are
the gentlemen who now are willing to say to France, "We will not fight
you; we give you license to do us all the injury you please. You may fit
out half a dozen frigates, which will be able to block up our ports; and
we give you this notice that you may effect your purpose with little
expense, and not prepare a large fleet for the purpose."

The gentleman from Virginia, (Mr. GILES,) whose zeal for keeping this
country in an absolutely defenceless state, has surpassed all the zeal
he ever before displayed, except that which he had shown on a former
occasion for bringing us into war, has told us that peace is the best
thing we can have; and that it would be knight-errantry to attempt to
defend our property at sea. After our Ministers have been sent off, and
a decree passed which must destroy our commerce, and which had been
already allowed to be just cause of war, this was the language of that
gentleman on the present occasion. To show this gentleman's consistency,
and because his language was at that time so spirited, so American, and
carried with it so much force and energy, he could not forbear reading
an extract from his speech on the 28th of March, 1794, upon Mr.
DAYTON'S motion to sequestrate British debts. The question was not then
whether we should arm for our defence, but whether we should make an
attempt at negotiation. The arguments of the gentleman were, it is true,
somewhat misplaced, though they were nevertheless patriotic and
admirable; and he could not account for the strange contrast of his
present sentiments on any other ground than that he believed the true
interest of this country was only to be effected by a treaty of alliance
with France and war with her enemy. Gentlemen who were on a former
occasion in favor of spirited measures in defence of our rights, and
were on this occasion the same, are consistent; though their arguments
might not altogether be properly timed, yet they were radically right.

Mr. H. said, he would bring another example to the view of the
committee. He meant that of Switzerland. Attempt after attempt had been
made by France on the independence of that country. After going a
variety of lengths, they effected their purpose of driving from thence
that unfortunate class of men, the emigrants, who had been persecuted by
those who had usurped all authority in France, and who sought the rights
of hospitality amongst them. New aggressions were made; they took
possession of a part of the Swiss territory, and displaced their
magistrates. Seeing that every submission invited fresh insult, they
united, hand in hand, took up arms, and reinstated the magistrates who
had been displaced, and resolved to live free or die. What was the
consequence of this spirited conduct? The French withdrew from their
territory, disavowed the measures of their General, and declared that
they desired nothing more than to leave the Swiss in full possession of
their rights.

Let us, said Mr. H., take warning by this energetic example of the
Swiss. Let us now begin to resist. Let us declare that we wish to
preserve peace with all the world; that we allow that peace is good, but
that we believe independence is better; that peace is desirable, but not
at any price--and then France will relinquish her aggressions.

At this point the committee rose and had leave to sit again.


THURSDAY, March 29.

_Relations with France._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, and the amendment to the first resolution moved by
Mr. SPRIGG, as to the inexpediency, under existing circumstances, of
resorting to war against the French Republic, which amendment is, to
strike out the words "French Republic," being under consideration,

Mr. GILES rose. It would be recollected, he said, that yesterday an
attack had been made upon him, as indecent in its manner as it was in
itself novel and unprecedented. He had been eight years in Congress, but
he never before heard so direct and personal an attack. He was pleased,
however, that it had been made, and only regretted that his state of
health was such as, he feared, would not suffer him to go so fully into
a refutation of the charges which had been brought against him as he
could wish. He should, however, state such circumstances as would not
only disprove the facts alleged against him, but also prove that the
reverse of them was true. In doing which, he begged to be corrected if
he should misstate any thing.

The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER) had said "that it had
been the object of himself and his associates, but particularly of
himself, since the year 1794, to go to war with Great Britain, if
possible, and to enter into a treaty of alliance, offensive and
defensive, with France." This charge he declared to be entirely void of
truth. He knew that slanders of this kind had been circulated in an
artful manner through the United States from that time to the present,
but he never before heard the charge publicly made. Being made, he would
refute it, though it had been the foundation of two long speeches of
that gentleman; for, whenever slander assumes an erect front, it is
dissipated by the first ray of truth which meets it.

He trusted he should prove, by a reference to the debate which had
already been quoted, and to others, that he had never been in favor of a
war with Great Britain; and as to an alliance, offensive and defensive,
with France, he never heard such a proposition in private conversation,
and it will be allowed that no such proposition was ever publicly made.

The inconsistency of his conduct had been spoken of. The gentleman from
South Carolina said it was unaccountable to him how the author of such
animated sentiments as were delivered by him, (Mr. G.,) in 1794, could
now utter sentiments so grovelling and pitiful as those heard from him.
He wished the gentleman had selected the passages to which he alluded,
as he himself was unconscious of any difference between those which he
then delivered and his present sentiments. From the year 1794 to the
present period, he had uniformly declared it to be his opinion "that war
is justifiable only in case of self-defence."

If boldness of assertion and dogmatism of expression would have availed,
the gentleman from South Carolina must have been victorious; but he
would beg to turn the attention of the committee to facts. That
gentleman had first introduced the book of Mr. Monroe, the sentiments of
which, he said, certain gentlemen, by their approbation of it, had
adopted as their own. Mr. G. said he had read the book, and had found a
great deal to commend in it, and little to condemn. Human nature was
liable to err. If the gentleman himself were to review his own political
history, he doubted whether it would be found to be always consistent.
There might have been errors in Mr. Monroe's Ministry, but he believed
they would be found to be as few as ever attended a negotiation which
was encompassed with so many difficulties.

What, he asked, was the letter which the gentleman read from his book?
It was a letter dated December 5, 1794. This was not a letter from Mr.
Monroe to his associates, but to the Secretary of State; and, if any
conspiracy was intended, General Washington and his Secretaries must
have been the conspirators. He saw nothing more in this letter than a
suggestion of what might be done if the Government thought proper. Mr.
G. stated the situation of things at that time. In the autumn of 1794
the PRESIDENT laid before Congress a communication stating that nothing
further could be done between this country and Great Britain by way of
negotiation, and what remained to be done was left to Congress. There
never was so threatening a state of affairs between Great Britain and
this country, since the revolution, as at that period. At the time,
therefore, when Mr. Monroe wrote the letter in question, he could not
possibly know the state of affairs here, or whether they would come to
an amicable settlement, and it was right in him, and it would have been
criminal not to have done it, to state what it was likely might be done
by France in our favor in case of extremities. He would only add one
further remark, as he should have occasion to defend himself more than
Mr. Monroe, which was, that he was at least as honorable a character as
any of his calumniators; that while he was in France he effected much
good, and that since he came away we had experienced much injury. If
gentlemen would examine the state of things when he first went to
France, what our situation was when he came away, and what it is now, he
thought this would appear evident.

The gentleman from South Carolina, doubtless, after examining all the
remarks he could find of his, had brought forward a debate which took
place in 1794. To follow the gentleman would be a disagreeable task; but
as it would serve to elucidate a truth which it was necessary to unfold,
he should undertake it, and show that, instead of these remarks being in
favor of war, they were founded in the most zealous wish for peace, Mr.
G. proceeded to read his remarks on Mr. DAYTON'S motion for a
sequestration of British debts, which, as the mover would recollect, he
said, was a mere arrestation of British debts, which was proposed as a
preventive of war, by holding in our hands what was within our power, as
a pledge for the good behavior of that country, in order to preserve
peace. Mr. G. stated the situation of things to be different from that
which Mr. HARPER had represented it to be, as the Legislature had no
knowledge of any negotiation being set on foot with Great Britain at
that time. This debate took place on the 28th of March, when they had
been informed by the PRESIDENT that nothing further could be done by
him, and the negotiation was not heard from until the 19th of April
following. A part of the system proposed was an embargo, and another a
suspension of intercourse with Great Britain. This bill passed this
House, but was negatived in the Senate, by the casting vote of the VICE
PRESIDENT who is now the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES; and if this
bill had been carried into a law, the other regulation for arresting the
British debts would evidently have been a proper measure.

Mr. G. did not believe that we stood upon such unequivocal ground with
respect to France as we formerly stood upon with respect to Great
Britain. This had long been his opinion; and though we have heavy
complaints to make against France, they were not without just complaints
against us, arising principally from the operation of the British
Treaty, that fatal instrument to the United States.

Mr. G. read some of the articles of the treaty, and his former remarks
thereon, and denied that there was any well-founded apprehension of war
at the time it was under discussion. He also noticed the assertion which
had frequently been made, of the French Directory receiving lessons from
this country, which, he said, was too absurd to be believed.

Though he thought France had just ground of complaint against this
country, he did not mean to justify her conduct towards us. He thought
she ought to have received our Ministers; and, if they had not agreed,
to have taken such measures as they thought proper. But this is
supposing our Ministers clothed with sufficient powers; if they were
not, there would be some ground of justification for their conduct. The
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES is in the possession of information which
would satisfy the Congress and the people in this respect, but he has
thought proper to withhold it, and therefore he alone is responsible.
There was one circumstance, he said, very unaccountable in this
business. The PRESIDENT informed the House that he had received certain
papers, and says, "I have considered these papers; I have deliberated
upon them; I have not sent them to you, but require you to act upon
them; I call upon you to take energetic measures, and request you will
provide sufficient revenue." The House has been thus obliged to take up
the subject in the dark. Is this, said he, a desirable state for the
Legislature to be placed in? Is it not rather a degraded state? He
thought it was; and when party rage shall subside, and it shall be seen
that the Executive is pursuing hostile measures, and keeping back all
information from Congress, this conduct would be deemed extraordinary.
He was far from saying the Executive had not done what was proper. He
could not say so, because he had seen no evidence upon which to form a
judgment; but it left a strong impression on his mind that something was
not correct, which was the reason the expected papers were not sent.

He also again referred to what the PRESIDENT says in his late Message
with respect to the change of circumstances, which he still thinks he
meant to apply to a change from neutrality in the country to something
like war. And in these circumstances, said he, are the people of the
United States to be led on from step to step, until they are
irrevocably involved in war? And are the people to be told that this is
a trifling question? When all the country is in commotion, and when the
people are preparing their petitions for peace, (which he thought very
proper,) he was not willing to proceed until the present question was
decided.

He would suggest another idea. He had heard a variety of observations
from different quarters, that at a period not very far distant from the
present, a more intimate connection between this country and Great
Britain than at present exists, is likely to take place. And yet
gentlemen are perpetually crying, What! give up your independence! Do
you prefer peace to independence? He would answer, No; for independence
he should be ready at all times to make war. But are we, said he, called
upon to fight for speculative independence, and, at the same time,
willing to commit our real independence to the mercy of another nation?
Where, he asked, is the difference between depending upon the French or
British nation? Except, indeed, (as he believed was the speculative
opinion of some gentlemen,) there was an intention of assimilating the
British and American Governments.

Gentlemen talked of newspapers. He would say a word on that subject.
There are two papers, said he, printed in this city, which not only
breathe defensive, but offensive war of the worst kind. One of these
papers, he believed, was particularly countenanced by the Government;
the other was printed by an infamous scoundrel, a British subject--a
paper which he was sorry to find too much countenanced. This paper not
only breathes war, but exterminating war. And this paper issued from a
British press, spreads its baneful sentiments throughout the country. He
proclaimed this fact; and he should think himself a traitor to his
country, not to proclaim it.

Mr. G. would say a few words as to the effect which the late French
decree would be likely to produce upon this country. The committee had
been told, by the gentleman from South Carolina, that it would
effectually destroy our revenue. He believed he was mistaken in this. To
France and to those nations who may be supposed to be under her
influence, we last year exported to the amount of $36,000,000, and to
Great Britain $8,000,000; two-thirds of which are re-exported to the
countries above mentioned.

Against whom, then, are we to arm? Against those who receive
$36,000,000, for the protection of the $8,000,000, two-thirds of which
are re-exported. How, he asked, would this operate? Would the decree
stop the importation of British goods? No, it might lessen them, but
would not stop them, as the British would become, in some measure, their
own carriers; and, as their vessels paid a higher duty in our ports than
our own, it is probable our revenue would not be greatly lessened. It
was possible, however, that there might be some abuse of the decree in
carrying it into execution.

He was as much opposed to the decree of the Executive Directory as any
man, but not so much on account of any loss we shall sustain from it, as
from its being an attack upon our neutral rights, which he preferred to
money. The British Treaty had authorized two acts that took place in
January last, which will transfer the carrying trade from American to
British vessels; but those acts will not affect our vessels going to
France, Spain, or Holland. He supposed, therefore, that our commerce
would not be very materially injured by the French Decree. He did not
know but it would even be upon a better footing than at present, as
there would be more security for it. At any rate, no rash measures ought
to be taken, until we see how the decree is to be executed.

He trusted the gentleman from South Carolina was, by this time, pretty
well satisfied as to the inaccuracy of his statement. Before gentlemen
make charges of inconsistency against others, they should be sure that
they themselves stand firm in that respect. That gentleman ought to have
looked back upon his own conduct in 1792 and 1793. He had been informed
that that gentleman was at that time a member of an affiliated society
of Jacobins. [Mr. HARPER said it was not true.] He believed, however,
all the gentlemen who knew him at that time would do him the credit to
say, that he was one of the most eloquent declaimers of that day in
favor of the rights of man. But his inconsistency had even appeared
within these two days. When the present proposition was first laid on
the table, he rejoiced that there was a prospect of all uniting in
manifesting a disposition for peace; but the next day he used arguments
which went to the destruction of the resolution.

The gentleman from Massachusetts (Gen. SHEPARD) had made a remark which
he must notice; it was, that he assumed to dictate to others what was
proper to be done. Of this he was not justly chargeable. That gentleman
told the committee he was a warrior; he venerated him as such--he was a
warrior in a glorious cause; but whilst he venerated him as a soldier,
he had to regret the political prejudices under which he labored, which
could suffer him to attribute a motive of that kind to him. The
gentleman from New York (Mr. BROOKS) had also told the committee he had
also been in service in the Revolution. This he did not know before he
heard it from the gentleman himself. But he had since been told he was
engaged in the honorable and humane employment of clothier to the army.
[Mr. BROOKS said, he had the honor of taking up arms in the defence of
his country, which he carried until he was taken prisoner. He was a
prisoner eighteen months, and when he was set at liberty he found his
vacancy was not preserved for him. He then served his country in a
different line, and he believed in a manner which entitled him to at
least as much merit as he had assumed. He believed that providing the
army with clothing was an essential part of the service; but, (said he,
with great warmth,) if the gentleman doubts my being a soldier, I am
here to answer him. A loud cry of order, and Mr. B. sat down.]

Mr. G. said, he had received this information from one of the
gentleman's friends. He made the inquiry, because he did not know what
services he had performed; and he assured him the information which he
had received had tended to raise, rather than to sink him in his
estimation; but he was not alarmed at being told he was a soldier.

It had been said of the resolution before the committee, that by stating
we are not ready to resort to war against the French Republic, that it
might be implied we are ready to go to war with some other nation. That
this idea might be done away, if gentlemen will permit the words
"against the French Republic" to remain. If the mover would give his
consent, he should have no objection to add the words, "or any other
nation."

Mr. HARPER hoped, as he had been particularly alluded to by the
gentleman who had just sat down, he should not be considered as
trespassing on the patience of the committee in an unreasonable manner,
if he made a few remarks in reply, though he did not mean to do it
generally, as he perceived others had undertaken to do that, whom he was
conscious were better able to do it than himself. He was called up
merely by the gentleman's personal observations.

In the first place, he was charged with great indecency in bringing
forward and commenting upon the gentleman's own speech. He left it to
the committee to determine with what propriety this complaint came from
a person who has omitted no opportunity of attributing the worst of
motives, not only to gentlemen in that House, but to others out of it;
neither age, character, nor absence, have preserved gentlemen from his
censure; from a person who has always indulged himself in the most
violent philippics against the Executive of the United States, and all
who concurred in his measures; from a person who, when gentlemen declare
they are for peace, says he does not believe them; from a person who has
continually charged all those with inconsistency who differed in opinion
from him, not by examining their conduct, but by making insinuations
against them as to their debts, or to the way in which they may have
acquired money, or by following them to their youth, before they became
members of this House? He thought the gentleman ought to attend to the
old, but just adage, "He who lives in a glass house ought not to be the
first to throw stones." If there could be a man more regardless than
that gentleman of all the rules of decorum in debate, he had never heard
him.

As to the charge of inconsistency in his conduct, it had often been made
in private, and as often contradicted; but as it is now brought into
public view, he would say a few words on that point.

It was said, that in 1791 and 1792, he was a member of a Jacobin
society, and a warm declaimer in favor of the rights of man. What was
said respecting his being a member of a Jacobin society, is one of those
falsehoods of party, which, though known to be unfounded, is still
reported.

The fact, Mr. H. said, was this, which he never concealed: In the year
1791, there were instituted in Charleston a variety of clubs, (there
were several before that time;) of many of these, being a young
practitioner of the law, and desirous of extending his acquaintance; and
procuring business, he was a member. Among these was a society called a
Patriotic Society. It was composed of French and American citizens; and
he and seven or eight other young practitioners became members, and
attended one or two evenings; but, finding it composed of persons from
whose society much improvement could not be expected, they never went
afterwards; and so anti-jacobinic was their conduct considered, that
they merited and received an expulsion from the society.

As to being a declaimer in favor of the rights of man in 1791 and 1792,
he owned he partook of that enthusiasm which at that time raged in
America, because he was deceived. He then believed the French had been
unjustifiably attacked, but he now found that they were the first
assailants. He then believed that the treaties of Pilnitz[30] and Pavia,
of which they had heard so much, were realities; but he now found them
contemptible forgeries. With respect to other parts of the French
Revolution, he then believed that the principal actors in it were
virtuous patriots, but he had since discovered that they were a set of
worthless scoundrels and mad-headed enthusiasts, who, in endeavoring to
reduce their fallacious schemes to practice, have introduced more
calamities into the world, than ages of good government will be able to
cure.

Mr. H. said, he never was a declaimer in favor of what gentlemen meant
by the rights of man. He held them and their author in merited contempt.
The pretended factitious rights of man to which gentlemen referred, were
the rights of a few noisy demagogues over the rights of the people.
Though he always believed this, he did not know it so well, in 1791 and
1792, as he knew it in 1794, and since. And, therefore, he was not a
declaimer in favor of what the gentlemen mean by the rights of man, but
he was a warm admirer of the French Revolution, when he thought the
object was the establishment of the true rights of man; but, since he
discovered that this was neither the object nor would it be the effect,
instead of viewing that Revolution as a blessing to the world, which he
once thought it, he now viewed it as the greatest curse that ever
afflicted mankind; as a phial of wrath from Heaven, the bitterest that
ever was poured out upon the earth.

There was a certain species of the rights of man of which he had always
been the defender, in favor of which his voice would always be heard. He
had, in a well-known instance, advocated the rights of his
fellow-citizens in the best manner he was able, and in a manner which
had obtained for him their thanks and their remembrance. How he
conducted that defence, was well known to some of his colleagues in that
House.

Mr. H. denied that he had been inconsistent with respect to the
proposition before the committee. He then noticed what had fallen from
Mr. GILES with respect to the decree of the French Directory not being
so inimical to this country as it had been supposed to be. Mr. H.
charged Mr. G. with being much mistaken in supposing that only the
amount of eight millions of dollars was exported to Great Britain and
her dominions, or that thirty-six millions of dollars were exported to
France, and to countries connected with her. Out of the fifty-one
millions exported from this country during last year, it appeared by the
statement before them that eight millions five hundred thousand were
sent to Great Britain; nine millions to the Hanse towns; to France and
her dominions eleven millions. But, he asked if the gentleman from
Virginia knew the reason why this amount to France appeared so large? If
not, he would tell him. All the produce shipped for the British West
Indies in 1797, was almost constantly cleared out for French ports, in
order to avoid the effects of the plundering decrees of the French West
Indies, and this was the reason why six or seven millions appeared under
this head, which ought to appear under another. But the gentleman seemed
to suppose that all which did not go to Great Britain went to France,
and countries connected with her. At least twenty millions, out of
fifty-one millions, went to countries over whom France had no power;
and, when to these were added what was sent to Great Britain, and six or
seven millions were deducted on the ground he had mentioned, the
gentleman would find the balance was not very considerable.

Mr. H. said he should not notice what the gentleman had chosen to say
respecting the British Minister, except as to the improper manner in
which he had called a confidential person a confidential agent of the
Minister, and to say that he could not see any analogy between this case
and that of the French Minister, who fitted out privateers and levied
troops in our country without permission from the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.

The gentleman from Virginia had entered fully, not only into a
justification of himself, but of his friends. How far he has acquitted
himself and them from the weighty charges which he had exhibited, he was
not the proper person to judge; he left the public to determine. He
must, however, beg leave to correct him in one of his facts. He informed
the committee that the letter of Mr. Monroe, which had been quoted, was
written in December, 1794, whereas it was dated Paris, September 10,
1795, long after that Minister had been officially informed by our
Minister in London, that the British Treaty was concluded and signed;
yet this letter recommends the taking of the posts, the invasion of
Canada, and the cutting up of the British commerce by privateers. He did
not say that this letter was a proof of conspiracy, but of a system of
policy which was very contrary to a peace system.

But the gentleman says, he (Mr. G.) never proposed war against Great
Britain. He knew it. The gentleman always spoke of peace, but pursued
measures which led to war. He did not speak of war when he recommended
sequestrations, confiscations, &c., because he loved peace. He did not
talk of war; but, whilst he and his friends opposed measures of defence,
they were in favor of every measure which led to war. While they were
irritating a nation to war, they opposed the building of the frigates.
He could not say what were the views of gentlemen in doing this, but he
would say what appearance it had on his mind, when he was far removed
from the seat of Government. He thought it seemed as if gentlemen
believed it would be well to get to war, and then rely upon their
favorite nation for support.

Mr. BROOKS again complained of the insinuation which Mr. GILES had
thrown out against him, which he said was not called for by any
circumstances under consideration.

Mr. GILES assured him he mentioned the fact alluded to, out of no
disrespect to him. With respect to the date of Mr. Monroe's letter, he
had been deceived by a leaf being folded down at the letter, the date of
which he had mentioned. The gentleman had said that he had attributed
improper motives to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. This he denied.
He had said, he took measures which he did not approve, and he hoped a
difference of opinion from any man would not be imputed to him as a
crime. With respect to the explanation which the gentleman had given of
his own conduct, he was glad to hear it. It was to obtain this
explanation, that he mentioned the reports which he had heard. Mr. G.
renewed the assertion, that he and his friends always had been willing
to put the nation in a state of defence. As to the frigates, he gloried
in his vote against them; but with respect to the use of them, the
gentleman was mistaken. They were intended to be sent against the
Algerines only.


FRIDAY, March 30.

_Relations with France._

Mr. ALLEN observed, that when the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES sent
his first Message to the House, announcing the receipt of despatches
from our Commissioners in Paris, he stated that it would take some time
to decipher the despatches which he had received. Some days afterwards,
on the 19th instant, he sent another Message informing the House, "that
it was incumbent on him to declare that he saw no ground of expectation
that the object of their mission could be accomplished on terms
compatible with the safety, honor, or the essential interests of the
nation."

It had been observed, in the course of the debate in the Committee of
the Whole on the state of the Union, and not in the most candid and
proper manner, that the papers received from our Commissioners ought to
have been laid before the House, and the PRESIDENT had been charged with
withholding them. He supposed gentlemen would have been satisfied, and
he was, with the information which the PRESIDENT had already
communicated, that our Commissioners are not received, and that France
refuses to hear us. But, though he was himself satisfied with the
information he had at present, he believed there were many gentlemen in
the House who wished for more, because there is a paper printed in this
city, which is continually insinuating that there is something in these
despatches which, if they were made known, would show that the conduct
of the Executive has been improper; because he found that paper often
speaking the language of gentlemen in this House, and which spoke it, he
believed, on this occasion; and because, if this is not true, he wished
the people to be undeceived; or if true, that he and those who thought
with him, that no such blame existed, might be convinced of their error;
he proposed the following resolution, to which he hoped there would be
no objection:

      "_Resolved_, That the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES be
      requested to communicate to this House the despatches from
      the Envoys Extraordinary of the United States to the French
      Republic, mentioned in his Message of the 19th instant, _or
      such parts thereof as considerations of public safety and
      interest_, _in his opinion_, _may permit_."

Mr. S. SMITH said, he should have no objection to the resolution, if the
latter part of it was struck out. If the PRESIDENT thought it necessary
that any part of the correspondence ought to be kept secret, he would,
as is usual in such cases, inform the House that this was the case, and
the galleries would accordingly be cleared. The communication would then
probably be referred to a select committee, and such parts of it
published as might appear proper.

Mr. ALLEN observed, that there might be parts of this correspondence
which it would not be proper to communicate to this House, even
confidentially. If this was not the case, the PRESIDENT could still
communicate such part of the correspondence in confidence as he may
think proper. He wished to leave the PRESIDENT to act according to his
discretion. Without some portion of this discretion being allowed him,
the Government could not proceed.

Mr. GILES said, no part of the correspondence ought to be kept from
Congress. He was not himself satisfied as to the sincerity of the
proceedings of the Executive of the United States towards France; he
wished, therefore, not only to have the correspondence of our Ministers,
but the instructions which were given to them. Mr. G. defended what he
had yesterday said about the PRESIDENT and these papers, and hoped if
the House called for the papers at all, they would call for all the
papers, and the instructions upon which our Ministers acted.

Mr. LIVINGSTON moved to amend the resolution by striking out all the
words after the 19th instant, and insert after the words "this House,"
"the instructions to and." This was not a time, Mr. L. said, to stand
upon trifling punctilios, which might be proper upon ordinary occasions.
They were now called upon to say whether the country should be preserved
in peace or go to war; yet the correspondence, which ought to convince
the House of the propriety of acting in this or that way, is withheld.
How could they say to their constituents, without this information, all
has been done that could be done to preserve the country in peace, but
war was inevitable? And if war is rushed into headlong, without due
consideration, and consequently without ascertaining whether it is just
or not, can it be expected that the wishes and aids of the people will
be heartily engaged in such a war? They certainly would not.

It would be no answer to say that our negotiation with a foreign power
would by this means be exposed. The communication might be made with
closed doors, and no one could suppose any thing would be exposed by the
members of the Legislature which the good of the country requires to be
kept secret. But gentlemen wish this House to repose the strictest
confidence in one branch of the Government, at the same time that they
say no confidence can be placed in the integrity of this House. [Mr.
ALLEN exclaimed, who said it?] Mr. L. replied, that this was a fair
inference from what had been said.

The latter part of the resolution proposed to transfer a right to the
PRESIDENT, which it ought itself to exercise, as to judging of what it
was proper to publish in consideration of the public safety and
interest. If this power was given to the PRESIDENT, he might withhold
such parts of the papers as might prevent a correct judgment being
formed upon them. He was not himself disposed to cede to the PRESIDENT
the right which he was sent there to exercise for his constituents, of
judging of so important a question, as a question of peace or war. He
could not basely surrender this right. If the papers were called for at
all, he hoped the whole would be called for, in order that the House
might form that sound and temperate judgment for which the present
crisis so loudly calls, and for which the people of the United States
so anxiously look. Indeed, to pass the resolution unamended, would, in
his opinion, be a shameful dereliction of their rights.

Mr. BAYARD thought the propriety of this call upon the PRESIDENT was
extremely doubtful, and, as it regarded the instructions given to our
Ministers, wholly improper. With respect to the communication of the
despatches, it was wholly a matter of Executive discretion to judge
whether it would be proper to communicate them or not. He was one of
those who had so much confidence in the Executive, as to trust to his
candor, understanding, and integrity, to determine upon the propriety of
what he should send to, or withhold from, this House. At a time when it
is not known that our negotiation with France is closed, it would be
extremely imprudent to have the instructions of our Ministers laid
before this House; as what was sent here, notwithstanding any vote of
secrecy, would not long be kept secret. It would soon be in Europe, and
might do us essential injury, by disclosing our ultimatum to France, and
by showing it also to the world. It was in vain, Mr. B. said, to suppose
that one hundred men could keep a secret for any length of time, however
important it might be. To elucidate that assertion, he referred to the
divulging the secret of the British Treaty by a Senator.

But the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. GILES) has no confidence in the
Government of this country with respect to its negotiation with France;
and in order to try the sincerity of the Executive, he wishes for the
papers. Does the gentleman by this mean to give the lie to the
Executive? Because in his Message he has told the House that he has
given power to our Ministers to settle our disputes with the French
Republic, and to "make all reasonable concessions." What more does the
gentleman wish? Does he wish unreasonable concessions to be made? Surely
he does not. Did any thing appear in the conduct of the French Directory
to show that our Ministers were not possessed of ample powers? No; the
Directory never knew any thing about their powers, at least so far as
any official communications had been received on the subject. There
could not, therefore, be any ground upon which the gentleman could rest
his suspicions. He hoped, therefore, the amendment would be negatived.

Two or three gentlemen were on the floor together.

The SPEAKER said, the amendment to insert "the instructions to and,"
would come first under consideration.

Mr. HARPER said, he did not mean at this time to enter into the merits
of the present question. It was important, and presented itself in a new
light to the House. The original motion he was ready to have voted for;
he did not know whether he might not vote for this. But he wished time
to consider of it. He therefore moved the further consideration of this
question be postponed till Monday.

Mr. ALLEN had no objection to the postponement, except the mover of the
amendment would permit it to be amended by a modification of this sort:
"Such parts of those communications as were communicated to the French
Government."

The question for postponement was put and carried--47 to 41.


MONDAY, April 23.

The SPEAKER attended to-day, and took the chair.

_Stephen Cantrill._

On motion of Mr. W. C. CLAIBORNE, the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the report of the Secretary of War on the
petition of Stephen Cantrill; and the report and papers accompanying it
were read. The report was as follows:

      "The Secretary of War, to whom was referred the petition of
      Stephen Cantrill, respectfully reports: That the services
      for which the petitioner prays compensation to himself and
      a company which he commanded, were performed in the month
      of September, 1794, on an expedition conducted by Major
      James Orr, into the Lower Cherokee country, which issued in
      the destruction of two considerable Indian towns, the
      Running Water and Nickajack, the killing of a number of
      Indians, and the taking about twenty prisoners.

      "That the report of Major Orr to Governor Blount, dated at
      Knoxville, the 24th September, 1794, shows, that this
      expedition marched on the 7th of the same month, and was
      ordered by General Robertson, of Mero district.

      "That the orders of General Robertson for this purpose were
      afterwards communicated by himself to Gov. Blount, in a
      letter dated the 8th October, 1794, detailing his reasons
      for the order.

      "That letters from Governor Blount to the Secretary of War,
      dated the 22d of September and 2d of October, 1794, as well
      as the copy of an order, which he states to have been the
      last given by him to General Robertson, previous to this
      expedition, evince that the Governor did not sanction the
      measure.

      "That the Secretary of War, previous to Major Orr's
      expedition, in a letter to Governor Blount, dated the 26th
      July, 1794, strongly discouraged the idea of destroying the
      lower towns of the Cherokees, in the following words, viz:
      'With respect to destroying the lower towns, however
      rigorous such a measure might be, or whatever good
      consequences might result from it, I am instructed
      specially by the President to say, that he does not
      conceive himself authorized to direct any such measure,
      more especially as the whole subject was before the last
      session of Congress, who did not think proper to authorize
      or direct offensive operations.' And that as soon as the
      destruction of the Running Water and Nickajack was
      communicated to him, the Secretary strongly disavowed any
      participation in the business, by his letter to Governor
      Blount, dated the 22d of December, 1794, in these words,
      viz: 'The destruction of the lower Cherokee towns stands
      upon its own footing; that it was not authorized is
      certain.'

      "That the President at all times, as well before as after
      this expedition, endeavored to confine the protection of
      the frontier of the South-western Territory to defensive
      operations, and to restrain from those which were
      offensive.

      "That, on the whole, it appears, the services for which
      compensation is prayed by the petition of Stephen Cantrill,
      were performed on an expedition, offensive, unauthorized,
      and in direct violation of the orders from the President to
      Governor Blount, by whom also they were not sanctioned.

      "The documents referred to, and others connected with the
      subject, are herewith presented, numbered from No. 1 to 9,
      inclusive.

      "All which is respectfully submitted to the House of
      Representatives.

                          "JAMES McHENRY.

      "WAR OFFICE, _April, 1798_."

The reading being finished, Mr. W. C. CLAIBORNE said, that, in his
opinion, this claim was founded on the principles of justice; and he
trusted every member who had attended to the reading of the documents,
must accord with him in opinion, that the Nickajack expedition,
undertaken by Major James Orr, in 1794, into the Lower Cherokee country,
was authorized by General Robertson; and it remains now to be decided,
whether soldiers shall not be entitled to pay until they have previously
assured themselves of the legitimate authority of their commanding
officer. At the time when this expedition was set on foot, a war raged
between the United States and the Cherokee nation of Indians, the
horrors of which bore hard upon the district of Mero; the very existence
of the settlement was threatened; scarcely a day passed without some one
or other of the inhabitants, or of their acquaintance, being murdered.
Information was received that the Indians were embodied in order to
carry the war into the settlement. What was the General to do? Was he to
stand still without making any attempt to avert the danger? The safety
of the people required him to act, and he struck the first blow, which
was a defensive measure authorized by the usage of all nations. The
citizens on this expedition obeyed the command of their officer; they
did not think it necessary to inquire by what authority he acted; all
for them to be assured of was, that he was an officer of the United
States, and this they well knew, as this was not the first time they had
served under him. Without a discipline of this kind no military
operation could be carried on. General Robertson acted also under the
authority of Governor Blount, who acted under the orders of the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. Having then performed this duty--a duty,
too, which put an end to a war which might have cost the United States a
million of dollars--he trusted the petitioners would be compensated for
their services. The amount, he believed, would not be more than about
$4,000, as the party was out only twelve days. To effect this purpose,
he proposed the following resolution for the adoption of the committee:

      "_Resolved_, That the proper officers be directed to settle
      the accounts of the militia who served on the expedition
      commanded by Major James Orr against the Cherokee Indians,
      in the year 1794."

This resolution was agreed to without opposition. The committee rose,
and after some few observations, it was agreed to in the House, and a
committee appointed to report a bill accordingly.


TUESDAY, April 24.

Mr. W. C. C. CLAIBORNE, from the committee appointed, reported a bill
directing the payment of a detachment of militia, for services performed
in the year 1794, under Major James Orr, which was twice read and
committed.

_Provisional Army._

A bill from the Senate, authorizing the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
to raise a provisional army of 20,000 men, was read the first time; and
upon motion made to read it a second time,

Mr. NICHOLAS objected to the second reading of the bill, as he believed
it possessed a principle which could not be assented to. He did not
believe it was necessary to pass a bill of this sort under any possible
modification. The highest act of Legislative power was, by it, proposed
to be transferred to the Executive, viz: the power to raise an army,
which he was to exercise at his pleasure. If an army was necessary, the
Legislature ought to raise it; but he did not think it was necessary at
present. Indeed, when discussing the bill for providing a naval
armament, gentlemen had said that members had been willing to make
preparations for defence on the land, where there was no danger, but
were unwilling to do it at sea, where the greatest might be expected. He
did not believe there could be any necessity for going into a measure of
this kind at the present session. In case of predatory attack, the
militia would be equal to repelling them. Mr. N. said he lived in a part
of the country perhaps more defenceless than any other; but, so far as
he or his constituents were concerned, he did not wish for a force of
this kind. He was willing to confide for defence on the militia of the
country.

Mr. OTIS thought it very extraordinary that the gentleman from Virginia
should endeavor to surprise a part of this House into a decision upon
this bill in this stage of it. He hoped he would consent to its taking
the usual course. The gentleman had gone into the merits of the bill; he
could not follow him, because he had not heard it read; so far as he did
hear it, he was of opinion that the gentleman had anticipated objections
which did not lie against it. He seemed to suppose that this bill
declared that a standing army should be raised. It does no such thing;
it only declares that if existing circumstances shall make it necessary,
then the PRESIDENT shall raise an army not exceeding a certain number of
men. It may happen that the necessity may not exist; but the gentleman
from Virginia must be able to fathom the intentions of France further
than he could pretend to do, if he could say that no such necessity
would exist. If what was said by the agents of that Government to our
Envoys could be relied on, there was a direct threat to ravage our
coasts. He hoped, however, no invasion would take place; but, when he
said this, he calculated upon the French acting as reasonable beings,
but perhaps he calculated delusively. Indeed, they are now threatening
the invasion of a country, where one may suppose they would have as
little chance of succeeding as in this country; and was the idea, then,
to be so much scoffed at, as not to suffer a bill, intending to provide
against it, to be read a second time? If the arms of our citizens were
to be tied up, and our militia were many of them without arms, with what
should we oppose such an attempt, if it were made? What, said he, is to
prevent Victor Hugues sending over two or three frigates? It had been
said that he expected open war, and that he was ready for it. In short,
he thought it would be the most disgraceful conduct that ever was
attempted in that House, if the bill should be rejected without a second
reading. It would be in vain to talk of unanimity, if a bill from the
Senate was to be treated in this way. If the gentleman persisted in his
motion, he trusted he would find himself nearly alone.

Mr. GALLATIN wondered that the gentleman from Massachusetts should be so
greatly surprised at a motion of this kind, because if he had attended
to the rules of the House, he would have found that it was a course
expressly prescribed by them. It had been acted upon before during this
session. The principle, he said, was well understood. When a member
disapproves of the principle of a bill altogether, and does not wish to
go at all into a discussion of the detail, he moves to reject it before
it goes to a second reading.

This bill goes to authorize the PRESIDENT to raise an army. He did not
know what was meant by a provisional army. He did not find any thing
said in the Constitution of the United States relative to provisional
armies, or of giving the PRESIDENT power to raise armies. He found
mentioned there no other kind of defence than an army and militia. It
says Congress shall raise and support an army, not provide for the
raising of an army; but this bill is to enable the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES to raise an army. The constitution has declared that the
raising of an army is placed in Congress, but this bill goes to declare
that this power shall be vested by law in the PRESIDENT. That is the
principle of the bill: and if Congress were once to admit the principle
that they have a right to vest in the PRESIDENT powers placed in their
hands by the constitution, that instrument would become a piece of blank
paper. If it were to be admitted in one case, it would be admitted in
another; and, if admitted in one department, it might be admitted in
another. The power to raise taxes, he said, is contained in the same
article of the constitution which says Congress shall raise armies. And
if they could delegate the power of raising an army to the PRESIDENT,
why not do the same with respect to the power of raising taxes? He
supposed the House would next hear of provisional taxes, to be raised if
the PRESIDENT shall think fit. Mr. G., therefore, thought the principle
inadmissible. If the circumstances of the Union required an army, let it
be raised; if not, he wished to give no power to raise it--especially,
as the PRESIDENT, if he saw necessity, could call Congress together, if
he should find that the circumstances of the country required it. Mr. G.
thought the House had already decided that no additional army was
necessary at present, in agreeing to an additional regiment of
artillery; as the select committee, when they brought in that bill, had
the report of the Secretary of War before them, which stated, besides
the regiment of artillery, that other additional force would be
necessary; and having reported no other, it was to be supposed they
thought no other necessary. But, if it was thought the House had not
gone far enough, he was willing to go farther, but not willing to
transfer their power to judge of the propriety of raising an army.

Mr. DANA hoped this bill would not be rejected on its first reading. It
required no labored arguments to prove that the motion might be made;
but more than had been adduced to show that it ought to be adopted. He
thought the gentleman from Massachusetts ought not to have been
surprised at this motion, because it was best calculated for exciting
alarm. It was said the Senate proceeded in a similar way on the bill
sent up from this House for a repeal of the stamp act; but that question
had already been agreed upon in the Senate on a distinct proposition,
and there was, therefore, no necessity for going again into it. The
gentleman from Pennsylvania had said that when the House agreed upon an
additional regiment of artillery, they negatively decided against any
other standing force. The gentleman might put what construction he
pleased upon that vote, he could assure him for himself that he had no
such idea when he voted.

This bill, Mr. D. said, provided for the raising of a regular force, in
case the PRESIDENT shall think the situation of the country requires it.
He is also authorized to accept of the services of the volunteer corps.
The bill could be amended in any manner which gentlemen thought proper.
But the gentleman from Pennsylvania does not know what a provisional
army means. He believed this was no new principle. He believed it was
acted upon when the three additional regiments were raised to the then
existing corps. It was in principle the same as when an army is directed
to be raised, but where the PRESIDENT has power given him to suspend the
raising of it, if he shall see it necessary.

Mr. SEWALL said that, though the present motion be not irregular in
point of form, yet it is a manner of proceeding very objectionable at
this time. His colleague had complained of this motion being a surprise
upon the House. He had good reason so to consider it. And the House will
consider whether it is expedient, without entering into a consideration
of the bill, without seeing whether any alteration could be made in it,
so as to render it more agreeable to gentlemen, thus to attempt to
destroy the bill. What was the motive of the gentleman from Virginia in
making the motion might easily be discovered. He had obtained leave of
absence, which might have a tendency to hurry him in his political
course. He wished to be heard on this subject, but this hurry of his to
return home ought not to hurry the House in its proceedings. Those
gentlemen who had determined to take this course had the advantage of
others who were unprepared for such a motion.

Mr. HARPER believed, notwithstanding what had been advanced by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. GALLATIN,) that this was a very
unprecedented measure; because however prepared the House may be on some
occasions, at the first blush of business, to decide upon the abstract
principle, yet it was perfectly novel in their proceedings to reject a
bill on its first reading, which contains such a variety of
propositions, and which is capable of such a variety of modifications as
the present. It was also as little consonant with the present situation
of the country as it was with their usual modes of proceeding. The
allusion to the decision on the bill for repealing the stamp act (as had
been shown) was no way applicable. He could see no other view in a
proposition of this kind but a determination to resist every measure for
the defence of the country. If the intention had not been to destroy the
bill, it would have been suffered to have taken its usual course, and
attempts would have been made to amend it. If a provisional army was not
liked, gentlemen might have had the army immediately raised; or, if
20,000 men were too many, fewer might have been proposed. If gentlemen
did not think the army immediately necessary, and did not choose to
leave it with the PRESIDENT to judge of that necessity, they might make
it to depend upon a declaration of war by France, on an invasion, or in
case Victor Hugues were to bring his troops, or send his threatened
frigates against us, or if an insurrection should be excited by our
enemy, then the PRESIDENT should be empowered to raise an army.

But gentlemen say this bill ought to be rejected, because it is
unconstitutional. Could gentlemen be serious in making this objection?
Were troops ever raised in a different manner? And if they had the power
to authorize the PRESIDENT to raise troops immediately, they could
certainly do it under such contingencies as they thought proper. Did not
Congress intrust the PRESIDENT with the discretionary power of borrowing
money, of, in some cases, fixing salaries, &c., which powers were
equally vested in them with the power of raising armies; and this must
be the case, except gentlemen insist that Congress should itself do all
the acts committed to it; and if so, they must always be in session.

But the gentleman from Pennsylvania says, that if this power be
delegated to the PRESIDENT, Congress may as well intrust the PRESIDENT
with the power of raising provisional taxes. He had no hesitation in
saying, that he believed this might be done; that the House might
determine upon a tax, and authorize the collecting of it, only in case
the PRESIDENT should find it necessary, or in case a certain event
should take place.

With respect, then, to the expediency of the measure--he did not speak
of the expediency of raising 20,000 men, because any other number might
be determined upon--but as to the thing itself. What is the internal and
external state of this country? Do we not know that the enemy has in
view a plan upon which they place great reliance--of gaining over to
their cause a certain class of men, who abound in the Southern part of
this country, and by whose means they intend to subjugate or destroy the
country? We do know this--gentlemen from the Southern States know it;
yet they say it is impossible to raise any regular force to repel the
enemy. He could not believe, that when we had to meet an enemy, who has
always fought by means of domestic insurrection, who is now subverting
the most ancient Governments in the world by these means, it would be
consistent with any maxim of common sense to be unprepared for the
worst.

What, said he, is our external situation? Do we not see the nation with
whom we are at variance find quarrels with every country who is not
strong enough to resist her? Does she not injure us on every side? Do we
not hear of depredatory threats, and the mischiefs she has the power of
doing us, urged as reasons why we should submit to her? And yet, after
being told of these designs, shall we sit with our arms folded, and make
no defence? For the measures already taken will be nothing without this.
Fortifications would be nothing except supported by a sufficient number
of infantry and cavalry.

What, he asked, is the situation of the West Indies? Were they not told
that Victor Hugues, with 5,000 of his best troops, is ready to make a
blow upon the Southern country, whenever the word of command shall be
given? They knew that these troops existed; they had been seen, and the
desperate character of their leader was also known. Yet, with this enemy
upon our threshold, within four or five days' sail of us, we still fold
our arms, and say we will make no defence.

When he reflected upon these things, he could not help deploring that
fatal blindness, that stubborn spirit of opposition, in certain
gentlemen, which could hide from their view the danger of our present
situation; that, at a period when the veil is rending from before the
eyes of the community; when those who have been the most blind
out-of-doors begin to see, that those gentlemen in this House, who, from
their ancient birth and fortunes, might be supposed to possess the true
American spirit, should still persist in their blind, their destructive
course, was greatly to be lamented. And though he could not doubt the
fate of this bill, yet that there should be a few men found supporting
measures which tend directly to the destruction of the country, he could
not help lamenting.

Mr. BALDWIN did not agree with the gentleman who had just sat down, that
the present motion was either unprecedented or improper. When it is
proposed to make a law on any subject, it presents itself to discussion
on two grounds, the principles of the law and the details. The proper
stages to debate the general principle on which the law is to be
founded, by the rules of this House, are, when it is proposed to
introduce the law, and at the third reading, when it is considered as
finished, and on its passage; the intermediate stages of the discussion
are all supposed to be employed to settle and adjust the detail. He had
often regretted that members, having been accustomed to different modes
of proceeding in their State Legislatures, were so apt to disturb and
keep unsettled their modes of proceeding in this House. He knew it was
sometimes a practice, after a bill had been read the second time, and
was referred to be shaped and formed by free discussion in Committee of
the Whole, a member would rise to amend the bill by striking out the
first section, declaring, at the same time, that he made the motion for
the purpose of destroying the bill--a mere law fiction, under color of
detail and amendment, to contest the original principle and destroy the
bill. Without doubt the commencement of the business is the regular
stage to contest the principle. If it originates in this House, it is on
a motion in Committee of the Whole, expressing in general terms the
expediency that such a law should be provided; if it comes from the
Senate, the same question presents itself after the first reading, in
the words of the present motion, which are the very words prescribed by
the stated rule of the House. If on this question the majority of the
House appear in favor of the principle of the bill, it goes on through
the stages of its detail and formation, and at the third reading the
general question occurs again, shall the principle, detailed as it now
appears, pass into a law? He was sure no member could object to the
fairness and propriety of the present motion.

As to the principle of the bill, he must say, it did not meet his
approbation. If the House is convinced it is necessary to raise an Army
of twenty thousand men, as the bill now proposes, they ought to say so
at once, and let it be done; if they are not convinced that it is
necessary, the law ought not to pass, the Army ought not to be raised
till they are convinced it is necessary. The constitution made the
Legislature the sole judge on this subject. The present bill says it is
not necessary to raise this Army now, but perhaps it may be before
Congress meets again, it therefore proposes to transfer the right of
judging on this subject to the Executive; he thought it a very improper
transfer of Legislative power. It has been said that all our troops are
raised thus provisionally. If attention is paid to those laws, it will
be seen that they did not pass till the Legislature was convinced that
circumstances then required the troops to be raised; a clause is added,
that if circumstances should alter so as to make the troops unnecessary,
the PRESIDENT might forbear to raise, or discharge them; it gives him
power to disband the Army, but not to raise one.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, as the principal objection against this bill seemed
to arise from an idea that the militia would be found sufficient for
every purpose of defence for this country, he thought gentlemen had
better concur in letting the bill go to a second reading and be
committed, and before it again came under consideration, the militia
bill would probably have been determined upon. He was pleased to hear
gentlemen say that the country must be defended, and if an effective
militia could not be had, it must be done by a force of this kind. For
his own part, from the proceedings already had upon the militia bill, he
had not much to hope of its passing; and if not, gentlemen would
certainly see the necessity of some additional standing force. Mr. R.
could not conceive what objections could have been induced by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania (as he was not in the House when he spoke)
on a constitutional ground. Mr. R. adduced, as in point, the law
enabling the PRESIDENT to call out troops in consequence of the Western
insurrection, and that making provision for the effectual protection of
the frontiers of the United States. Mr. R. then mentioned his
expectation of despatches being received from our Ministers in Paris in
the course of twelve hours (a particular mention of which has already
been made) which might convince all of the propriety of going into this
measure; for he believed it was the wish of all to defend the country
with vigor and effect, and that they only differed as to the means of
doing it.

Mr. MCDOWELL was in favor of the motion for rejecting the bill, as it
contained two principles which he thought inadmissible; the first,
because it delegated Legislative power to the PRESIDENT; the other, as
it respects volunteer corps. The first, he believed, would be
unconstitutional, and the last would go to the destruction of the
militia of the United States. If our situation be such as it had been
figured to the committee by the gentleman from South Carolina, they
ought to turn their attention to it, and create an army themselves, and
not direct the PRESIDENT to do it if he shall judge proper. But if there
be no real appearance of danger, but it is merely conjectural, then it
is not necessary to act. Gentlemen have talked of members folding their
arms and doing nothing for the defence of the United States. It must be
recollected that we have gone considerable lengths in measures of
defence. We have voted large sums for the frigates, for fortifications,
for an additional regiment of artillery, and put in requisition 80,000
militia. If gentlemen can show that these measures, with our former
establishment, are not sufficient for our present situation, he was
ready to go further, but he was not willing to delegate any power lodged
with that House to another branch of the Government.

It was well known, Mr. McD. said, that it had been the wish of the late
PRESIDENT, that it was also the wish of the present PRESIDENT, of the
Heads of Departments, and many members of Congress, to increase our
Military Establishment, and to fix a standing army in this country. It
has heretofore, however, been opposed with success, except in time of
war. If we were to be involved in war, an army must be resorted to in
aid of the militia; but, in the first instance, the militia might be
depended upon as a sure and safe defence of this country. He was sure
they would be equal to any invasion, and if we were to engage in a
lengthy and formidable war, we must provide accordingly.

Mr. S. SMITH hoped this motion would be withdrawn. At a time like the
present, when the people of the United States are looking up to Congress
in expectation of their taking effectual measures of defence against
what they think not only a possible, but probable event, he wished
nothing to appear like indifference to that object. He agreed with the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER) that if gentlemen did not
like the bill, it might be amended; but to reject it altogether would
have too much the appearance of indifference to the defence of the
country. He did not know that this would be the best and most effectual
mode of defence; he thought a better might be established, but he had
not made up his mind upon it. He would, however, throw out an idea or
two for the consideration of the committee. Last session, eighty
thousand man were ordered to be held in requisition. He thought if the
PRESIDENT was to draw out twenty thousand of these for three months, and
when their time expired, to draw out twenty thousand more, and so on,
till the whole had been out, it might afford a sufficient protection,
and more speedily than any other, and it would have the good effect of
making eighty thousand soldiers. In addition to this, there might be a
provision authorizing the PRESIDENT to receive volunteer corps of
cavalry from the Southern States, to be commanded by their own officers,
to serve in a manner as shall be directed by law, the equipments for
which to be furnished by the United States, which would be more
effectual than a general law to raise three or four thousand cavalry.

Mr. MACON said, that some of the arguments used on this occasion were of
an extraordinary nature. The motion was first said to be contrary to
rule, and then unprecedented. It must certainly be allowed to be as
proper to debate a bill on its first reading, as to refuse to refer a
resolution. The fact was, that motions of this kind were made every
session. It was said to be a surprise upon gentlemen; this could not be
the case, if they had done their duty, as it had lain on their desks for
some time. One reason, with him, for wishing the bill to be rejected in
this stage was, that he was desirous of bringing the session to a close.
It was wonderful that gentlemen should persist in bringing standing
troops into the Southern States against their will. If members from that
quarter were of opinion that their militia was sufficient defence, why
will gentlemen be so over civil as to force troops upon them? It was a
little extraordinary that gentlemen most in favor of this bill are the
most opposed to the plan for newly organizing the militia. [Mr. DANA
doubted the fact.] It was said that, because gentlemen are opposed to
this bill, they are opposed to all measures of defence. The fact was
otherwise; they wished only to avoid unnecessary expense. If they were
to bring forward a proposition for raising one hundred thousand or two
hundred thousand men, and it was opposed, they might say the same thing.
He supposed every man wished to defend his country. He had only heard
one reason in favor of committing the bill, and that was, that it was
probable we might shortly hear from our Commissioners. If there was any
certainty in that, it might be ground for delaying a decision.

Mr. GALLATIN could not conceive why it should be insinuated that there
was any thing unfair in making opposition to this bill on its first
reading; for, if gentlemen were not ready to vote against the bill, they
would, of course, vote for committing it, so that the opposition would
have less chance of succeeding now than in the future stages of the
bill. In the meanwhile, he wished to take every opportunity of
endeavoring to destroy the bill. If a majority could be got against it
on the first reading, so much the better, as it would prevent a loss of
time in future discussion. He was not, however, afraid of discussion; he
believed, the more it was discussed, the more the committee would be
convinced of the impropriety of passing this bill. He did not believe,
as had been supposed, that it was capable of amendment in any of its
essential parts. It had been said, that a contingency might be
mentioned; or a time fixed, at the expiration of which, the army might
be raised. Such a bill would, however, be altogether different, as this
bill vested the power of judging of the proper time with the PRESIDENT;
nor could he see how it was susceptible of the amendments suggested by
the gentleman from Maryland. If he thought it was, he would certainly
agree to its being committed, as he perfectly concurred in the plan he
mentioned; but such a system would be so different from the present,
that it would be a much shorter and better course to reject this bill,
and originate a new one.

He thought a bill of this kind was sufficient to alarm the House, and
that it ought to be opposed in every stage, notwithstanding what was
said about the danger of the country; indeed that danger was what
strengthened his opposition to the bill; for, if our danger be, as it is
represented, likely to come from Victor Hugues and his troops, from an
insurrection of the negroes, from disaffected persons, from our enemy
being at the door, it is the duty of Congress to raise an army
themselves, and not to give the PRESIDENT the power of doing it; but if
it is not believed that this representation of danger rests upon any
specific ground, but that it is merely imaginary, then there is no
necessity for giving the PRESIDENT the power, as he can call Congress
together whenever he thinks proper.

If the danger of invasion was great, he should not hesitate to raise an
army, without waiting until the event took place. He thought, therefore,
the gentleman from South Carolina was not right to say that the
opposition to this bill arose from a determined opposition to every
thing like defensive measures. Mr. G. said it was true he did not
apprehend all the dangers which that gentleman had spoken of; but, if
they really did exist, he had a much greater reliance upon the militia
of the country for defence than that gentleman seemed to have. He knew
that though in some States they were not either well disciplined or well
armed, yet they were organized, and had their officers, and the States
being in possession of arms, they would be a much more effectual
defence, and sooner brought together than any other force. He did not
believe that giving the President the power to raise 20,000 men would be
so effectual as the calling out of 20,000 militia, as the one could be
raised immediately, and the raising of the other would be doubtful.
Besides, in proportion as the danger exists, it would be better to call
upon the people themselves to defend their country, than upon hired
troops. If any danger was to be apprehended from the negroes, they would
be best suppressed by the people in the States where they are. A militia
is every where; whereas a standing army may be very distant from any
attack which may take place. A standing army in Virginia, for instance,
would do little good against insurgents in South Carolina; and if an
insurrection of that kind was not immediately suppressed by the people,
the mischief would be incalculable.

Mr. RUTLEDGE thought it necessary, as the gentleman from Virginia had
withdrawn his opposition to the commitment of the bill from what had
fallen from him with respect to the probability of despatches being
shortly received from our Ministers, to state upon what ground he had
said this. [Mr. R. then mentioned the arrival of the _Pomona_ at
Baltimore.]

Mr. MCDOWELL did not think the information given by the gentleman from
South Carolina (Mr. RUTLEDGE) ought to put off the decision of the
question which had been under consideration.


WEDNESDAY, April 25.

_Provisional Army._

The SPEAKER having declared the question on the bill from the Senate for
the raising of a provisional army, viz: "Shall this bill be rejected?"
to be first in order before the House,

Mr. MCDOWELL said, upon further consideration, and conceiving that
gentlemen might wish to see the contents of the despatches of our
Ministers, which had been mentioned, before they gave their vote on this
occasion, he should withdraw his opposition to the second reading of the
bill.

The bill was then read a second time; and a motion being made to commit
it to the Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union,

Mr. LYON called for the yeas and nays; but only himself and another
member rising in support of the motion, it was not carried.

The bill was then referred.

_Department of the Navy._

Mr. HARPER called for the order of the day on the bill for establishing
an Executive department, to be denominated _The Department of the Navy_.
The House accordingly went into a Committee of the Whole on this bill,
and rose without making any amendment in the bill; but, upon the
question, in the House, of its passing to a third reading,

Mr. GALLATIN said, he had not proposed any amendment to this bill in the
Committee of the Whole, because, what he had to say upon it, would go
against the principle of the bill. He did not think it necessary to
establish a Navy Department. He did not suppose our Army and Navy were
at present so large as to require two separate departments. If the
business was so much increased as that the persons at present employed
could not do it, they might be increased. Nor did he believe, with some
gentlemen, that such an institution would produce economy; on the
contrary, he always found that the increase of officers was the increase
of expense. Some time ago, it was said that great economy would arise
from appointing a Purveyor of Supplies; but he had seen, from the time
of this establishment, a great and constant increase of expense, in
every thing which relates to supplies. Not seeing the necessity of it,
therefore, he should vote against it, except good reason should be given
for it; for he believed, the moment a department of this kind was
established, the head of it would wish to make it of as great importance
as possible, by endeavors to extend the object of his superintendence.
He called for the yeas and nays upon the question, which were agreed to
be taken.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS did not feel disposed to vote for this bill. It appeared
to him that the Secretary of War, with officers under him, would be
sufficient for the management of our naval concerns also. It was some
time after the constitution was framed before the War Department was
established. Whenever an office was established, something was always
found for it to do. Soon after the War Department was established we had
an Indian war; and after that Indian war ceased, another establishment
was made under the name of the Accountant's Office. If the business was
increased, new clerks might be employed, but he should be against any
new department. If we were engaged in hostilities, and our naval power
of course increased, such an establishment might be necessary; but at
present he did not think it necessary, nor did he think our revenue
equal to the support of a Navy which should require such an
establishment to take care of it. If this office was to superintend the
construction of vessels, persons acquainted with this business might be
employed under the Secretary of War. The present expense of the War
Department was $18,250 a year; and though there would not be much to do
in this new office, he supposed the expense would not be much less; and,
besides, Congress would be importuned, from session to session, to
increase our naval force. Mr. W. said he was desirous of making every
defence for our country, yet he wished to keep down our expenses as much
as possible. If circumstances called for going further into the business
of the Navy, he should not object to it.

Mr. SEWALL said, when the House was considering any subject relative to
the increase of the Navy, complaints were made of the enormous expenses
and of the little responsibility which attends the business; and when it
has been said that the greatness of the expense might have arisen from a
want of knowledge in the persons who had the care of the business, it
was said that defect ought to be remedied. This department is intended
to do that, and, by the expense of a few hundred dollars, he had no
doubt thousands would be saved. When talking about vessels, it was
complained that too great an expense was incurred on this object; now it
is said there is no object for the proposed officer to attend to. But
the gentleman from New York (Mr. WILLIAMS) was afraid, if this office
was established, it would be the means of increasing the Navy. This
certainly could not be done, contrary to the will of Congress.

He thought there were obvious reasons for the establishment of this
department. It was well known that an officer might be well acquainted
with the business of the army, without knowing any thing about a navy;
and a man employed at the head of such a department ought to have some
knowledge of the business committed to his care. Mr. S. said, however
well the present Secretary of War might be acquainted with army
concerns, he believed he was not conversant with naval matters. In
consequence of this, he had a number of agents employed under him.
Indeed, the War Department had so much business on its hands, as not to
be able to pay a sufficient attention to our naval establishment. He
therefore believed it was necessary to make this new establishment,
especially as the Navy Department was likely to be considerably
augmented.

Mr. S. SMITH believed, after all the struggles which had been made on
this subject, it would at length be found necessary for the United
States seriously to turn their attention to the establishment of an
efficient naval force; and the sooner gentlemen could bring their minds
to this, the better it would be for the general good. If this
proposition had been brought forward at the commencement of the session,
he should have thought it unnecessary; but, from the increase which had
been made during this session, he thought the establishment proper.
$950,000 had been appropriated for providing twelve vessels; a number of
galleys were also contemplated. A ship of war or schooner, it appears,
has been built on the lakes, and some galleys on the rivers. These, with
the frigates and cutters, form an establishment which will require a
naval man to superintend it. An expenditure of two millions of dollars,
he supposed, would be authorized this session; and a man knowing
something of naval architecture will be able to save more, in the course
of this year, to the United States, than will pay ten years of the
expenses of this office. A merchant going into the building of vessels
without a knowledge of the business will find the truth of this fact.
The great expenditure attending the building of the frigates, he
supposed had been chiefly owing to the want of such an establishment as
the present. The gentleman from New York had stated the expense of the
War Department at $18,250; but one-half of that expense was incurred in
the office of the Accountant of the War Department; and as there would
be no need of a new Accountant, the expense could not be doubled. The
duties of the War Department are greatly increased, and might be further
increased during the present session; and an expenditure of the kind
proposed might save the throwing away of thousands of dollars.

Mr. MACON said, the arguments in favor of this bill were derived from a
want of knowledge of naval affairs in the War Department. He thought
that might be supplied without the establishment of a new department;
but he believed the building of the frigates had mostly been carried on
under the direction of the captains who were to have the command of
them. More clerks had been added to the War Department, in consideration
of the business which the Navy had occasioned. He believed the more
officers were appointed, the more money would be expended.

Mr. OTIS said, the gentleman from New York had opposed this bill on
different grounds from the gentleman from Pennsylvania. He did not make
any reply to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, because he expected
opposition from him and some others, to every measure which had the
defence of the country for its object; and, as the session was drawing
to a close, he thought it best to have as little debate as possible,
and that the sooner the question was taken the better; but when he saw a
gentleman rise in opposition to it, upon whose support he calculated, he
was apprehensive lest it might have an effect upon other persons on
whose support he also relied. The gentleman from New York seemed to
apprehend some new and heavy expense was to be incurred, and that some
greater caution was now necessary than heretofore. What saving, then,
does he mean to make by opposing the establishment of this office? Since
he supposes the same clerks will be sufficient, it will only be the
salary of the chief officer, which, Mr. O. supposed, would be $3,500--a
greater saving than that which would be made by such a person in every
ship built or purchased. Taking the expense of our Naval Establishment
at one million dollars a year, it would only be an expense of one-third
per cent., which every one must allow was a mere trifle, to have the
money of the public well expended. The services of the War and Navy
Departments were, he said, perfectly distinct. The duties of the War
Department became every day more arduous, and whatever gentlemen may
think, they must become still more so. This opposition coming from a
friend, he could not suppose it arose from a bad motive, but merely from
a narrow conception of what is conceived to be the agricultural
interest. Agriculture and commerce, said Mr. O., are twin sisters, and
cannot live separate from each other; they must live together, or expire
at the same moment. It was the duty of gentlemen representing
agriculturists thus to speak to their constituents. It was an axiom
realized by every politician in the world. The fact was, that every
thing spent upon the Naval Department was so much saved, in which the
agricultural part of the country partake very largely.

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE never remembered to have heard such language as had
fallen from the gentleman last up. He laments, said Mr. C., that a
gentleman who usually voted with him should dare to think for himself.
Are gentlemen's opinions and language thus to be circumscribed? [Mr. O.
explained.] Mr. C. continued, the gentleman was willing that all
questions should now be taken without debate. Does this mean, said he,
that there are a majority of members in this House who must always be in
the right, and a minority always in the wrong? If this be the case, they
had better dismiss the minority, and do the business themselves. Were
not gentlemen any longer to express their difference of opinion? Would
this be the way to keep the Government together, or to preserve harmony
in the country? If this were to be the situation of things, he should
regret it with tears in his eyes. He had himself no mathematical
certainty that any opinion of his was right; nor did he think the
gentleman from Massachusetts ought to expect men to bow to his. Such an
assumption led to mischief of a serious kind. What! to say we have a
majority, and therefore we will have no debate. [The SPEAKER said no
such expression had been made use of; if it had, he should have checked
it.] Had it not been for an expression of this kind, he should not have
risen on this question. He wished to hear every man deliver his opinion
freely. Mr. C. did not believe the bill to be a proper one, and he
should therefore vote against it.

Mr. MCDOWELL said, he should be opposed to the bill, if he had no other
objection to it than that it went to countenance the idea, according to
the gentlemen from Maryland and Massachusetts, that this country must go
into the establishment of a large naval power. The great saving to be
derived from this office, he understood to be from savings in the
building of vessels; but, as the twelve vessels which were lately voted
are proposed to be purchased, ready built, he supposed this reason did
not apply at present. If there was no intention, therefore, (which he
trusted there was not,) of carrying our Naval Establishment to any
considerable extent, he could see no occasion for the creation of this
office. For, if this Secretary of the Navy was appointed, he would also
be obliged to rely upon others, in a great degree, for information.

Mr. HARPER said, the naval defence which this House thought necessary
for the service of the country having been voted, he could not agree
with those gentlemen who consider this as a question of defence. He
thought it a question of economy, and, in this view, he should reply to
some observations which had been made upon it.

He believed our naval defence would be much more efficaciously and
speedily provided by means of the proposed establishment than if the
bill was rejected. So far, indeed, it is a question of defence, but only
collaterally so. The point of view in which this bill should be
considered, is simply this: will it not effect with more speed and
economy the marine defence now existing, as well as that contemplated?
He himself had no doubt as to the fact. Indeed, he would ask the
gentleman from North Carolina, whether, if he were about to erect a
distillery on his place, he would employ his overseer to do it, who,
though he might understand the business of his farm very well, knew
nothing of building. He certainly would not; and if this would be bad
policy in an individual, it would be equally so in a nation. Besides,
the expense would be so trifling as only to amount (as had been stated)
to one-third per cent., though traders were in the habit of paying five
per cent. to have their business done.

But it was said, that if an office of this kind was established, it
would soon create business. But the business is already created. We
have, said he, already a marine of fifteen ships of war. This, he knew,
was comparatively a small force, but in the establishment of which we
shall yet expend two millions of dollars, and the support of which will
amount at least to $700,000 or $800,000 annually. When the War
Department was first established, the object of its care was not, he
believed, of equal magnitude.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS was ready to acknowledge he did not believe it could
ever be the interest of this country to go into the establishment of a
large naval power, and therefore he should not be in favor of the
present bill on that ground. Nor did he think there was any good reason
for dividing the military and naval business, except there was more than
could be attended to by the present establishment. But it was said the
business was of a different nature, and therefore it ought to be in
separate departments, as one man cannot be supposed to understand both
concerns. That objection would apply to any of the other departments;
and whenever this rule of dividing business shall be adopted, we shall
get men of inferior talents to do it. When the Government was
established, it was thought that a War Department would be equal to the
military and naval concerns of this country. But it was said a navy was
not then thought of; it was, however, doubtless thought of when the
frigates were ordered to be built, and it was not then gone into. It
was, however, said that much money had been lost for want of an officer
of this kind. This was mere assertion, and it was by no means clear that
the business would be done better with such an officer than without him.

But it was said, it was necessary to go into this measure for the sake
of appearances. To whom are these appearances to be made? Not to our own
people, but to European nations. The gentleman from Massachusetts says
we ought to adopt their opinion upon this subject. He viewed a policy of
this kind the most fatal of any other to this country. He believed that
the less we had to do with European politics, and their mode of
administration, the better. The only object in view, with that House,
ought to be the interest of their own country. What, said he, is the
situation of those countries which have gone into the establishment of
large navies? They are involved in debt which they never can, and never
will, pay.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said, the only point in dispute was, whether a separate
office should be established for the business of the Navy, or whether it
should be put under the care of a superintendent in the War Department.
He wished the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. OTIS) had spared his
observations until he had heard those of the gentleman from Maryland,
(Mr. S. SMITH.) It had appeared to him that a superintendent in the War
Department would have been sufficient, and he yet thought so. He did not
think the business of the Navy was so great as to require a separate
establishment. There was more business in the War Department in 1794
than at present, and nothing was then heard of a new department. He
should not have opposed this measure if he had not been convinced that
every measure taken to increase the Navy beyond its present
establishment would have a bad effect on this country. It had been
proposed last winter to purchase all the live-oak timber in the Southern
States; afterwards a proposition was brought forward for the
establishment of navy yards. Those measures had been defeated, and they
were now called upon to establish a new department for this favorite
object. He was not willing to do it. The gentleman from Massachusetts
said there would only be a difference between making a new office, and
continuing to do the business in the War Department, of the salary of
the chief officer; but if he looked at the second clause of the bill, he
would find himself mistaken, as there was in that provision for a
principal clerk, and such other clerks as he shall judge necessary: so
that he may have a clerk for every port in the Union, if he pleases. If
he represented, as the gentleman from Massachusetts does, a commercial
interest, he might be as favorable to a Navy as him; but as that was not
the case, he was opposed to it. He gave his approbation to such
appropriations as he thought necessary; and if, in this instance, he
differed in opinion from the gentleman from Massachusetts, he should
stand excused. He believed with that gentleman, that the commercial and
agricultural interests were closely connected; they differed only as to
the extent to which it was proper to carry our naval defence. He did not
wish, however, at present, to reject the bill. He believed it might be
amended, and he had no objection to the question being postponed for
that purpose.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, he was almost tempted to smile at the arrogant
pretensions of some gentlemen in this House, in their treatment of
others, at least their equals on this floor, whatever they might be out
of doors, being equally with them Representatives of the people. They
were told by the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. OTIS) that opposition
was expected, was looked for, from certain gentlemen; that no argument
was necessary on the occasion, because those members who were opposed to
all measures of defence, would oppose this measure also; but that those
who had originated the measure would carry it into effect. This simple
declaration of a strength of party was also attended with a very
handsome rebuke of one of his colleagues (Mr. J. WILLIAMS) for having
dared to doubt the propriety of the measure before the committee. He was
happy to find this rebuke had produced its effect, and that though his
colleague was at first very decidedly against the bill, he was now
disposed to doubt; and the effect of another rebuke, he supposed, would
obtain his vote in favor of the new establishment. For his own part,
neither the rebuke, nor the preliminary observations with which it was
accompanied, had produced any effect upon him. He did very much doubt
the propriety of the measure; for, although there was a great deal of
business in the War Office, and the same person could not be supposed to
be acquainted with military and naval affairs, if a ship-builder was to
have the appointment, he could not think such a person fit to be one of
the great council of the nation; and it must be recollected that the
person who holds this office will become one of the counsellors of the
President on all great concerns.

It was said that this establishment was necessary, in order to give an
appearance of defence to Europe, as if the establishment of a Department
of the Navy was to have the effect to do away all our past and to
prevent future injuries. But our appearance to Europe was not all; the
example of European countries was mentioned. All were said to have a
Marine Department. The practice of Europe, Mr. L. said, had proved
itself to be a bad one, as the navies of those countries had proved the
ruin of them.

The yeas and nays were taken upon this bill going to its third reading,
and decided in the affirmative--yeas 47, nays 41, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, Bailey Bartlett, James A. Bayard,
      Christopher G. Champlin, John Chapman, James Cochran,
      Joshua Coit, William Craik, Samuel W. Dana, John Dennis,
      George Dent, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster,
      Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, Roger
      Griswold, William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, Samuel
      Lyman, James Machir, William Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis
      R. Morris, Harrison G. Otis, Josiah Parker, Thomas
      Pinckney, John Read, John Rutledge, jun., James Schureman,
      Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Thompson
      J. Skinner, Nathaniel Smith, Samuel Smith, Peleg Sprague,
      George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson, Thomas
      Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, and Peleg Wadsworth.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Stephen Bullock,
      Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne, Matthew
      Clay, Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph,
      William Findlay, John Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James
      Gillespie, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph
      Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston,
      Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jun., Richard Stanford,
      Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van
      Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, John
      Williams, and Robert Williams.[31]


THURSDAY, April 26.

The bill for establishing an Executive Department, to be denominated the
Department of the Navy, was read the third time and passed--42 to 27.

_Military Appropriations._

On motion, the House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole
on the bill appropriating for the Military Establishment for the year
1798; when, the question for filling the blank in the Quartermaster's
Department with $200,000 again recurring,

Mr. GALLATIN moved to fill the blank with $150,000, which was the sum he
had proposed on a former day, since which, he said, the House had
received a number of statements from the Secretary of War, in order to
induce a larger appropriation. As there seemed to be a general
concurrence of opinion to restrict the expenses of the War Department,
he wished some gentlemen, better able to do it than himself, would
compare the number of troops in service with the sums there required.
Mr. G. noticed a number of items which appeared to him unaccountably
extravagant, and contrasted the very great expense incurred on the
North-western frontier with that of the troops employed on the seaboard.
Mr. G. also took a view of the expenses under this head from the year
1789 to the present time, in order to show that $150,000 would be a
sufficient appropriation.

After commenting pretty freely and at large on the estimates from the
War Office, Mr. G. said, he believed there was some radical defect with
respect to the connection subsisting between the Accountant's
department, the Treasury and War Departments, which prevented a proper
investigation of accounts. So far as relates to the Treasury Department,
the accounts were always very clear, and there was no ground of
complaint; but, from the connection which subsists between the War
Department and the Accountant's department, there seemed to be a want of
responsibility.

In the details which had been laid before the House, Mr. G. said, he
found items under the head of contingencies, which he should never have
expected to have found there; one was for the pay of an inspector of the
troops and garrisons of the United States, at a salary of sixty dollars
a month. He could not say such an officer was not necessary; but if he
was, he would say he ought to have been provided for by law. The other
item was for a much larger sum, viz: the pay of an engineer of the
fortifications of the United States, at a salary of three thousand
dollars a year, which was a salary greater than that of the Secretary of
War. It appears that this engineer was engaged for three years; but,
after he had been some time in the service, two thousand dollars were
given him over and above his pay, to relinquish his contract.

After a few observations from Mr. DANA, in favor of the Secretary of
War,

Mr. SHEPARD rose, and went over the different items contained in the
statement read yesterday, particularly the boatmen, $13,000; the
pack-horsemen, $5,000; the wagoners, $7,000; the laborers, $3,000; the
armorers, $6,000; the artificers, $14,000; hire of expresses, $6,000;
and fuel, $8,000. He could not tell how so many boatmen, pack-horsemen,
and wagoners, could be employed (for it was not for boats, pack-horses,
and wagons, but for the men alone;) and what so many laborers could be
employed in he could not imagine. He did not see why the soldiers could
not do all the labor the Army had to do themselves. When he was in the
Army, he was at no expense like this. And how the repairing the arms for
three thousand men could cost $6,000 he could not tell; nor could he see
how $14,000 could be expended on artificers. If we were to be involved
in war, it would not do to expend money in this manner. It was easy to
write down thirty, fifty, or one hundred thousand dollars for this or
that, but when the taxes came to be laid, the money would not be so
easily raised. Mr. S. passed over a number of articles, till he came to
fuel. He thought $8,000 a year for fuel, in a country where the trees
were ready to fall upon them, was a very exorbitant charge. While he was
in the Army, it never cost him sixpence for fuel. The United States had
better purchase the land upon which the timber grows, at once; they
would be able to get it for a much less sum. If these expenses were to
be incurred for five thousand men, what would be the expense of an Army
of thirty thousand men? This estimate, he was sure, must be much too
large; and it became Congress to be careful how they gave encouragement
to such charges as these, for the country would scarcely be able to
support the expense of any considerable establishment if more economy
was not used.

The question on filling the blank with two hundred thousand dollars, was
put, and negatived without a division.

Mr. GALLATIN moved to fill the blank with $150,000. He said that, with
respect to the integrity of the Secretary of War, he did not doubt it in
the least; as to his talents he had no opportunity of forming a correct
judgment of them; he was, however, some judge of accounts, and he saw
enough of them to authorize the declaration which he had made as to the
improper connection of the different departments. He had spoken of facts
only.

The question for filling the blank with $150,000 was put, and carried
without a division.

After agreeing to several other items, amongst which was one for the
vessels on the Lakes, the committee rose, the House agreed to the
amendment, and the bill was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading.

_Presents to Ministers._

The SPEAKER said he had received a letter this morning, signed Thomas
Pinckney, which he was desired to lay before the House. It was
accordingly read. It stated that when he (Mr. Pinckney) had concluded
the late treaty with the Spanish Government, the Spanish Minister, the
Prince of Peace, informed him the presents usually given in such cases
would be prepared for him; and that also when he took leave of the
British Court, the like information was given to him by the Minister
there. To both of which he replied, that the Constitution of the United
States forbade its Ministers from receiving any present from any foreign
Prince or State, without the consent of Congress; that in due time he
would ask that consent, and act accordingly. This letter asks for the
determination of Congress.

It was moved by Mr. RUTLEDGE to refer this letter to a select committee.

Mr. MACON wished it to go to a Committee of the whole House.

After some observations, the latter motion was negatived, and the former
carried.


FRIDAY, April 27.

On motion of Mr. W. C. CLAIBORNE, the House went into a Committee of the
Whole on the bill directing the payment of a detachment of militia, for
services performed in the year 1794, under the command of Major James
Orr. The bill was reported without amendment, and ordered to be
engrossed for a third reading to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, May 2.

_Naturalization Law._

On motion of Mr. SEWALL, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on
the report made yesterday by the Committee for the Protection of
Commerce and the Defence of the Country, on the subject of
naturalization; and the report having been read, and the first
resolution for prolonging the term of residence before aliens shall be
admitted as citizens, being under consideration,

Mr. SEWALL said, the term of residence now required from foreigners
before they can become citizens, is five years. The committee think this
period too short; it is much shorter than the period adopted by the
French Government. The committee were of opinion that a residence of at
least ten years should be required; but this might be left a blank in
the bill, and afterwards filled.

Mr. HARPER believed that it was high time we should recover from the
mistake which this country fell into when it first began to form its
constitutions, of admitting foreigners to citizenship. This mistake, he
believed, had been productive of very great evils to this country, and,
unless corrected, he was apprehensive those evils would greatly
increase. He believed the time was now come when it would be proper to
declare, that nothing but birth should entitle a man to citizenship in
this country. He thought this was the proper season for making the
declaration. He believed the United States had experience enough to cure
them of the folly of believing that the strength and happiness of the
country would be promoted by admitting to the rights of citizenship all
the congregations of people who resort to these shores from every part
of the world. Under these impressions, which, as he supposed they would
have the same force upon others as upon himself, he should not detain
the committee by dilating upon, he proposed to amend the resolution by
adding to it the following words, viz: "that provision ought to be made
by law for preventing any person becoming entitled to the rights of a
citizen of the United States, except by birth."

The CHAIRMAN declared this amendment would be a substitute to the
resolution before the committee, and therefore not in order.

Mr. OTIS said, he would propose an amendment, which he believed would be
in order, which was as follows, namely, "and that no alien born, who is
not at present a citizen of the United States, shall hereafter be
capable of holding any office of honor, trust, or profit, under the
United States."

Mr. HARPER moved to amend this amendment, by adding the following words:
"or of voting at the election of any member of the Legislature of the
United States, or of any State."

Mr. H. said, he was for giving foreigners every facility for acquiring
property, of holding this property, of raising their families, and of
transferring their property to their families. He was willing they
should form citizens for us; but as to the rights of citizenship, he was
not willing they should be enjoyed, except by persons born in this
country. He did not think this even was desirable by the persons
themselves. Why, he asked, did foreigners seek a residence in this
country? He supposed it was either to better their condition, or to live
under a Government better and more free than that they had left. But was
it necessary these persons should at once become entitled to take a part
in the concerns of our Government? He believed it by no means necessary,
either to their happiness or prosperity, and he was sure it would not
tend to the happiness of this country. If the native citizens are not
indeed adequate to the performance of the duties of Government, it might
be expedient to invite legislators or voters from other countries to do
that business for which they themselves are not qualified. But if the
people of the country, who owe their birth to it, are adequate to all
the duties of Government, he could not see for what reason strangers
should be admitted; strangers who, however acceptable they may be in
other respects, could not have the same views and attachments with
native citizens. Under this view of the subject, he was convinced it was
an essential policy, which lay at the bottom of civil society, that none
but persons born in the country should be permitted to take a part in
the Government. There might have been, Mr. H. acknowledged, individual
exceptions, and there may be again, to this general rule; but it was
necessary to make regulations general, and he believed the danger
arising from admitting foreigners generally to citizenship would be
greater than the inconveniences arising from debarring from citizenship
the most deserving foreigners. He believed it would have been well for
this country if the principle contained in this amendment had been
adopted sooner; he hoped it would now be adopted.

Mr. S. SMITH believed it would be best first to decide upon the
resolution as reported; if it was negatived, the gentleman from South
Carolina might then introduce his amendment as a substitute. To adopt
the resolution as reported would be, he believed, to agree upon an _ex
post facto_ regulation. It could not be intended, he should suppose, to
prevent persons who had resided in this country two or three years,
under the expectation of becoming citizens at the end of five years,
from that privilege.

Mr. CHAMPLIN suggested whether, if this amendment was adopted, it would
not prevent foreigners, who are not at present citizens of the United
States, from becoming officers in the Military or Naval Departments of
the United States. If so, he believed it would be proper to insert the
word "civil" before "officers."

Mr. OTIS acknowledged that the objections of the gentleman from Maryland
(Mr. S. SMITH) were, in some degree, well founded; but there might be
regulations introduced into the bill to avoid them. The present law, he
believed, directs that persons shall give notice of their intention of
becoming citizens of the United States. Where this notice had been
given, he thought such persons should be excluded from the operation of
the law. These resolutions having only been laid upon the table this
morning, he wished, however, that the committee might rise, in order to
afford a little time for consideration. He wished to exclude all
foreigners, whom he could constitutionally exclude, from holding offices
in the United States; but not to entrap such as are in the way of
becoming citizens.

Mr. HARPER said, that, having had it suggested to him that the
constitution would not admit of restraining the States in their
admission of citizens, he should withdraw his amendment for the present,
until he had had an opportunity of examining the constitution in this
respect.

The motion being put for the committee to rise, it was carried, and the
committee rose accordingly.


THURSDAY, May 3.

_Naturalization Law._

Mr. SEWALL moved the House to go into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, in order to resume the consideration of the
resolution which had been reported on the subject of aliens.

Mr. OTIS wished to propose a resolution to the House, before it resolved
itself into a Committee of the Whole on the state of the Union, as a
substitute for the first resolution, reported by the Committee for the
Protection of Commerce and the Defence of the Country. It was to the
following effect:

      "_Resolved_, That no alien born, who is not at present a
      citizen of the United States, shall hereafter be capable of
      holding any office of honor, trust, or profit, under the
      United States."

Mr. VENABLE did not think the House were authorized to enact such a
principle into a law. If taken up at all, it ought to be considered as a
proposition for amending the constitution. If it was thought necessary
by gentlemen to amend the constitution in this way, he should not object
to going into the subject. After foreigners were admitted as citizens,
Congress had not the power of declaring what should be their rights; the
constitution has done this. Foreigners must, therefore, be refused the
privilege of becoming citizens altogether, or admitted to all the rights
of citizens.

Mr. OTIS had no idea that this proposition could be considered as a
proposition to amend the constitution. If the House had the power to
amend the naturalization law, and to extend the time of residence
necessary to entitle an alien to citizenship, they could certainly
extend it to the life of man. The idea of citizenship did not always
include the power of holding offices. In Great Britain no alien was ever
permitted to hold an office, he wished they might not be allowed to do
it here.

The SPEAKER said this was not the proper time to argue whether this
proposition ought to be considered as an amendment to the constitution.
The Committee of the Whole would report upon it as they thought proper.

Mr. VENABLE did not object to the resolution being referred, but thought
it ought to go rather to an ordinary Committee of the Whole than to that
on the state of the Union, as he did not believe Congress had the power
of saying, men who were entitled to hold offices by the constitution,
shall not hold them.

The motion for reference was put and carried, there being for it 45
votes.

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, Mr. DENT in the chair; when

Mr. OTIS moved to postpone the consideration of the resolution formerly
under consideration, for extending the time of residence of aliens
before they should be entitled to citizenship, in order to take up the
resolution which he had proposed, and which had been referred to this
committee.

The question was put and negatived--51 to 26.

The question then returned upon the motion made by Mr. OTIS yesterday,
to amend the first resolution, by adding words of the same tenor with
those contained in the resolution referred this morning.

Mr. MACON said, whether it would be good or bad policy to adopt a
regulation of this kind, he would not inquire, because he believed the
PRESIDENT and Senate could always appoint such men as they thought
proper to office. If a man is a citizen, he is eligible to office
agreeably to the constitutional rule, and that could not be altered by
law. If the people chose to elect a foreigner as a member of the
Legislature, if he had been a citizen seven years, Congress could not
say he should not be eligible. They might, indeed, make the time of
residence, to entitle a foreigner to citizenship, so long, as to prevent
him in that way from holding a seat in the Legislature; but, after a man
is a citizen, he must be entitled to the rights of a citizen.

Mr. OTIS said, gentlemen could certainly read the constitution for
themselves, and draw their own conclusions from it. He himself had not
the smallest doubt as to the constitutionality of restricting aliens in
the way proposed. He believed that Congress, having the power to
establish an uniform rule of naturalization, could, if they thought
proper, make a residence of forty or fifty years necessary before an
alien should be entitled to citizenship, which would extend to the whole
life of a person, and prove an effectual exclusion. If Congress, then,
had a right to exclude foreigners altogether from citizenship, any
modification of that right was certainly within their power, and would
be an advantage to aliens, for which they ought to be grateful. There
would be nothing in this contrary to the constitution; for it was always
acknowledged that where an absolute power may be exercised, a
conditional power may also be exercised. What advantage, he asked, was
derived to this country from giving aliens eligibility to office? The
people of this country were certainly equal to the legislation and
administration of their own Government, comprising all the aliens who
are now become citizens. He had no doubt but many aliens would become
very valuable acquisitions to this country; but he had no idea of
admitting them into the Government. He did not wish to open the door to
the intrigues of other countries in this way; since we know there are
countries whose chief attention is paid to the obtaining of influence in
the internal concerns of the countries over which they wish to have
dominion. And he could see it possible that persons might be furnished
by such a country to come here and buy lands, and by that means, in
time, get into the Government. Great Britain, he said, was very careful
of the avenues which led to her liberty in this respect. Aliens were
there excluded from holding all places of honor, profit, or trust. The
situation of America heretofore was different from what it is at
present. It had not only been thought good policy, in times past, to
encourage foreigners to come to this country, but also to admit them
into the Legislature, and important offices. But now, said he, America
is growing into a nation of importance, and it would be an object with
foreign nations to gain an influence in our councils; and, before any
such attempt was made, it was proper to make provision against it; for
if the time ever should arrive when a number of persons of this
description had found their way into the Legislature, a motion of this
kind would of course be very odious. If, however, gentlemen were of a
different opinion and think the object would be better accomplished by
extending the residence of aliens, he should not object to that course
being taken, though he thought the one he proposed perfectly within the
power of the House.

Mr. SITGREAVES wished that, in attaining an object in which all seemed
to concur, they might avoid any constitutional embarrassment; and this
it was allowed might be done by extending the time of residence of
aliens so far, as to prevent them from ever becoming citizens, by which
means persons who could not be considered as having a common interest
with the citizens of the country, would be effectually excluded from
holding offices in the Government.

Mr. OTIS withdrew his amendment; and then all the three resolutions were
agreed to, without a dissenting voice.

The committee rose, and reported the resolutions. The two first were
concurred in; but, on the question being put on the third,

Mr. N. SMITH said, a foreign Government might do an act tantamount to
war, without declaring it, yet according to the wording of the
proposition, the citizens of that country could not be removed. He
therefore moved to amend the proposition by adding the words, "being
native citizens of any country the Government whereof shall be at war
with the United States."

Mr. SEWALL said, the only objection that he had to this amendment arose
from the consideration that Congress alone had the power of deciding on
the question of war, and he could not therefore see how it could be
determined that any nation was at war with us, until the declaration was
made by that nation, or by Congress.

Mr. OTIS wished his friend from Connecticut would admit of an amendment
which he held in his hand, in the place of that which he had offered. It
was in the following words: "or shall authorize hostilities against the
United States."

Mr. N. SMITH had no objection.

Mr. MCDOWELL thought this motion more objectionable than that of the
gentleman from Connecticut. It ought to be remembered, Mr. McD. said,
that inducements had been held out to foreigners to come to this
country, and many of them had come with a view of becoming citizens of
this country, and many, he believed, were as good as any amongst us. Out
of respect to these foreigners, he should not wish to place them in the
situation which this amendment went to place them in; because it might
be said, hostilities were authorized when no war was declared, and these
people might be treated as if the nation from which they came was at war
with us, when no war existed. It had been said our population was now
sufficient, and that the privileges heretofore allowed to foreigners
might now be withdrawn. In some parts of the country, this might, in
some degree, be the case; but he knew there were other parts which
wanted population. From this consideration, and as he did not wish
unnecessarily to distress the minds of foreigners who had taken up
their residence amongst us, he should vote against this amendment.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS was persuaded, that, if this proposition passed, no good
citizen need be afraid of being disturbed. He had no objection to this
resolution without the amendment, nor had he any particular objection to
the amendment.

Mr. RUTLEDGE was so far from believing that this amendment would check
the immigration of foreigners, that he believed it would encourage it.
Foreigners came here to live under a good Government, and the more
secure the Government was made, the greater would be their desire to
live under it; and he believed a greater security could not be given to
it, than was proposed to be given by this amendment. It was wished to
vest a power in the President to send out of the country persons who
were natives of a country with whom we are at war, or who may have
authorized hostilities against us. In fact, in the situation of things
in which we are now placed, the PRESIDENT should have the power of
removing such intriguing agents and spies as are now spread all over the
country. What, said Mr. R., would be the conduct of France, if in our
situation? In twenty-four hours every man of this description would
either be sent out of the country or put in jail, and such conduct was
wise. Was there nothing, Mr. R. asked, to admonish us to take a measure
of this kind? Yes, there was. A gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. DAVIS) had
said, that a person was in that State delivering commissions into the
hands of every man who was so abandoned as to receive them. Other means
were also taken to alienate the affection of our citizens; and are we
still, said he, to say we will not send these persons out of the country
until a declaration of war is made? If these persons are suffered to
remain, France will never declare war, as she will consider the
residence of these men amongst us as of greater consequence than the
lining of our seaboard with privateers, or covering our coasts with men.

Mr. VENABLE did not wish to show any particular encouragement to
foreigners; but, if persons thought they could live happier here than in
their own country, he should not object to their making the change. He
could not agree to the amendment. Suppose hostility was committed upon
the property of any of our citizens by France, such hostility might not
be sufficient cause for placing all our commercial citizens in a
situation of having their property seized. Many cases might be deemed
hostility by the PRESIDENT which ought not to go to cut off all
communication between the citizens of the two countries. In such a case,
if any of the citizens of France should be taken up here, it would
produce a similar conduct towards our citizens in that country, which
would be allowed to be a serious evil.

Mr. SEWALL again urged, as an objection to this amendment, the
constitutional power of Congress to declare war. Too many circumstances
of insult and aggression, he allowed, had been experienced by this
country from a foreign power, which might have been understood by other
nations as war, and might have been so considered by this country; yet,
as it is an act of Congress to declare war, we could not be considered
as at war until Congress declared us to be in such a state, except war
was declared against us. This provision was not intended for any
particular case, but as a general provision, which might at any time be
called forth by proclamation. It should, therefore, be as well guarded
and definite as possible. If the words proposed were introduced, the
proposition would be rendered too indefinite; and the PRESIDENT might
proceed to send aliens from this country, and of course cause our
citizens in a foreign country to be sent from thence, or to be
imprisoned, and their property confiscated, at a time when Congress
might not judge it expedient to go to war. France, said he, has now done
towards the United States what might be considered as hostility. Suppose
we pass a law which calls upon the PRESIDENT to act, what ought the
PRESIDENT to do? Was he to determine the point whether France has
authorized hostilities against the United States? If so, he would
doubtless say she had, and in consequence every Frenchman in this
country will be liable to be removed out of the country, and our
citizens who happen to be in France will be placed in the same
situation. Mr. S. said, though it might be proper for Congress to
declare this to be the state of the country, he thought it would be
improper to give the PRESIDENT this power. He wished the power of
sending persons out of the country to be confined to such cases as were
particularly dangerous, which were included in the resolution without
this amendment. As to foreigners guilty of crimes against the United
States, they ought to be apprehended and punished according to the
existing laws: the present regulation was not pointed at them.

Mr. OTIS said, as his colleague had chosen to call his amendment
indefinite, he must excuse him when he said he considered the resolution
without it, as trifling and ineffectual, and argued a timidity which
ought not at this time to be shown by this country; and had he not been
thoroughly acquainted with the uprightness of intention and the purity
of the motives of his colleague, he should really have doubted whether
he was sincerely desirous of exerting all the energies of the country in
her defence; but, being persuaded of these, he would suppose that he
himself was wrong in his conception on this occasion, and would make a
few observations as to the ground upon which he formed his opinion.

He believed it would not be proper to wait until predatory incursions
were made--until the enemy was landed in our country, or until what
shall be considered as threatening or actual invasion appeared--before
any steps were taken on the subject now under consideration. He was of
opinion that when an enemy authorized hostilities, that was the time to
take up that crowd of spies and inflammatory agents which overspread the
country like the locusts of Egypt, and who were continually attacking
our liberties. The provision would doubtless be exercised with
discretion. There might be Frenchmen in this city and others (and he
doubted not there were) who were peaceable, well-disposed persons, and
against whom it never could be thought necessary to exercise this power;
but there were other persons, not only in this city, but in others, who
have not only been extremely instrumental in fomenting hostilities
against this country, but also in alienating the affections of our own
citizens; and it was men of this description whom he wished to remove
from the country.

It is proposed by this resolution to give the PRESIDENT the power to
remove aliens, when the country from which they come shall _threaten_ an
invasion. Some believe that this country is at present threatened with
an invasion, and with a ravage of our coasts, yet others say that the
despatches from our Envoys only consist of unauthorized conversations
with X, Y, and Z, and therefore not to be relied upon. Mr. O. thought
this a more indefinite power than that which he proposed to vest in the
PRESIDENT. His opinion was, that something ought to be done which should
strike these people with terror; he did not wish to give them an
opportunity of executing any of their seditious and malignant purposes;
he did not desire, in this season of danger, to _boggle_ about slight
forms, nor to pay respect to treaties already abrogated, but to seize
these persons wherever they could be found carrying on their vile
purposes. Without this, every thing else which had been done in the way
of defence would amount to nothing.

Mr. MCDOWELL said, from the observations of the gentleman who had just
sat down, it would appear that hostilities had already commenced between
this country and France. If this is the case, and the House knew it, why
not say so, and make preparations accordingly? Why pass acts fitted for
a state of war, without declaring that that is the state of the country?
[Mr. OTIS said, if the gentleman from North Carolina would bring forward
a proposition of this kind, he should be ready to vote for it.] Mr. McD.
expected the gentleman was prepared for war, and, therefore, that he
would have brought forward a resolution to that effect himself.

The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. RUTLEDGE) had not considered this
amendment with his usual accuracy, when he said that the adoption of it
would prove an encouragement to foreigners to come to this country. He
thought it could not be very flattering encouragement to foreigners, to
tell them, "if you come here, and your Government commits any act of
hostility against the citizens of this country, you will be liable to be
imprisoned, or sent out of the country."

But it was said the country swarmed with spies and seditious persons. If
this was the case, he should be glad if gentlemen would point them out;
if they could, he should be as glad as they to take measures against
them. A person in Kentucky had been alluded to. Under the authority of
_Genet_, he believed some commissions had been issued; but he did not
believe that any had been issued since. It was also known that there had
been another Minister of another country who had adopted a similar
practice. He still remained here, and might still be carrying on his
mischievous schemes.[32] [The SPEAKER said the resolution was general.]
It was said that hostilities having been committed on our commerce by
France, they would authorize a war with France, (though Great Britain
had conducted herself much in the same way, and nothing was said as to
her,) and that therefore the PRESIDENT ought to be empowered to send all
Frenchmen out of the country, however peaceably they might be residing
here, if he thought proper to do so. This he could not consent to. It
was too large a power. He should therefore vote against the amendment.

Mr. SITGREAVES considered this as one of the essential features of the
system of defence about which Congress had been employed during the
present session, in order to enable us to meet the dangers which
threaten us. He believed, that though it might be extremely wise and
prudent to enter into regulations for securing our peace at all future
periods, yet it was most particularly their duty to concert measures of
defence and protection in our present exigencies. He believed the
business of defence would be very imperfectly done, if they confined
their operations of defence to land and naval forces, and neglected to
destroy the cankerworm which is corroding in the heart of the country.
There could be no question on this subject. It is well understood by
every member of the community. There is no occasion for specific proof
that there are a great number of aliens in this country from that nation
with whom we have at present alarming differences; that there are
emissaries amongst us, who have not only fomented our differences with
that country, but who have endeavored to create divisions amongst our
own citizens. They are, said he, assiduously employed at this moment,
and it is much to be lamented that there exists no authority to
restrain the evil. It was therefore peculiarly incumbent on Congress to
add to their other measures of defence, such powers as will protect the
country against this evil. He believed this could not be effected
without the adoption of some such principle as that under consideration.
If the power was too limited, the enemy would not be met. There could be
no difficulty, Mr. S. said, in point of right. All understood the rights
to which aliens are entitled by the laws of nations. They are no more
than the rights of hospitality, and this right varies according to the
relation in which the country from which they come, and that in which
they reside, is peaceable, or otherwise.

We do not owe to the citizens of France residents in this country (since
France had been mentioned) the same hospitalities which we owe to those
foreigners who are alien friends; though he confessed there were rights
of hospitality which could not be done away in time of war, particularly
as it respects alien merchants, which were provided for in this
resolution. And except a person had an actual agency in designs which
would endanger the peace of the country, though he was ordered out of
the country, a free passage would be given to himself and effects; and
if actually engaged in designs against the country, there would be a
strong necessity for restraining the liberty of any such persons.

It had been well asked, whether we ought to wait till the enemy landed,
before any measures were taken to remove persons from the country, who
would be ready to join them by thousands, or take advantage of knowledge
we have of their hostile intentions towards us? He thought there could
be no doubt on the subject. He knew there were aliens in this country,
of valuable characters, whose acquaintance ought to be cherished and
cultivated. Such men would be in no danger from the proposed provision.
It was meant only to operate against factious and bad men, who abuse the
liberty allowed to them of residing in this country, and these all must
see the necessity of attending to. France, said he, will not admit an
alien of any description to reside in her country without a card of
hospitality, and shall Congress scruple to go the length of this
amendment? He hoped not.

Mr. ALLEN said, he would move an amendment which would supersede that
under consideration, by making the resolution extend to _all aliens_ in
this country. He wished to retain none of the restraints which are in
the present resolution. Nothing but his respect for the gentleman who
made this report (Mr. SEWALL) would have prevented him from suspecting
that there existed some latent and mischievous design in this business.
The proposition goes upon the supposition that none but the citizens of
a particular nation can be dangerous to this country; whereas he
believed that there are citizens of several other countries who are as
dangerous, who have dispositions equally hostile to this country with
the French--he believed more so. He believed the whole country was aware
of this. Mr. A. alluded to the vast number of naturalizations which
lately took place in this city to support a particular party in a
particular election. It did not appear to him necessary to have the
exercise of this power depend upon any contingency, such as a
threatening of invasion, or war, before it could be exercised. He wished
the PRESIDENT to have it at all times. He moved an amendment to this
effect, which went to enable the PRESIDENT to remove at any time the
citizen of any foreign country whatever, not a citizen, regarding the
treaties with such countries. If gentlemen took a view of the different
States of Europe which had been subdued by the French, Mr. A. said, they
would not think it either wise or prudent to wait for an invasion, or
threatened invasion, before this power was put in execution. Venice,
Switzerland and Rome, had been overcome by means of the agents of the
French nation, at a time when they were in a much less alarming
situation than we are at present; and the first disturbance in those
countries was made the pretext of open hostility. This has been the
effect of _diplomatic agency_; of emissaries within and without, who
have bred quarrels, for the purpose of forming pretexts for measures
which have led to the subjugation of those countries. He believed there
were citizens in this country who would be ready to join a foreign power
in assisting to subjugate their country. What passed before our eyes,
and every day offended our ears, were so many proofs of it. Not many
weeks ago open threats were made to disturb the peace of the country. He
hoped, therefore, with all these things before them, the amendment which
he had proposed would be agreed to.

Mr. SEWALL said, being one of the committee who made this report, he
supposed he fell in for a share of that censure which had been so
liberally cast upon it by his colleague, and the gentleman last up from
Connecticut. The gentleman from Connecticut had thought fit to condemn
the committee for not having considered cases which were not referred to
them. It was not referred to them to consider what France had done in
all other countries with whom she had had disputes, or what this country
should do against France; but what should be done with respect to aliens
in this country generally. Civil policy regarded aliens in two lights,
viz: alien friends and alien enemies. He did not contemplate the making
of this country a wall against all aliens whatever; or that no alien
should come here without being subject to an arbitrary authority, such
as is known only to the French Directory. If the existence of such a
power as shall be able to place every alien in the country in a dungeon,
was necessary to quiet the fears and apprehensions of the gentleman from
Connecticut, he should not be willing to grant it. Indeed, it appeared
to him that the fears and apprehensions of that gentleman arose from
some defect in his own organization, or disease of his body (which he
believed might be better cured by the physician, than by any thing else)
rather than from any real ground of alarm.

What, said Mr. S., is to be feared from the residence of aliens amongst
us? Any thing to ruin the country? He acknowledged many inconveniences
arose from this circumstance, but more from our own unnatural children,
who, in the bosom of their parent, conspired her destruction. But did
the gentleman wish to increase the evil, by saying that persons born in
foreign countries, however regular and orderly their conduct may be,
shall be liable to be imprisoned, or sent out of the country, but that
citizens of this country, however reprehensible their conduct, should
have nothing to fear? The committee were not called upon to report on
this point. He was himself of opinion that more ought to be done, and
that aliens from any country should be liable to be removed, in case of
misbehavior; but he did not wish to leave the business wholly with the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. The committee had reported only in part;
they had yet to consider what steps would be proper to be taken against
aliens, or citizens, guilty of criminal proceedings; but when gentlemen
saw the addresses which were pouring in from all parts of the country in
favor of the measures which had been pursued by Government, and
expressions of determination to support every measure in defence of
their country, was any thing to be feared from a handful of aliens? It
was a reproach to the country to suppose it. If aliens were found to be
guilty of seditious practices, let them be restricted; but not placed
under an arbitrary authority. He never wished to see the Government of
this country in such a situation. Our situation, said Mr. S., is not
like that of the Directory of France, whom all of the nation are
cursing; we have, therefore, no necessity for the strong measures
adopted by them. But if gentlemen were determined to arrest every alien
in the country, let them bring forward a resolution of that kind; but,
in making regulations against alien enemies, let us not subject every
foreigner who comes to this country, however well intended he may be, to
the fear of a dungeon or removal. If gentlemen wished to make the
resolution more general, and to provide for cases, in which war was
first declared by this country, though he had before said he did not
think it necessary, he had no objection to indulge them, by inserting
the words, "between which and the United States there shall exist a
declared state of war." But unless the United States were inclined to
assume the character of the Turks or Arabs, such a regulation as was
recommended by the gentleman from Connecticut could not be adopted.

Mr. ALLEN had no particular anxiety that the resolution should pass to
the extent which he had proposed. If gentlemen did not think it
necessary, he should not persist in it. He was sorry the gentleman from
Massachusetts should have discovered in him any disease of body which
was capable of giving rise to personal fear. He believed he possessed as
little as most men. As to the necessity of the measure which he had
proposed, he would mention two circumstances which led him to think it
necessary. A person in this city, who has too respectable a standing,
and who is doing too much business in it, has declared that he wishes to
see a French army land in this country, and that he would do all in his
power to further their landing. He had heard nearly the same thing from
another quarter. He thought, therefore, that there ought to exist a
power which should be able to send such persons out of the country. Not
that he was himself either afraid of being assassinated or having the
city burnt. But the chairman of the committee had said, that this
subject was yet before them. This he did not know, before the gentleman
said so; for, having made a report upon the subject, he supposed that
they had done all they intended to do upon it.

Mr. DANA was opposed to this amendment. He thought the provisions of
this resolution ought to be made definite, as it contemplated
regulations which Congress would be willing to have in existence at all
future times; and though the principle upon which the residence of
aliens was regulated is laid down in the law of nations, as it relates
to monarchical Governments, yet, in this country, where the sovereignty
of the country is vested by the constitution in Congress, these
regulations must be fixed by law. The danger of war with which the
country was threatened had forced the subject upon Congress at this
time, and this being the case, he was desirous of adopting some
regulations of a permanent nature respecting it. If any other
regulations were necessary with respect to our present situation with
France, he thought they ought to be made special and temporary.

Mr. ALLEN withdrew his amendment; when

Mr. OTIS'S proposition returned, the question on which was put and
negatived--55 to 27.

Mr. SEWALL made the motion which he had suggested when he was last up,
viz: to add the words, "between which and the United States shall exist
a state of war."

Mr. OTIS hoped this motion would not prevail, as he thought it would
deprive the resolution of every good feature which it at present
possessed; for it would prevent the exercise of the power in any other
case than in a state of war; and as all the expressions were future, it
supposed that such a state did not exist at present. He confessed he set
no value at all upon any law, unless it was adapted to the present
exigencies of the country. Gentlemen might talk as they pleased about
permanent regulations; he believed they ought to provide against the
residence of alien enemies existing in the bosom of the country, as the
root of all the evil which we are at present experiencing, and he could
not conceive any mode of doing this, but by applying the remedy
immediately to the evil. Gentlemen talk about a declaration of war. No
such thing scarcely ever precedes war. War and the declaration of war
come together, like thunder and lightning. Indeed, if France finds she
can enfeeble our councils by refraining to declare war, and that we will
take no measures of effectual defence until this is done, it is probable
she will not declare it, but continue to annoy us as at present. He
therefore thought, if the select committee had not been ripe for making
a report fully on this subject, they ought to have delayed it until they
were.

Mr. SEWALL explained.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, he had suffered no little from finding the
difference of opinion which existed between the chairman of the
committee who made the report on this subject, and gentlemen who usually
voted with him. He saw that difference of opinion was essential and
radical. He did not mean to go into the subject, but merely to make a
proposition, and call the yeas and nays upon it. It was to add the
words, "or shall declare hostility against the United States."

Mr. DAVIS moved a postponement of this question till to-morrow, as he
wished time to consider of it. He had some doubts as to the
constitutionality of such a provision.

Mr. SITGREAVES had no objection to a postponement, if time was wanted
for consideration; but he could not see on what constitutional ground
this motion could be objected to.

Mr. GALLATIN was in favor of the postponement. He would suggest to his
colleague that part of the constitution which might be in the way of
this motion. A distinction was made by it between actual hostility and
war.

If it had only gone to have made a difference between declared and
actual war, by striking out the word "declare," it would have removed
the objection. If there be a difference between a state of war and of
actual hostility, there is also a difference in the relation between
alien subjects of a nation with whom we are at war, and those of a
nation with whom we are in a state of actual hostility. If this
distinction be correct, by turning to the 9th section of the
constitution, it is found that the migration of such persons as any of
the States shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by
Congress, prior to the year 1808. He understood it, however, to be a
sound principle that alien enemies might be removed, although the
emigration of persons be not prohibited by a principle which existed
prior to the constitution, and coeval with the law of nations. The
question was, therefore, whether the citizens or subjects of nations in
actual hostility can be considered as alien enemies. The term "actual
hostility," is vague in its nature, and would introduce doubt as to its
true import. He should, therefore, be in favor of the postponement,
except the mover would consent to have the word "declare" struck out in
the way he had mentioned.

The question for a postponement was put and carried; and the two first
resolutions were referred to a select committee, to report a bill or
bills accordingly.


FRIDAY, May 4.

_Presents to Ministers._

Mr. BAYARD called for the order of the day on the resolution from the
Senate granting leave to Mr. Pinckney, our late Ambassador to Great
Britain and Spain, to receive certain presents from those courts, on his
taking leave. The House accordingly went into a Committee of the Whole
on the subject, and the resolution having been read,

Mr. BAYARD moved that the committee concur.

Mr. MCDOWELL said, this was a new subject, and, as it struck him, of
importance. Notwithstanding he felt as much disposed as any member of
the committee to do every thing respectful to our late Minister to
London and Madrid, yet, when he looked upon the constitution, and
reflected upon the intention of the clause which forbids the receiving
of presents by our Ministers, and the consequences which must flow from
a precedent of this kind, he could not easily bring himself to consent
to it, unless some gentleman could show the propriety or necessity of it
in a stronger light than he at present saw it. If we allow our Ministers
to receive presents from foreign courts, on their taking leave, we must
also calculate upon giving presents to all the foreign Ministers who
come here, and these we have every reason to expect, will be constantly
increasing. Besides, he objected to the principle of these presents.
What are they given for? He supposed it was to gain their friendly
offices and good wishes towards the country who gave them. He thought
this improper; and he believed it would be well now to put a stop to the
business, as a fairer opportunity could never occur of trying the
principle, for if it ever could be allowed, in consideration of public
services, it could not be better deserved than in the present case; but
believing the principle to be a bad one, he should, therefore, be
opposed to it.

Mr. BAYARD said, every constitutional objection must vanish on a single
view of the article, because it allows that presents may be received, if
the consent of Congress is obtained; and, so far from the constitution
insinuating that it would be bad policy to allow these presents to be
received, it proves that they might be received if inconvenience in
receiving them could be avoided. He supposed the constitutional
provision was meant to oblige Ministers to make known to the world
whatever presents they might receive from foreign courts, and to place
themselves in such a situation as to make it impossible for them to be
unduly influenced by any such presents. Indeed, he supposed those
presents would produce a directly contrary effect, for when a Minister
was known to have received a present of this kind, he would naturally
be particularly careful of all his actions, lest he should be supposed
to be improperly biased. If presents were allowed to be received without
number, and privately, they might produce an improper effect, by
seducing men from an honest attachment for their country, in favor of
that which was loading them with favors; but any evil of this kind was
securely avoided by the notoriety of the act.

What, said Mr. B., is this present? It is a gold snuff-box, a gold
chain, a picture, or some trifling thing which could have no possible
operation upon any man. It was necessary, he believed, to attend to
these little civilities and ceremonies, as the want of attention to them
often produced hostility between nations. He had some doubt from the
constitution, whether it was necessary in this case, to have applied to
Congress at all for leave to have received these presents, as the office
of this gentleman had expired before they were offered. Under the old
articles of Confederation, a like provision was in being, only that the
receipt of presents by our Ministers was positively forbidden, without
any exception about leave of Congress; but their being allowed to be
received under the present Government, by consent of Congress, shows
that they might be received in certain cases. He had, indeed, been
informed that, notwithstanding the prohibition under the former
constitution, presents were frequently received by Ministers; for,
though persons holding offices were forbidden to receive presents, the
moment their office ceased, and they became private individuals, they
were no longer prohibited from receiving any presents which might be
offered to them. Under these circumstances he thought the resolution
ought to be agreed to.

Mr. W. C. C. CLAIBORNE hoped the present resolution would not be
adopted. When this subject was first brought into view, he felt inclined
to favor the request. This first impression arose from his great
personal respect for the applicant, and the desire he felt to gratify
his wishes. But, upon a little reflection, it appeared to him that
policy dictated the propriety of rejecting the present resolution. So
far as relates to the constitutionality of receiving the presents in
question, he thought no member would join in opinion with the member
from Delaware last up. By recurring to the letter of the gentleman from
South Carolina, (Mr. PINCKNEY) it would appear that these presents were
offered to him when he was about to take leave of the courts to which he
was Minister. He was, of course, at that time, the Minister of the
United States, and came within the constitutional prohibition.

The prohibition in the constitution appeared to him to be bottomed on
sound policy, and of great importance to the security, the happiness,
and freedom of the nation. [Mr. C. read the clause.] The object of this
clause appeared to him very different from what had been stated to be
its object by the gentleman from Delaware. He believed it was intended
to lock up every door to foreign influence, to the influence of courts
and monarchies, which could not but prove baneful to every free country.
He had been told that it was the custom of Europe, when a favorite
Minister was about to take his departure, not only to present him with
presents, but also to confer a title upon him; and if the leave now
asked was granted, a precedent would be established which he apprehended
would, at a future day, bring the question before Congress, whether
leave should be given for a citizen of this country to receive a title
from a foreign monarch, and thus all the folly and vices of European
courts will be brought up for discussion before the Congress of the
United States; and he had no doubt characters might be found who would
desire such a distinction, and others who would advocate the granting of
it. On the contrary, he was persuaded that, if the vote of this House
negatived the present resolution, no future application would be made on
this subject. The reason, in his opinion, which induced the insertion of
a clause in the constitution that presents might be received when leave
of Congress was obtained, was this: That in the course of events, a case
might exist, in which it might be proper for a citizen of the United
States to receive a present from a foreign Government. Many, perhaps,
might be named; he thought of one: Suppose an officer of our navy were
to render essential service to the vessel of a foreign power in distress
on the high seas, it might be proper, in such a case, for Congress to
permit the officer to receive any suitable present as a reward for his
service and benevolent exertions in the clause of the unfortunate. But,
he believed, in all ordinary cases, every present ought to be rejected.

Mr. OTIS saw no ground for the apprehensions which the gentleman from
Tennessee had manifested, as to the effects to be produced by concurring
in the resolution now before them. When every present to be received
must be laid before Congress, no fear need be apprehended from the
effects of any such presents. For, it must be presumed, that the
gentleman who makes the application has done his duty, as he, at the
moment he makes the application, comes before his country to be judged.
In the present case, he supposed no idea could be entertained that our
Minister had not done his duty, or that he had been bribed by a foreign
power, as a reason for not granting the request. But it was strange that
gentlemen should assert that, if presents were allowed to be received,
Congress might next be asked to consent to the introduction of titles;
for the constitution expressly says, presents may be received, but, with
respect to titles, it says, "no title of nobility shall be granted."

Mr. O. said it was altogether a matter of discretion in the gentleman
from South Carolina, whether or not he had asked consent to receive the
presents in question; for he is at present no officer of the United
States, and he might receive them as a private citizen. He believed he
had a perfect right to do so, though it might not consist with the
delicacy of his character. Mr. O. said he had it from the best
authority, that, even under the old Confederation, though presents were
unconditionally prohibited, Dr. Franklin, Mr. Jefferson, and Mr.
Laurens, received the customary presents on their departure from the
foreign Courts at which they were employed. They, to be sure,
communicated the fact to Congress after they had received them. And they
received them for a good reason, because they could not refuse them
without giving umbrage to the Courts which presented them. He,
therefore, thought it very improper for gentlemen to suggest
difficulties of the kind which had been brought forward, as if the
gentleman making the application was personally concerned--it could not
be considered as any object to him. The question was merely whether we
would conform or not to the customs and usages of other nations, with
the presents in question; in which there certainly could be nothing
either dangerous or alarming.

Mr. MACON had no doubt Congress had a right to grant leave to receive
the presents in question, and believed the determination in this case
would fix the usage in future. He believed an application could never be
made to the House, in which there could be less objection to the
applicant, than in the present case. He was convinced that the gentleman
from Massachusetts need not to have said that this was no object to the
gentleman from South Carolina. He was sure no one thought so. He
believed it was improper to bring any personal considerations into the
question. He was sure there had not been a more popular act done for
this country for a long time than the treaty which that gentleman had
concluded with Spain. But the committee were told that this resolution
ought to be adopted, because it was a European custom. If, said he, we
adopt this custom, we must adopt another--that of paying foreign
Ministers who come here. And he owned he should not be willing to see
any of them carry off the money of his constituents, because he did not
think the conduct of any of them was deserving of such a fee.

Mr. BAYARD remarked that the gentleman from Tennessee seemed to be
greatly alarmed, lest the agreeing to this resolution should destroy the
liberties of the country; and that a precedent of leave being given to a
Minister to accept of a gold snuff-box or a gold chain, should hereafter
be brought as a sanction to the granting of titles of nobility. But he
asked the gentleman, as a lawyer, whether he conceived that a precedent
for granting permission to a Minister to receive a snuff-box could be
adduced as a precedent for granting titles of nobility? It certainly
could not. Therefore, as to precedent, the gentleman might feel himself
perfectly at ease. There could be no doubt but that the Congress of the
United States might give their consent to a citizen receiving a title
from a foreign power; but he could not apprehend that they would ever do
so. Was this, then, to be brought as an argument against allowing a
gentleman--against whose conduct the most slanderous tongue had never
said a word--from receiving the customary trifling presents, on his
leaving a foreign Court? He trusted not. He allowed it would be a
precedent for the future in this respect, and that Congress might expect
to be called upon hereafter for similar permissions. But he did not
think there was any thing alarming in this--the amount would be very
trifling; and he did not know that having a few additional gold
snuff-boxes in the country could produce any material effect. As to the
constitutional question, he thought it was as he had already stated it.

Mr. VENABLE wished that every thing which was said upon this subject
might be said without reference to the gentleman making the application,
but that it might be considered as establishing a general principle
which was to operate hereafter. It was said that it was necessary to
accept of these presents as a point of etiquette, and that refusal to
accept of them might give offence. He did not believe this could be the
case, as it was well known to the European Courts that our Government is
established on principles totally different from theirs; and when our
Ministers informed them that their Government did not permit them to
receive presents, it must be a satisfactory reason for not accepting
them. He knew that these presents were sometimes made in pictures,
sometimes in snuff-boxes, and sometimes in money. And, said he, if these
presents were not sanctioned by custom, would it not appear an
indelicate thing to offer these things to a Minister of a foreign
country? It certainly would. If the origin of the custom was, therefore,
a bad one, the United States ought not to adopt it, since they had now
the choice of doing so or not. He hoped the United States would always
make sufficient provision for their own Ministers, and not permit them
to receive any thing from a foreign Court. A contrary custom, to say the
least of it, would prove a very troublesome and disagreeable one.

Mr. W. CLAIBORNE submitted to the gentleman from Delaware, as a lawyer,
whether the committee could gather, from any thing before the House,
that these presents made by foreign Courts consisted of chains or
snuff-boxes? He owned he could draw no such conclusion for himself. But
whatever the present may be, it was immaterial to him in the present
question, because he was convinced that nothing which a European monarch
had it in his power to give, could lessen the patriotism of our late
Minister, or alienate his affections from his country. It was not to the
amount of the present; and whether it was a snuff-box, or any thing
else, which was a thing of no consequence, and ought not to have been
named. He objected to the principle of our foreign Ministers receiving
presents at all from European monarchs. This principle he looked upon
as the more dangerous, because it opened an avenue to foreign
influence--an influence among monarchs--which has always proved the
destruction of Republics.

Mr. THATCHER was in favor of the resolution. Gentlemen seemed opposed to
it on the ground of its establishing a precedent for the future. He did
not think this objection well founded; for, as the constitution does not
absolutely forbid the receiving of presents, the discussion on the
propriety of allowing it in future would not be prevented by the present
decision. Future Houses could refuse or grant leave to receive these
presents. Mr. T. said, it was the natural right of every citizen who
served the country as a Minister to receive presents, and the
constitution did not absolutely take away the right. He considered the
gentleman who now applied to Congress as having a natural right to
receive a present, except some reason was shown to the contrary.
Gentlemen allow they know of no special reason; they allow the applicant
has done the business with which he was entrusted, well. He supposed,
therefore, that gentlemen must themselves vote for it, except they
abandon their own ground.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS hoped, by the vote of this day, the House would get rid
of future applications of this kind. When the subject was first
introduced, he was opposed to it; but, if the question had gone off
without debate to-day, he intended to have voted for it. From the
discussion which had taken place, however, he was convinced it was a
subject upon which they ought not to legislate, since the acting upon it
would produce greater evils than the constitution had provided against.
He believed they ought here to put a stop to the business. If not, he
would rather that our Ministers should be at liberty to receive all the
presents offered to them, than the thing should stand upon its present
footing.

Mr. BAYARD would tell the gentleman from Tennessee on what authority he
informed the committee that the presents in question consisted of what
he had mentioned. Being upon the committee to whom this subject was
referred, he made some inquiry as to what were the usual presents from
the European Courts, and found, that in Holland, it was customary to
give a gold chain and medal; in France, a gold snuff-box; and in Spain,
a picture. It was on this ground that he said these things were of no
consequence. Mr. B. then remarked, upon what had fallen from Mr. R.
WILLIAMS with respect to the expense incurred in discussing this
subject, and said it had been owing to gentlemen opposing the resolution
that so long a discussion had taken place. As to the law which that
gentleman proposed to introduce, he must see that the constitution would
not admit of such a law.

Mr. RUTLEDGE said, that, being closely connected in the bonds of
friendship with his colleague, who made the present application, he did
not intend to have said a word upon the subject; but, when he heard
things of a personal nature introduced into the debate, he could not
avoid rising. And, with due submission to the chair, he must say, that
every thing of a personal nature, introduced on this occasion, was, in
his opinion, wholly out of order; particularly when it was said by a
member, "If the gentleman from South Carolina is not satisfied with what
he has received for his services, I am willing to pay him more." The
constitution has said, that the customary presents from European Courts
shall not be received without the consent of Congress; and, accordingly,
when these presents were offered his colleague at the two Courts at
which he was Minister, he declined receiving them, saying, that he would
lay the matter before Congress on his return home. He had done so, and
he could not see any ground of alarm in this. He felt none of that
Republican jealousy which caused his mind to revolt at these civilities.
He rose to dissipate, if possible, those ideas of danger which seemed to
be apprehended from the adoption of the present resolution--the
apprehension that it would break down the barriers which were to keep
out corruption from our Government, and introduce a variety of evils.

Mr. GALLATIN said this question might be considered either as of a
personal, or of a general nature. He had heard gentlemen, arguing both
in support of and against the resolution, speak of the important
services rendered by the gentleman from South Carolina in having
accomplished the treaty with Spain. Nor did he conceive this to be out
of order. He believed, however, the gentleman himself was perfectly
indifferent as to the fate of the question.

Mr. G. had some doubt with respect to the construction of the
constitution on this point. If he was well acquainted with the fact
relative to this business, it stood in this way: When Mr. Pinckney was
sent as Envoy Extraordinary to Spain, he still remained Minister
Plenipotentiary at the Court of Great Britain; therefore he was
altogether precluded from accepting of the present offered to him by the
Spanish Government on his taking leave from that Court; but, with
respect to the present offered to him by Great Britain, it appeared to
him that the moment a Minister receives his letters of recall, and has
taken his leave, he is no longer an officer of the government; and, in
such case, both under the present constitution, and under the old
Confederation, presents have been received. So far, therefore, as
relates to Great Britain, he did not think it was necessary to apply to
Congress for their consent.

He had said, that after a Minister has received his letters of recall,
there was nothing to prevent him from accepting of a present. He might
be told the constitution is lame in that respect; but it was more so
with respect to private citizens, because any private citizen might
receive either presents or titles from a foreign power. It has not,
therefore, effectually shut out corruption. Officers may receive
presents by consent of Congress; but any officer, or member of Congress,
might accept of presents, either in secrecy, or wait till they are out
of office and receive them publicly. Nothing could prevent this but the
infamy that would attach to such an act. Therefore, so far as it was
contended that a disagreement to this resolution would shut out a source
of corruption, it had little effect upon his mind.

But there was another point of view on this subject, which would induce
him to give his vote against the resolution. He considered that if
Congress gave its assent to this proposition, it would be saying that
they approve of the act, and that it is in itself proper that a foreign
Minister should receive presents. If it was, in their opinion, proper to
accept of these presents, the resolution would be affirmed; but if they
were of opinion, that the practice is a bad one; that it is useless in
itself, and ought to cease, they had nothing to do but refuse to
authorize it. He owned it was proper to keep up civilities, when it
could be done by conforming to custom of an inoffensive nature; but when
the constitution stood in the way, it ought always to be respected.

The question on the resolution was put, and negatived--44 to 38.

The committee then rose and reported their disagreement to the
resolution of the Senate; when the question was taken on concurring with
the Committee of the Whole in their disagreement, and decided in the
affirmative--yeas 49, nays 37, as follows:

      YEAS.--George Baer, jun., David Bard, Bailey Bartlett,
      Lemuel Benton, Thomas Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan,
      Stephen Bullock, Dempsey Burges, Thomas Claiborne, William
      Charles Cole Claiborne, John Clopton, Thomas T. Davis, John
      Dawson, John Dennis, George Dent, Lucas Elmendorph, Thomas
      Evans, William Findlay, John Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James
      Gillespie, John A. Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N.
      Havens, Joseph Heister, Walter Jones, Matthew Locke,
      Matthew Lyon, James Machir, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New,
      Josiah Parker, James Schureman, Thompson J. Skinner,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jun., Richard Stanford,
      Thomas Sumter, Thomas Tillinghast, Abram Trigg, John Trigg,
      Phillip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable,
      and Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, Abraham Baldwin, James A. Bayard, David
      Brooks, John Chapman, Samuel W. Dana, William Edmond, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William Barry Grove,
      Robert Goodloe Harper, William Hindman, David Holmes,
      Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, Samuel Lyman, William
      Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison G. Otis,
      John Rutledge, jun., Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Samuel
      Smith, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson, John
      E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams.


SATURDAY, May 5.

_Additional Revenue._

On motion of Mr. HARPER, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on
the report of the Committee of Ways and Means, Mr. DENT in the chair,
when the three following resolutions being read, viz:

      _Resolved_, That it will be expedient to raise an
      additional revenue of ---- dollars annually, by a direct
      tax.

      _Resolved_, That the said tax ought to be laid by uniform
      assessment, on lands, houses, and slaves.

      _Resolved_, That the apportionment of the said tax ought to
      be made among the several States according to their
      respective number of inhabitants, as ascertained by the
      last census.

Mr. HARPER moved to fill the blank in the first resolution with two
millions.

The question was put and carried--47 to 25.

The resolution was then agreed to as amended, as was also the second.

The third resolution being under consideration,

Mr. DAYTON moved to strike out the words "last census," as it might be
determined when the bill came in whether the number of inhabitants
should be ascertained by the last census, or a new one should be taken.

Mr. BAYARD said, the words of the constitution were, "within every term
of ten years;" so that a greater period than ten years could not be
suffered to pass without taking a census, but it might be taken every
year if it were necessary. He believed it would be very proper to have a
new census taken before the tax was assessed, otherwise from the great
increase in the population of some of the States, since the last census
was taken, the tax would not be constitutionally collected, since it is
directed to be laid according to the number of inhabitants.

Mr. HARPER said, he should be glad to see a new census taken at an early
period, so as to relieve the States from any inequality which might
arise from the variation of population which has taken place since the
last census; but he trusted it would not be thought necessary to do this
before the proposed tax was assessed. The carrying a law of this kind
into effect, let it be done in whatever way may be adopted, would be
found a tedious business, and the amount to be produced by it, would
have to be anticipated by loans; and if a new census was to be taken
before the tax could be assessed, it could not be said, with any kind of
certainty, when an effectual revenue was to be raised. He hoped,
therefore, when so great an inconvenience would be incurred by delaying
the tax until a new census was taken, that, though for one year some of
the States would have to pay a little more than was justly their
portion, they would consent to do so rather than subject the country to
so great an inconvenience as would be experienced by such a delay.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS supposed, if the amendment obtained, the tax must be
apportioned according to a new census; and, if so, he apprehended the
resolution would be disagreed to. Though a new census might be taken
within the ten years, he believed that term ought to be nearly expired
before a census was renewed. It was true that some of the States are
greatly increased in population; but it could not be supposed that
States increased in riches in proportion to their increase of
inhabitants, as the people who emigrate are mostly persons of little
property, who settle upon the back lands. This being the case, he
thought it was a wise provision of the constitution which directs that
the census shall be taken only once in ten years. If these words were
struck out, no tax ought to be laid until the time comes for taking the
new census.

Mr. BAYARD would not be in favor of striking out these words, if he
thought it would prevent the collection of the tax; but it would be
necessary, before the tax could be laid, that an assessment of lands,
houses, and slaves, should be made, and he could not see why the number
of inhabitants could not be ascertained at the same time.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS wished to know whether the new census proposed to be
taken was to affect the representation as well as the tax?

Mr. DAYTON answered in the affirmative. The return of the enumeration of
the inhabitants, he said, might be made at the first meeting of the next
Congress, by which means the number of Representatives to which each
State will then be entitled might be ascertained in time for the
succeeding election. If the order was not made at this session for
taking a new census, the enumeration could not be returned before the
last session of next Congress, which would be too late for the election
of the following Congress.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, it would be better for the mover of this amendment,
and others who wished to have this tax collected, to suffer the
resolution to stand as at present, so that the tax might be immediately
assessed by law, and provide at the same time for taking a new census,
which no one would object to; and, if it could hereafter be shown that
the new census could be taken without prolonging the collection of the
tax, it might be done; if not, the tax must be laid according to the
present census. The best way would be to strike out the resolution
altogether, and then make a provision for taking a new census.

Mr. DAYTON consented to vary his motion so as to meet the ideas of the
gentleman last up, by adding after the word "that," in the first line,
"until a new census shall be taken," and to the end of the resolution
these words: "and that provision ought to be immediately made by law for
taking a census of the inhabitants of the several States, agreeably to
the constitution."

Mr. GALLATIN believed this amendment consisted of two parts; he
therefore called for a division of it. He should vote in favor of the
first. The other part he thought perfectly a distinct subject, and not
at present under consideration. If a new census was to be directed to be
taken, he thought it ought to be done in a separate bill, and not
entangled with this subject.

The question on the first part of the amendment was put and carried,
without a division.

On the second, some observations were made, chiefly expressive of a wish
to have the provision for a new census separate from the present
subject; after which the question was put upon it, and carried, 39 to
29.

The committee then rose, and reported the amendments to the resolutions
as agreed to; which being confirmed by the House,

Mr. D. FOSTER moved to strike out the word "annually" in the first
resolution.

Mr. GALLATIN was in favor of the motion. It was his intention to have
made some general observations on this subject whilst under
consideration in the Committee of the Whole; but whilst he was putting
down some figures on paper, the question was taken; as they would be
equally applicable, he should now make them. They would go to show that
this tax was not wanted as a permanent revenue, but solely to meet the
present exigencies. He should show that the present revenues of the
Union are sufficient to meet the current expenses, and to meet the
instalments of deferred and Dutch debt due after the year 1801.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury states that it is probable
there will be a deficiency of $1,796,705; but supposing that, from the
present situation of the country, our expenses may be greatly increased,
and our revenue defalcate, the certainty of a great augmentation in the
ordinary expenses by the deferred debt, and the increasing instalments
of the foreign debt, the Committee of Ways and Means do not think it
safe to contemplate an additional revenue from permanent sources of
taxation to a less amount than two millions of dollars.

In looking into the statements of the Secretary of the Treasury, it
would be found that most of the objects of expense brought forward to
show the necessity of a permanent tax are of a temporary nature. He has
estimated the expenditures for the year 1798 to be $6,926,460; in order
to ascertain what will be the permanent expenditures of the Union after
the year 1800, it is necessary in the first place to deduct from the sum
those items which are not of a permanent nature; and, as he would add a
sum for the Dutch debt due after 1801, Mr. G. said he would also deduct
the instalment of $80,030 due for the present year. The first item of a
temporary nature was a sum reported for deficiencies in the Military
Establishment of $164,000. Every gentleman who had attended to this
subject, when it was lately before the House, must be convinced that
sufficient sums had been appropriated under this head, and that
deficiencies must be considered as extraordinaries not likely again to
occur. Second, $103,000 were set down for diplomatic expenses; the
permanent establishment was now fixed at $63,000, and $40,000,
therefore, were a temporary expense. Finally, the following items were
stated by the Secretary himself as temporary, viz: for light-houses, in
addition to the usual appropriation, for expenses incident to the
treaties with Great Britain and Spain, and for reimbursing the unfunded
and registered debts, and for the payment of old accounts, a sum of
$546,000. The last item not yet agreed to by this House. These several
articles amount to about $830,000, which, deducted from the expense of
1798, as calculated by the Secretary of the Treasury, will leave a
balance of about $6,100,000 for the permanent ordinary expenses, civil,
military, contingent, and relative to the present debt. To this must be
added $1,146,370 for the interest and extinguishing annuity of the
deferred debt, payable in 1801, and also the sum necessary to pay the
principal of the Dutch debt after that year. The Committee of Ways and
Means have reported the foreign debt which will become due in 1802, 1803
and 1804; but, by taking the aggregate of all the years, it will be
found that an average sum of $800,000 a year will pay the whole of that
debt in twelve years. This last item, the $1,146,000 for the deferred
debt, and the $6,100,000 for ordinary expenses, makes the aggregate of
$8,046,000 for the permanent expenditures of the Union after the year
1801, including provision for paying the whole of the principal of the
foreign six per cent, and deferred debt according to contract.

This, in time of peace, would be the extent of our expenses, especially
as there are a number of items which might be reduced, and in that
calculation no reduction is introduced in the Naval, Military, or
Diplomatic Departments, or in the Civil List. If the current revenue be
examined, it will be found to exceed this amount. The amount of revenue,
as calculated by the Secretary of the Treasury, for the present year, is
$8,011,897. But to this must be added the deduction of $549,649, which
he has made from the duties on imposts and tonnage, from an apprehension
of a defalcation in this part of the revenue, on account of capture, and
which was of course to be considered as temporary. To this there should
also be added the duty on salt, laid at the last session, which could
not make any part of this estimate. That duty was eight cents per
bushel, and calculating the quantity of salt imported at three millions
of bushels, it will amount to about $250,000. There was also a number of
additional duties, laid during the last session of the last Congress,
which would not raise less than $350,000, viz: two and-a-half per cent,
on all white cotton goods imported, and an additional duty on tea, brown
sugar, and molasses. These two sums make $600,000, and added to the
above $500,000, deducted this year on account of captures, would make
the permanent revenue, in time of peace, equal to $9,111,897, which
would exceed our expenses by $1,000,000. This is clear from the papers
before the committee. It was suggested that some of his deductions for
expenses were improper, or that he might be mistaken in his expectations
of revenue on some items, yet this surplus million, which was equal to
one-eighth of the whole expenditure, would certainly cover any mistakes
of that kind. Besides, there is every reason to believe some of the
branches of the revenue will be more productive, on account of the
increase of population in 1801, than now. Mr. G., therefore, agreed with
the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. VARNUM) that the present revenues
of the nation are equal to all its expenditures, including therein the
redemption of the public debt, except in case of war. The gentleman from
Maryland (Mr. SMITH) seemed to be of the same opinion, and, indeed, the
Chairman of the Committee of Ways and Means had formerly made a similar
declaration. It would, therefore, be improper to vote a permanent tax,
when the objects for which it was wanted were not of a permanent nature.

Two years ago, Mr. G. said, he was in favor of a permanent land tax, as
he then thought it would be wanted to meet the demands which would come
against the Government in the year 1801. He was of that opinion, because
he did not wish to see the list of indirect taxes swelled beyond what it
was; but Congress were of a different opinion, and had, since that time,
laid indirect taxes on salt, sugar, stamps, &c., to the amount of
$800,000 a year, and have so far diminished the necessity of a direct
tax.

There was another thing in which he had been agreeably disappointed. The
mistake was common to almost every individual, as well as to himself. It
was in relation to the amount of duties which would probably arise from
imposts and tonnage, and which were productive beyond the most sanguine
expectations. The estimates of the Secretary of the Treasury then fell
short of the real amount by upwards of a million of dollars, and the
same thing had taken place last year. If, however, in the year 1801, a
diminution should take place in the product of those duties, the land
tax might then be made permanent.

Mr. G. concluded by saying the tax of two millions was already agreed to
for one year, though he thought it too large a sum. He could see no
objection to its being made an annual tax as in Great Britain, as it
could not be doubted that if the money was wanted for another year, the
act would be annually renewed.

Mr. HARPER confessed himself very much alarmed at this motion. He saw in
it, and in the arguments of the gentleman from Pennsylvania in support
of it, the second leaf of the book for keeping this country in an
utterly defenceless state--and another attempt made to render those
measures which had been taken nugatory, by effectually tying our hands;
and therefore it was that he saw this motion made with grief and
astonishment, by his friend from Massachusetts, whose motives he could
not suspect.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania, said Mr. H., reasons as if we were in a
state of profound peace, and as if we had nothing to apprehend from
abroad; as if all our disputes were settled, and we had nothing to do
but pay the expense of the preparations of defence gone into, and then
at all future times we should rest in security. This was the basis of
his speech, and he could not entertain so low an opinion of his
understanding as to believe he thought it a good one. That gentleman
must know, every one must know, that this country is not in a settled
state of things, but that we are threatened, and speedily, with a war.
No longer ago than yesterday the House was informed that our Ministers
had presented their final memorial, and that if they did not soon
receive an answer to it, they should give up their mission and return
home. Far from desisting from her attacks upon our commerce, France goes
on increasing them. Her former violations of right have been greatly
increased. They had been told by the papers on the table of the
subjugation of our country, of the fate of Venice and of Hamburgh. She
talks of sending frigates against us, of ravaging our coasts; she has
spoken of internal divisions, of a party in this country on which she
can rely. We had heard, though not officially, that orders had been
issued for taking all our vessels, and executing our citizens as
pirates, yet gentlemen sit down with counting-house exactness to
calculate the amount which it will take to defend ourselves. This was,
however, perfectly consistent with the rest of the conduct of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, because he has constantly set his face
against every measure of effectual defence, though he has constantly
talked of being willing to concur in what he considered measures of
defence.

But will the House thus be acted upon? He trusted not. He could not
relinquish the pleasing persuasion that a majority of this House is
determined to defend this country against a foreign foe, that they are
desirous of protecting their property, their wives, and their children,
and that they will rend from their eyes the veil which the gentleman
from Pennsylvania has endeavored to cast over them. That they will
defend themselves against a foe who relies upon our weakness, upon our
calculations of avarice, upon the exertions of men among us who are to
paralyze all our efforts to defend ourselves, and upon a prostrate
colonial spirit in this country. The existence of this spirit would be
confirmed were the present motion adopted. Why? Because the complete
defence of the country is not to be effected by two millions of dollars.
Mr. H. recapitulated what had been done by way of defence; but said
these amounted to nothing, they were only measures of precaution a
commencement of defence, and if those events take place which all think
probable, a much larger sum of money will be wanted. Mr. H. said it
would be seen, by the report of the Committee of Ways and Means, that
they did not take into view the expense which might be incurred for the
military defence of the country, either by a provisional army, or by
detachments of militia. And would any one say that it would be proper to
rise without providing a military defence for the country? Or could they
say that no part of the 80,000 militia, ordered to be held in readiness,
would not be called into service? Or would it be proper to sit down,
satisfied that our enemy will not invade us, though they see we are not
prepared to meet them? He hoped not.

Mr. OTIS wished to inquire of his colleague, before he proceeded to make
any observations, whether he would consent to withdraw his motion, and
admit of another in its place; but as he did not see him in his place,
he would state what his proposition was. He supposed it was the object
of his colleague to prevent the tax from being permanent. He knew that
gentleman too well to believe he wished to render the tax futile. He
proposed, therefore, instead of this amendment, to retain the word
"annually," and to add "until all loans that may be authorized by law on
the credit of such tax be reimbursed."

Soon after the late despatches from our Ministers were read to this
House, and the common sense of the community was convinced of the
necessity there was for immediately going into measures of defence,
speaking of the agreeable unanimity which seemed to prevail in the
House, it was prophesied to him, by men who had been much longer in this
body than himself, that, notwithstanding all this appearance, yet
certain gentlemen in the House would take care so to embarrass the
detail of the business, that they might just as well have refused to
assent to the principle. [Mr. DANA hoped these remarks were not meant to
apply to the mover of the present proposition.] Mr. O. said he felt some
difficulty in speaking on this subject, from the motion coming from the
quarter whence it came; but he trusted his friend would not apply these
remarks to himself. [Mr. VENABLE hoped the gentleman did not mean to
insinuate that any gentleman was actuated by improper motives. The
SPEAKER said it was improper to speak of motives.] Mr. O. added, that
his object was to show that the opposition made to this tax would have
nearly the same effect as voting against it in the first instance; for
he doubted whether a shilling could be got upon it, if passed in this
way. Perhaps many wish that this should be the case; they may think the
money is not wanted. If there was any wisdom in thus acting, he could
not see it, and therefore could not give gentlemen that credit for their
actions which they may think they deserve. Mr. O. expressed his
astonishment that gentlemen who were two or three years ago in favor of
a land tax, should now be wholly opposed to it. He also added that he
had heard another prophecy, which was that many gentlemen who were
always averse to a land tax would not now agree to it, but attempt to
defeat it, however willing they were to go into measures of defence for
the country, when those measures were unconnected with the raising of
money. He hoped this would not come true.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS observed, it was a fortunate circumstance that the
present motion was made by the gentleman from Massachusetts, though,
even that circumstance could not secure gentlemen from abuse; for though
his friends cannot but allow the mover's motives are pure, yet they have
imputed the worst views to those who support it.

The gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER) has, as is usual with
him, consumed one-half of his speech in censuring the conduct of members
of this House, because they do not agree with him in opinion as to what
is the proper defence of this country, and in recounting what France has
done in Europe.

As to what that gentleman had said with respect to motives, he believed
every gentleman had a right to deliver his sentiments freely, without
being subject to the lash of that gentleman, or any other. How could it
be fairly argued, because gentlemen desired to limit the duration of
this law, that they were unwilling to defend their country? No such
conclusion could be drawn. He believed the people of this country would
always be found ready to defend themselves, as far as their own
interests and the interests of the country required; but not to defend
other nations. The gentleman from South Carolina never spoke on the
subject of defence, but he went into Europe, to tell the House what was
going on there. He thought enough had been said on this subject.

The gentleman had talked much of national honor and national dignity;
but he wished him to recollect that national honor and national dignity
were national interest. But the dignity and honor, which were too often
spoken of, were mere phantoms; and what is looked upon as disgraceful in
one country, may be looked upon as honorable in another. But the dignity
and honor which he spoke of were the same in all countries; they were
the interest of the people. He believed that some gentlemen would even
account it honorable to go into Europe, and endeavor to raise up all the
crowned heads which had fallen in the course of the present war. He
liked no such honor.

The gentleman from South Carolina has not only to-day, but often,
reprobated the idea of introducing calculation into our debates when
measures of defence have been under consideration; whereas it appeared
to himself the true ground upon which they ought to act. He believed, if
nations in general were to sit down and count the cost before they went
to war, one-half the blood and treasure which are now caused to flow,
would in such case be spared. Wherever a nation was about to enter into
a war to support its rights without its jurisdiction, it was perfectly
right to sit down and calculate the expense of doing it; he agreed,
when a country was attacked upon its own territory, that was not the
time to talk about expense. It appeared to him, in such a situation, our
defence would not so much consist of money as of individual exertion. In
his opinion, free men fought for liberty, and slaves for money.

The House was told, that if this money was not wanted, it would be safe
in the Treasury, or applied to the reduction of the public debt; but he
believed it would not be in the power of the gentleman from South
Carolina to convince him, or the people of this country, that the money
will not remain as safe in the pockets of the people, until it is
wanted, as in the Treasury. He believed the willingness of the people to
give the money when it is wanted cannot be questioned; and if that
gentleman had all the reliance upon the people which he pretends to
have, he would not wish to take their money when he was not certain it
would be wanted.

As to our late despatches, containing the conversations of X, Y, and Z,
which gentlemen seemed so much to rely upon, he confessed his opinions
had not been at all changed by them. He believed, before they were
communicated, that this country had been greatly injured by France, and
he was not ready to take any step now that he was not ready to take
before. He believed that he, and others who voted with him, should be as
willing to defend the country, in case of danger, as those gentlemen who
are continually raising up military phantoms for the purpose of knocking
them down again. He hoped the amendment would be agreed to.

A motion was made and carried to adjourn, without the question being
taken.


MONDAY, May 7.

_Presents to Ministers._

Mr. PINCKNEY said, he rose to request leave to withdraw the resolution
which had yesterday been laid upon the table by his colleague, Mr.
HARPER, without his knowledge, respecting a business which had already
been decided relative to himself, as it was founded upon a ground which
was at least doubtful, and he thought out of order.

The SPEAKER interrupted Mr. P. to say that he would save him the trouble
of any farther observations, by saying that he deemed the motion out of
order.

Mr. PINCKNEY hoped, notwithstanding, he should be permitted to make a
few remarks on the subject.

The SPEAKER replied, that any remarks upon a business already decided
would not be in order, and could not be admitted without general
consent. A pretty general cry of "I hope the gentleman will be permitted
to proceed," being heard, Mr. PINCKNEY went on.

He said, it was with reluctance he took up the time of the House a
moment in a matter relating to himself, particularly at present, when so
much important business pressed for consideration; but he wished to
state his reasons for wishing this motion to be withdrawn, lest it
should seem to have been brought forward by his consent. He was grateful
for the good intentions of his colleague, because he doubtless thought
the vote which had passed on the preceding day might cast some
imputation upon his, Mr. P.'s, character. But he also wished it to be
withdrawn, because it was founded on at least a doubtful suggestion,
viz: that it is not customary for the United States to make presents to
foreign Ministers leaving this country. He believed it was customary to
do so. But another reason for wishing it to be withdrawn was, that the
discussion of it might not subject him to a species of trial as to his
public conduct, in which he should not be at liberty to make his
defence. He should never shrink from any authorized investigation of his
conduct; but he should wish to avoid any unauthorized proceeding of that
kind.

But his principal reason for troubling the House was to assign his
reasons for addressing a letter to Congress on this subject, apparently
of so trifling a nature. With respect to the present offered to him by
the Court of Spain, it would have been improper for him, under any
construction of the constitution, to have received it, as he was at that
time also Minister to Great Britain. Upon this ground it was that he
wrote to the Spanish Minister declining the acceptance of the present
offered to him from that Court, except he should obtain leave of
Congress to do so. This being the case, whatever might have been the
propriety of accepting of the present offered to him by the Court of
Great Britain, there would have been at least an appearance of
inconsistency to have received a present from one Court and not from the
other. He therefore gave the same answer to both.

This he hoped would account satisfactorily for having troubled Congress
with any application on this subject. It was from a respect which he
thought due to the Court of Spain, from the favorable treatment he had
received from them, and being fully satisfied with all their conduct
towards him, that he thought it proper to make the application. The
other, respecting Great Britain, was involved with it.

Mr. P. said, he did apprehend there would have been a propriety in this
House, at the time they rejected the resolution sent from the Senate, to
have assigned a reason why they did so. He would say why he thought so.
He thought the constitution expressly allows, that, in some cases,
presents may be received from a foreign power, but that the power of
deciding upon this shall be left in the hands of the Legislature, as a
check upon officers that they may not improperly receive any presents
from a foreign power. But, considering this power to have been intended
as a check upon the improper conduct of officers, it must strike the
minds of the public when they are told that an officer was refused this
privilege, that he had not done his duty, especially if the refusal was
unqualified, and unaccompanied with any reason for the refusal, and that
the refusal was intended as a censure upon his conduct.

It was in this point of view, that he conceived the conduct of the
person to whom this privilege was refused, was implicated, without an
opportunity of being heard in his defence. He should be far from wishing
any resolution to be entered into approving of his conduct; but there
was a great distinction between approving and disapproving; between
censure and applause; and although he did not desire applause, he could
have wished to have avoided censure. All that he wished had been done
was, that the House should have stated something of this kind, "deeming
it improper that the diplomatic agents of the United States should
receive a present from any foreign Prince or State, the request cannot
be complied with;" as, without this, the natural inference must be, that
there has been some misbehavior in the officer, or the usual privilege
would not have been refused. He called it usual, because whenever it had
heretofore been applied for, it had been invariably granted, and the
rejection of the resolution from the Senate, must, therefore, be looked
upon as establishing an imputation upon his character. It was saying to
the world, "Every other person in a similar situation, has been
permitted to accept of these presents, but you, and you alone are an
exception; you cannot receive them." Such a person may have been worthy
of condemnation; he may have betrayed the interest of his country; but
it was injustice to that person to condemn him without a trial.

Mr. P. said, he thought it necessary, in justice to himself, to make
these observations before the House, from a regard which he felt, in
common with other gentlemen, for his reputation--more particularly as
this matter would appear upon the journals of the House, and might not
only reflect upon himself, but upon his children after him; they might
be pointed at by the finger of scorn, as the offspring of a man who had
betrayed the interests of his country. It was under the impression of
these ideas that he had been led to trouble the House, and he trusted he
should stand excused for having done so.

Mr. MCDOWELL rose, but was prevented from speaking by the SPEAKER, who
declared that nothing more could be admitted on a subject which was not
before the House.

Mr. HARPER rose. He was also checked by the SPEAKER, but not before he
had declared he brought forward the motion in question without the
knowledge of his colleague.


_Additional Revenue._

The House then proceeded to the order of the day, when the SPEAKER
having stated the question to be to strike out the word _annually_ in
the first resolution,

Mr. D. FOSTER rose, and observed that, for a justification of himself to
those who knew him, he need not declare that the motion, which had
caused so much agitation, was made with good intentions; that it was not
designed to embarrass the measures of Government, or with a view to
prevent a provision of revenue adequate to the present or probable
future exigencies; or from any reluctance on his part to concur in every
measure requisite for an effectual defence of our country. To the
uniform tenor of his conduct, on all occasions, since he had the honor
of a seat in this House, he would cheerfully appeal. Those with whom he
associated knew that nothing was more dear to his heart than the honor,
the dignity, the liberty, and the independence of his country. He did
not, therefore, consider many of the remarks which had been made on this
subject, as applicable to himself, nor should he take any measures
whatever to repel them. If his friends intended he should make a
personal application, their object was lost. Alike indifferent to
censure as applause, when unmerited, he had ever done, and, as far as he
could be informed, he would continue to do, what, at the time, appeared
to be his duty.

He was as deeply impressed as any gentleman of this House could be, with
a sense of the necessity and importance of sufficient and productive
sources of revenue. Measures for defence must be expensive; without the
means to carry them into effect, all our acts and resolutions are vain
and futile.

Protection to our commerce, defence to our frontiers and sea-coasts,
security to our rights as a nation, energy and respectability to the
operations of Government, are not to be obtained without money, and if
the present revenues are not sufficient, more must undoubtedly be
provided.

Although he did not mean to pledge himself that he would vote for it, he
should be glad to see a bill before the House, that opportunity might be
given to examine the subject in detail. Since the motion he had
submitted had been thought so exceptionable, he was willing for the
present to modify it. If gentlemen would concur with him in a
substitute, he would withdraw the motion to strike out the word
"annually," and propose to add, as an amendment at the end of the
resolution, the following words:

      "To be collected for a term not exceeding -- years;
      provided the Legislature of the United States shall at all
      times be at full liberty to substitute other duties or
      taxes of equal value in lieu thereof, for the purpose of
      discharging any debts or loans which may be contracted on
      the credit of said tax."

Mr. HARPER rose to second the motion, because it concurred with his
ideas on the subject, that the revenues ought to be commensurate with
the debts incurred. He need not repeat, he said, that he had always been
opposed to a land tax, except in the case of a war, or of preparation
for war; but he now believed it necessary.

Mr. MACON hoped this motion would not prevail. In the State from which
he came, they had an annual land tax, and found no inconvenience from
its being annual. He had no idea of a permanent tax on land, as all the
State Governments collected their revenues from this source, or from a
capitation tax, every other object having been seized upon by the United
States. The idea of the tax being laid for a number of years, would make
it more unpopular than any thing else. All our revenue laws are
temporary. But it was said it was necessary that this tax should be
permanent, in order to obtain loans upon it. He believed loans might
very well be obtained upon it, though it were passed annually; for
certainly those who loaned the Government money would have so much
confidence in it as to believe that it would pay all its contracts
fairly and honorably. He did not believe that all the money appropriated
could be expended before the next session of Congress. Besides, there is
a surplus million in the Treasury, ready for any purpose which the
Executive may think proper to apply it to.

But it had been said, advantage ought to be taken of the present moment
to get this tax. The same thing was said with respect to the Navy. He
did not think it necessary to take advantage of the present enthusiasm
of the people to collect a tax; the people would always obey the laws.

Mr. FINDLAY said, it was admitted, on all hands, that it depended on a
contingency whether this tax would be wanted at all. For his own part he
was under no apprehension of any formidable invasion of this country
taking place before Congress meets again. If France is desirous of
making conquests, there are more preferable objects to this country
nearer home. The difficulties which have so long agitated Europe are not
yet so far settled as to suffer France to send out any formidable force
here. Let the conduct of the French Government have been as bad as it
can be painted, it cannot be said that it has ever wholly lost sight of
its own interest, and it would not be her interest to make an invasion
of this country at this time; and, therefore, there is no necessity for
going into measures as if an invading army was immediately expected
amongst us.

A land tax was with him a favorite tax. He had long wished it. He was
for adopting it some time ago, and for taking advantage of a low market,
to bring up the public debt. But when he came to inquire into the
subject, he found that many of the States had laid direct taxes for the
support of their own Government. There is now an appearance of necessity
for this tax; but being a new tax under the General Government, and not
likely to be very satisfactory to some parts of the Union, it would be
proper to make the law of short duration. Upon constitutional ground he
was against continuing a direct tax longer than two years; every
Congress ought to pass a vote upon it; but, in the present instance, he
believed the law would be best if passed for one year.

Mr. F. concluded by observing, that if this law was passed for one
year, he could confidently rely on future Congresses to renew it, if the
situation of the country should require it. It would not hereafter be
convenient for him to take any farther share in the public councils, but
he should not distrust the wisdom and patriotism of those who might
follow him; and to do away the charges continually made against himself
and others, that they were not willing to defend the country, he should
call the yeas and nays upon every question of defence which came before
the House.

Mr. S. SMITH did not like the amendment; but he should vote for it,
because, if he could not get all he wished, he would get all he could.
If the blank was to be filled with two or three years, (as had been
intimated,) it would not go far enough to induce moneyed men to rely
upon it as a permanent security.

There seemed to be no difference of opinion as to the propriety of
laying a direct tax; it only seemed to be as to the length of time which
it ought to be laid. He agreed with those gentlemen who assert that
money cannot be borrowed, except a permanent fund be provided. But
gentlemen say, where are your expenses? Certain expenses have been
agreed to, which are proposed to be met by a direct tax of two millions;
but could it be supposed that the proceeds of this tax could be brought
into the Treasury in less than eighteen months? They could not, and
something must be done in the mean time to raise the money already
voted, whether any war takes place or not. How was this to be done? By
loans alone. But what inducement will there be to moneyed men to lend
money, except a permanent revenue be made the security? You hold out the
credit of the United States, which has not heretofore been injured. This
is true. But heretofore we have not been engaged in war; we have had
nothing to impede our revenue. But if a war takes place, it is possible
our revenue may suffer very materially; and Congress are about to
provide a fund which, in the opinion of some, will leave no permanency,
and in the opinion of others, very little. And would it not require a
great degree of patriotism in gentlemen to lend twenty shillings for
twenty shillings, when they can go into the market and purchase them
with sixteen. The difference of opinion on this subject, he was
convinced, arose from the different pursuits of the members of that
House. Certain gentlemen believed moneyed men would advance money
without a permanent tax as a security. He believed the contrary; for,
however great a confidence they may have in the honor of future
Congresses, they would wish to see this Congress do something for their
security. He feared gentlemen were not in earnest when they spoke of
defending the country. We have men, said he, but we want money. He did
not agree with the gentleman from North Carolina (Mr. WILLIAMS) that
slaves fought for money, and freemen only for liberty. If he commanded a
regiment of militia, he believed they would expect to be paid, and he
could not believe he would term them slaves. Money must be had.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania was afraid of making the revenue
permanent, because, as our revenue increased, it had been usual, not to
repeal our revenue laws, but to increase our expenses. Whence did he
collect this information? Not from the documents on the table; for there
he would find that there was an unexpended surplus of one million nine
hundred thousand dollars, which were in 1797 applied by the
Commissioners of the Sinking Fund to the reduction of the public debt.
We have, said he, gone on decreasing our expenses. It was true, that our
dispute with Algiers, and a war with the Indians, had cost a great deal
of money; but when the war with the latter was at an end our expenses
were decreased. And now an income of expense is asked for to repel
threatened danger, and gentlemen have voted measures of defence; but now
they come to touch the expense, they flinch. Men may moralize and talk
about defence as much as they please, it will avail nothing without
money.

Mr. VARNUM hoped the motion under consideration would be negatived. The
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. S. SMITH) gave two reasons on Saturday
against striking out the word annually. One was, that it was necessary
the tax should have some permanency, in order that money might be
borrowed upon it; and another, that it might be a substitute for
indirect taxes. That gentleman allowed, and he perfectly agreed with him
in opinion, that in case of war, the defalcation in our revenue, he did
not suppose, would be large, and that in our present situation he had no
idea of a defalcation. If, then, a defalcation of our revenue was not to
be expected, he thought he should be able to make it appear that the
proposed tax is not necessary at all; and, of course, that it will not
be right to pass it for more than one year. But the gentleman from
Maryland says the people ought to be relieved from indirect taxes,
because, for every 12-1/2 per cent. duty, the consumer pays 27-1/2. Does
that gentleman wish, then, that the merchant should be deprived of a
profit of 15 per cent. on the duties which he now pays? If so, this
might be very well effected, without doing away the duty, and
substituting a land tax in its place, by the merchants lowering the
price of their goods 15 per cent.

But the gentleman added another reason for passing the law for a number
of years, viz: that this tax might be at any time repealed. But,
although this House might consent to a repeal of this tax, it was by no
means certain that the other House would consent to its repeal. Indeed,
it was his opinion, that if this tax was established as a permanent tax,
that the people of this country would not be relieved from it for many
years. Many objects, he had no doubt, would be found out by gentlemen,
ever fruitful in this respect, upon which to expend any surplus which
might arise from this tax.

The gentleman from South Carolina, on Saturday, brought into view our
situation with respect to France, and our liableness to an attack from
that nation. He alluded to the conversation which took place between our
Envoys and X, Y, and Z, and thence inferred that it was probable that
this country would be attacked by France. He could not say that all the
propositions made by these unauthorized persons were not from the
Directory; but there was no evidence of this, and therefore he could not
believe it, especially as the agents themselves declared they were not.
He thought, therefore, if we wished to preserve peace with France, that
we ought not to be too forward in believing all which was said by X, Y,
and Z, was authorized by the French Government. He hoped it would prove
to be the contrary, and that when the Directory shall discover what has
been done, they will punish these persons for their conduct.

The question was put and negatived--46 to 35.

Mr. D. FOSTER then renewed his motion to strike out the word "annually,"
which was carried, there being sixty votes for it.

The question on the amendment providing for the taking of a new census,
was put and carried, there being 57 votes for it.

Mr. READ moved an amendment, which went to strike out the provision
which proposes that the tax should be laid by a uniform rule through all
the States, with the view of inserting in its place the following words:

      "And upon such other estates within each particular State
      as are taxable according to the established rule of direct
      taxation in each State."

The motion was negatived, there being only twenty-one votes for it.

The report was referred to the Committee of Ways and Means, to report
bills accordingly.


TUESDAY, May 8.

_Naturalization Law._

Mr. SEWALL called for the order of the day on the third resolution
reported from the Committee of the Whole, on the subject of aliens, and
the consideration of the following amendment being resumed, viz to add
to it these words:

      "Between which and the United States, there shall exist a
      state of declared war:"

It was agreed to; and referred to the select committee on commerce and
defence, to report a bill accordingly.

The following is the resolution as amended by the House:

      "_Resolved_, That provision be made, by law, for the
      apprehending, securing or removing, as the case may
      require, of all aliens, being males, of the age of fourteen
      years and upwards, who shall continue to reside, or shall
      arrive within the United States, being natives, citizens,
      or subjects, of any country between which and the United
      States there shall exist a state of declared war, or the
      Government of which shall threaten, attempt, or perpetrate,
      any invasion or predatory incursions upon their territory,
      as soon as may be, after the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
      shall make proclamation of such event; providing, in all
      cases where such aliens are not chargeable with actual
      hostility, that the period settled by any treaty with such
      hostile nation, or other reasonable period, according to
      the usage of nations, and the duties of humanity, shall be
      allowed, for the departure of such aliens, with all their
      effects, from the territory of the United States; and
      excepting all cases of such aliens to whom passports or
      licenses of residence may be granted, consistently with the
      public safety."


THURSDAY, May 10.

_Provisional Army._

GENERAL SUMTER'S VINDICATION OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA MILITIA.

This favorite scheme of raising a standing army must be pushed forward
by every aid of fact and fiction, and that its success may be insured,
the Southern members are to be terrified into its adoption, for we are
told that the Southern States have much to fear, that there is every
reason to believe the Southern States will be speedily invaded by a
merciless and vindictive foe from the West Indies. That at this moment
thousands may be disgorging on our shores; that they are prepared to
strike. And the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. HARPER, one of his
colleagues) has, in the height of his zeal for American defence, or his
fears for the safety of the Southern States, or from some other cause,
which he did not pretend to divine, by his nice and minute delineations
of the condition of the Southern States, shown to the House a terrifying
picture of Southern imbecility, and had also published to this cruel,
malicious, and insidious enemy, (as he terms them,) an enemy
sufficiently penetrating without his aid, every point, every avenue,
every position, most advantageous for them to take in attack; he has
exposed our most vulnerable parts to their inveteracy, and our
wealthiest part to their rapacity. The policy or prudence which dictated
the detail, he did not stop to examine, but went on to ask, supposing
these marauders were disposed to invade the Southern States, whether it
would not be allowed that they were too fully and completely occupied
nearer home, to be at liberty to execute at this time their intentions
of such an invasion? For his part he thought such was their condition,
and expected it would continue to be so for some time to come; but,
admitting that it is possible for the man who has been mentioned, to
invade our coast with the three or four thousand men spoken of, the
consequences predicted are not likely to follow. The reasoning of his
colleague being admitted, perhaps his conclusions might also; but the
former not being just, the latter could not result.

He was aware that the number of inhabitants of the lower country, of the
States of Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina, as stated by his
colleague, was not very great; but he did not consent to the deduction
which the gentleman had made, that, therefore, the lower country was
very weak in point of force to oppose an invasion. And here he deemed it
proper to notice the attempt which had been made to draw invidious
distinctions between the militia force of our country and what are
termed regulars--attempts constantly made by the advocates of standing
armies, not only on this occasion, but on many others--not only on this
floor, but in the other branch of the Legislature, and very lately, in a
pointed manner, by his colleague, (Mr. HARPER,) who pressed the
establishment of a standing army by depressing the manly character of
his fellow-citizens: he (Mr. HARPER) had said he was well acquainted
with the Southern States; that the inhabitants on the seaboard are few,
that for fifty or sixty miles they are still fewer, that the strong
population is quite remote, that the whole in general are badly armed,
many altogether without arms; that they are not well organized, and even
if they were, they are not to be depended upon, unless headed and aided
by regular troops; in short, that no good can be expected from the
militia, unless they are supported by regulars.

It is an unpleasant thing, said Mr. S., for me to have to make any
remarks on a subject of this sort; but so frequently have gentlemen made
invidious distinctions between the courage and efficacy of militia and
regulars, and with so much injustice to the former, that I cannot permit
their assertions any longer to pass without notice. For doing this, I do
not mean to derogate from the merit of the late American regular army,
nor more particularly from that part of it which served to the
Southward, of whose condition I can better judge than of that which
served in the Middle and Eastern districts; as to them I am bold to say,
they were not inferior, under all circumstances, to any army of equal
numbers and equal opportunities which I have heard or read of in any
time or in any place; but, then, it must also be remembered, whatever
gentlemen may here say to the contrary, that the militia were as
serviceable and as successful as any regulars whatever.

He said he would take a cursory review of the services of the militia in
one of the Southern States, which would tend to support his last
declaration.

He would quote only a few cases out of a great number where the militia
had acted alone, without any co-operation or support from the regulars,
and that against the veteran and conquering cavalry and infantry of
British corps, and in which actions they were distinguished for their
bravery and success. It may be remembered that very partial, if any,
impressions had ever been made by our regular troops on the British
corps of cavalry during the early period of war; and it seemed to be
reserved to the Southern militia to convince them that their equals
existed in our country. It is not to be attributed to the want of
courage or discipline in our regular corps that this had not been done
before, but to imperious circumstances which no skill could overcome;
but this did not change the fact.

After the fall of Charleston in 1780, the first action, and that fought
by the militia, without any aid from our regulars, was the action of
Fishing Creek, where, without entering into a minute description of all
the circumstances attendant on such an occasion, it will be sufficient
to say, that the gallant Captain Rooke, who commanded a squadron of
Tarleton's legion, fell, and the whole force was beaten and dispersed.

A few days after--and here permit me, said Mr. S., to remark, that if my
colleague does not remember, and our historians have neglected to record
the achievements of the militia, yet justice is in some degree done them
by a British historian, who was an officer in the British service in
that part of our country, and at the very time I am speaking of, who
corroborates my facts--a few days after an attack was made by the
militia on Rocky Mount, and Colonel Turnbull, who commanded the enemy's
force, and who is now in New York, I have no doubt has candor enough to
acknowledge, that from the contest he had with them, (although strongly
defended by well constructed works,) and which lasted ten hours, there
is something due to their bravery and the effect of their arms.

Eight days after the affair on Rocky Mount, an attack was made on the
British at their posts of the Hanging Rock. The force on this occasion
consisted of the same corps of South Carolina militia who had
enterprised on the other occasion; they were in number about 600; they
had been joined by a few of the militia from North Carolina, and it is a
pleasure to reflect on the cordiality and bravery displayed by them on
this occasion.

The enemy's force at this post was 1,200 effectives; yet the result was,
after an action which lasted through the greatest part of the day, that
Major Bryan's corps was totally defeated, the Prince of Wales' regiment
exterminated, even its name has never since been recorded. Other
detachments from the 63d and 71st, under the command of Major Camden,
were also cut up, driven from their encampment with the entire loss of
baggage, &c.; and, in the course of this action, Captain Kinlaw, with a
squadron of Tarleton's legion, arrived from Rocky Mount, made a
desperate charge on the militia, was repulsed by them, and fled to
Camden, without attempting to renew the combat. In this, as well as
other actions, it ought to be remembered how many field officers, brave
captains, and other officers, as well as valuable citizens, fell, or
were wounded, while another nation had to regret in this action alone
the loss of upwards of 800 men.

Passing by a number of important and considerable conflicts which took
place between the British regulars and the Southern militia, still
unsupported by regulars of our own army, said Mr. S., I come now to
mention the attack which was made in the neighborhood of Winnesborough,
while Lord Cornwallis laid in that town, upon the South Carolina
militia, by a British regular force under Majors Wymes and McCarthy,
supported by two troops of cavalry, the whole corps drawn together and
formed for the purpose; after various charges made by the infantry and
cavalry, and after repeated repulses, the enemy was totally repelled,
their commanding officer wounded and taken, together with a number of
his corps, and the rest were dispersed.

On the return of Colonel Tarleton to Winnesborough another effort was
made, and from the number as well as the nature of the troops employed,
it was certainly intended to be effectual in driving the South Carolina
militia from that part of the country; for it was Tarleton's legion,
McCarthy's corps, and that part of the 63d, under Major Money, which
troops were led to the attack of the militia on the 20th of November;
the result of this action is known to those who do not wish to detract
from the merit of the militia. The enemy's detachment consisted of 270
legionary horse, and upwards of 400 regular infantry, with two
field-pieces; the militia were between five and six hundred, without (as
indeed they were through all the actions I have described) a single
piece of artillery. In the number of militia are included some
Georgians, who not only acquired honor to themselves from their
exertions on that day, but did honor to their country. The fate of the
British cavalry was then decided; they had been formerly unconquerable,
but after that day they were never known to be brought to act with
either energy or effect.

Knowing the ardor and firmness of the Southern militia, and not doubting
but the militia of the several States in the Union possess equal motives
for their exertions, equal spirit and activity, I cannot, said Mr. S.,
but rely on them as the natural and main support of our national
independence--a support fully effectual without a recurrence to a
standing army. These few cases, and it is stopping very short indeed of
what the merits of the Southern militia deserve, tend to show that the
charges brought against the militia generally are as unfounded as they
are cruel to their feelings; while, at the same time, they demonstrate,
that if an invasion (which is a contingency by no means likely to
happen) should actually take place, we may rely with confidence on the
manly exertions of the militia to meet the attack, and to resist every
effort, at least for such a period as until more effective aid shall be
drawn down to their support, and more permanent measures adopted.

The question for striking out twenty thousand to insert five thousand,
was put and negatived--47 to 41.

The question now returned upon striking out twenty thousand to insert
ten thousand.

Mr. N. SMITH hoped this amendment would not be agreed to. It was
contemplated, when this reduction was proposed, that the power should
be given to the PRESIDENT for three years; but it was now restricted to
the recess of Congress. He did not himself think that at present there
was any danger of an invasion, nor did he believe that imminent danger
of an invasion would exist, whilst the war continued between France and
England; but, whenever a peace shall take place between those two
powers, the question ought then to be taken whether this country ought
not immediately to go into preparations for war; and if Congress were
not in session at the time, the PRESIDENT ought to have the power of
determining this question. It will depend on several circumstances; on
what kind of peace was made; upon what ground parties stood when peace
was made; on the situation of France at the time; on what kind of men
are in power; on the situation of this country; on what is the state of
parties here at the time; what is the number of those who are opposed to
the Government; how many there are of those who wish to lull the rest to
sleep; and what is the amount of spies in the country. All these will be
important considerations to be decided at the time, and if it shall then
appear that imminent danger does exist, will twenty thousand men be too
large a number to raise? He believed not.

The question for striking out twenty thousand, and inserting ten
thousand, was put and carried, 54 votes being in favor of it.

The question next came up on agreeing to the section proposed by the
select committee, for authorizing the PRESIDENT, from time to time, as
he shall deem it necessary, to call forth in rotation such portion, not
exceeding at any one time the number of twenty thousand men, of the
detachments of the United States, authorized by the act of the 24th of
June last, as may be conveniently mustered together, and cause them to
be trained and disciplined by their proper officers, either in their
respective States, or in one corps, to be drawn from two or more
adjoining States, for a term not exceeding ----; for which time the
officers and men shall be considered as in actual service and be paid
and governed accordingly.

After some discussion, in which constitutional objections were urged
against this provision, the committee rose without taking a question
upon it, and the House adjourned till Monday.


MONDAY, May 14.

_Provisional Army._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
bill for authorizing the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to raise a
provisional army; when, the question being put on the section providing
for the calling out 20,000 militia at a time, to be trained and
disciplined, it was negatived, there being only 11 votes for it.

This section was objected to on the ground that the constitution has
placed the training and disciplining of the militia in the several
States, and that Congress had power only "to provide for calling forth
the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections,
and repel invasion; reserving to the States respectively the appointment
of the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to
the discipline prescribed by Congress."

Mr. SEWALL moved to fill the blank in this section with $200,000. He
supposed $50,000 or $60,000 would be sufficient for purchasing the
accoutrements mentioned; the remaining $140,000 or $150,000 would be
ready in the Treasury in case of emergency, for the other purposes of
the act. This mode of proceeding was objected to. It was thought by some
that it would be best to appropriate only for the purchase of the
articles specified, and provide for the whole expense of carrying the
act into effect in one sum, either in this law or some other; but it was
finally carried as it stands, and the blank was filled with 200,000
dollars.

The last additional section proposed for exempting private soldiers from
arrest for debt or contract, during their term of service, was then
agreed to.


FRIDAY, May 18.

_Call of the House._

The SPEAKER informed the House that the hour was arrived at which a call
of the House was ordered to be made, and that the clerk would
accordingly proceed to the call.

The call was accordingly made, when it appeared that 92 members were
present, which, with 13 members absent on leave, and 1 sick, made up the
whole number of members.[33]


_Provisional Army._

The bill authorizing the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to raise a
Provisional Army, was read the third time; when

Mr. MCDOWELL moved to postpone the question on the passage of this bill
till Tuesday next. Information had been received from Europe, and was
entered on the Coffee-House books of this city, that our Commissioners
had been received by the Executive Directory; and that the persons who
had held authorized conversations with them on the subject of bribes,
&c., were imprisoned. He could not say that this information was true;
but, if it were, our differences with the French Republic may probably
be amicably accommodated, and there may be no necessity to pass this
bill at all. He hoped, therefore, the postponement would take place.

Mr. SEWALL should be sorry if a motion of this kind were to receive any
attention from the House. If negotiations were opened with the French
Republic, they might not very soon be concluded. What appearance would
it have to the nations of Europe, if, after all the insults and injuries
we have received from the French Republic, the moment Congress heard in
an indirect, uncertain way, that they had deigned to receive our
Ministers, they stopped their proceedings in all measures of defence. A
more unfavorable appearance, in his opinion, could not take place. It
ought to be recollected that the army proposed to be raised was a
provisional army, and would not be raised, if the contingencies therein
named, did not take place.

The question for a postponement was put and negatived; there being only
29 votes for it.

The question on the passing of the bill was then taken, and stood--yeas
51, nays 40, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, James
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher G.
      Champlin, John Chapman, Joshua Coit, William Craik, Samuel
      W. Dana, John Dennis, George Dent, William Edmond, Thomas
      Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry
      Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William Barry
      Grove, John A. Hanna, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas
      Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H.
      Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, James Machir,
      William Matthews, John Milledge, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R.
      Morris, Harrison G. Otis, Josiah Parker, John Read, John
      Rutledge, jr., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William
      Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel
      Smith, George Thatcher, Mark Thomson, Thomas Tillinghast,
      John E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Thomas
      Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne, John Clopton,
      Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, William
      Findlay, John Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie,
      Andrew Gregg, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens,
      Joseph Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Matthew Locke,
      Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph
      McDowell, Anthony New, Thompson J. Skinner, William Smith,
      Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram
      Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum,
      Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.


MONDAY, May 21.

_Presents to Ministers._

Mr. BAYARD said, he had a resolution to offer to the House, which he
trusted would meet with no opposition from any quarter. It was intended
solely to explain the grounds upon which the House proceeded when they
refused to consent that Mr. Pinckney should receive the presents usually
made by foreign Courts to Ministers upon taking leave, and which had
been offered to him by the Courts of London and Madrid. He had purposely
avoided in the resolution any expression of approbation of the conduct
of Mr. Pinckney during his missions, because he perfectly knew that no
approbation of that House could add to the high sense the people of the
United States already entertained of the integrity and talents of that
gentleman; and because it did not belong to the occasion for the House
to express any opinion as to the conduct of the gentleman during the
time he was employed abroad. That the design of the resolution he had to
submit, was simply to negative an implication which possibly might be
made, that, as the constitution certainly did contemplate cases in which
Ministers might be allowed to receive presents, the House were induced,
by reasons connected with the conduct of this gentleman, to refuse the
liberty to accept the presents; whereas he was perfectly satisfied, from
the declarations of gentlemen who opposed the permission, who had all
taken occasion to testify much esteem for the character and entire
approbation of the conduct of Mr. Pinckney while in office, that their
opposition arose from principles of general policy, which led them to
think that, in no case should presents be allowed to be received. Nay,
they had said, that the purity of this gentleman's character, and the
importance of his services, furnished a happy opportunity of
establishing an invariable rule precluding the acceptance of these
presents, which no merit hereafter should induce the House to depart
from. The subject, however, was of so delicate and tender a nature, that
he conceived it a piece of justice on the part of the House to state
explicitly the grounds upon which their decision was made, in order to
preclude the possibility of any mistake as to their motives. He should
rely, therefore, with perfect confidence, that the following resolution
would be unanimously adopted:

      _Resolved_, That this House, in refusing to allow Thomas
      Pinckney, late Minister at the Court of London, and Envoy
      Extraordinary to the Court of Madrid, to receive the
      presents usually made by the said Courts to foreign
      Ministers on taking leave, were induced to such refusal
      solely by motives of general policy, and not by any view
      personal to the said Thomas Pinckney.

Mr. GRISWOLD moved the postponement of this resolution till to-morrow.

The question on postponement was put and negatived--41 to 34.

The question on agreeing to the resolution then recurred--

Mr. SEWALL had some doubts as to the propriety of the determination of
the general question, as he believed, by that determination, the House
had parted with an advantage placed in them by the constitution. He
thought the best way of settling this business would be to reconsider
that question. He knew one gentleman who had voted upon it through
mistake, and there might be several others in the same situation.

The question on agreeing to the resolution was put and carried
unanimously.


_Naturalization Law._

On motion of Mr. SEWALL, the House went into a Committee of the Whole
on the bill supplementary to, and to amend the act to establish an
uniform rule of naturalization, and to repeal the act heretofore passed
on that subject.

Mr. SEWALL moved to fill the blank specifying the length of time
necessary for an alien to give notice of his intention to become a
citizen, before he can be admitted, with "five years." Carried.

The blank declaring the length of time necessary for an alien to reside
here before he can be admitted a citizen, Mr. S. moved to fill with
"fourteen years."

Mr. MCDOWELL hoped this blank would not be filled with so long a time.
The residence now required from foreigners before they can become
citizens is five years. He would not object to an increase of the length
of this term to seven years; or, if the committee thought nine better,
he would not object to it. He did not wish to discourage an emigration
to this country of respectable foreigners, by barring them from the
rights of citizenship. The policy of this country had always been
different, and he did not wish entirely to change it. When persons come
here from foreign countries, it was our interest to attach them to us,
and not always to look upon them as aliens and strangers.

The question for filling the blank with "fourteen," was put and
carried--41 to 40.

Mr. SEWALL moved a clause providing that no alien who comes from a
country at war with us, shall be admitted to citizenship while such war
continues. Agreed to.

Mr. GALLATIN wished to know whether the provisions of this act are
intended to extend to persons who were in this country previous to the
passing of the law of January, 1795, which requires a residence of five
years before an alien can become a citizen, but who have neglected to
become citizens, as well as to all those aliens who have come to the
country since January, 1795; although they may have made the declaration
by that law required three years before they can become so, of their
intention of becoming citizens of the United States. The law of January,
1795, had made an exception in favor of all aliens then in the country.

As the bill stands at present, Mr. G. said, it would have a
retrospective effect on three descriptions of persons, viz: all those
aliens who were in this country prior to the adoption of the present
Constitution of the United States, and who were not naturalized under
the State laws before the act of 1790; in the next place, it affects all
those who, under the law of 1790, might have been naturalized, and all
those who, under the law of 1795, might hereafter be naturalized,
provided they have made the necessary declaration of their intention of
becoming citizens. From the year 1795, many persons, with a view of
making themselves citizens of this country as soon as the law would
allow them, have renounced their allegiance to the countries from
whence they came, and if this bill passes in its present form, they will
for ten or twelve years to come be without citizenship in any country.
He hoped, therefore, some exception would be made in favor of the
descriptions of persons which he had named.

One reason which led him to mention this circumstance was, that there
are a great number of persons in the State of Pennsylvania, and many in
the district from whence he came, who, though they are not citizens of
the United States, really believe they are. This mistake has arisen from
(an error common to most of the districts of the United States) a belief
that an alien's being naturalized by the laws of a State Government,
since the act of 1790, made him a citizen of the United States. The
Mayor of Philadelphia, till the year 1795, admitted citizens under the
State law, who afterwards considered themselves as citizens of the
United States. He always thought that construction to be wrong--Congress
having the power to pass, and having passed an uniform naturalization
law, which, in his opinion, excluded the idea of admission to
citizenship on different terms by the individual States. But he knew the
contrary opinion till lately generally prevailed. Indeed, he knew that
at the late election in this city, the votes of respectable merchants,
who had obtained American registers for their vessels, on a presumption
of their being citizens, were refused on this ground. The same mistake
had extended to other parts of the Union. It may be said that, since the
year 1795, these persons might have gone to any of the courts and have
become citizens. In this city, and in others, he supposed persons had
generally done so; but where people are two or three hundred miles
distant from the District Court of the United States, they had not
always an opportunity of doing it, especially on account of a
construction of the act of 1795, which had prevailed in some counties of
Pennsylvania, and which made it doubtful whether any court in the State
out of the city, could administer the oath of citizenship. Mr. G.
supposed that since the year 1790, from ten to fifteen thousand
emigrants had come into the State of Pennsylvania, two-thirds of whom
believed, till lately, that they were citizens of the United States,
from their having been naturalized by the laws of that State. It has now
been discovered that they are not citizens; but since that discovery was
made, they have not had an opportunity of being admitted according to
the law of the United States. If some limited period was given to these
persons to come forward to be naturalized, and they did not become
citizens in that time, he should be willing to exclude them. He thought,
indeed, provision should be made for all these persons, but he would not
move any amendment until he had heard the opinion of the committee on
the subject. The amendment just adopted, for excluding their enemies
from citizenship, would do away any objection which could be urged
against a provision of this kind. Indeed, the persons he alluded to
generally came from the territories of the King of Great Britain, and
three-fourths of them from Ireland.

Mr. SEWALL said, this subject was before the select committee, and it
was the opinion of a majority of that committee that no exception ought
to be made, but that the bill should pass in its present form. His own
sentiments were decidedly against any alteration. As to the Irishmen
whom the gentleman from Pennsylvania has mentioned, as they have
neglected to avail themselves of the privilege of becoming citizens, he
supposed they did not place any high value upon it. They are now
permitted to hold lands; and from the present distracted state of the
country from whence they have emigrated, he did not think it would be
prudent to make them eligible to hold seats in the Government after a
residence of five years. He believed the liberty which the United States
have given in this respect heretofore has been unexampled, and it was
high time the evils which had arisen from this imprudent liberality
should be remedied. The present distracted state of the world, and the
attempts made to disturb other governments, showed the necessity of the
proposed regulations.

Mr. S. did not consider the persons who had been mentioned as laboring
under any disadvantages. Considering what they have left, and what they
receive here, their situation is vastly improved by the change which
they have made, without giving them any chance of becoming members of
our government, for they would have had little chance of becoming
members of the government which they have left. He did not suppose they
came here with a view of getting into the government, but to acquire
property, and to enjoy peace and happiness, and this they might do
independent of citizenship. As he saw no good, therefore, to be derived
to the country from admitting these persons to citizenship, but much
danger, he hoped the bill would be agreed to as reported.

Mr. GALLATIN said, if the bill was proceeded with, he would prepare an
amendment in favor of those classes of persons he had mentioned.

The bill was accordingly proceeded with; and coming to the fifth
section, where it is provided, that if an alien shall continue to reside
here, and shall refuse or neglect to make a report of his residence, and
receive a certificate thereof, he shall forfeit two dollars, _and shall
be liable to be arrested as a suspected person_--

Mr. GALLATIN moved to strike out the words printed in italic. It was
sufficient, he said, that such a person should pay a fine. It was a new
thing to punish a man by imprisonment, not for delinquency, but because
he was suspected. A conduct of this kind had been highly condemned in
another country, and he hoped it would not be adopted here.

Mr. SEWALL said, it was the intention of the committee to show the
nature of the offence of omitting to make the proper report; to show
that such omission would lay the citizens under the suspicion of not
acting openly and candidly.

Mr. SITGREAVES remarked, that if his colleague's objection only went to
the words "suspected person," his motion went too far.

The question was put and negatived--37 to 36.

Mr. GALLATIN then proposed an amendment to the following effect:

      "Provided that any alien who was resident within the
      limits, and under the jurisdiction of the United States,
      before the 29th of January, 1795, and any alien who shall
      have made a declaration of his intention of becoming a
      citizen of the United States, in conformity to the
      provisions of an act establishing a uniform rule of
      naturalization, passed on that day, may be admitted to
      become citizens of the United States, according to the
      provisions of that act."

Mr. CRAIK was disposed to go much further than is proposed in this bill
in restricting aliens from becoming citizens of this country. He should
have no objection to say, that no foreigner coming into this country
after this time, shall ever become a citizen; but he believed if this
law was to have a retrospective operation on all those foreigners now
residing within the United States, who have neglected to become
citizens, it would be very unjust. There was a large class of persons,
he said, in the country from which he came, who are not naturalized
under any law, and many others who had been naturalized under the State
law; about the legality of which, as had been stated, there is much
doubt, though in Maryland and Virginia foreigners are still naturalized
by the States, notwithstanding the law of the United States.

In deciding upon this question, Mr. C. said, it would not be proper to
take into consideration emigrants from any particular country. Many of
the persons he alluded to, are Germans, and well entitled to every
privilege that can be given them, and whose neglect to become citizens
was probably owing to their ignorance of our language and laws. He
should, therefore, be in favor of this amendment, especially as far as
it respects those aliens who were in this country before the year 1795.

Mr. BAYARD said, though foreigners were prevented from becoming citizens
of the United States until they have resided fourteen years in the
country, in many of the States, they are entitled not only to vote for
filling the offices of the State Governments, but also for filling those
of the United States. Therefore, the only privilege which they are
denied, is the capacity of becoming members of the Federal Government;
which was a denial, he thought, recommended by sound policy. And he did
not see why the restriction should not extend to the aliens now within
the United States, as to those who shall hereafter come here. If aliens
residing here had any right to expect an exception, it must be on the
ground of compact. He did not, however, consider naturalization laws in
that light. Aliens cannot be considered as members of the society of
the United States; our laws are passed on the ground of our own policy,
and whatever is granted to aliens is a mere matter of favor; and, if it
is taken away, they have no right to complain. Every principle of
policy, in his opinion, required this regulation to be made general; for
he believed there were as many Jacobins and vagabonds come into the
United States during the last two years, as may come for ten years
hence; so that these very persons against whom this law was intended to
operate, will become citizens, and may be chosen into the government. He
hoped, therefore, the amendment would not be adopted.

With respect to those persons who have given notice of their intention
of renouncing their allegiance to the foreign country from whence they
came (for they do not actually renounce it until they become citizens)
it can make no difference to them, especially those referred to by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, because it is a principle of the British
law, that British subjects have not a right to alienate themselves; they
cannot renounce their allegiance to the British King. No objection,
therefore, could be had against the measures being general on that
ground.

Mr. MACON was apprehensive that gentlemen in their zeal to get at
particular persons, will go too far in this business. He agreed with
them, that, for three or four years past, people of all sorts of
politics had come to this country, from the highest aristocrat to the
greatest Jacobin; and he doubted not that persons who were very desirous
of becoming citizens, or who had any particular end to answer by it, had
availed themselves of the law. But there are persons in distant parts of
the Continent, who have never yet become citizens, perhaps from their
not being in the way of going through the ceremony, and because they had
no apprehension of the privilege being taken from them. Many had also
omitted to do it from an ignorance of our language. He hoped, therefore,
this amendment would be agreed to. If persons have given notice of their
intention to become citizens, they have complied in part with the laws;
and he did not think it would be right to put it out of their power to
comply with the other part.

Mr. SEWALL said, this amendment would comprehend those aliens who have
come here since the year 1795, though they may have made no declaration
of their intention to become citizens, as they may make the declaration
before the law passes. As to the other description of persons, he had
not the same objection to them. He agreed with the gentleman from
Delaware, that our regulations in this respect are made for our own
convenience and safety, and that no alien has a right to complain, if
these regulations should disappoint his expectations.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, this was either a question of right or expediency.
He presumed no gentleman was prepared to say any alien had acquired an
absolute and positive right in this country to citizenship at any
particular time. If not, it was a mere matter of expediency; and, when
it is considered in this light, there can be little difficulty in seeing
the danger and disadvantages which would arise from allowing foreigners
to become citizens, as heretofore, or as proposed by the present
amendment. They are too evident to be enumerated.

But it was supposed that there were a large number of individuals in
this country entitled to citizenship by the law of 1790, but who have,
nevertheless, neglected to become citizens. It was a little
extraordinary, he said, if this were so; that persons should for so long
a time have neglected to embrace a right which, it is now represented,
it would be doing them great injury to deprive them of. As to those
persons who came into the country since the law of 1795, he saw no good
reason for making an exception in their favor. As policy, safety, and
security, dictated the measure, he hoped the bill would be passed as
reported.

Mr. W. CLAIBORNE said he could not reconcile it to his feelings to vote
for the bill without the amendment proposed by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, because it would be doing a number of people whom he
represented the greatest injustice. Those people, be said, were
peculiarly situated. It was only at the last winter session that the
State of Tennessee was represented on this floor; and, at the time of
passing the naturalization law, the people of that country were not in a
situation to receive information of what was done in Congress. It need
not be a matter of surprise, therefore, if, in that frontier country,
there are many persons aliens who did not take advantage of the law of
1790. There are numbers of such who have given the strongest proofs of
attachment to the country; they have fought and bled in the service of
the United States, and are as much wedded to the Government of the
United States as any man born on American soil. If this amendment does
not prevail, it will affect many valuable citizens of the State of
Tennessee who were citizens in the year 1795, and ten years before that
time. These persons would be deprived of rights, because they were
living in a country in which there was no post road, and where, of
course, they had no newspapers to give them information of what was
going on at the seat of Government. He hoped, therefore, it would not be
agreed to.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS hoped this provision would be agreed to. When an act is
passed, good reasons, he said, ought to be given before any change takes
place. Many persons had come into this country from an expectation of
being naturalized at the end of a certain period; but, if this provision
is not agreed to, the system will be entirely changed. He saw no
difficulty which could arise from agreeing to this provision, as persons
from countries at war with this country could not be made citizens at
all. He knew a number of persons who had not taken advantage of the
naturalization law, who perhaps are as good men as any in the United
States. It was true, he said, that by the laws of the several States
aliens are allowed to hold land; but when foreigners come here to
reside, and behave well, he did not see why they ought to be prevented
from becoming citizens. They contribute their share of the expense of
government, and it was an acknowledged principle that representation and
taxation ought to go together; which would not be the case if the bill
was passed without this amendment.

The question was put and carried, there being 52 votes for it.

The committee then rose, and the House proceeded to take up the
amendments.

The amendment of Mr. GALLATIN coming again under consideration,

Mr. COIT hoped that part of the clause would be disagreed to which
embraces persons who were in this country before the year 1795, but who
had never shown any disposition to become citizens. Those who came
since, and had given notice of their intention of becoming citizens,
stand on very different ground. He should have no objection to the
latter being accepted, in the way proposed, but not the former.

After a few observations on this amendment, it was negatived--49 to 32.

Mr. SITGREAVES proposed an amendment, limiting the time within which
aliens, included in Mr. GALLATIN'S proposition, should be permitted to
avail themselves of the exception in their favor, viz: those who were in
this country before the year 1795, within one year after the passing of
this act; and those who have come here since, and given notice of their
intention to become citizens, within four years from the time of such
notice having been given.

The question was first put on the former part of the amendment.

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE did not wish to punish men for not being born here, but
to punish both natives and foreigners when guilty. He hoped two years
would be allowed instead of one.

The question on two years was put and negatived--31 to 39. It was then
put on one, and carried--57 votes being for it.

The question on the second part of the amendment was then put.

Mr. VARNUM said, the impulse of the moment led members to believe that
these restrictions upon foreigners were necessary. He thought there was
no necessity for any measures being taken with respect to foreigners,
except such as belong to the nation with whom we expect to be at war;
yet, he had no particular objection to restrictions being made with
respect to such foreigners as shall hereafter come to this country; but,
having heretofore held out inducements to foreigners to come to this
country, and when they are come, with an expectation of becoming
entitled to the rights of citizens in a certain time, he would not
disappoint those expectations.

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE said, this was a very important bill, and he should
wish a little more time to consider on it; he therefore moved an
adjournment.

The motion was put and negatived, there being only 15 votes for it.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, the observation of the gentleman from Massachusetts
could only be applicable when the principle of the bill was under
consideration; whereas, the present proposition only went to limit the
period within which advantage should be taken of the indulgence proposed
to be allowed.

Mr. VARNUM moved a division of the amendment, and proposed to allow till
the 1st of September next for persons to make a declaration of their
intention to become citizens.

This motion was not seconded; and the question on the amendment was put
and carried--47 to 31.

The bill was then ordered to be read a third time to-morrow.


TUESDAY, May 22.

_Alien Enemies._

On motion of Mr. SEWALL, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on
the bill respecting alien enemies, Mr. DENT in the chair; when the bill
was read as follows:

      SEC. 1. _Be it enacted, &c._, That whenever there shall be
      a declared war between the United States and any foreign
      nation or government, or any invasion, or predatory
      incursion, shall be perpetrated, attempted, or threatened,
      against the territory of the United States, by any foreign
      nation or government, and the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
      STATES shall make public proclamation of the event, all
      natives, denizens, citizens, or subjects of the hostile
      nation or government, being males of the age of fourteen
      years and upwards, who shall be within the United States,
      and not actually naturalized, shall be liable to be
      apprehended, restrained, secured, and removed, as alien
      enemies; and shall be further subject, with their goods and
      effects, to a just retaliation of any unusual severities,
      restraints, and confiscations, which shall be suffered by
      the citizens of the United States, resident within the
      territory of the hostile nation or government, and
      inflicted by their authority, previous to, or at the
      commencement of, any war or rupture as aforesaid, under
      color or pretence thereof. And the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
      STATES shall be, and he is hereby, authorized, in any event
      as aforesaid, by his proclamation thereof, or other public
      act, to direct the conduct to be observed, on the part of
      the United States, towards the aliens who shall become
      liable as aforesaid; the manner and degree of the restraint
      to which they shall be subject, and in what cases and upon
      what security their residence shall be permitted, and to
      provide for the removal of those who, not being permitted
      to reside within the United States, shall refuse or neglect
      to depart therefrom, and to establish any other regulations
      which shall be found necessary in the premises, and for the
      public safety, subject, nevertheless, to the regulations
      which the Congress of the United States shall thereafter
      agree and establish.

      [The second section allows to any alien enemy who shall
      not be chargeable with actual hostility, all the time for
      the disposal of his effects, and his removal from the
      country, which any treaty with his nation may stipulate;
      and the third commits the execution of the act in relation
      to all persons comprehended in the PRESIDENT'S
      Proclamation, and to all who shall harbor them, to all the
      judicial and ministerial officers of the Federal and State
      Governments.]

The two first sections having been read, without motion for amendment,

Mr. LYON moved to strike out the word "harbor," in the third section,
which was negatived.

Mr. MACON thought the third section gave the PRESIDENT a very
extraordinary power; it seemed that his proclamation, in all cases, was
to be considered as law. He wished the chairman of the committee, who
reported the bill, to give some information on the subject.

Mr. SEWALL said, the gentleman from North Carolina seemed to suppose
that this was a general power placed in the hands of the PRESIDENT,
whereas his power is confined by the first section of the bill. This
power, Mr. S. said, must be placed somewhere, and he believed it could
not be better placed than in the PRESIDENT.

Mr. LYON saw no ground for the first section of the bill, except it was
to restrain the property of aliens to make satisfaction for the injuries
done to our own citizens; nor should he be willing to give a power to
the PRESIDENT which might enable him to distress innocent persons. He
moved, therefore, to strike out the words "or threatened," in the first
section, as he considered these words too vague to authorize the
exercise of so great a power as was here given.

Mr. MACON seconded the motion.

The question was put and negatived, 44 to 39.

Mr. HARPER moved to strike out the words "predatory incursion," in the
first section. The power, he said, was a very extensive one, and he did
not think it ought to be given except in cases of serious attack; but,
after a few words in opposition to it by Mr. SEWALL, and in favor of it
by Mr. MCDOWELL, he withdrew his motion, alleging that he had not
rightly understood the section.

Mr. BAYARD said, the last section of this bill contained a principle
contrary to all our maxims of jurisprudence, viz: to provide punishment
for a crime by a law to be passed after the fact is committed. Whether
the crime to be punished is to amount to treason, misprision of treason,
or be only a misdemeanor, is left uncertain. It was his opinion that
laws could not be too definite; but it would be impossible in this case
for the person committed to know what crime he had committed, or to what
punishment he was liable. In order to get rid of this difficulty, he
moved to strike out all the words after the word "aforesaid," at the
conclusion of the last section, and to insert in lieu thereof the
following words, viz: "shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to
a fine not exceeding ---- dollars, and be imprisoned not exceeding ----
months."

Mr. SEWALL acknowledged there was a good deal of uncertainty in that
part of the bill moved to be struck out; but the select committee did
not see any way of remedying the evil without making the law too mild in
its operation. In some cases, the offence would amount to high treason,
the punishment for which is death; in others, to misprision of treason,
the punishment for which is imprisonment not exceeding seven years, and
a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. As the offence might,
therefore, sometimes amount to high treason, there would be an
impropriety in making it uniformly a misdemeanor.

If an alien should have resided here for a number of years, and he
should turn out to have been a spy, and a citizen of the United States
should have harbored and concealed the said alien, knowing him to have
been a spy, he would be chargeable with high treason for aiding and
abetting the enemies of the United States within its territory, or at
least a misprision of treason.

But the gentleman from Delaware was mistaken in his idea that it was
intended to try an offender by a law passed after the offence was
committed. By the expression, "as by law is or shall be declared," was
only meant such law as should be passed between the present time and the
time of committing any offence.

The question on this amendment was put and carried, 44 to 25.

On motion of Mr. BAYARD, the blank for containing the amount of the
penalty, in the amendment just carried, was filled with one thousand
dollars.

The committee rose, and reported the amendments; which having been
agreed to,

Mr. DENT moved to strike out the word "months," in Mr. BAYARD'S
amendment, in order to insert "seven years."

Mr. N. SMITH hoped this amendment would not be agreed to. He believed
the penalty might, in some cases, be too severe, and in others by far
too mild. He thought the bill stood well as it was. He did not think
there was any uncertainty in it but what arose from the different
species of offence which were comprised within this provision--for a
person under it might be guilty of the highest crime, or of no crime at
all, according to the circumstances of the case. This being the
condition of things, to make an uniform punishment for all cases,
whether highly criminal, or no crime at all, cannot be proper.

The bill as it stands, without the amendment, provides that offenders
shall be imprisoned and punished according to the law which is or shall
be made, (before the offence is committed,) and he thought this was the
proper footing, as the punishment would then be apportioned according
to the offence.

Mr. BAYARD hoped the amendment would be agreed to. He did not know that
a greater misfortune could happen to any man than to live in a country
where the laws are so indefinite that a person cannot ascertain when he
commits an offence, or what is the penalty of an offence when it is
committed. The gentlemen from Massachusetts and Connecticut tell the
House about the aggravation of the offence. What was the aggravation
they allude to they have not stated, and no gentleman could form an
opinion upon the subject. The fact was of a definite nature, and a
definite punishment ought to be made for it. What is the fact? It is the
harboring and concealing of an alien enemy after the proclamation of the
PRESIDENT. Gentlemen say this offence may amount to treason, misprision
of treason, or other offence. If the offence could amount to treason, he
owned he did not understand the bill, because the crime of treason is
defined by the constitution, and could not be varied by any law of
Congress. If, then, the fact amount to treason, it will not be included
in this law. If gentlemen wished to punish persons in exact conformity
to their degree of offence, they ought to prepare a scale of offence for
that purpose. If not, the amendment agreed to in Committee of the Whole,
ought, in his opinion, to be concurred in.

Mr. SEWALL said, this bill aimed at one thing, and the gentleman from
Delaware at another. The bill has in itself a definition of the offence.
It has declared certain circumstances which shall put a person in a
situation in which he shall answer for his conduct. It declares that a
person harboring an alien enemy shall be a suspected person; but the
crime and punishment must be ascertained by other laws; and by these
offenders are to be punished agreeably to their offences, whether they
be great or small.

Mr. GALLATIN said, if he understood the gentleman from Massachusetts, it
was not the object of this bill to define the nature of the offence of
which a person shall be guilty, or the punishment for it, for harboring
and concealing an alien enemy, but only that certain circumstances
should render a man a suspected person. This to him was altogether a new
legislation.

If he understood the bill as it stood rightly, a person may be
apprehended and imprisoned on account of his having harbored and
concealed alien enemies; yet the gentleman from Massachusetts says this
is in itself no crime; for, if it were a crime, it ought to be punished
in the way proposed by the gentleman from Delaware, but he states it to
be only a sufficient ground of suspicion. This Mr. G. said, was not only
contrary to every principle of justice and reason, but to the provisions
of the constitution. The constitution says, "that no person shall be
deprived of life, limb, or property, without due process of law." But
here certain persons may be deprived of their liberty without any
process of law, or being guilty of any crime. Yet the gentleman from
Massachusetts says, that this bill does not define a crime or award a
punishment. But, Mr. G. said, this assertion was not correct; for there
was a new crime instituted, which was that of being a suspected person,
and the overt act which is to be evidence of that crime, is the
harboring and concealing of an alien enemy, and the punishment is to be
apprehension and imprisonment until it shall be found what law the
prisoner has offended.

Mr. G. said he was ready to acknowledge that where a man commits an
offence, he ought to be punished; but he could not consent to punish any
man on suspicion merely. He therefore moved to recommit the bill. He did
this because he thought the whole of the bill vague in its nature. He
wished it to be more in detail, and that the offences to be punished
should be defined; for it was remarkable that every section of the bill
concluded with these singular words: "subject nevertheless to the
regulations which the Congress of the United States shall thereafter
agree and establish." So that instead of deciding what the law should
be, it gives the PRESIDENT the power of saying what it is; subject to
the after regulations of Congress. He wished now to make the law to
declare what the offence should be, and what the punishment, and not
leave it to the PRESIDENT to make what regulations he shall think
proper. If not, the whole of the bill might as well be in two or three
words, viz: "The PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall have the power to
remove, restrict, or confine alien enemies and citizens whom he may
consider as suspected persons." When Congress attempted to legislate,
they ought not to do it in this way. When the resolution was agreed to,
authorizing this bill to be reported, he expected the committee would
have defined the nature of offences and their punishments, and not
reported the bill in the vague way in which it is before the House,
especially as this appears not to be meant for a temporary, but a
permanent law.

If gentlemen examine the third section of the bill, it will be found
that all Judges, Justices, Marshals, Sheriffs, and other officers, and
all the good people of the United States, are bound to do, what? Not to
execute any law; but to carry into effect any proclamation, or other
public act of the PRESIDENT. So that instead of the Judicial, and any
other officers of the United States, and the people at large, being
obedient to the laws, they are to be obedient to the will of the
PRESIDENT.

The last clause of the bill, which does not relate to aliens, but to our
own citizens, is very objectionable. It is in the shape of a penal law,
and the crime it defines is the harboring and concealing of alien
enemies. Now it is said, that this crime may amount to high treason, by
its being construed that an offender has adhered to the enemies of the
United States, knowing them to be such, or it may be no offence at all.
But the provision is general; and a man guilty of no offence is liable
to be apprehended and imprisoned equally with the highest offender under
this law.

Upon the whole, it was evident, Mr. G. said, that this bill wants
detail, as what is left general and ambiguous, ought to be clearly
defined. He hoped, therefore, the bill would be recommitted.

Mr. SEWALL said, that the gentleman from Pennsylvania, in order to bring
forward this motion, has shut his eyes to the intention of the bill. He
says it is a bill for punishing crimes which are not defined. He never
knew that alien enemies were guilty of an offence merely as such. It is
a bill to provide for the public safety in certain cases. In the event
of a war with France, all her citizens here will become alien enemies,
but neither this bill, nor common sense, would consider them as
offenders. They may be offenders, but not because they are alien
enemies; nevertheless it is necessary to provide for the public safety,
and in all countries there is a power lodged somewhere for taking
measures of this kind. In this country, this power is not lodged wholly
in the Executive; it is in Congress. Perhaps, if war was declared, the
PRESIDENT might then, as Commander-in-chief, exercise a military power
over these people; but it would be best to settle these regulations by
civil process. They would be regulated by the treaties as well as by the
laws of nations. The intention of this bill is to give the PRESIDENT the
power of judging what is proper to be done, and to limit his authority
in the way proposed by this bill. In many cases, it would be unnecessary
to remove or restrict aliens of this description; and he believed it
would be impossible for Congress to describe the cases in which aliens
or citizens ought to be punished, or not; but the PRESIDENT would be
able to determine this matter by his proclamation. If, however,
gentlemen could point out any way in which the necessary regulations
could be detailed, he should have no particular objection to it, though
he thought the bill stood very well as it was.

Mr. OTIS.--In considering this subject, the only practicable modes, he
said, which present themselves, are three. To provide for the removing
or otherwise restricting all alien enemies without distinction, or to
specify some overt acts for committing of which they shall be liable to
be removed or restricted, or else to leave the power with the PRESIDENT
to take such steps respecting them as he shall think proper and
necessary for the public safety.

Mr. O. inquired if the House was ready to do the first? He thought not.
He had no doubt there might be French citizens resident here who were
entitled to protection, who meant to become good subjects, and who ought
not to be exposed to any inconvenience or penalty whatever. He believed
very few gentlemen are of opinion that it would be proper to treat all
alien enemies in the same way. The operation of such a measure would be
unjust. Will gentlemen think it right, then, to declare that alien
enemies shall only be removed, or otherwise restricted, on conviction of
some overt act to be specified in the act? They are at present liable,
with all other persons, to be punished for crimes; so that a regulation
with this view would be unnecessary. But there may be cases where the
conduct of such persons being extremely suspicious, they ought to be
taken into custody, though no positive crime could be proved. Suppose a
French army were to land in this country, some of these persons might
show a disposition, which would warrant their imprisonment; and yet he
did not know how such dispositions could be defined in this bill.

Mr. O. believed, therefore, that it would be best to vest a
discretionary power in the Executive to secure and take care that these
men should do no injury. And this could not be looked upon as a
dangerous or exorbitant power, since the PRESIDENT would have the power,
the moment war was declared, to apprehend the whole of these people as
enemies, and make them prisoners of war. And in case of a predatory
incursion, made on this country, there might be as much reason for
securing some of them as in case of actual war or invasion. So that this
bill ought rather to be considered as an amelioration or modification
of those powers which the PRESIDENT already possesses, as
Commander-in-chief, and which the martial law would prove more rigorous
than those proposed by this new regulation. Unless gentlemen were
disposed to interfere, to suffer those men to go at large, and to carry
on a correspondence with their countrymen and our enemy; unless they
will consent to suffer a band of spies to be spread through the country,
from one end of it to the other, who, in case of the introduction of an
enemy into our country, may join them in their attack upon us, and in
their plunder of our property, nothing short of the bill like the
present can be effectual.

He was willing to say, that in a time of tranquillity, he should not
desire to put a power like this into the hands of the Executive; but, in
a time of war, the citizens of France ought to be considered and treated
and watched in a very different manner from citizens of our own country.

As to the objection made by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that the
bill provides a punishment for suspected persons, and that the word
suspected was indefinite, Mr. O. asked whether men are not usually
arrested on suspicion? When information is lodged against a man for
committing an offence, he is suspected of being guilty, and imprisoned
until he can be examined.

Mr. O. believed, that, to provide for this detention of the person, was
all Congress could now do. If the bill was recommitted, he did not think
any definite provision could be made. It was necessary the PRESIDENT
should have the power of judging in this case, and that punishment
ought not to depend upon the slow operations of a trial. Though
possessed of this power, the PRESIDENT would doubtless suffer all such
persons to remain in this country as demeaned themselves peaceably; but
when they discovered a contrary spirit, he would treat them accordingly.

Mr. GALLATIN withdrew his motion for committing the whole bill, and
moved to commit the third section of it. His arguments, he said, went
wholly against that; and gentlemen, in reply to him, had chosen to
direct their observations to other parts of the bill. As he did not wish
his object to be misunderstood, he would only move for a recommitment of
the third section of the bill, as his objections to the other parts of
it were immaterial when compared with this.

After a few words from Mr. OTIS, Mr. MACON renewed his motion for
recommitting the whole bill, which was negatived--37 to 36.

Mr. GALLATIN then renewed his motion for recommitting the third section,
which was negatived by the casting vote of the Speaker, there being
thirty-eight votes for it, and thirty-eight votes against it.

Mr. LYON renewed his motion to strike out the words "or threatened," in
the first section. He thought this too indefinite an expression upon
which to rest so important a power as was given to the PRESIDENT by this
bill. Where the liberty and happiness of thousands of people are
concerned, he wished they might depend upon something more certain.
Gentlemen who advocate this bill, he said, spoke as if all power was to
be placed in the PRESIDENT, and Congress were never to sit again. He
wished this expression to be stricken out, and if, when Congress met
again, they found the PRESIDENT had not power enough, they might give
him more. He called for the yeas and nays upon his motion.

The question for taking the yeas and nays was put, but less than
one-fifth of the members present rising in its favor, it was not
carried. The question was then put on the motion, and it was negatived
without a division.

Mr. GALLATIN supposed, if these regulations were established, it would
be proper that permits should be granted to such aliens as the PRESIDENT
should suffer to remain in the United States. He was not immediately
prepared to introduce a proper amendment for that purpose; but he would
move to add a few words in that part of the bill where it is proposed to
punish citizens for harboring aliens, to try the question. He did not
very well understand the phrase, "liable as an enemy," by which those
aliens were defined, and whom it would be criminal by this law to
harbor; but he would move to introduce the words, "who shall not have
obtained permission, under the authority of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES to remain within the territory of the United States." He moved
this, in order that citizens might not be entrapped by this law, but
that they should know precisely to what description of aliens they
might give a night's lodging, without being liable to be arrested as
suspected persons.

Mr. BAYARD did not think this amendment necessary, as a citizen must
harbor and _conceal_ an alien to be guilty of any offence.

And the question was put and negatived--38 to 33.

The bill was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, May 23.

_Alien Enemies._

The bill respecting alien enemies was read the third time, when

Mr. R. WILLIAMS moved a recommitment of the bill. He said his objections
did not lie so much against the provisions respecting aliens, as to the
power proposed to be given to the PRESIDENT of issuing proclamations,
which are to be binding on the Judges and other officers with respect to
our own citizens. He would wish to designate every offence, and its
adequate punishment, as far as it could be done. In order to effect this
he made his motion.

Mr. SEWALL said, so much discussion took place on this subject
yesterday, that he did not expect any more to-day. The gentleman from
North Carolina seemed not to object to the powers given to the PRESIDENT
by the first and second sections of the bill, but he did not wish him to
have any officers to execute his powers. If the PRESIDENT could carry
the law into effect with his own hand, he might do so, but he objected
to his having any aid from his officers or the people at large. He did
not believe this kind of reasoning could have any effect in this House.
If the PRESIDENT is authorized to issue orders, he must be authorized to
require the aid of proper persons to execute them.

Mr. GALLATIN called for the yeas and nays upon this question, which,
being agreed to, he hoped this bill would be recommitted. He had no
doubt that the committee, by paying due attention to the subject,
instead of this general and vague bill, might report such rules and
regulations as would be proper to be adopted on this occasion. He
recollected seeing a bill from the Senate on this subject, in which
something of this kind was done; and though he did by no means approve
of that bill, yet it showed that the thing was not impossible. The
objection made against a recommittal of this bill, was, that it was
necessary to do something to provide means for securing and removing
alien enemies, which did not apply as an argument against the
recommitment of the bill. It was a good reason why a bill should be
passed, but no reason why it should pass in its present form. The
present bill, Mr. G. said, was grounded upon the principle that the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall have the power to do by
proclamation what ought only to be done by law.

In the first place, the Proclamation of the PRESIDENT is to determine
the period when foreigners not naturalized shall be liable to be
apprehended, restrained, secured, and removed as alien enemies. Mr. G.
understood what was meant by apprehending alien enemies, and securing
them, but he did not understand the word "restraining;" it was vague, he
said, in its nature, and he did not know that it was a legal phrase. The
committee could themselves explain it. By the bill from the Senate, it
was intended to confine them within the place where they reside; perhaps
this was their idea. The bill goes further: they are not only liable to
be apprehended, restrained, secured, and removed, but "to be subject,
with their goods and effects, to a just retaliation of any unusual
severities, restraints, and confiscations, which shall be suffered by
the citizens of the United States resident within the territory of the
hostile nation or Government, and inflicted by their authority."

Mr. G. wished to have explained what was meant by "unusual severities."
They must mean something more than confiscations--than apprehending,
restraining, or removing--because they are specifically provided for. He
wished, therefore, to know what these unusual severities were which,
upon our own ideas of Government, we could retaliate? If any other
severities besides those which are here enumerated were to be inflicted
upon our citizens in France, he thought it would be disgraceful to that
country, and he could not believe that either propriety or justice would
warrant us committing a disgraceful act against the citizens of another
nation, because that nation had committed a disgraceful act upon our
citizens in their country.

[Mr. SEWALL rose to explain, but the SPEAKER said, the rule which
declares no member shall speak more than once to a question would not
permit him.]

Mr. G. did not know whether these words "unusual severities" were not
intended to be held _in terrorem_ over the conduct of France. If so, he
did not think it a very creditable proceeding. But he believed that part
of the bill perfectly useless, for two reasons: First, it is extremely
doubtful whether the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES could
constitutionally exercise those "unusual severities," which this bill
says he may exercise; and with respect to confiscation, it was explained
by a subsequent part of the bill to be only a sequestration till the
next meeting of Congress, and he therefore conceived this part of the
bill to be of no use, except to train our code of law in a manner
expressly contrary to the spirit of our constitution, which expressly
declares no "cruel or unusual punishments" shall be inflicted.

But, supposing the words only held out _in terrorem_, he wished to know
how they would apply, whether it was to make a part of our permanent
law, whether it is suited for the present time only. If it were not to
make a part of our permanent system--and he thought no gentleman would
say it ought--then it must be on account of our present situation. As to
our present situation, in relation to any thing which may befall our
citizens in France, he would say the words are useless, and this for a
plain reason; for, out of the natives of France in this country,
ninety-nine out of an hundred are of that description of persons whom
the French call emigrants, and it is therefore perfectly immaterial to
the French nation how they are treated; so that the bill could operate
only on a dozen or two of persons of a different description who may be
in this country.

In the next place, with respect to confiscations, which by the next
clause are so limited as to become sequestrations, it would be wrong to
give this power to the PRESIDENT. An article is inserted in the British
Treaty expressly to declare that sequestrations are impolitic and unjust
in every case, and providing against them. He admitted that it might be
necessary to resort to them on some occasions, because he believed there
might be cases where sequestration would be necessary, by way of
indemnification; but what he insisted on was, that it ought to be done
by law, and not by the PRESIDENT. On a former occasion, when the
question of sequestration was before Congress, the power was not
proposed to be left at large with the PRESIDENT, but was to be regulated
by law.

There was another circumstance which showed how easy a thing it would be
to pass a law themselves, instead of leaving every regulation relative
to this subject with the PRESIDENT. About the middle of the second
section it is said, "where no treaty exists, a reasonable time shall be
allowed, which shall be ascertained and declared by the PRESIDENT, or by
the Congress of the United States." This was a kind of double
legislation which was new to him. He wished to know what difficulty
there would have been in defining the time here referred to in this
bill? It appeared to him the right and proper time to do it. From the
moment that the resolution came before the House, he was ready to
acknowledge that the power of regulating this business was in the power
of Government, as it was a power possessed by every nation, which it had
a right to exercise for its own security; but it ought to be exercised
according to law. In some countries, indeed, this power is vested in the
Executive. In France, he believed, it was wholly so, and in England in a
great degree; but in this country he trusted that this House would be of
opinion that Congress is the proper body to regulate so important a
measure.

But the evil, Mr. G. said, did not stop here, it extended to all the
citizens of the United States. The object of the last section provides
that justices, judges, marshals, sheriffs, and the people at large shall
perform a duty which is undefined. But the gentleman from Massachusetts
says this is right, because the power given to the Executive by this
bill is also undefined. This is the foundation of all the objection made
to this bill; it is to the want of legislation in it, which leaves not
only alien enemies, but citizens of the United States, to the will of
the PRESIDENT.

But he would go farther, and say it is impossible to define the duties
of our own citizens, though the two first sections of the bill should be
left at large as they are. By the present bill, the duties of justices,
&c., are to be regulated by the Proclamation of the PRESIDENT. He could
conceive that the House might take into consideration the nature of the
powers vested in the PRESIDENT, and inquire what will be the duties
required to be performed by the several officers of the Government to
carry into effect those powers. Those powers are to apprehend, restrain,
secure, and remove alien enemies, and to sequester their property. As to
the removal of aliens, he could not see what justices and judges had to
do with it; but if they had any thing to do with it, Congress ought to
say what. They might say what should be the duties of judges or
justices, or of Executive officers in the several cases which may be
likely to occur, instead of leaving the thing wholly at large.

The last part of the 3d section, he said, was as objectionable as any
other. It defines the crime in two words, "harboring and concealing,"
and the penalty, if found guilty of this vague and uncertain charge, is
imprisonment not exceeding seven years, and a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars. So that if a person be found guilty of harboring and
concealing an alien enemy, however trifling the expense may be, his
punishment will be left wholly to the discretion of the court. The only
power of the jury will be to decide on the fact; and if a citizen has
harbored for one night, however undesignedly, an alien enemy, he must be
found guilty, leaving it altogether to the court to judge of the
criminality of the act, and to affix the degree of punishment. He
thought this part of the law ought to be better defined. It ought to
distinguish between cases of misdemeanor and those which might arise
from ignorance, and in which no offence at all might exist. He hoped,
therefore, the bill would be recommitted.

The question on recommitting the bill was put and carried--46 to 44. The
yeas and nays were as follow,

      YEAS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Stephen Bullock,
      Dempsey Burges, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole
      Claiborne, John Clopton, Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson,
      George Dent, Lucas Elmendorph, John Fowler, Albert
      Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, William Barry
      Grove, John A. Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N.
      Havens, Joseph Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Matthew
      Locke, Matthew Lyon, James Machir, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New,
      Josiah Parker, John Read, William Smith, Richard Sprigg,
      jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, John
      Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham
      Venable, and Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, James
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Christopher G. Champlin, John
      Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William Craik, Samuel
      W. Dana, John Dennis, William Edmond, Thomas Evans, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James
      H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, William
      Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison G. Otis,
      James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, George
      Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson, Thomas
      Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John
      Williams.

Mr. SEWALL, Mr. DANA, Mr. IMLAY, Mr. S. SMITH, Mr. JOSIAH PARKER, Mr.
BROOKS, and Mr. RUTLEDGE, composed the committee.


FRIDAY, May 25.

_Instructions to Armed Vessels._

Mr. SEWALL, from the Committee for the Protection of Commerce and the
Defence of the Country, to whom was referred Mr. SITGREAVES' resolutions
for instructing the commanders of our public and private armed vessels,
and also the bill from the Senate for the further protection of the
commerce and coast of the United States, reported it as the opinion of
that committee that the bill from the Senate ought to be agreed to by
the House.

The report was twice read, and ordered to be committed to a Committee of
the Whole.

On the SPEAKER'S asking for what day this bill should be made the order,
Monday, to-morrow, and to-day, were named.

The question was first taken on Monday, and negatived--43 to 37.

The question was then put upon to-morrow.

Mr. GALLATIN hoped this bill would be made the order for to-morrow, as
the bill had only been printed this morning, and the report but this
moment made. It would be a very extraordinary proceeding to make this
very important bill the order for this day.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS said, this was a very extraordinary case. When we learn
every day that our vessels are taken by the French cruisers, without any
cause whatever, it is necessary to act with decision. This day had been
spent on a very trifling business compared with this, and he hoped the
House would sit until this bill was gone through.

Mr. MCDOWELL hoped this bill would be made the order for to-morrow, as
it had only been laid upon the table this morning, and few gentlemen had
yet turned their attention to it. Besides, the usual hour of adjournment
is arrived, and he hoped gentlemen would not insist upon hurrying so
important a bill through the House in this manner. The gentleman from
New York remarked that the House had been engaged in trifling business
all the day; but, he observed that gentleman sat very contentedly under
the discussion, though he now seems so desirous of expediting this
business.

Mr. SEWALL was impressed with the necessity of passing this bill as soon
as possible. If the committee had thought they might with propriety have
taken time to deliberate upon this subject, they would not have made
this report, but have taken into consideration the resolution which had
been referred to them with this bill; but finding it necessary that our
armed vessels should receive their instructions immediately, that they
may go out and take the vessels on the coast, or drive them off, they
made this report, intending hereafter to report farther upon the
subject. But the present measures they thought necessary, from the
peculiarity of our present situation; the dangers attending which the
people without seemed to be fully persuaded of. And as this subject had
been fully discussed on the resolutions which had been before the House,
he hoped the bill would be immediately taken up; as he wished to provide
without delay for the defence of our coast as far as our force would
permit.

Mr. MACON said, it was very extraordinary indeed, that gentlemen should
wish to hurry this bill through the House in the way proposed. It
appeared as if they were afraid of any thing coming from our
Commissioners before they got the country in war. Being now the usual
hour of adjournment, it could not be expected that if the House went
into this bill, that any debate could take place. Indeed, gentlemen
seemed to wish to prevent debate as much as possible; a few days ago,
they had got a rule passed that no person should speak more than once to
any question, and now by moving to go into a Committee of the Whole, at
the hour of adjournment, they wish to prevent them from speaking once,
and that upon a bill which will certainly place the country in a state
of war. He thought a regard to decency ought to prevent gentlemen from
pushing this motion.

Mr. LYON called upon gentlemen to consider the importance of this bill.
He considered it as a declaration of war as it now stands, and he hoped
time would be given to consider whether some amendment could not be
introduced into it, so as to prevent its being so considered. At
present, he believed, it was directly in the face of the laws of
nations. He was desirous of avoiding war if possible. His constituents
also wished it. He had received at least two hundred letters requesting
him to do all in his power to prevent it. Indeed, he was afraid of the
consequences of war; he was afraid it might produce even a dissolution
of the present Government.

Mr. BRENT was proceeding to express his astonishment at the conduct of
gentlemen in wishing to press so important a subject upon the House,
while members were impatient to adjourn, when,

Mr. SEWALL rose and withdrew His motion, and the bill was made the order
of the day for to-morrow.


SATURDAY, May 26.

_Protection of Commerce._

Mr. SEWALL called for the order of the day on the bill from the Senate
for the more effectual protection of the commerce and coasts of the
United States; and the House accordingly resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the said bill, Mr. DENT in the chair. The bill
having been read,[34]

Mr. MACON rose and observed, that he wished to amend both the bill and
the preamble to it, and desired the Chairman to say which it would be in
order to move first. The Chairman having answered that it would be most
regular first to amend the bill, and then the preamble could be made
conformable to it, Mr. MACON moved to strike out the word "such," in the
enacting clause (the effect of which was to make the instructions given
to the commanders of our vessels general against all cruisers, as well
as against the French.) His reason for making the motion was, that if
this bill must pass, it might be general against all nations who commit
depredations upon our commerce, for it was a fact well known that France
is not the only nation which does this. It was his opinion, that before
any measure of this kind was taken, we ought to know the result of our
mission in France; for, however slender our expectations of an
accommodation may be, still those expectations ought not to be
abandoned, until we are certain our Commissioners have left Paris,
without being able to accomplish their mission.

Mr. M. believed it could not be doubted by any one, that, if we had
thought a state of war preferable to the state in which we had been
placed for some time back, we had had sufficient provocation from more
than one nation to have declared war long ago. Indeed he looked upon
this bill as a declaration of war in substance; he saw that this was the
situation to which measures were progressing, but he could not have
expected that gentlemen would have proposed a measure of this kind
whilst our Commissioners were yet in Paris. It was his opinion, however,
that, disagreeable as our present situation may be, it is much
preferable to a state of war; for, notwithstanding all the losses which
our merchants have sustained, our trade and our revenue are continually
increasing.

In the part of the country from whence he came, Mr. M. said, the price
of produce is now higher than it has been for some time past. But, in
the case of war, it would fall, of course.

Notwithstanding all the evils which he was sensible must attend on a
state of war, when he found our Commissioners had left France, and no
hope of accommodation remained, he should not hesitate to join gentlemen
in any measures which shall be necessary to meet a state of war.

Mr. MCDOWELL said, the gentleman from South Carolina had dwelt much upon
the inconsistency of the present motion. He himself could not see any in
it. He had insinuated that the mover and seconder of it must be blinded
by prejudice and governed by passion; that, instead of going to war with
one nation, it would be going to war with three, and that before we
remonstrate with them, or request them to desist from their practices;
that we have been attempting to get redress from France for eighteen
months past without effect, but that no attempt has been made to
negotiate with England or Spain on the subject of their depredations. In
this the gentleman from South Carolina was certainly mistaken. He knew
we had lately concluded a treaty with England, which had been constantly
violated; and what faith, Mr. McD. asked, could be placed in a nation
which one day makes a treaty, and the next violates it? The same remark
would apply to Spain, so far as they have depredated upon our commerce.

Mr. McD. said, he had all along declared himself opposed to war, or to
any measures which would lead to it, and he still held the same opinion.
He had no prejudice against or in favor of any nation whatever, except
so far as their conduct towards this country was friendly or otherwise;
and he could see no reason for giving instructions to the commanders of
our vessels to seize and bring in the vessels of one country which may
commit depredations upon our commerce, and not those of another. He was
himself opposed to the bill altogether; but, if it must pass, he wished
to make it contain as little mischief as possible, and he thought by
striking out the word "such," and by that means making it general,
France could not take the same offence at it; as the bill now stood, it
was tantamount to a declaration of war.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS was in hopes, when the gentleman from North Carolina
first made his motion, that the opposition which he had heretofore shown
was done away, and that the bill was only objected to because it was not
general; but now it appears that gentlemen are opposed to the bill
altogether. He had hoped when gentlemen had reflected upon what had
taken place, even within our own jurisdiction, that there would not have
been a single dissenting voice in the committee. Gentlemen allege that
this measure will lead to war; but he would ask whether other neutral
nations had not taken measures fully as strong as this, without
producing war? For his part, he supposed it might have been better if
this country had gone into this system of defending our commerce. He was
opposed to it for a considerable time. He was in hopes of a
reconciliation taking place; but he had been deceived from time to time,
and, instead of any appearance of accommodation, every day brought
information which convinced him that, except we meant to submit
altogether, we must defend ourselves.

This being the case, he asked gentlemen which they would choose? Whether
they would suffer themselves to come under the power of the French
nation, or repel force by force? He did not believe any gentleman would
say we ought not to embrace the latter.

At a time when the enemy's vessels are within our own jurisdiction, are
we to withhold the necessary instructions to the commanders of our
vessels? He hoped not. Not that he would go hastily into war; but have
we not, he asked, been in war for a long time?--a war on one side, and
total submission on the other. Yet the House are now called upon to
postpone the consideration of this question, lest it should produce war.
The only way to prevent a war, he believed, was to be prepared to meet
it. If spirited measures had been taken during the extraordinary session
of Congress, he believed it might have prevented the loss of property to
the amount of twenty millions of dollars, and the necessity of a war.
But Congress had gone on, from time to time, saying, we will wait for
this, that, and the other, and it will, in all probability, prevent war.
This conduct had produced the greatest difficulties, and yet gentlemen
wish to go further in the same course. The enemy's vessels, he
understood, are within the Capes, and he supposed gentlemen would wait
till they came up to the city, before they would take any means to
oppose them. He believed it was high time to say, "We will not submit,"
and to prepare to repel the repeated aggressions of our enemy.

Mr. SHEPARD observed, that much had been said on this bill, and on the
resolutions on the same subject, which were referred to the same
committee. Members differed in opinion very materially as to the proper
mode of conducting our affairs at this important crisis; but he could
see no reason for deferring vigorous measures any longer, as he did not
see the least ground of hope for a reconciliation; it was, therefore,
idle to dispute about it.

But gentlemen decline taking this measure, because they are apprehensive
it will irritate the French nation. Mr. S. believed this country could
do nothing to alter the conduct of the French nation towards us, except
it were by giving them money. There could be no doubt, he said, but the
French meant to subjugate this Government, and to lay the United States
under contribution. Every newspaper told them this; yet some gentlemen
seem opposed to every thing intended to resist their doings, or even to
tell them they have done wrong. For his part, he believed that nation
had been boiling over with madness for two years past, and that they are
totally void of every virtue.

They have told us, said Mr. S., in plain terms, they mean to subjugate
us. They say they have a strong party in this country, and that they
understand diplomatic agency as well as any other nation. This he
believed, as he saw they had effectually used that power in subduing
every country in Europe that they had any thing to do with, except
Great Britain, and he feared they would succeed against her. No man, he
said, disliked war more than him; but, he believed, the best way of
preserving ourselves from it, was to take measures to oppose a power
which has so unjustly treated us. We ought not, he said, to trifle any
longer, but take new ground. The more insults we submit to, the more we
shall have. He could not suppose gentlemen would be willing to wait till
all our vessels are taken and our Government overcome, before they will
make resistance. If we meant to preserve our independence, he believed
resistance ought now to be made. It is time, said he, to tell the French
nation, "we will not submit any longer." This was the way we gained our
independence, and this must be the way by which we must keep it. He
hoped, therefore, the bill would pass as it stands.

Mr. OTIS said, though he had sufficient confidence in the committee to
induce him to believe that the present motion cannot succeed, yet he
could not forbear to expostulate with gentlemen on the impropriety of
any measures which should have a tendency to give unnecessary offence to
other nations, besides that against which we are called upon to act. To
increase our foes would only be to aggravate our misfortunes. Mr. O.
hoped and believed this country would be able to defend itself singly
and alone; but, supposing, as gentlemen agree to be true, that we are on
the eve of a war, would it not be highly impolitic to irritate a power
whose assistance we may find very acceptable in the course of a few
months against a common enemy? He hoped it would never be necessary to
seek for this assistance, though it is possible, if we are driven into
war with our old friends, that we may willingly avail ourselves of the
aid of our old enemies; for, though we had suffered injuries from more
nations than one, yet he agreed with our Envoys in the sentiment that,
if France should attack us, we must seek the best means of defence; and
may find it more prudent to forgive than to provoke, by harsh measures,
a nation which may aid in our defence.

Mr. O. said, if, after injuries had been committed against us by Great
Britain and Spain, of the same nature with those which have been heaped
upon us by France, and those nations, like her, had refused to hear us,
or to do us justice, he would support the same measures against them and
vindicate our national character and honor. But though he should by no
means attempt to extenuate the conduct of Great Britain or Spain, he
believed he might say that the depredations committed by those powers
subsequent to their treaties, have been under color, at least, of the
laws of nations. But the difference in the degrees of these
depredations, in comparison with those of the French Republic, cannot be
better ascertained than by the rates of insurance paid as a security
against them respectively.

Insurance may be effected against the Spanish and British for five per
cent., whilst it cannot be procured against the French for less than
twenty-five or thirty per cent. And though the British cruisers do, in
some cases, take our vessels, in others they afford them protection.
Indeed, he believed, the number of our vessels rescued from the fangs of
the French, and restored to us by the British, greatly exceed in value
the amount of those which have been taken from us by them since their
treaty. They have saved to Philadelphia about a half a million of
dollars. With respect to Spain, he believed her disposition towards us
to be friendly, and that an injury offered by them to us was done at the
instigation of another country. Again, we have received, under the late
treaty with Great Britain, £100,000 sterling for damages sustained by
her depredations, and from Spain $300,000 have been awarded on the same
account. So that no comparison could possibly be made between the
treatment we experienced from France and those countries. She makes no
treaties--she pays no compensations.

Mr. KITTERA rose to observe, that one of the articles in our treaties
with Great Britain and Spain, stipulates that no reprisals shall be
authorized by either country until application shall be made to the
other, which he thought would be a sufficient reason for negativing the
amendment. He believed it would be proper to adopt an additional rule to
those already established for the government of the House, viz: that
when French privateers come within our own ports and take our vessels, a
long debate shall not take place upon a bill to instruct the commanders
of our vessels to make reprisals.

Mr. GALLATIN, in reply to the last observation of Mr. KITTERA, said
that, if his assertion was true, that the French privateers were
committing depredations within our own ports, or any where within our
jurisdiction, it was no reason why this bill should pass immediately;
for, without the bill, the PRESIDENT had full power to apply the armed
vessels, or any other force at his disposal, in repelling the outrage.
As to the amendment, he would not pretend to say that it was very
essential; but, he supposed, the reason for moving it was this: It was
asserted that this bill was not a declaration of war, but only a kind of
special reprisal authorized by the law of nations; it was, therefore,
thought it would be proper to make it a general regulation. If it was
intended to be a declaration of war, it would be extremely wrong to make
two enemies instead of one. If it was to be passed with that intention,
it would be wrong to adopt the amendment; but he supposed it was
introduced on the ground assumed by the supporters of the bill, that the
measures proposed might be entered into without violating the laws of
nations, and consistently with a state of peace.

The question was put and negatived, there being only 22 for it.

The question then came up on the bill's going to a third reading; when

Mr. BRENT said he voted against the amendment offered by the gentleman
from North Carolina, because he apprehended its effects would be to
involve us in war with two countries instead of one. The amendment of
the gentleman from North Carolina was to strike out the word _such_ in
the bill, in which instance the commanders of our armed vessels would
have been directed by the PRESIDENT to seize and take the vessels of any
nations that shall have committed, or are found hovering on our coast
for the purpose of committing, depredations on the commerce of the
United States. As the bill now stands, it will only apply to French
depredations; if amended as proposed, it would have applied to Great
Britain, or any other country whose subjects or citizens are unlawfully
spoliating our commerce--as he believed that the laws of nations and the
stipulations of treaties had been violated in relation to us, not only
by the French, but the British also, he considered the tendency of this
amendment might be to involve us in war with Great Britain, and he did
not wish to increase the number of foes with whom we were to engage in
hostility. That he was accurate in his opinion that the armed vessels of
Great Britain were at this time in the practice of violating our neutral
rights, seemed to be acknowledged by others, and particularly by the
member from Massachusetts, (Mr. OTIS,) who had opposed the amendment,
with a suggestion that in the event of an open rupture with France, it
might be expedient for us to call in the aid of England, and, supposing
the amendment might have a tendency to create irritation between that
country and this, it was improper that at this crisis it should be
adopted. This reasoning of the gentleman from Massachusetts could only
be derived from an admission that Great Britain did not at this time
respect our neutral rights; for, as the amendment only authorized the
seizure of vessels spoliating our lawful commerce, there could be no
danger that such a regulation would involve us in war, or produce a
coolness with Great Britain, without a previous acknowledgment that her
armed vessels were illegally depredating our commerce, and consequently
would be affected by the general provision of the amendment, which,
instead of confining our reprisals to French, extended it to vessels of
all nations thus acting illegally in relation to ours.

Though, Mr. BRENT said, he was not, under any circumstances, like the
gentleman from Massachusetts, for embarking our destiny with that of
Great Britain in her present contest with France; though he should
consider such an event as one of the most deplorable which could befall
the United States, yet he was willing and even studious to preserve
peace with Great Britain, notwithstanding the many injuries we had
received from that quarter; on the same principle, from the same desire
to preserve the tranquillity of His country, he was opposed to the bill
itself. He considered this bill as perhaps determining the question,
whether or not there should remain a possibility of reconciling our
differences with the French Republic. He considered this bill as
probably dispelling every ray of hope which yet remained of a
reconciliation taking place, and he hoped gentlemen would pause a moment
before they adopted a measure so serious and awful. He did not see that
we were at present exposed to any greater danger, or our commerce to any
great extent to ravages more considerable than we had experienced for
some time past.

He acknowledged that our commerce had received great and repeated
injuries from France; that it had long felt their injuries and still
continued to suffer; yet, under all these circumstances, a disposition
has been constantly evinced, and he believed was still sincerely
cherished by the great mass of our people, that recourse should not be
had to the last fatal resort, till every mode of amicable negotiation
had been attempted, and every rational hope of a peaceable adjustment of
our complaints was exhausted. From these impressions, and at a period
when our commerce was suffering their unjust depredations, we had sent
Commissioners to the French nation; and was it proper, until we were
certainly advised that our Commissioners had left France, or that every
hope of their effecting the object of their mission was to be abandoned,
to precipitate a measure, the probable effect of which would be to
destroy all prospect of reconciliation, even if, at the present moment,
our Commissioners should be engaged in a treaty? Mr. B. said, that
neither the despatches which we had received from our Commissioners, nor
any other intelligence from abroad, that he was acquainted with,
compelled a belief that every possibility of negotiation was past; on
the contrary, it was perhaps strictly within the bounds of probability,
that, when the Government of France discovered an inflexible disposition
on our part not to accede to terms dishonorable or disadvantageous,
others of a less exceptionable nature would be, and perhaps before this
have been, proposed. But, in every event, what is now a matter of
conjecture, a few weeks will reduce to certainty; a few weeks must bring
us certain and decisive accounts from Europe, and he was for postponing
all deliberation respecting the very delicate subject under
consideration till this intelligence arrived. At present, he believed it
would be premature and inexpedient to adopt the proposed measures, and
should therefore refuse to give them his assent.

The question on the bill going to a third reading, was taken by yeas and
nays, and stood--51 to 39.

The bill having been determined to be read a third time, the usual
question was put by the SPEAKER, "For what day shall it be made the
order?" Monday and to-day were answered.

Mr. GALLATIN hoped Monday would be the day. He did not see the necessity
for passing the bill to-day. But it was said, the House ought not to
exercise their discretion upon this subject, because French privateers
are within our Capes. To this, he replied, that if there was any
invasion of our jurisdiction, and depredations committed within it, the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES had power to repel them without this law.
He knew he had it, because the power is expressly given to him in the
law respecting the revenue cutters; and he knew the power had been used
by him when a vessel, taken by a privateer within our jurisdiction, had
been restored to the owner by the PRESIDENT. He agreed with the
gentleman from Delaware, that the PRESIDENT had not power to employ an
armed force to make reprisals of vessels within our jurisdiction which
may have taken vessels belonging to the United States.

Besides, he understood that the Senate were not in session to-day, and
therefore the bill, if passed to-day, could not go any sooner to the
Senate than if it passed on Monday. If, therefore, it could not hasten
the final passage of the bill by going to the Senate to-day, he wished
to know what other reason could be given for so hasty a proceeding? He
saw none. He saw one reason for not passing it. Every hour might be
expected to bring despatches from our Ministers. It was known that a
vessel had arrived from France which is said to have brought accounts up
to the 8th of April. Perhaps she may bring information that would
produce unanimity of opinion as to the propriety of passing this bill.

Mr. J. PARKER said, as it could make no difference whether this bill
passed to-day or on Monday, he should be in favor of Monday, as it is
possible the vessel which had been mentioned might bring some advices
from our Envoys, though he expected nothing more favorable from that
quarter than had been already received. As it was said a French
privateer was within our boundary, it was probable she might commit some
depredation which might be heard of before Monday, which would convince
every one of the necessity of passing this bill.

Mr. OTIS saw no reason for delaying the passage of this bill till
Monday, arising from the possibility of the vessel, which was said to
have arrived from France, having brought any news; because, if
information should be received from our Commissioners which would give a
different aspect to our affairs, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
could refrain from giving these instructions. If this bill was passed
to-day, it might be reported to the Senate on Monday morning; but if it
was postponed till Monday, gentlemen might come with fresh motions and
speeches, and produce a further delay.

Mr. DAVIS hoped the passage of this bill would not be insisted upon
to-day. This subject had but very lately been referred to a select
committee, and they had made an expeditious report. He had just given
his vote in favor of the bill's passing to a third reading; but if,
contrary to the usage of the House, he should be called upon to vote on
the passage of the bill to-day, he should vote against it.

Mr. VARNUM said, since the bill would become a law as soon if passed on
Monday, as to-day, he could not see why the motion was objected to. This
question, Mr. V. said, was of the greatest importance, as it went to
plunging the country into a war from which it might not be extricated
for many years to come. Yet gentlemen act as if they were afraid
intelligence should be received before this bill becomes a law, which
shall make it unnecessary. Indeed, it appeared to him, that there are
certain gentlemen in the House who are determined to have a war with
France, at any rate.

Mr. V. said, it had been complained that an allusion had been made to
the coffee-house books of this city, respecting certain information from
France; he did not think that was more out of order, than what was heard
one day about French privateers having landed men on the coast--another,
about their being in our harbors, and taking our vessels from thence.
All which stories, he had no doubt, were raised to influence the votes
of members of this House. The public would doubtless see them in this
light.

Mr. SITGREAVES said, as the gentleman last up appeared to have some
doubt as to the fact of a French privateer's being within the bay of
Delaware, he would read the information lately given by a Captain Canby,
on oath, at the office of the Secretary of State. [This certificate has
appeared in the papers: it speaks of having seen a French privateer four
miles within the bay.] He would add, that with respect to the vessel
arrived from Bordeaux to-day, she brings information that our
Commissioners were yet in Paris, but not received by the Directory. She
left Bordeaux the 8th April, so that the hope of receiving any favorable
news by her could not be indulged. Mr. S. observed, that this bill was
intended to meet a case of emergency, and it was proper to get it passed
as soon as possible. If he saw it passed to-day, he should be sure there
could be no difficulty about it next week; but, if it was postponed till
Monday, he should be afraid of further time being spent upon it. The
gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. DAVIS) had already said, it would not be
proper to pass this bill while our Envoys are in Paris; therefore,
though the question were postponed till Monday, his vote could not be
expected. He, therefore, saw no reason for the delay.

The question on the bill's being read a third time on Monday, was put
and negatived, 49 to 41. The question on reading it a third time to-day,
was then put and carried.

The bill was accordingly read the third time and passed by yeas 50, nays
40, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, James
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher G.
      Champlin, John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, John Dennis, George Dent, William
      Edmond, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster,
      Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, Roger
      Griswold, William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James
      H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, James Machir,
      William Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison
      G. Otis, Josiah Parker, John Read, James Schureman, Samuel
      Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel
      Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, George Thatcher, Richard
      Thomas, Mark Thompson, Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van
      Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and John Williams.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemue Benton, Thos.
      Blount, Richard Brent, Nathan Bryan, Dempsey Burges, Thomas
      Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne, John Clopton,
      Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, Lucas Elmendorph, John
      Fowler, Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg,
      John A. Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens,
      Joseph Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Matthew Locke,
      Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph
      McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New, William Smith,
      Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram
      Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum,
      Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.


MONDAY, May 28.

_Marine Corps._

Mr. SEWALL called for the order of the day on the report of the
Committee for the Protection of Commerce and the Defence of the Country,
proposing an arrangement, in one corps, of the marines, who are or shall
be engaged in the service of the United States, and by annexing them to
the existing Military Establishment, to consist of a major and suitable
commissioned and non-commissioned officers, 500 privates, and the
necessary musicians.

Mr. GALLATIN wished the committee who made this report, would inform the
House how many men would be wanted on board the several armed vessels of
the United States.

Mr. J. PARKER said the United States have three frigates, twelve ships,
and ten galleys. The two 44 gun frigates will require fifty marines
each; one of 36 will need 48 men; two vessels of 22 guns each, will want
25 each; two vessels of 20 guns will require the same number; eight
vessels of 16 guns each will need 20 men each; and ten galleys each 10
men, making in the whole 518, exclusive of sergeants and music. There
will be no additional expense attending the change except the pay of a
major, and it would be much more convenient to be thus organized, than
to remain as at present.

Mr. VARNUM wished to know whether these men could ever be together so as
to enable the commanding officer of a battalion to discipline the corps.
He believed they would be separate in the different vessels, and that
there would be no means of bringing them together for the purpose.
Besides, those marines who have engaged in the service, have engaged to
serve on board ship, and not on land, so that this law would have a
retrospective effect on those men, now, to say they should serve both on
sea and land.

Mr. SEWALL could not say that these marines could be brought together to
be disciplined; but the major would superintend the whole, hear
complaints, and attend to the recruiting service. He would also have to
attend to the fortifications, and take a great deal of trouble from the
War office. The men would also sometimes be on shore, and without some
officer is appointed, they would be solely under the care of the
lieutenant. He believed, upon the whole, much advantage and economy
would be derived from it.

The question being put upon the report, it was agreed to--54 votes being
for it.

The committee then rose, and the House agreed to the report, after a few
observations from Mr. GALLATIN, hoping that, when the bill was brought
in, this corps of marines would not be made a permanent part of the
Military Establishment; but only have the same duration with the laws
for equipping and keeping in employment the armed vessels.


FRIDAY, June 1.

_Intercourse with France._

The bill for suspending the commercial intercourse between the United
States and the French Republic, was read the third time; and, after the
blanks were filled,

Mr. GALLATIN inquired, whether there was not a mistake in the third
section of the bill in that part which related to foreigners. The bill,
as it stands, would affect vessels belonging to foreigners residing
here. He proposed a change in the phraseology.

Mr. SEWALL had no objection to the alteration, and he supposed it might
be made by general consent, without recommitting the bill.

Consent was granted, and the alteration made.

The following question was then put, "Shall this bill pass?"

Mr. MCDOWELL could not reconcile it to himself to give a silent vote on
the passage of this important bill. He had heard no reason assigned for
the introduction of this bill, either when the original proposition was
before the House, or since; and, therefore, though the bill might pass
by a large majority, he should give his vote against it. It had been
said, by the gentleman from Massachusetts, that this bill was intended
to secure the property of the citizens of the United States from
capture. How was this to be done? This bill will not lay an embargo,
and, therefore, cannot prevent our vessels from falling into the hands
of the French, or any other nation, who chooses to attack them. If
gentlemen wished to effect their object, they ought to propose a general
embargo; but when he found gentlemen indisposed to this, he could
scarcely believe them serious in their wishes to prevent the property of
our citizens from being taken. By this bill our merchants are
prohibited from trading to any of the ports of France or her
dependencies. This he neither thought politic or just. He thought there
was no cause for going this length at present. It would be seen by the
estimate on the table, the great amount of exports sent to those
countries, and this bill would not only destroy the trade to France and
her dependencies, but affect also all our other trade. Gentlemen better
acquainted with commerce than he pretended to be, would be able to
ascertain the effects of this regulation with more precision than he
could do; but it appeared to him that this regulation would put the
whole of our exports within the power of Great Britain. He hoped,
therefore, gentlemen would consider the inconveniences which would be
produced by this measure, and not suffer their passions, which are so
highly irritated against France, to lead our citizens into serious
difficulties, for the sake of doing her some injury. There could be no
doubt, that the moment France received the information of the passage of
this bill, all negotiation would be put an end to, and they will lay
their hands on all the property belonging to citizens of this country,
which they can meet with. He was of opinion that the prudence of
merchants alone would be sufficient to regulate the business, without
Legislative interference. Mr. McD. hoped, therefore, the bill would be
passed, and called the yeas and nays upon it.

Mr. SEWALL said, it was very true, as the gentleman from North Carolina
observed, that no general reasons had been given in favor of this bill;
and he did not know that any opportunity had occurred in which they
could with propriety have been given. Certainly if a measure meets with
general approbation, and passes without argument and without discussion,
it must have been carried for the best reasons. Reasons, said he, are
not strengthened by debate; general consent indicates the strongest
reasons in favor of a measure that can be assigned.

The gentleman from North Carolina has supposed that the only arguments
in favor of this bill was, that it would be the means of protecting the
commerce of our citizens; that argument, he agreed, was forcible, but he
confessed he relied upon this measure very much affecting our enemy. It
occurred to the committee that this measure might very much distress the
French West Indies, which are the harbor of a nest of pirates, which
continually assail our commerce. It is true, he said, that our commerce
is also annoyed in the European seas, but in a much greater degree from
vessels fitted out from the West Indies; the privateers from these
islands depredate our commerce upon our coast, and if no measures are
taken to prevent it, they might soon be expected on our shores. Any
measure, therefore, which can be taken, consistent with our political
situation, ought to be taken to prevent this mischief. This would not be
carrying on hostility, but would withdraw from our enemies the means of
supporting their hostility. Gentlemen have objected to this bill
because they conceive it will not have this effect; he was, on the
contrary, in favor of it, because he believed it would have the effect.

Mr. S. considered our trade with France as at present annihilated, as
well as that with Spain and Holland, in a great degree; and France must
hereafter, if this bill passes into a law, carry on her trade with this
country by means of vessels belonging to the Hanse Towns, Sweden, or
Denmark; and having reduced France to the necessity of changing her
measures with regard to the neutral powers of Europe, she might,
perhaps, be induced to change her conduct with respect to the United
States, or perhaps with respect to all the neutral powers. He thought
this measure recommended by these political considerations. Whether it
would produce all the effect which had been mentioned, he could not
tell, but it was well calculated to produce it. And the only objection
to the measure appeared to be, that it would produce commercial
disadvantages to our merchants; but since the adoption of the decree of
the French Directory, which directs that all neutral vessels, with
British produce or manufactures on board, shall be confiscated as good
prizes, and which goes to the destruction of nearly all our trade, this
objection would have but little weight, as a trade thus carried on would
stand but a very small chance of producing any profit. Some merchants,
indeed, are of opinion that our trade to France and her dependencies has
for a long time past been attended with loss instead of profit. It was
evident, he said, that the decree to which he had alluded had already
had the effect in this country to lower the price of our produce, as
many vessels employed in that trade are now employed in a different
manner.

Mr. GALLATIN must confess, without pretending to be a very good judge of
the subject, that this measure appeared to him at least of a doubtful
nature. The object of it is said to be to distress France and the French
West Indies as much as possible. How far this could be effected, or
whether the attempt to distress our enemy might not distress ourselves
more than the enemy, he was not able to ascertain with precision. With
respect to France herself, he did not see that it could have any effect.
As to the West Indies, Guadaloupe, which he supposed was the place
principally aimed at, was so situated with respect to neutral islands
that she could always procure supplies of provisions from them. The only
place, then, which would be affected by this regulation would be St.
Domingo, and there he believed it might have some effect. If the
intercourse between this country and that was stopped, it might be
distressed for want of provisions; but in doing this he was persuaded we
should also injure ourselves, by annihilating our commerce and sinking
the price of our produce. With respect to our commerce, in six weeks or
two months, all the trade which our merchants now carry on to French
ports would be transferred to other neutral nations. The Danes and
Swedes will come into our ports and carry our produce to the French
islands; so that the only difference, after that time, will be that the
carrying trade which we now have will be transferred to those powers.
France will be supplied by way of Holland or Hamburg, and as the freight
and other expenses attending the trade will of course be greater than if
the commerce was carried on direct, it may be expected the price here
will be low. It would be the same with respect to provisions. If the
measure would be likely to distress France or her islands to any
considerable degree, so as the better to bring her to terms of
accommodation, he should not object to it. The inconveniences attending
it must be encountered by our citizens; but seeing its effects on our
enemy would be doubtful, and upon ourselves certain, he should vote
against the bill.

Effectually to prevent provisions being carried to the West Indies, the
exportation of them ought to be forbidden, both in our own vessels and
in all others. Without this we cannot prevent our provisions from being
exported by means of neutral vessels to French ports.

So far as related to his own constituents, Mr. G. said, they are not
immediately concerned in this question, as they do not export their
produce either to the West Indies or any port of Europe, but to New
Orleans, by the Mississippi. He stated the matter as it struck him, and
left other gentlemen to enlarge upon it.

Mr. RUTLEDGE allowed that the bill was liable to the objection which had
been urged by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, and which might be made
against every measure which would be proposed for the defence of the
country; it might be said of it that it will produce some inconvenience
to our constituents, and bear hard upon the commercial and agricultural
interests; but he believed no measure could be devised which would prove
so injurious to France, and as little inconvenient to America, as
suspending the commercial intercourse between the two countries.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania thinks the bill under consideration will
prove fruitless, because the vessels of Sweden and Denmark may carry our
produce to the French West Indies; this could not be contemplated as a
probable event; in the convulsed state in which almost all the
commercial States of Europe are, neutral bottoms will be in too great
demand in Europe to permit of their seeking freights in America. If,
however, they shall come here, and the Danes and Swedes become our
carriers, we can then adopt the regulation suggested by the gentleman
from Pennsylvania; we can then prohibit our intercourse with the French,
even by means of neutrals; or as that may be impracticable, inasmuch as
we shall not have any control over a neutral vessel after she leaves our
ports, we can lay a general embargo.

Mr. R. thought gentlemen were greatly mistaken who imagined the present
measure would lower the prices of our produce. He did not believe they
would fall in consequence of the present bill or any which could be
passed. He did not believe a declared war would lower the price of our
grain. For some time past, an _ex parte_ war has existed; the French
have made war in every sea upon our commerce, which for months past has
been bleeding at every pore. Government has not protected the trade of
the country, but has, by preventing our vessels from arming, deprived
our merchants of the use of the means their wealth afforded, of
protecting themselves; thus insurance and seamen's wages have been
higher, and the price of produce lower than they probably will be in a
state of declared war. The grain of the State he had the honor of
representing sells for less than it has done for twenty years past, or
at any period of the last war; rice, which is the great staple of the
country, and which, a few years ago, sold at six dollars the hundred
weight, now sells but for a dollar and a half, and Indian corn, which
article, the year before last, sold at a dollar a bushel, now sells for
twenty-five cents only.

The gentleman from North Carolina has insisted, that because our trade
to France and her dependencies, for the two last years, has been great,
we ought not to stop it. He thinks that merchants understand their
interests better than we do, and that if they, who are in the habit of
calculating risks, think it proper to prosecute a trade with France,
that we ought not to restrain them. Mr. R. allowed that our exports to
France the year before the last had been great, but said that our
returns had been small indeed; of the great number of valuable cargoes
sent to St. Domingo, very few have been paid for. The proclamations of
persons in authority in that island, and other deceptive contrivances,
have allured much of our property to its ports, but, arriving there, it
has been arbitrarily taken at a price fixed by the government, and
payment made by bills upon France, which have not been paid, and are now
lying protested at Paris, to the amount of many millions of dollars. So
that our exports, which the gentleman says France has taken, have been
literally _taken_, very little of it having been paid for. Upon such
terms it was impossible to suppose this commerce would continue, and it
is fallacious in the extreme to calculate, as a permanent trade, that
which a peculiar state of things has occasioned with the French islands
for some years past, and which we are now suffering for having engaged
in.

Mr. R. said he was not apprehensive of giving umbrage to any honest
merchant or fair trader, when he declared it as his opinion, that a
trade with France would not and could not be carried on at present but
by persons sinking under pecuniary embarrassments. Like gamblers upon
the threshold of ruin, they adventure and put at hazard the remnants of
their fortune to increase the chances of recovering what had been
previously lost. The trade, he also believed, was in a great degree
carried on for some time past by bankrupts, who, by means of bank
facilities, and other credits fraudulently obtained, were enabled to
speculate in a sea of danger and risk, into which they would not have
gone if they had had any thing to lose. In such a state of things, it
would be wise and expedient for Government to interfere, and say to the
merchants who are willing to continue trading with France, although you
may be disposed to continue this commerce, because it is carried on upon
a borrowed capital, and because it is insured in Europe, yet we will put
a stop to it, for we must take care of our sailors. When they are abused
and imprisoned, and their captains publicly whipped in French ports, it
is our duty to protect and preserve them from a continuance of such
injuries. Mr. R. concluded with observing, that the present bill would
occasion much distress to the French islands; would be the means of
preserving many of our vessels and seamen, and answer other very
valuable purposes. He hoped therefore it would pass.

Mr. OTIS said, as neither of the gentlemen who had spoken on this
subject had expressed an opinion which had a primary influence on his
mind, he would beg leave to declare it in a few words. It was
undoubtedly desirable, that this country should have a free commerce
with all the world; but, under our present circumstances, with relation
to France, no intercourse will be maintained with that country by the
fair American merchant. He will not venture his property either to
France, or to any of her dependencies. None but merchants who may have
exclusive privileges in the ports of France, will now carry on this
trade. He had no doubt that Citizen Hedouville, and other agents of the
Directory, would give exclusive privileges to a certain description of
dealers at the expense of the fair trader. Protections of this kind had
been given, he believed, to favorite traders in every considerable port
in the United States; and were not the proposed regulations to be
adopted, these persons would be growing fat and rich, while the whole
body of merchants would be suffering from the injustice and violence of
the French. He did not think it would be prudent to leave room for
encouragements of this kind to any of our citizens. For, while they are
in the habit of receiving large favors from the agents of the French
Government, they will be likely to feel a stronger attachment to the
interests of that country than of their own; and a stronger temptation
could not be offered to them than a monopoly of the French trade.

Mr. O. inquired whether, in a state of war, it was not usual and proper
for all nations to restrain their subjects from a direct trade with
their enemies? And are we not in war? Have we not passed a variety of
bills which gentlemen have declared amount to war? This very morning, a
bill has been passed, which, according to their construction, reaches
the climax of war measures. If, then, we are now in a state of war, it
will be inexpedient to continue to carry on this traffic. But, it is
said, if we restrain our own citizens, it will be carried on by neutral
nations. To a certain degree, it might be supposed that this would be
the case; but this is one of the losses incident to a state of war. We
must expect that a part of our carrying trade will be transferred to
neutrals for a time; but though this will affect the mercantile part of
the community, it will not wound the agricultural interest so deeply as
a total suspension of commerce. If neutral vessels come hither for
produce, the price will not fall so low as it otherwise would do, and
the farmers will be the better able to bear the burdens which a war must
necessarily lay upon them.

Mr. W. C. CLAIBORNE said, it was his intention to vote in favor of the
passage of this bill for two reasons. The first was, we have many
vessels and much property afloat on the ocean, which we cannot
adequately defend, and which is now constantly depredated upon. This
measure will keep many of our vessels at home. The second was, that it
would tend to increase our revenue, which at this time is a very
desirable thing; for he was of opinion, that the neutral powers of
Europe would become the carriers of our produce to the West Indies.
Denmark, Sweden, and the Dutch all possess islands in the West Indies in
the neighborhood of the French Islands, and if they come and fetch away
our produce, the duty on tonnage will be increased; and the duties
arising from imposts will not be lessened, as they will doubtless bring
with them the produce of Europe when they come out to this country.

The question on the passage of the bill was then taken, and stood--yeas
55, nays 25.


MONDAY, June 4.

Mr. MACON informed the House of the death of his colleague, Mr. BRYAN,
at nine o'clock this morning. The House, in consequence, entered into a
resolution appointing the members of North Carolina a committee to
manage the funeral of the deceased, and stating that the House do attend
the same. This committee afterwards reported that the funeral would take
place at nine o'clock in the morning.[35]


_Seditious Practices._

Mr. SEWALL, from the committee for the protection of commerce and the
defence of the country, reported a bill for the prevention and restraint
of dangerous and seditious practices, which was committed for Wednesday.

[This bill proposes, that any alien resident, or who shall come to
reside within the United States, who hath been convicted of any felony,
or other infamous crime, or who shall be a notorious fugitive from
justice, upon any charge of treasonable or seditious practices, in any
foreign State or country, or whose continuance within the United States
shall be, in the opinion of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
injurious to the public peace and safety, may be deemed and adjudged a
dangerous person, and may be required to depart from the country, and be
apprehended and removed therefrom. And if any person, whether alien or
citizen, shall secretly or openly combine, or conspire together, with an
intention of opposing any measures of the Government of the United
States, which are or shall be directed by the proper authority, or to
defeat the operation of any law of the United States, or to discourage
or prevent any person holding any place or office in or under the
Government of the United States, from undertaking or executing his trust
or duty; and if any person, with intent as aforesaid, shall by any
writing, printing, or advised speaking, threaten such officer or person
in public trust, with any danger to his character, person, or property,
or shall counsel or advise, or attempt to procure any insurrection,
riot, or unlawful assembly or combination as aforesaid, whether such
conspiring, &c., shall have the proposed effect or not, shall and may be
punished, upon the conviction of the offence, by a fine not exceeding
---- dollars, and by binding, with sufficient surety for good behavior,
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ---- years; and if the
person so convicted shall be an alien, he may be farther adjudged, in
lieu of such binding or imprisonment, to be banished and removed from
the territory of the United States.]


TUESDAY, June 5.

Mr. RUTLEDGE proposed a resolution to the following effect, which was
unanimously agreed to:

      "_Resolved_, That the members of this House, from a desire
      of showing their respect to the late Nathan Bryan, Esq.,
      member of this House, deceased, will go into mourning for
      one month, by wearing a crape on the left arm."


_Relations with France._

A Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, as
follows:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives:_

      I now transmit to both Houses the communications from our
      Envoys at Paris, received since the last which have been
      presented by me to both Houses.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _June 5, 1798_.

The said Message, and communications referred to therein, were read, and
ordered to lie on the table.


WEDNESDAY, June 6.

Mr. ALLEN proposed a resolution to the following effect:

      "_Resolved_, That there shall be a call of the House at
      half past eleven o'clock every day on which the House shall
      sit during the present session."

Ordered to lie on the table.


_Relations with France._

Mr. D. FOSTER laid the following resolutions upon the table, viz:

      "Whereas the French Republic, regardless of those
      principles of good faith which ought to ensure a due
      observance of treaties, have, in various instances,
      violated the express stipulations of the treaties
      heretofore made and subsisting between the United States
      and the French nation, in a manner highly injurious to the
      interest and honor of the United States; by reason whereof
      the United States are released from all obligation on their
      part to respect the said treaties, or to consider
      themselves as holden or bound thereby.

      "_Resolved_, That it is expedient to make a Legislative
      declaration notifying the citizens of the United States,
      and all others concerned, that the said treaties are no
      longer obligatory upon the United States.

      "_Resolved_, That provision ought to be made by law,
      authorizing the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to grant
      letters of marque and reprisal against all ships and other
      vessels, with their cargoes, found on the high seas,
      sailing under the authority of the French Republic, or
      belonging to the said Republic, or any of the citizens
      thereof, or its dependencies; to continue and be in force
      until the French Government shall revoke and annul the
      orders and decrees authorizing the capture and detention of
      the vessels and property of the citizens of the United
      States, contrary to the laws of nations.

      "_Resolved_, That provision ought to be made by law
      granting a bounty, in proportion to the size and number of
      guns, on all armed vessels (which shall be taken and
      brought into any of the ports of the United States)
      belonging to the Republic of France, or to any of the
      citizens thereof, or of its dependencies, or to others
      sailing under the authority, or pretence of authority, from
      the said Republic."

They were ordered to lie upon the table.


FRIDAY, June 8.

_Letters of Marque, &c._

Mr. D. FOSTER then called up his resolutions relative to granting
general reprisals, letters of marque, &c., which, being read, he moved
to refer to the Committee for the Protection of Commerce and the Defence
of the Country, with power to report by bill or otherwise.

Mr. DAVIS hoped these resolutions would not be referred. It appeared
very strange to him that gentlemen should be desirous of taking this
step at present. He had heard much in this House about French parties,
and of gentlemen being attached to France, but he thought the House had
witnessed, not many minutes ago, something of another party, (referring
to the negative which had been put upon the resolution calling upon the
PRESIDENT for information respecting British depredations.) And yet,
when we have lately received information from France that peace is
probably yet within our grasp, a motion is brought forward which, if
adopted, would effectually shut out all hopes of a favorable termination
of our dispute. In the conclusion of the late despatches, he read as
follows:

      "As we were taking our leave of Mr. Talleyrand, we told him
      that two of us would return immediately, to receive
      instructions of our Government, if that would be agreeable
      to the Directory; if it was not, we would wait some time,
      in the expectation of receiving instructions."

So, that two of our Commissioners might be expected shortly to return,
to lay certain propositions before the Government here, or that they
will write for farther instructions; and, whilst these things are
pending, can a proposition like the present be justified? He thought
not. It was not, in his mind, a declaration of war; but it was evidently
a war measure. And when it is evident, from our Envoys' own showing,
that the negotiation between them and the Minister of Foreign Affairs in
France was in train on the 8th of March, the date of their last
despatches, as certain propositions had been made to them which were not
rejected, he thought it would be extremely imprudent to refer
resolutions of so hostile a kind as these certainly are. It would be
time enough, Mr. D. said, to adopt a measure of this kind when our
Envoys shall have informed us that peace is unattainable; but, whilst
they held up a contrary expectation, he could not consent to do any
thing which should cast wholly away the hope of preserving a state of
peace. With respect to the first resolution, which declares the treaty
between France and this country void, he had not much objection to it,
because it must be so considered from the laws already passed; but those
which respect the granting letters of marque and general reprisals, he
thought very objectionable indeed.

Mr. HARPER said, if the arguments of the gentleman from Kentucky were
well founded, he had not introduced them at the proper time. If he views
the state of our negotiation with France in the light which he had
placed it, his objections to this measure are natural and consistent;
but they ought to be made, when a bill is brought in, against its being
read a second time; or if the motion had now been to adopt the
resolutions instead of referring them, the remarks which he had made
would have been perfectly in order; but that gentleman must know that
there is a great difference between committing and agreeing to adopt a
resolution. He would confess that he, for one, should not now be ready
to agree to any of those propositions, though a fortnight hence he might
be willing to adopt them all. If the motion was, therefore, for
adopting, instead of referring them, he should move a postponement, or
the previous question, or take some other mode of disposing of them; but
when the motion was merely to refer them to a committee who might report
upon them immediately, or let them lie until farther information was
received from our commissioners; or, if they report a bill, that bill
might lie until gentlemen thought proper to pass upon it. He did not,
therefore, see any ground for the alarm which the gentleman from
Kentucky has shown. He confessed he could not look upon our negotiation
with France as in the happy train in which it appears to that gentleman.
He knew we might have peace, if we would consent to have our property
plundered _ad libitum_; or by paying a contribution to the full amount
of our ability to pay, which were the terms that Talleyrand and his
agents had offered to our Envoys; and this loan was made a _sine qua
non_ by Talleyrand. He could not tell, therefore, how the gentleman from
Kentucky could conceive the negotiation to be in good train, except he
is willing to pay the tribute which France demands from us.

Mr. VENABLE said, the gentleman last up had drawn a distinction between
committing these resolutions and agreeing to them, and had said that he
himself is not ready to agree to them. Mr. V. thought resolutions of
this kind ought not to be laid upon the table before the House is ready
to decide upon them, as the moment the foreign nation to which they have
reference hears that such resolutions have been brought forward, they
will take advantage of it, and seize all the property belonging to our
citizens within their power. If the resolutions are not proper,
therefore, to be adopted, they ought immediately to be rejected; for, if
this is not done, we may expect that not only all the property of our
citizens in French ports will be seized, but that all our vessels
without exception which can be met with will be taken. He hoped,
therefore, if gentlemen are of opinion with him that the time for taking
measures like the present is not yet arrived, that the reference would
be refused. It would do infinite mischief. We ought not, he said, to
show a spirit of this kind, until we are perfectly prepared to act. And
as he believed the House is better calculated to judge of the propriety
of thus changing the situation of the country, than any committee could
be, he should not choose to ask the opinion of the Committee for the
Protection of Commerce and the Defence of the Country what he should do
in this case.

Mr. R. WILLIAMS observed, that the gentleman from South Carolina seemed
to argue in favor of committing these resolutions, as if no time would
be so proper for doing so as the present. But he believed this House
would be equally capable of judging of this matter hereafter as at
present, and could act upon them in future as well as now. Why, then,
ought the House now to refer them, when even the gentleman from South
Carolina says he is not prepared to vote for them; but that if he were
called upon now to vote upon them, he should give his negative on the
question?

It appeared to him, Mr. W. said, that the reference of these resolutions
could have no other appearance than that of a challenge, and will
doubtless produce the consequences which have been mentioned by the
gentleman from Virginia. And however their vessels may have depredated
upon our commerce, and suffered their citizens to plunder us at sea,
they have not gone so far as to make it a national act to seize all the
property of our citizens within their power. He was, therefore, opposed
to this reference: for though, whenever the time of actual war shall
arrive, (for it seemed as if it must arrive,) we shall think it
necessary to do France all the mischief we can, yet he did not think it
would be prudent to tell them we mean to injure them in this or that way
beforehand.

Mr. HARRISON believed, that to refer these resolutions would be to give
them a degree of sanction; and as he looked upon the question as very
important, he should call for the yeas and nays upon it. They were
agreed to be taken.

Mr. GALLATIN said, it appeared to him that the committee to whom it is
proposed to refer these resolutions might, without this reference, have
brought the subject before the House, as they are appointed to consider
whatever relates to the protection of commerce and the defence of the
country. The reference must mean something more, therefore, than a mere
instruction to them to consider the subject, because they have already
those instructions given to them generally in their original
appointment. What, he asked, could be obtained by a vote on this
subject? He was at a loss to know. He could see no possible good to be
derived from it. He wished, indeed, the committee to whom it is proposed
to refer these resolutions, instead of doing the business committed to
them by piecemeal, in the manner which they had adopted, had laid before
the House at once a complete general plan of defence consistent with the
present situation of the country. A majority of this House seem not only
ready to take every defensive measure, but, in a certain degree,
offensive measures also. This having been once determined, the committee
might very well prepare such a plan. Such a plan would be more
consistent and uniform, than if individual members were left to bring
forward any measures which it may strike them as necessary to be taken.
Of what use, Mr. G. asked, had been the reference of a set of
resolutions made some days ago by Mr. SITGREAVES? No report has been
made upon them. A part of them were of the same nature with these, and
would authorize a report on this subject, if the committee had not the
general power already mentioned.

So far as any conclusion could be drawn from the despatches of our
Ministers, he confessed he had no great hopes of our negotiation with
France being concluded in an effectual manner. He saw a kind of
negotiation open between our Envoys and the French Minister for Foreign
Affairs. He saw that the latter had asked for a loan; a demand
inadmissible by our Envoys, since it was contrary to their instructions;
a demand inadmissible from any instructions they might hereafter
receive, for the sentiments of the Executive on that subject were well
known; and, he would add, a demand inadmissible in its very nature,
inadmissible in the opinion not only of this House, but of every
individual in the House. So that, as long as that demand was insisted
upon, no accommodation could be effected. But it must have been
remarked, in the late despatches, that when our Envoys inquired of Mr.
Talleyrand whether a loan of money was the ultimatum of the French
Government, he did not choose to give a direct answer. This shows it to
be possible that this demand may not be their ultimatum; and if not, as
we have heard it reported, (though not officially,) that one of our
Commissioners still remains in Paris, it would not be prudent to take
any step that would defeat any treaty which might be in contemplation.

Mr. W. CLAIBORNE hoped the motion for postponement would prevail, for,
though a reference of those resolutions would not be a complete sanction
of them, he should consider it as a prelude to a speedy adoption. His
observation on the past proceedings of the House justified this remark.

Mr. C. differed in opinion from the gentleman from North Carolina as to
the power of Congress with respect to treaties. He believed Congress has
a right to do away any treaty by a Legislative act; if not, he should
think he lived under the most miserable Government upon earth.

What, said Mr. C., is the nature of the injuries which we have received
from France? Have they not been wholly maritime? and have we not done
all we can conveniently do for the defence of our commerce? Was not all
our marine force already under such regulations as to be enabled to act
to great advantage in the prevention of future outrages on our commerce?
Why, then, shall we proceed to measures which must inevitably involve
the country in war? Will the adoption of these resolutions give us a
single ship or gun? No. Why, then, widen the breach between the two
countries, by acting upon a measure more replete with impolicy than any
act he ever saw introduced into that House. If it were adopted, it would
go to the destruction of our commerce with several of the great
commercial powers; for the moment war is declared with France, we shall
also be at war with Spain and Holland, her allies. And when a war with
Spain shall take place, the commerce of the Southern States and Western
country will be immediately gone, and all our vessels in French, Dutch,
or Spanish ports, will doubtless be confiscated. These, he said, were
evils which he foresaw would attend the adoption of these resolutions,
and he called upon the mover to show a single advantage which could be
derived from their adoption. He hoped, therefore, the question would be
postponed for a week; and if, at the end of that period, nothing shall
have transpired which will make their adoption proper, he trusted they
would then be farther postponed. If France is determined to have war
with us, we must and will defend ourselves; but he was desirous that no
act of ours should show that we ourselves wish for war.

Mr. SITGREAVES did not feel very solicitous whether the reference of
these resolutions should or should not be postponed for one week, as he
did not think so short a time would make any essential difference in the
state of things; but, as he knew no good purpose that could be answered
by the postponement, he should vote against it. He rose to offer his
reasons in favor of the reference, generally.

His colleague (Mr. GALLATIN) had fallen into two mistakes; he had said
that these resolutions are of the same nature with those which he (Mr.
SITGREAVES) had the honor, some days ago, to lay before the House; and
that the committee, to which the resolutions are proposed to be
referred, have, at present, all the power which this reference would
give them. He was not correct, in the first place, in saying that these
resolutions are of the same nature with those formerly submitted. The
former propositions suggested a course of special reprisal, in cases
limited and defined; the present propositions are for letters of general
marque and reprisal, which modes of proceeding are essentially different
in their nature and their incidents, in their theory and practice. The
present propositions, also, recommend a declaration on the subject of
the treaties, to which the former ones made no allusion. He believed his
colleague to be equally mistaken in his other assertion, that the
committee had already power to report to the extent of these
resolutions, if they should deem it expedient. Their general power was
to consider and report upon so much of the PRESIDENT'S Speech as relates
to the protection of commerce and defence of the country; and this
authority, when construed with relation to the Speech, cannot be
considered as going beyond the measures of defence, strictly compatible
with the neutral position in which we stood at the commencement of the
session; and could not, without an express reference, justify the
committee in proposing broad measures of hostility. This, however, is a
question of form merely. If the committee have already the power, the
reference proposed can do no mischief; if they have it not already, it
remains to inquire whether they ought not to have it. He conceived they
ought.

Mr. BALDWIN said, that nothing was more certain than that individual
members could not vote to refer a motion to a committee, as was now
proposed, unless at the time they feel themselves favorably disposed to
the object of the motion, and vote to refer it to a committee to further
that object, and to give it practicable shape and form. The gentleman
who had just sat down should reflect, that referring petitions is a
matter of course, and is established by usage as a respectful form of
receiving and hearing the applications of our fellow-citizens. The
introduction of a petition requires no second; but a motion made and
seconded, is to be regarded as a step in the actual operations of the
House. For himself he must say that, with respect to the present motion,
it required no time for him to be ready to declare, that he was not now
favorably disposed towards it, and could not, in any shape, now give it
his countenance and support.

When he reflected on what they had done in the small space of a few
weeks, and the course of measures which had been adopted by Congress
since the receipt of the despatches from our Envoys, he thought they had
come on, one upon another, in a succession sufficiently rapid. They
must, in their nature, greatly affect the state of the country, perhaps
more than was ever done before in so short a time. He thought it would
be wise in the House, at present, to make a short pause, before they
proceeded any further. It is a subject on which all Governments are apt
to err, and to proceed too rapidly. Let us, said he, take a little time
to ourselves, and give some time to our constituents, to look at our
interests, and the state of our public affairs, in the new posture which
we have given them in the course of a few weeks.

Our measures, he said, divided themselves into three classes; first, the
internal defence of our country and of our sea-coast. On this there had
been no difference of opinion; we had adopted, promptly, the same course
of measures which had been adopted a few years ago, when we were
threatened by another European power; we had fortified our ports and
harbors, fixed row-galleys and other vessels on our coast, and ordered a
draft of eighty thousand militia to hold themselves in constant
readiness; and ordered a million of dollars to be expended, in procuring
arms, cannon, and ammunition, to be placed all along the country in
proper situations, that they may be put into use by such of our
fellow-citizens as should be driven to the unfortunate necessity of
defending themselves by arms. He had been glad to see such a perfect
unanimity in those measures, and such a readiness, on all quarters, to
vote even larger sums than were recommended in the reports for these
purposes. This course of measures was founded on principles merely
defensive, and related only to our own country, and our own coast within
cannon shot from our shores, which, by the law of nations, is called our
territory; he trusted what had been done, accompanied with the spirit
and resolution of our countrymen, would render our country impregnable.

The second course of measures, which he said had also been adopted, was
extending our military preparations, and carrying our force beyond our
own jurisdiction, on the main ocean, to defend our commerce by convoys,
and to seek for and capture French privateers. On these the House had
not been unanimous; they had appeared to be founded on more questionable
policy; but, as the laws were passed, they would not only be cheerfully
submitted to, but as vigorously supported as the others; it was now his
duty to hope and expect that they would do more good than harm.

The third and last course of measures, was presented to our
consideration by the present motion, to put the country immediately
into an actual state of war. He must say he had been surprised to hear
it; he thought it very ill-timed; he must express upon it his utter
disapprobation. As had been already stated, the last official
information from our Envoys, showed that our negotiations were still
going on; and though the French Minister still insisted on a compulsory
loan, which our Ministers justly declared to be a very inadmissible
condition; yet, it ought to be noticed in the despatches that, when he
was asked by Mr. GERRY, if they were to consider him as insisting on a
loan as an ultimatum, he avoided the question, which gives reason to
believe that, as things then stood, a loan or war was not an absolute
inevitable alternative; it was such an alternative as he was not
disposed to take, so long as it was avoidable. Though our situation has
been, in many respects, bad for the year past, yet in a state of actual
war it will be much worse. He never turned his attention to the part of
the country where he lived, but that he felt himself compelled, by every
principle of duty to those whom he represented, to address and to urge
every consideration to avoid going to that extreme. They have been once
almost totally destroyed by war; they know, from their distance and from
past experience, that prompt and adequate protection never will be
extended to them. He believed no honest man, deliberating merely for the
public good, could take a view of the affairs of this country, of his
own home, and of his friends, and think of going into a state of war, if
it is possible to avoid it.

Mr. DANA hoped the gentleman from Georgia did not want to inquire of his
constituents whether they would consent to a treaty with France, in
which we shall bind ourselves to pay a tribute. He trusted if that
gentleman's constituents were thus to instruct him, he would refuse to
obey their instructions. He hoped no member of this House could be
prevailed with to set his hand to what would prove the death-warrant to
the liberties of the country. Mr. D. thought, therefore, that no
instructions were necessary on this subject; it is not a subject proper
for deliberation in the American Congress, and no other terms of
accommodation had been held out to us by that country. Does not Mr.
Talleyrand, said Mr. D., complain of the Farewell Address of General
Washington, and of the Speeches of Mr. Adams, and say that, before any
treaty can be entered upon with us, some proof of our friendly
disposition must be shown towards them, and that proof, he more than
insinuates, must be a loan, or a tribute to the extent of our capacity
to pay? If the despatches do not mean this, he did not know what they
mean; and when Mr. Talleyrand was asked whether this was the ultimatum
of the French Government, though he does not answer in direct terms, it
is clearly implied that it is so.

What, then, said Mr. D., are our hopes relative to France? Does any body
expect any thing from the terrible generosity of the Great Nation? Can
we expect any thing from their justice, or, rather, have we not every
thing to expect from their vengeance, if not prepared to meet it? Why do
gentlemen tell the House of the danger of irritating France? He thought
delicacy of this kind unnecessary, when speaking of a nation which has
set at defiance every moral principle, which has taken and is determined
to take our vessels, contrary to every principle of right. For himself,
he felt no such delicacy; and, therefore, he was in favor of referring
the resolutions under consideration. He did not think them so
notoriously wrong that they are not fit subjects for deliberation.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS wished to say a few words in reply to the remark which
had been made, that members who voted for the reference of resolutions,
generally vote for the resolution itself. He believed he could produce
twenty instances to the contrary, where references had been made, and
the measures themselves afterwards have been disagreed to. He should
give his vote in favor of the committal, because he wished to see the
principles of these resolutions detailed; but he by no means pledged
himself to vote for the passage of the bill.

The gentleman from Kentucky had spoken of two parties in this country,
but that the decision upon a resolution of this morning proved that
there is now a third party. He supposed the gentleman who had made the
motion alluded to would have given some reasons why it ought to be
agreed to; but not having done that, he voted against it.

[The SPEAKER reminded Mr. W. of the question.]

He then observed in reply to the remark of the gentleman from North
Carolina (Mr. R. WILLIAMS) with respect to treaties, that it was clear
from the writers on the laws of nations, that when one nation breaks a
treaty, it is no longer obligatory on the other party. But treaties are
nowadays done away, and power substituted in their place.

According to the opinion which gentlemen had themselves expressed,
Congress had already agreed to form different measures, which would
involve the country in war. If the present bill was passed (and he
doubted not it would be) it will be the fifth, though the gentleman from
Pennsylvania has said that this reference will give the Committee for
the Protection of Commerce and the Defence of the Country no new power,
and of course, in his opinion, it could make no difference whether these
resolutions are referred or not.

The yeas and nays were taken, and the question was negatived--42 to 41,
as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, Bailey Bartlett, James A. Bayard, David
      Brooks, Christopher G. Champlin, James Cochran, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, John Dennis, William Edmond, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William Barry Grove,
      Robert Goodloe Harper, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer,
      James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, William
      Matthews, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison G. Otis, Isaac Parker,
      John Read, John Rutledge, junior, James Schureman, Samuel
      Sewall, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel
      Smith, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, and
      John Williams.

      NAYS.--George Baer, jun., Abraham Baldwin, David Bard,
      Lemuel Benton, Thomas Blount, Richard Brent, Stephen
      Bullock, Dempsey Burges, John Chapman, Thomas Claiborne,
      William Charles Cole Claiborne, John Clopton, Joshua Coit,
      Thomas T. Davis, John Dawson, George Dent, Albert Gallatin,
      James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna, Carter B.
      Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph Heister, David Holmes,
      Walter Jones, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, John Milledge, Anthony New,
      Josiah Parker, William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard
      Stanford, Thomas Sumter, Abram Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, Robert Williams, and
      Matthew Locke.

Mr. SITGREAVES moved to postpone the consideration of these resolutions
for two weeks, which motion was seconded by Mr. J. PARKER.

Mr. VENABLE inquired whether it was in order to take any further
question upon the resolutions, the original motion having been
negatived.

The SPEAKER answered, that the question on reference having been
disagreed to, the resolutions themselves are now before the House.

Mr. VENABLE said, he had thought it was not in order to enter again upon
the consideration of these resolutions, after the question which had
been taken upon them. He knew that, to suffer them to lie on the table,
could have no effect upon the people of this country, but it might have
effect on the conduct of a foreign nation, as, when they heard such
resolutions were under consideration, and of course likely to be
adopted, they might anticipate their being carried into law, and proceed
to seize the property of our citizens in their ports. If this motion
were to be negatived, or withdrawn for the present, it might be brought
forward again, whenever gentlemen shall think it ought to be adopted. He
was as much opposed to the suspension, as he was against the reference
of these resolutions.

Mr. MACON hoped the consideration of these resolutions would not be
postponed. It was a little curious that a gentleman who was a few
minutes ago against a postponement for a week, was now become an
advocate for a postponement for a fortnight.

The SPEAKER said, the two questions were different.

Mr. RUTLEDGE rose to make this observation: That members opposed to the
former motion for postponement, when a mere question of reference was
under consideration, might with propriety be in favor of it when the
question comes to be final upon the resolution.

Mr. R. wished gentlemen to use their victory with moderation. He
believed the country was big with expectation that spirited measures
would be entered into. He did not believe they approved of the
half-measures which Congress took. Indeed, the countries which France
had overcome, had been overcome chiefly from their taking half-measures
while France had taken whole measures. He hoped the postponement would
be agreed to; as if the next advices from our Envoys are not more
favorable than the last were, he supposed there could be no hesitation
in agreeing to have these resolutions carried into effect, and to reject
them would have a mischievous effect.

Mr. LYON called for the yeas and nays on the question, but as one fifth
of the members present did not rise in favor of it, the question was not
carried.

Mr. DAVIS wished the mover to withdraw his resolution.

The question on postponement was put and carried--44 to 40.


_Alien Enemies, &c._

Mr. SEWALL, from the Committee for the Protection of Commerce and the
Defence of the Country, reported the bill respecting alien enemies,
newly modified, which was some days ago recommitted to the committee for
that purpose. Also, a bill authorizing merchant vessels to defend
themselves against French depredations. This bill authorizes the
commanders and crews of merchant vessels to oppose the attack or search
of any French armed vessel, and to repel any such search or attack by
force, and to capture the vessels making such attack. All such captures
to go--one-half to the owner of the vessel making the capture, and the
other half to the captors. No armed merchant vessel to be suffered to
clear out but such as is owned by citizens of the United States, who,
together with the commander, shall enter into bond that she shall not
commit any outrage against the vessels of any nation at amity with the
United States, and that said vessel shall not, during her voyage, carry
any articles contraband of war.

A bill was received from the Senate entitled "An act concerning aliens."
This bill goes to authorize the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to order
all such aliens as he shall deem dangerous to the United States to
depart out of its territory; and if, after such order, any such alien
shall be found at large, he shall be imprisoned for three years, and for
ever after deprived of the privilege of becoming a citizen of the United
States. And if any alien shall return to this country, after he shall
have been sent out of it, he shall be imprisoned and kept to hard labor
for life. And all commanders of vessels who shall arrive in any of the
ports of the United States after the 1st day of July next, shall make a
report in writing of all aliens who shall come passengers on board their
vessels, giving an account of their age, profession, description of
their person, &c., on pain of forfeiting three hundred dollars.

These bills were severally made the order of the day for Monday.


SATURDAY, June 9.

Mr. J. PARKER moved that the bills, with the amendments of the Senate to
them, for altering the time of entering stills, and for the more
effectual collection of the internal revenues, be referred to a select
committee. Agreed to.

The House spent the remainder of the day principally in going through a
very long bill to provide for the valuation of lands and dwelling
houses, and the enumeration of slaves within the United States,
previously to the laying a direct tax on them. The bill was gone through
in the Committee of the Whole, without any debate of consequence, except
as to what related to filling the blanks intended to contain the amount
to be appropriated for carrying the law into execution, the salary of
the Commissioners, Assessors, &c. The committee had leave to sit again.
No other business of importance was done this day.


MONDAY, June 11.

Mr. HARPER, from the Committee of Ways and Means, reported a bill
providing for the enumeration of the inhabitants of the United States;
which was committed for Wednesday.


WEDNESDAY, June 13.

_Direct Taxes._

The bill providing for the valuation of houses and lands and the
enumeration of slaves within the United States, was then read the third
time, and upon the question being put "Shall this bill pass?"

Mr. DAVIS said, he was under the necessity of opposing the passage of
this bill. No part of the community would contribute more cheerfully, to
the extent of their ability, to the support of the General Government,
than his constituents; but, from the knowledge he had of their
situation; of the scarcity of circulating medium amongst them; and from
the want of a market for their surplus produce, he could not give his
vote in favor of a tax, which it would be with great difficulty they
would be able to pay. The people of Kentucky, he said, had produce of
every kind, in abundance, but they want a market for it. The Mississippi
had lately promised a medium through which to transport it, but as yet,
little advantage has been derived from it; and whenever a war shall take
place, it may be expected that they would be deprived of the advantages
which the free navigation of that river promises to the Western country.

Mr. D. said, when he came from home he did not think the coin in
circulation, in Kentucky, amounted to $10,000; and, since that period,
he was informed that money had become still more scarce. If he thought
the tax would be paid without great difficulty he would have cheerfully
voted for it; but believing the contrary, he was constrained to give his
vote against it.

Mr. W. CLAIBORNE said, the people of Tennessee are, in a great degree,
similarly situated with those of Kentucky. Every one enjoyed the
necessaries of life, but few of them experience those conveniences which
flow from wealth. Money is a scarce article amongst them; and when he
reflected upon the present situation of things, and the probability
there is, that the avenue which was lately opened for the disposal of
the surplus produce of the State would soon be closed, he feared his
constituents would be illy able to pay this tax. But if, as the
gentleman from North Carolina (Mr. MACON) on a former occasion
suggested, he should be mistaken in this respect, and that the people of
Tennessee are well able to pay the tax, he should rejoice in the event.
Fearing the contrary, however, when he heard the people complaining of
this grievous burden, he wished to have the consolation of saying, "I
did not consent to this law, because I was of opinion that its operation
would be particularly oppressive to the Western people."

Mr. GALLATIN observed, it would be extremely difficult to point out any
mode of taxation which will not be inconvenient and oppressive, in some
degree, for some part of the people to pay; and it must be expected that
every mode which can be adopted, will bear more hardly on some parts of
the community than on others. With respect to the tax on land, he must
agree with the gentleman from Kentucky and Tennessee, that, from there
being a less quantity of circulating medium in their States than any
other State of the Union, it would probably fall heavier upon their
constituents than upon people of the Atlantic States. But there is one
circumstance with respect to those States which ought to be taken into
consideration, viz: that the tax for this year will be laid according to
the old census taken seven or eight years ago; since which time, it is
well known that the population of these States has more than doubled.
Therefore, the inconvenience of paying this tax will be greatly lessened
to these States by that circumstance. In the State of Tennessee, by the
old census taken in 1791, there were only 35,000 inhabitants, whereas,
by a census taken in that State by themselves, two years ago, the number
exceeded 60,000.

Besides, it appeared to him that both the gentlemen assumed a principle
by no means ascertained, viz: that the Mississippi will be shortly
closed to the Western country. No people could suffer more by such an
event than the people whom he himself represented. They stood precisely
in the situation of the constituents of those gentlemen; and
undoubtedly, if our present difficulties with France should produce a
war with Spain, it would be extremely fatal to his constituents as well
as theirs. But he knew of no reason for supposing this; and it would be
wrong to legislate on a presumption that such will be the case.

In relation to this law, it was not formed, Mr. G. said, altogether to
his wish; but it was as nearly so as he could get it, and it was
necessary the money should be raised. He had opposed, as long and as
forcibly as he was able, most of the measures which made the great
expenses of the present session necessary; but a majority having
determined that the expense shall be incurred, and that measures shall
be taken which will necessarily decrease our present revenue, it has
become the duty of every member to provide the means for paying the
expense to be incurred, and for supplying the probable deficiencies of
former revenues.

If the expense is to be provided for, how is it to be done? It must be
either by taxation or by loans. Indeed, it is probable that Congress
will be obliged to resort to loans, even during the present session; but
certainly it is their duty, as far as they are able, to provide for the
public expenses, without going into measures which will increase the
public debt. Our choice lies, therefore, between loans and taxation; and
however inconvenient it may be to the people to pay taxes, he should
certainly resort to taxes rather than loans. And if the money is to be
raised by taxes, to what objects can we turn our attention? Congress
must have recourse to internal revenue, or an increase of duty on the
importation of some of the necessaries of life. Indeed, after turning
his attention very seriously to the subject, he could not find how any
considerable revenue could be raised, but by means of a direct tax on
land and houses, or a tax on salt. He did not think any other could be
relied upon; and, between the two, he believed it would be infinitely
better, both for the United States and his constituents, to lay a tax on
land and houses than on salt. The tax on land and houses will be laid
according to the value of the property; and though there is less
circulating medium in the back country, which is thinly settled, than in
the larger towns, the property in those parts will be estimated at a
much lower rate, and of course the people will have a smaller proportion
of the tax to pay; and he thought it far preferable to lay a tax which
would fall, in a great degree, upon persons according to their wealth,
than one which would operate as a _poll tax_, (as a tax on salt would
do,) according to their number.

Mr. DAVIS said, he believed he could prove to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania (Mr. GALLATIN) that his conclusions with respect to the
ability of the people of the State of Kentucky to pay this tax, were not
altogether correct; and that the number of the people inhabiting the
State now, being double what it was when the last census was taken, will
afford them no relief. For, if there were $10,000 in circulation in the
State, when there were only 30,000 inhabitants, and no more, now there
are 150,000--the tax would fall no lighter now than it would have fallen
then. How, it might be inquired, does it happen that, though the
population is so greatly increased, no increase should have been made in
the quantity of circulating specie? It happens thus: Men who emigrate
from the Atlantic States to this country, seldom bring much money with
them; for, whatever they may have when they set out, it is expended on
their journey, or paid for land to a single person when they reach us,
so that none of their money comes into general circulation and though
the people are able to raise plenty of produce, they are not able to
exchange it for money. It is true, the more inhabitants they get, the
more the general property of the State is increased, but it did not
increase the circulating medium. He did not believe there is now so much
money in circulation as there was when the census was taken. There was
then an army there, and produce sold for a good price; but since a peace
was made with the Indians, money has been constantly draining off from
the State, to pay the debts which the merchants of that State had
contracted whilst trade was brisk in this and other cities.

Mr. S. SMITH did not think the fears of the gentlemen from Kentucky and
Tennessee would be realized. It is no doubt true that the quantity of
circulating specie in Kentucky had diminished since the peace with the
Indians; but it is also true that the spring trade this year from
Kentucky by the Mississippi has been both great and profitable. But
gentlemen suppose, if we have a war with France, we shall also be at war
with Spain, and our intercourse by that river will be cut off. But the
interest of Spain will be against this; for in case of war, there will
be great difficulty in getting flour to the Havana from the Atlantic
ports, as our West India trade will be cut off, and they will have to
depend upon a supply by the Mississippi. Besides, if produce be so much
cheaper in the Western country than in the Atlantic States, as it has
been stated to be, it will become the interest of neutrals in the
Atlantic cities, to make remittances by produce from that country to the
Havana. And if Spain should be drawn into the war, there would be other
modes of the people of those States disposing of their produce. He did
not think, therefore, gentlemen from that country need be so much
alarmed as they appeared to be.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS had always been opposed to every system of direct taxes;
but as a majority of the House had agreed to call forth the resources of
the country by this means, he must give his vote for this bill. He was
astonished to find the gentlemen from Kentucky and Tennessee opposing
this bill, when so much of the money of the General Government had been
expended in that country. They must acknowledge their States have had
their portion of specie from the Treasury of the United States. An act
had indeed been passed during the present session for paying a company
of militia for a certain expedition in Tennessee, which amounted to
nearly one fourth of the whole sum required from that State. He believed
some of the troops of the United States are also now there, and likely
to continue, so that they are constantly receiving supplies of cash from
the Treasury of the United States. Besides, it ought to be considered
that this tax will fall upon unimproved, as well as improved land, many
of the owners of which, he supposed, lived out of that State, which
would reduce the portion of the tax to the State. The district in which
he lived would pay more tax than the whole State of Tennessee. He knew
the tax would be collected in some places with difficulty, and more so,
since the bill had undergone a change which had thrown the tax upon land
more than it would otherwise have fallen.

But, whatever difficulty may attend the collection of this tax, when we
see the ruinous effects of public debt in other countries, we ought to
be cautious how we make extensive loans, and endeavor to draw forth the
resources of the country, to meet any of the expenses which we may have
to encounter.

Mr. VARNUM should vote against this bill. He had always thought, since
the establishment of the present Government, that there would be no
necessity for resorting to direct taxes, except in case of our being
engaged in war. He believed the measures already taken would not require
a direct tax if no further expenses were contemplated. But he now
believed a majority of the Government of the United States are
determined on war, and he would, on that account, have given his vote
for the bill, if the tax was proposed to be laid on just and equal
principles. It was his opinion, that every species of property ought to
be taxed, as well as houses and land. So far from this being the case,
he believed that between one third and one half of the property taxed by
the State Legislatures, in their system of direct taxes, would, by the
present plan, be excused altogether from tax. Some of the most wealthy
people in the Union would, by this means, be untaxed, in a great degree,
while persons who hold a small property in houses or land, will bear the
burden of it; and not only of this tax, but to any further extent to
which the Government may have occasion to carry it.

Mr. T. CLAIBORNE had opposed many of the measures which made this tax
necessary; but a majority of Congress having determined upon a certain
course of measures, however contrary they may be to his opinion, he
should cheerfully submit to them, and vote in favor of this bill.

The people of Virginia, if they must be taxed, wished to be taxed in a
direct way, and he doubted not this tax would be paid with alacrity.
They always had been, and would continue to be, he had no doubt, prompt
in their obedience to the laws of the General Government.

The yeas and nays were then taken upon the passing of the bill; it was
passed--69 votes to 19.

_Resolved_, That the title be, "An act to provide for the valuation of
lands and dwelling houses, and the enumeration of slaves, within the
United States."


THURSDAY, June 21.

_Relations with France._

In the course of the sitting, the following Message was received from
the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives:_

      While I congratulate you on the arrival of General
      Marshall, one of our late Envoys Extraordinary to the
      French Republic, at a place of safety, where he is justly
      held in honor, I think it my duty to communicate to you a
      letter received by him from Mr. Gerry, the only one of the
      three who has not received his congé. This letter, together
      with another from the Minister of Foreign Relations to him,
      of the third of April, and his answer of the fourth, will
      show the situation in which he remains, his intentions and
      prospects.

      I presume that, before this time, he has received fresh
      instructions, (a copy of which accompanies this message,)
      to consent to no loan, and therefore the negotiation may be
      considered as at an end.

      I will never send another Minister to France, without
      assurances that he will be received, respected, and
      honored, as the representative of a great, free, powerful,
      and independent nation.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _June 21, 1798_.

                          PARIS, _April 16, 1798_.

      MY DEAR SIR: This, I expect, you will receive by my
      colleague, General Marshall, who carries with him the last
      letter of Mr. Talleyrand to the American Envoys, and their
      answer. On the day when we sent the answer, I received a
      letter from the Minister, a copy of which and my answer is
      enclosed. I have not sent these to the Secretary of State,
      because I have not time to prepare a letter to accompany
      them. Indeed, I expected my passport with my colleagues,
      but am informed the Directory will not consent to my
      leaving France; and to bring on an immediate rupture, by
      adopting this measure contrary to their wishes, would be,
      in my mind, unwarrantable.

      The object of Mr. Talleyrand, you will perceive, was to
      resume our reciprocal communications, and again to discuss
      the subject of a loan. I thought it best, in my answer, not
      merely to object to this, but to every measure, that could
      have a tendency to draw me into a negotiation. I accepted
      of this mission, my dear sir, to support your
      Administration, and have brought myself into a
      predicament,[36] which you must assist me to extricate
      myself from, by appointing some others to supply the places
      of myself and colleagues, if a further progress in this
      business should be found practicable.

      I have only a moment to add my best respects to your lady,
      and my assurance of the most sincere and respectful
      attachment. My dear sir, yours, sincerely,

                          E. GERRY.

      The PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.


[TRANSLATION.]

      PARIS, _the 4th Germinal, 6th year of the French Republic,
      one and indivisible, April 3, 1798_.

      The Minister of Foreign Relations to Mr. Gerry, Envoy
      Extraordinary of the United States of America to the French
      Republic.

      I suppose, sir, that Messrs. Pinckney and Marshall have
      thought it useful and proper, in consequence of the
      intimations given in the end of my note of the 28th Ventose
      last, and the obstacles which their known opinions have
      interposed to the desired reconciliation, to quit the
      territory of the Republic; on this supposition, I have the
      honor to point out to you the 5th or the 7th of this
      decade, to resume our reciprocal communications upon the
      interests of the French Republic and the United States of
      America.

      Receive, I pray you, the assurances of my perfect
      consideration.

                          CH. MAU. TALLEYRAND.


MONDAY, June 25.

_Alien Enemies._

On motion of Mr. S. SMITH, the House went into a Committee of the Whole
on the bill respecting alien enemies. The Chairman stated, that when
this bill was formerly under consideration, a motion was made to strike
out the first section, which was negatived. He proceeded to read the
second.

Mr. OTIS hoped the committee would rise. He made this motion with a view
of moving, in the House, a postponement of the consideration of this
bill until the next session of Congress. He did not know that there was
any immediate necessity for it, the PRESIDENT having sufficient power
over aliens by the bill already passed.

Mr. GALLATIN said, he did not expect a motion of this kind. If any bill
respecting aliens was necessary, it was certainly a bill of this kind
against alien enemies; but a bill having been passed against aliens
generally, the gentleman from Massachusetts appears now to be willing to
pass by the bill against alien enemies. This gives a new coloring to the
business, and it seems as if gentlemen were more desirous of guarding
against alien friends than alien enemies. It is true, if this bill is
not passed, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES will have the power of
removing from the country all those aliens whom he may think it
necessary and proper to be removed, whether they are alien enemies or
alien friends. But, if alien enemies are really dangerous, it cannot be
supposed that the PRESIDENT can remove them all. This bill, therefore,
provides in what manner they may be laid under certain restraints by way
of security.

Mr. OTIS interrupted Mr. G. to say he would withdraw his motion. He made
it, because he expected the bill would have been objected to by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania and his friends. Since they were agreeable
to pass it, he had no objection to it.

The committee rose and reported the bill, and it was ordered to be read
a third time to-morrow.


THURSDAY, July 5.


_Punishment of Crime._


SEDITION.

A bill was received from the Senate in addition to the act for the
punishment of certain crimes against the United States, which was read
the first time.

[This bill provides, that if any persons shall unlawfully combine or
conspire together, with intent to oppose any measures of the Government
of the United States, or to impede the operation of any law, or to
intimidate or prevent any person holding an office under the Government
from exercising his trust. And if any person shall, by writing,
printing, or speaking, threaten such officer with any damage to his
character, person, or estate, or shall counsel, advise, or attempt to
procure any insurrection, riot, &c., whether such attempt shall have the
desired effect, or not, he shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor,
and punished by a fine, on conviction, not exceeding $5,000, and by
imprisonment not less than six months, nor exceeding five years. And if
any person shall, by any libellous or scandalous writing, printing,
publishing, or speaking, traduce or defame the Legislature of the United
States, by seditious or inflammatory declarations or expressions, with
intent to create a belief in the citizens thereof, that the said
Legislature in enacting any law, was induced thereto by motives hostile
to the constitution, or liberties and happiness of the people thereof;
or shall in manner aforesaid, traduce or defame the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, or any Court, or Judge thereof, by declarations tending
to criminate their motives in any official transaction, the persons so
offending, being convicted shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$2,000 and by imprisonment not exceeding two years.]

Mr. OTIS moved that it be read a second time.

Mr. HARRISON called for the reading of the amendments to the
constitution.

The SPEAKER said, the only motion in order, if objections were made to
the second reading of the bill, would be to reject the bill.

Mr. LIVINGSTON made that motion.

Mr. ALLEN.--I hope this bill will not be rejected. If ever there was a
nation which required a law of this kind, it is this. Let gentlemen look
at certain papers printed in this city and elsewhere, and ask themselves
whether an unwarrantable and dangerous combination does not exist to
overturn and ruin the Government by publishing the most shameless
falsehoods against the Representatives of the people of all
denominations, that they are hostile to free Governments and genuine
liberty, and of course to the welfare of this country; that they ought,
therefore, to be displaced, and that the people ought to raise an
_insurrection_ against the Government.

In the _Aurora_, of the 28th of June last, we see this paragraph: "It is
a curious fact, America is making war with France for _not_ treating, at
the very moment the Minister for Foreign Affairs fixed upon the very day
for opening a negotiation with Mr. GERRY. What think you of this,
Americans!"

Such paragraphs need but little comment. The public agents are charged
with crimes, for which, if true, they ought to be hung. The intention
here is to persuade the people that peace with France is in our power;
nay, that she is sincerely desirous of it, on proper terms, but that we
reject her offers, and proceed to plunge our country into a destructive
war.

This combination against our peace is extensive; it embraces characters
whose stations demand a different course. Is this House free from it?
Recollect what a few days ago fell from the very gentleman (Mr.
LIVINGSTON) who now so boldly and violently calls on us to reject this
bill at the instant of its coming before us, without suffering it to be
read a second time. The gentleman proposed a resolution requesting the
PRESIDENT to instruct Mr. Gerry to conclude a treaty with the French
Government; and declared that "he believed a negotiation might be
opened, and that it was probable a treaty might be concluded which it
would be honorable to the United States to accept. He did not wish to
frustrate so happy an event by any punctilio, because they had refused
to treat with three Envoys, but were willing to treat with one." This is
in the very spirit of the malicious paragraph I just now read. It is
pursuing the same systematic course of operations. The gentleman also
said, (what has not been published, however,) that "the commission of
the Envoys being joint and several, Mr. Gerry had unquestionably ample
powers to treat alone." Here are circumstances of what I call _a
combination against the Government_, in attempts to persuade the people
of certain facts, which a majority of this House, at least, and of the
people at large, I believe, know to be unfounded. Who can say that Mr.
Gerry has power to treat alone, or that the French Government is willing
to treat with him on fair and honorable terms? Gentlemen do not believe
either, let them say what they will. Does such a commission empower one
to exercise the functions of the whole in opposition to the opinions of
his colleagues? It would produce the most inextricable confusion. The
severalty of the powers is well known always to be a provision against
such accidents as may prevent or disable a part of the Commissioners
from acting. I mention these things to show what false ideas gentlemen
endeavor to impress the public mind with on this subject.

The gentleman (Mr. LIVINGSTON) makes his proclamation of war on the
Government in the House on Monday, and this infamous printer (Bache)
follows it up with the tocsin of insurrection on Tuesday. While this
bill was under consideration in the Senate, an attempt is made to render
it odious among the people. "Is there any alternative," says this
printer, "between an abandonment of the constitution and resistance?" He
declares what is unconstitutional, and then invites the people to
"resistance." This is an awful, horrible example of "the liberty of
opinion and freedom of the press." Can gentlemen hear these things and
lie quietly on their pillows? Are we to see all these acts practised
against the repose of our country, and remain passive? Are we bound hand
and foot that we must be witnesses of these deadly thrusts at our
liberty? Are we to be the unresisting spectators of these exertions to
destroy all that we hold dear? Are these approaches to revolution and
Jacobinic domination, to be observed with the eye of meek submission?
No, sir, they are indeed terrible; they are calculated to freeze the
very blood in our veins. Such liberty of the press and of opinion is
calculated to destroy all confidence between man and man; it leads to a
dissolution of every bond of union; it cuts asunder every ligament that
unites man to his family, man to his neighbor, man to society, and to
Government. God deliver us from such liberty, the liberty of vomiting on
the public floods of falsehood and hatred to every thing sacred, human,
and divine! If any gentleman doubts the effects of such a liberty, let
me direct his attention across the water; it has there made slaves of
thirty millions of men.

At the commencement of the Revolution in France those loud and
enthusiastic advocates for liberty and equality took special care to
occupy and command all the presses in the nation; they well knew the
powerful influence to be obtained on the public mind by that engine; its
operations are on the poor, the ignorant, the passionate, and the
vicious; over all these classes of men the freedom of the press shed its
baneful effects, and they all became the tools of faction and ambition,
and the virtuous, the pacific, and the rich, were their victims. The
Jacobins of our country, too, sir, are determined to preserve in their
hands the same weapon; it is our business to wrest it from them. Hence
this motion so suddenly made, and so violently supported by the mover,
to reject this bill without even suffering it to have a second reading;
hence this alarm for the safety of "the freedom of speech and of the
press."

Mr. HARPER said, if, in voting against the rejection of this bill, his
vote should be considered as giving his assent to all its provisions, it
would be misunderstood. He thought it right and necessary to make a law
on the subject; but not exactly such a law as the present, his
particular objections to which he should make known when the subject was
fully before him. He should vote against a rejection of the bill,
because to vote for it, would be to declare that no law ought to be
passed to restrict seditious writing and speaking, which was not his
opinion.

He had often heard in this place, and elsewhere, harangues on the
liberty of the press, as if it were to swallow up all other liberties;
as if all law and reason, and every right, human and divine, was to fall
prostrate before the liberty of the press; whereas, the true meaning of
it is no more than that a man shall be at liberty to print what he
pleases, provided he does not offend against the laws, and not that no
law shall be passed to regulate this liberty of the press. He admitted
that a law which should say a man shall not slander his neighbor would
be unnecessary; but it is perfectly within the constitution to say, that
a man shall not do this, or the other, which shall be injurious to the
well-being of society; in the same way that Congress had a right to make
laws to restrain the personal liberty of man, when that liberty is
abused by acts of violence on his neighbor.

Mr. H. knew the liberty of the press had been carried to a very
considerable extent in this country. He had frequently seen private
character vilely calumniated; he had himself come in for a share of
abuse, but he had always despised the base calumniators, believing that
a man's propriety of conduct would always be sufficient to shield him
against these slanders. When he saw the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
and the Government of the Union defamed, he still despised them, and he
believed also that the people were not affected by them, because he saw
they did not rise in insurrection against the Government; and if they
had not believed that all the things which were said respecting the
Government were vile falsehoods, he should have thought the people the
most wretched fools, had they not risen against it.

Mr. NICHOLAS was sorry this motion had been made, because it prevents
members from going into the modification of the bill, which he was
convinced would completely exemplify the folly of the principle; but
until gentlemen saw what form the bill was finally to take, it was
impossible to speak with precision on its merits; because if the
declarations of the gentlemen from Connecticut and South Carolina were
attended to, it would be found they are most afraid of the speeches and
letters of gentlemen in this House. They acknowledge, however, they
cannot prevent members from speaking what they please here. What, then,
is their aim? Do they mean to prevent the publication of their
sentiments to their constituents and to the world? If this was not their
intention, he could not tell what it was.

There was one general view of this subject, which Mr. N. took to be the
most momentous that this country ever saw. He was ready to go with
gentlemen into measures for affording a liberal support to the war,
which it appears must be gone into; but he was not ready to create a
_domestic tyranny_. The people of this country are competent judges of
their own interests, and he was desirous that the press should remain
perfectly free to give them every information relative to them; and to
restrict it, would be to create a suspicion that there is something in
our measures which ought to be kept from the light. It was striking at
the root of free republican Government, to restrict the use of speaking
and writing. He wished, however, to see the bill put into such a shape
as the friends of it themselves might approve.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, after receiving the chastisement of the gentleman
from Connecticut on one cheek, he, like a good Christian, had turned
the other to the gentleman from South Carolina, and received the stripes
of both. He expressed his acknowledgments to these gentlemen, however,
if not for their chastisement, for the insight which they had given the
House into this bill. They have said, its design is not only to restrict
the liberty of the press, which is secured by the constitution, but the
liberty of speech on this floor. The gentleman from South Carolina did
not say explicitly that he wished this; but he said he was regardless of
what was said in the public papers, either of private or personal
slander, or of a slander on the Government, until he heard a certain
speech delivered in this House; and though he said he did not intend to
restrict the liberty of speech in this House, he must have had something
of the kind in view. [Mr. HARPER said it was not his intention to
restrict the freedom of speech on that floor, but the consequences of it
out of doors.] Then, said Mr. L., he will either restrict the members
from speaking, or, in some way, prevent the people from knowing what has
been said. How is this to be done? By shackling newspapers, and
preventing that free communication of sentiment which has heretofore
been expressed on public topics.

The gentleman from Connecticut had been pleased to read a quotation from
some observations which he had made on a former occasion, which that
gentleman thought highly blamable. Mr. L. said, what he had read he
avowed to be his sentiments. He avowed them with pride, and he trusted
he should always avow them with pride. Nor could he see how acts made
contrary to the constitution could be binding upon the people; unless
gentlemen say Congress may act in contravention to the constitution.
[Mr. OTIS asked who were to be the judges?] Mr. L. answered, the people
of the United States. We, said he, are their servants, when we exceed
our powers, we become their _tyrants_!

This is one object of complaint; the other is against newspaper
publications. The gentleman from South Carolina has said, that provided
the law is clear and well defined, and the trial by jury is preserved,
he knew of no law which could infringe the liberty of the press. If this
be true, Congress might restrict all printing at once. We have, said he,
nothing to do but to make the law precise, and then we may forbid a
newspaper to be printed, and make it death for any man to attempt it!

If this be the extent to which this bill goes, it is not only an
abridgment of the liberty of the press, which the constitution has said
shall not be abridged; but it is a total annihilation of the press. Were
he then to withdraw his motion, he should consider himself guilty of
treason; by his consent, so unconstitutional a measure should not
progress an inch. However unsuccessful he might be, he would oppose it
in every stage.

Mr. OTIS supposed the opposition to this bill arose chiefly from
prejudice, as gentlemen could not be so well acquainted with the bill
from hearing it once read, as to say there are no parts of it which
ought to become law. He had not nicely examined the merits of this bill,
but he heard that it contained several important provisions, and he
should certainly be opposed to a rejection of it without a perusal. To
vote for such a motion, would be to say, we will not examine the bill;
and yet he believed there was nothing in it contrary to the common law
of the several States of the Union.

Mr. MACON had no doubt on his mind that this bill was in direct
opposition to the constitution; and that if a law like this was passed,
to abridge the liberty of the press, Congress would have the same right
to pass a law making an establishment of religion, or to prohibit its
free exercise, as all are contained in the same clause of the
constitution; and, if it be violated in one respect, it may as well be
violated in others. Several laws had been passed which he thought
violated the spirit, but none before this which directly violated the
letter of the constitution; and, if this bill was passed, he should
hardly think it worth while in future to allege against any measure that
it is in direct contradiction to the constitution.

Laws of restraint, like this, Mr. M. said, always operate in a contrary
direction from that which they were intended to take. The people suspect
something is not right, when free discussion is feared by government.
They know that truth is not afraid of investigation.

If, said Mr. M., the people are so dissatisfied with Government as some
gentlemen would have it believed, but which he did not credit, by
passing a law like the present you will force them to combine together;
they will establish corresponding societies throughout the Union, and
communications will be made in secret, instead of publicly, as had been
the case in other countries. He believed the people might be as safely
trusted with free discussion, as they whom they have chosen to do their
business.

It was a most extraordinary thing, Mr. M. said, that at a time like
this, when some gentlemen say we are at war, and when all believe we
must have war, that Congress are about to pass a law which will produce
more uneasiness, more irritation, than any act which ever passed the
Legislature of the Union.

No gentleman, in support of the bill, has gone into the constitutional
question; no one has shown what part of the constitution will authorize
the passage of a law like this. He believed none such could be adduced.

The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. OTIS) has said, this bill is
conformable to the common law. He knew persons might be prosecuted for a
libel under the State Governments; but if this power exists in full
force at present, what necessity can there be for this bill?

Mr. MCDOWELL was in hopes that when the third article of the amendments
to the constitution had been read, that the unconstitutionality of this
bill would have been so evident, that it would have been rejected
without debate.

Mr. McD. was sorry that the gentleman from Connecticut should have
thought it necessary to have taken up so much of the time of the House
by reading paragraphs from newspapers, which every body had seen; but it
might have been expected after the gentleman had taken so much pains to
vilify and abuse the printer of one of the papers of this city, a
citizen of respectable character and connections, that he should have
taken at least some notice of another, called the British printer, who
boasts of being a subject of King George, and who is generally supposed
to be in the pay of the British Minister--whose paper contains more
libels and lies than any other in the United States, and who,
notwithstanding, is countenanced by characters whom he was sorry to see
have any connection with such a man; whose constant daily business it is
to abuse, and render ridiculous, every member of our Government who does
not in every thing fall in with the British views.

As to what had been said with respect to the circular and other letters
of members which have been published, he had seen some of them and heard
of others. It was not any thing which the gentleman from South Carolina
could say, which would prevent him from speaking and writing his
sentiments freely. The gentleman from South Carolina said he had seen a
letter in the papers the signature of which he knew. He should be glad
to know where he saw the signature to know it? He had seen a letter in
Fenno's paper, signed _McDowell_, followed by some violent strictures on
the letter, and on the author. The letter he owned to be his, but the
insinuations contained in the observations upon it were as false as they
were malicious.

Mr. HARPER said, he knew the gentleman wrote the letter in question; but
he would assure him he did not see it under seal, nor did he break the
seal, or write the strictures upon it.

Mr. GALLATIN wished that the bill had been committed before any debate
had taken place, as in its present stage, any observations on details
susceptible of amendment would be out of order; and he must now confine
himself to the general question "Does the situation of the country, at
this time, require that any law of this kind should pass? Do there exist
such new and alarming symptoms of sedition, as render it necessary to
adopt, in addition to the existing laws, any extraordinary measure for
the purpose of suppressing unlawful combinations, and of restricting the
freedom of speech and of the press?" For such were the objects of the
bill, whatever modifications it might hereafter receive.

The manner in which the principle of the bill had been supported, was
perhaps more extraordinary still than the bill itself. The gentleman
from Connecticut, (Mr. ALLEN,) in order to prove the existence of a
combination against the constitution and government, he communicated to
the House--what? a number of newspaper paragraphs; and even most of
those were such as would not be punishable by the bill as it now stands.
The object of that gentleman in wishing a bill of this nature to pass,
extended far beyond the intention of the Senate who had sent down this
bill; far beyond, he would venture to say, the idea of any other member
upon this floor, besides himself. His idea was to punish men for stating
facts which he happened to disbelieve, or for enacting and avowing
opinions, not criminal, but perhaps erroneous. Thus one of the
paragraphs most obnoxious to the gentleman from Connecticut, was that in
which the writer expresses his belief that Mr. Gerry may yet make a
treaty with the French Government, his powers being sufficient for that
purpose. [Mr. ALLEN said, his charge was against persons making this
assertion, when they knew it to be unfounded.] Mr. G. said, he did not
understand the gentleman's explanation. He now says that the act he
condemns is the assertion of a fact, which may be true, but which the
writer himself disbelieves; and thus he wished to punish such men as,
according to his caprice, he may suppose guilty of expressing opinions
not consonant with their own sentiments. For by what rule of evidence
could he discover and know what was really the writer's belief? But, to
return, was there any thing criminal in that paragraph? It asserted that
Mr. Gerry had powers sufficient to treat. The gentleman from Connecticut
denies this to be true. Mr. G. would aver that it was an undeniable
fact, as appears evidently from the documents now on the table. They
showed that the powers given to the Envoys were joint and several. And,
if Mr. Gerry had powers to treat, how could it be criminal to say that
he might treat? Or supposing the writer of the paragraph to have said,
that he believed Mr. Gerry would treat, could the opinion be charged
with any thing but being erroneous? When a paragraph of this nature was
held out as criminal, what writings, what opinions could escape the
severity of the intended law, which did not coincide with the opinions,
and which might counteract the secret views of a prevailing party?

The gentleman from Connecticut had also quoted an extract of a letter
said to be written by a member of Congress from Virginia, and published
in last Saturday's Aurora. The style and composition of that letter did
the highest honor to its writer. It contained more information and more
sense, and gave more proofs of a sound understanding and strong mind,
than ever the gentleman from Connecticut had displayed, or could display
on this floor. So far he would venture to say, although he had given but
a cursory reading to the letter, and he was altogether at a loss to know
what was criminal in it, though he might easily see why it was
obnoxious. Was it erroneous or criminal to say that debts and taxes
were the ruinous consequences of war? Or that some members in both
Houses of Congress uniformly voted in favor of an extension of the
powers of the Executive, and of every proposed expenditure of money? Was
it not true? Gentlemen of that description avow that, in their opinion,
the Executive is the weakest branch of government; and they act upon the
ostensible principle that, on that account, its influence and powers
must be increased. Look at the laws passed during this session. Look at
the alien bill, at the provisional army bill, look at the prodigious
influence acquired by so many new officers, and then deny that the
powers of the Executive have not been greatly increased. As to the
increased rate of expenditure, and the propensity of these gentlemen to
vote money, they would not themselves deny it. Was it criminal to say
that the Executive is supported by a party? when gentlemen declared that
it must be supported by a party. When the doctrine had been avowed on
this floor that men of a certain political opinion, alone ought to be
appointed to offices; and when the Executive had now adopted and carried
into practice that doctrine in its fullest extent?

Mr. DANA did not propose to enter into any controversy respecting the
honor which some gentlemen seemed disposed to arrogate to themselves, on
account of certain sentiments which they have avowed. If any members of
that House were ambitious of being distinguished as heralds of calumny
and apostles of insurrection, it might serve to show how incorrect were
their ideas of what is truly honorable.

The bill has two objects in view--it proposed to punish conspiracies and
calumnies against the Government. Against this bill, the freedom of
speech and of the press has been insisted on; and the bill has been
condemned as violating one of the articles adopted as amendments to the
constitution. Why is the gentleman from Pennsylvania so very anxious on
the subject? Or is it abridged by a law to restrain lying? Could the
framers of the constitution intend to guarantee, as a sacred principle,
the liberty of lying against the Government? What do gentlemen
understand by "the freedom of speech and of the press?" Is it a license
to injure others or the Government, by calumnies, with impunity?

Let it be remembered, that the uttering of malicious falsehoods, to the
injury of the Government, is the offence which it is now intended to
restrain; for, if what is uttered can be proved true, it will not,
according to this bill, be punished as libellous. What, then, is the
rational, the honest, the constitutional idea of freedom of language or
of conduct? Can it be any thing more than the right of uttering and
doing what is not injurious to others? This limitation of doing no
injury to the rights of others, undoubtedly belongs to the true
character of real liberty. Indeed, can it, in the nature of things, be
one of the rights of freemen to do injury? Let gentlemen consult any
writer of established reputation on this subject; let them examine the
constitution of their own favorite "terrible" Republic! they will not
find the ideas of liberty extended to that indefinite latitude which
they advocate on this floor.

However, if there are gentlemen who seriously and conscientiously
believe that it would be violating the constitution to restrain abuses
of the press, by punishing the guilty; if there are gentlemen who
believe that malicious calumnies against the Government ought to be
uttered and published with impunity, such gentlemen ought certainly not
to consent to act further upon this subject. Mr. D. was of a different
opinion. He believed that the editor of a newspaper, like the writer of
a public history, in the execution of his office, should dare to utter
what is true, and dread to utter any thing that is false. Considering,
therefore, that the liberty of lying, the privilege of vice, is what is
truly intended to be corrected by this bill, how is it possible that
gentlemen should appear so anxious to excite clamor against it? For
himself, Mr. D. wanted not the liberty of calumny or of conspiracy, and
was in favor of the principle of the bill.

The question on rejecting the bill, was taken by yeas and nays--yeas 36,
nays 47, as follows:

      YEAS.--David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas Blount, Dempsey
      Burges, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne,
      John Clopton, John Dawson, John Fowler, Albert Gallatin,
      James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna, Carter B.
      Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph Heister, David Holmes,
      Walter Jones, Edward Livingston, Matthew Locke, Matthew
      Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell,
      Anthony New, John Nicholas, Samuel Smith, William Smith,
      Richard Sprigg, jun., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, John
      Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham
      Venable, and Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, Jas.
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher G.
      Champlin, John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, George Dent, William Edmond, Thomas
      Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry
      Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon, Roger Griswold,
      William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper, William
      Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes
      Kittera, Samuel Lyman, William Matthews, Harrison G. Otis,
      Isaac Parker, John Read, John Rutledge, jr., James
      Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thos.
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Peleg
      Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, and Peleg Wadsworth.


FRIDAY, July 6.

_Abrogation of Treaty with France._

Mr. SEWALL called up the bill from the Senate, declaring the treaty
between France and the United States void, and of no effect.

Mr. ALLEN wished the resolution that he laid upon the table yesterday,
respecting the condition and relation of this country with respect to
France, first to be taken up.

Mr. SITGREAVES thought it would be proper first to go into a
consideration of this resolution. We are, said he, now in a state of
war. The House know that, by the distribution of powers under this
Government, it is only competent for Congress to declare the country in
war; therefore, until that declaration is made by this department, the
Executive and Judiciary cannot act in the same way as if the country was
at war. In other countries, the Executive Department can create war; but
here it cannot. If it shall be considered expedient to declare war in
consequence of the repeated aggressions and injuries we have received
from the French Republic, and the hostility urged against us, and the
necessity there exists of making defence against them, there can be no
occasion for declaring the treaties void; because, if war is declared,
it is the major proposition, and, of course, includes all the minor
propositions. If discussed at all, therefore, it would be proper to
discuss the major proposition first. He supposed it was a subject on
which the minds of members were made up. Whether, therefore, the vote is
affirmative or negative, it would be best to declare, in the first
instance, the state of the country.

Mr. NICHOLAS hoped, if we are to come to this question of war at all, it
might be so taken up as to occupy the least time of the Legislature. The
question of setting aside the treaties is evidently included in the
other; he hoped, therefore, the proposition of the gentleman from
Connecticut, if to be taken up at all, would have a preference.

Mr. SEWALL said, if the question of annulling the treaties with France
was included in the resolution of the gentleman from Connecticut, he
should think it ought first to be taken up; but he did not think this
was the case. The gentleman from Connecticut wishes a committee to state
what is our relation with respect to the French Republic. How could we
say what our relation is, except we determine what is our relation with
respect to the treaties subsisting between the two countries? He took
the two things to be perfectly distinct. The gentleman from Pennsylvania
(Mr. SITGREAVES) seems to conceive that the question whether it will be
proper to make a declaration of war against France, is included in this
resolution, as he could not be so anxious for the declaration of an
historical fact, which, in his opinion, the report on this resolution
could only be; for gentlemen could not consider that the constitutional
power, placed in Congress to declare war, meant no more than a mere
report, whether or not the country is in war. A number of acts have been
done, which are indicative of war, and if a report was made as to our
situation with the French Republic, it must be reckoned at least a state
of hostility. But this would be doing nothing. If it was the intention
of any gentleman to propose a declaration of war, such a motion would
supersede the necessity of taking up the bill from the Senate; but, as
the resolution of the gentleman from Connecticut did by no means go to
this, he hoped the bill he had mentioned would be first considered. If
he were to give an opinion on the subject, it would be clearly against
declaring war at present. As to the Judicial Courts, they would find no
difficulty in acting according to the situation of things, without
troubling themselves with the nice distinctions which gentlemen seemed
inclined to make between a state of war, and a state of hostility.

Mr. GALLATIN wished to know, if the House were to go into a Committee of
the Whole on the bill from the Senate, whether a declaration of war
might not be moved as an amendment to the bill. To his mind, there
seemed to be but little difference between saying the treaties are at an
end, and declaring war. If such a motion could be received, it would be
desirable to know the will of the House upon it. The shortest way of
coming at this question would be the best. He wished the SPEAKER to say
whether he thought such a motion would be in order.

[No answer was given to the inquiry.]

Mr. ALLEN considered it best to act always with frankness. He wished, by
his resolution, that a committee should inquire into, and declare to the
House, and to the country, the true state of our situation with respect
to France; and if they should report any measures which should supersede
the bill from the Senate, it would be the most fair and open way of
getting at the business.

The question on taking up the bill from the Senate was put, and
negatived--41 to 35.

Mr. ALLEN then called up his resolution. It had been said that our
negotiation with France is yet carrying on, which he denied, and he
wished this resolution to go to a numerous committee to report as to
that fact, and as to our situation generally with respect to France.

Mr. HARRISON hoped the House would go into a Committee of the Whole on
the state of the Union, in order to inquire into what is the state of
the country? Those gentlemen who wish war, and are determined to have
it, ought to speak out. The world should understand them, and the people
ought not to be deceived. He hoped gentlemen would bring forward their
declaration of war at once. He had always been, and should now be,
opposed to war, but he wanted to put his negative upon it.

Mr. HARPER had no objection to go into a Committee of the Whole on the
state of the Union, if the gentleman from Virginia had any motion to
make, when the House got into that situation.

Mr. HARTLEY hoped the resolution before the House would be referred to a
select committee, that the House might have a report upon it. He
wondered that gentlemen who were against going to war, should wish to
press the question of a declaration of it upon the House.

Mr. DANA observed that, from what had been now said upon the
resolution, he saw no necessity for voting upon it at all.

Mr. OTIS spoke in favor of referring the resolution to a select
committee, and saw no reason why the House should go into a Committee of
the Whole on the state of the Union.

Mr. HARRISON said, every one would know he had no proposition to bring
forward with respect to war; he wished to remain at peace; but he wished
his constituents and the country at large to be informed as to what was
to be the state of the country. Seeing, however, that no member is ready
to make the declaration which had been so often spoken of, he should
withdraw his motion for going into a Committee of the Whole.

Mr. SITGREAVES observed, with respect to the allusions of the gentleman
last up, as to being prepared for a declaration of war, he confessed he
felt no hesitation in saying, that he thought this declaration ought to
be made in some form or other. He believed it was the duty of the
Legislature to make it. He had thought so for some time; but certain
considerations with respect to our Envoys, had prevented its being
proposed. Such, he said, was his individual opinion; but he owned he had
some scruples about bringing it forward, unless he should be assured,
from a comparison of the opinions of gentlemen, such a proposition would
receive a respectable and firm support. If he supposed this would be the
case, he would make the motion at this moment; and it was because the
motion of the gentleman from Connecticut looked towards a declaration,
that he was in favor of it.

Mr. S. said he had heard it said for months past, by gentlemen of
different opinions, that the aggressions of France against this country
were lawful cause of war, and all have admitted that it has become a
single question of expediency whether we shall declare war, or not. It
was said no consideration but that of interest, would prevent its being
done, and he did not believe there was any such. We have, said he, for a
long time suffered all the mischiefs that can be inflicted upon us in a
state of war, and, therefore, the single question is now, whether we
will avail ourselves of the advantages which might be derived from
declaring war; for, however trifling gentlemen may deem the distinction
which he made between a state of hostility and war, he looked upon that
distinction as real and material. In case of an invasion taking place
before a declaration of war has been made, certain limited authorities
are placed in the PRESIDENT, and in the Executives of the several
States, with respect to the armed force; but, if a declaration of war
has previously taken place, the direction of that force is placed wholly
in the hands of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. If this declaration
should be made, he should still deem it a war of defence on our part.
Mr. S. said he rose to declare his opinion on this point, and to say he
was in favor of the motion of the gentleman from Connecticut.

Mr. NICHOLAS supposed there could have been no doubt as to the
intentions of the gentleman from Connecticut in bringing forward this
resolution, though he expected it would have been found necessary to
have made it more explicit. If the object was, as he had no doubt it
was, to procure a proposition for a declaration of war, he hoped the
resolution would be so amended as to embrace that object. At present, it
was quite an unmeaning thing.

Mr. GALLATIN said, if he understood the resolution, it proposed the
appointment of a committee, to declare what is the state of things
between this country and France. He could not see with what propriety
Congress could declare a statement of facts by a legislative act. It
would be a little curious to pass a law to declare Mr. Gerry has no
authority to treat with the French Government; or to declare that this
room is sixty feet long, or any other fact. If the committee were to
report what was necessary to be done, he could see the use of such a
report.

Mr. LYON observed, that though this resolution was not so explicit as
gentlemen might wish, yet such as it was, he was desirous it should
pass. He wished to know the state of the country. Some say we are at
war; others that we are in a state of hostility; others at peace. He
wished to see a report on the subject. He had considered the country as
in war for some time; if he was mistaken, he was desirous his mistake
should be rectified. If we are at war, it would be well to request the
PRESIDENT to get us peace as soon as he can.

The question on the resolution was put and negatived, without a
division.

On motion of Mr. OTIS, the House went into a Committee of the Whole on
the state of the Union, to take into consideration the bill from the
Senate declaring our treaties with France void and of no effect. The
committee being formed, and the bill having been read,

Mr. LIVINGSTON called for the reading of the treaties.

Mr. GALLATIN thought it would be sufficient to have certain parts of the
treaties, which he mentioned, read. Mr. LIVINGSTON consented; but Mr.
LYON persisted in the motion for reading the whole. On the question
being taken, he only rose in favor of it. The parts of the treaties
called for by Mr. G. were read.

Mr. SEWALL said, some doubts might be entertained, perhaps, as to the
propriety of this measure. It is certainly a novel doctrine to pass a
law declaring a treaty void; but the necessity arose from the peculiar
situation of this country. In most countries, it is in the power of the
Chief Magistrate to suspend a treaty whenever he thinks proper; here
Congress only has that power. We have, said he, during this session, in
a variety of cases, suspended the treaties in question, by authorizing
measures of hostility against France, contrary to the stipulations
contained therein. He believed it would be proper, therefore, to set
aside these treaties by legal authority. But he confessed to do this,
in the manner proposed by the Senate, would, at least, be inconvenient.
He could not conceive that the Senate meant to go so far as this bill
goes. We ought not to say the treaties are void and of no effect. They
must have effect as historical facts; they must have effect, in our
appeal to the world, on the ground of their having been violated, and in
our claim upon France on account of those violations. There are also
other articles which must have effect in case of war. He alluded to the
articles which respect the situation of French citizens in this country,
or American citizens in France, after war shall have been declared by
either power. Mr. S., therefore, proposed a new form of a bill, more
simple and with a much shorter preface, viz: "that, whereas the treaties
have been in numerous instances violated, they are no longer to be
considered as law within the United States," &c. It also proposed that
any claim or restraint, stipulated by the said treaties, shall be
abrogated and annulled.

The CHAIRMAN said this motion was not in order, and could not be
received.

Mr. NICHOLAS saw no difference between the substitute proposed and the
original bill. The gentleman from Massachusetts wished to retain the
provision relative to the residence of the citizens of either country,
after the declaration of war shall have taken place; but could that
gentleman for a moment suppose that he could annul one part of a treaty
and preserve other parts? The idea appeared to him a very extraordinary
one.

Mr. RUTLEDGE hoped the committee would rise, and that the bill would be
referred to a select committee. He believed it would be better to
declare a part of the treaties void than the whole, which he thought
might with propriety be done.

Mr. NICHOLAS had no objection to the committee's rising; but he could
not believe we could take such parts of a treaty as we liked, and
declare the rest void.

Mr. DANA believed that the gentleman from Virginia did not rightly
apprehend what had been said by the gentleman from Massachusetts. Mr. D.
admitted the impropriety of declaring void and of no effect a legal
instrument which was originally valid. In his opinion, this impropriety
might be avoided, and the object of the bill attained, by a different
phraseology. He believed a proper mode of acting upon this business
would be, to declare the stipulations of the French treaties no longer
obligatory on the United States. This we may justly do, in consequence
of their being disregarded by France.

As to the effect of such a declaration, he acknowledged that it must be
regarded as abrogating all those articles of the treaties which are
executory, such as stipulate for the future conduct of the parties.
Agreeing thus far with the gentleman from Virginia, he would consent
most cheerfully that all such articles should be set aside, as they
respect both countries. But the declaration would not have any effect
on articles which are executed, such as contain cessions or
renunciations of territorial claims, and where a corresponding
possession has taken place. The operation of these articles is
completed, and cannot be reversed by the declaration now proposed.

Mr. D. then moved to amend the enacting clause, by expunging all the
words after "That," and substituting "the United States are, of right,
freed and exonerated from the stipulations of the treaties heretofore
concluded between the United States and France, and that the same shall
not henceforth be regarded as legally obligatory on the Government or
citizens of the United States."

Mr. OTIS approved of this motion, and, after a few observations by him
in favor of it, the question was put and carried upon it without a
division.

Mr. O. then moved to strike out the whole of this preamble; which motion
being carried,

Mr. DANA proposed that the reasons for passing this bill should be
condensed in the preamble, to read as follows: "Whereas, the treaties
concluded between the United States and France have been repeatedly
violated on the part of the French Government, and the just claims of
the United States for reparation of the injuries so committed have been
refused; and their attempts to negotiate an amicable adjustment of all
complaints between the two nations have been repelled with indignity;
and whereas, under the authority of the French Government, there is yet
pursued against the United States a system of predatory violence
infracting the said treaties, and hostile to the rights of a free and
independent nation, therefore," &c.

The question on the preamble was put and carried--41 to 38.

The committee then rose, and the House took up the amendments. On the
question being put on agreeing to the new preamble,

Mr. BAYARD said he thought it more in detail than was necessary. He
thought it more like a State paper than the preamble of a law. He
thought the preamble ought to go no further than to state sufficient
ground for the act, which was about to be done; and he took it for
granted that whenever a nation violates an essential article of a
treaty, it is competent for the other party to declare the treaty no
longer binding upon them. He, therefore, moved to strike out all the
preamble after saying the treaties have been frequently violated. As to
the French having committed depredations upon our commerce, and refused
to negotiate with our Commissioners, though these circumstances may be a
just cause of war, he did not know whether they were sufficient ground
upon which to declare a treaty void.

Mr. KITTERA was against striking out. He could not agree that there
could be causes for a declaration of war, which are not also causes for
setting aside a treaty. The reverse of this position appeared to him to
be true, viz: that there might be causes for declaring a treaty void,
which would not be causes of war.

Mr. CRAIK was in favor of the preamble as it stood.

Mr. GORDON hoped the amendment would not prevail. It ought to be
considered that if this bill passed into a law, it would be considered
as a novel thing. It will be tantamount to a State declaration to annul
a treaty, and there ought to be the grounds annexed to it which had led
to the measure; and though the gentleman from Delaware is desirous of
stating a sufficient cause, he did not think his motion went far enough.
The practice of nations is, that when injuries are done, reparation is
demanded; and it was necessary, in his opinion, to state that this
demand had been made in vain, and that the injuries complained of are
still continued.

Mr. S. SMITH hoped the amendment would be adopted. He disliked preambles
very much. The reasons given by the gentleman from Delaware in favor of
his motion he thought well founded. It would be much better to give one
good reason for declaring the treaties no longer binding, than several
doubtful ones. In his opinion there were some of this description as the
preamble stands at present. He did not know that a reparation for
injuries had been refused by France. He had seen nothing like an
absolute demand made upon the French Government. The Envoys were
empowered to make the demand; but, from their not having been duly
received, the demand was never made. If it were made, it is clear it has
not been complied with; but we have no evidence of its having been
refused to be complied with. On the contrary, we see that on the 3d of
April, Talleyrand had fixed a day on which he proposed to treat with Mr.
Gerry on the subject of the disputes between the two countries. We have
not heard the result of the conference; but it may have happened that
Mr. Talleyrand has offered to make complete reparation for the injuries
committed on our commerce, and this intelligence may arrive here a
fortnight hence, and then a declaration of this sort would not have a
good appearance. He thought, therefore, it would be better to strike
these words out than to retain them.

Mr. S. presumed it was not yet _sedition_ for him to say that he
believed proposals to treat would be made to our Commissioners,
independent of any tribute, and such as this country might with honor
accept. He hoped, therefore, no difficulty would be placed in the way,
by passing the preamble as it now stands.

Mr. DANA was not generally in favor of fixing preambles to laws.
Whenever the subject is such that it is obviously competent for the
Legislature to act upon it; whenever the act proposed is, from its
nature, completely within the usual Legislative powers, and, without any
explanation, appears perfectly consistent with national honor and
propriety, a preamble is unnecessary. But ought this to be said of the
subject under consideration? Whence is it that the United States may
abrogate the treaties with France? Is it because the Legislature may, at
pleasure, set aside a treaty? If it is proper to do this, without any
external cause, a preamble is needless in the present instance.
According to his view of the subject, the act was founded on a different
principle. France has violated the faith pledged by her treaties with
America: this, by the law of nations, puts it within the option of the
Legislature to decide, as a question of expediency, whether the United
States shall any longer continue to observe their stipulations. It is
owing to the perfidy of the French Government that the abrogation of our
treaties with that nation has become justifiable and necessary. As an
American, he hoped the United States would always regard the faith due
to treaties, and that all their acts would, on the face of them, appear
consistent with it. In this respect, he wished the conduct of the
American Government to exhibit a marked contrast to French perfidy. It
is of importance to the fairness of our national character. Therefore it
is that the facts should be stated which have led to this measure.

The gentleman from Delaware, in support of the amendment which he has
moved, supposes it sufficient to state one cause for setting aside the
treaties. He is understood to admit that a sufficient cause should be
stated. In this principle, said Mr. D., we are agreed. But the question
arises, whether a violation of the treaties on the part of France is, of
itself, sufficient for setting them aside? The idea of Mr. D. was, that
it would not be sufficient, according to the liberal principles which
should be cherished in the United States. A treaty might be violated by
the imprudence of some person in authority, or by persons acting without
authority; and yet the foreign Government, on proper representations,
might be willing to redress the injury. In such case, it would ill
become the Government of the injured party immediately to dissolve
friendly connections. Why is it now deemed requisite to abrogate the
treaties by which this country has been connected with France? It is
because France has not only violated them, but has also refused that
attention which was due to our representations on the subject, and
persists in the violation. On this account, and in order to show that
the United States were completely justifiable in taking the measure, he
was against the amendment of the gentleman from Delaware, and in favor
of retaining the several clauses of the preamble.

A gentleman from Maryland (Mr. SMITH) has declared himself in favor of
this amendment, because, in his view, there is no proof that our claim
for the injuries committed on our rights, as a neutral nation, have been
refused to be adjusted by France. The reason assigned for this opinion
is so extraordinary that it may astonish every man acquainted with
subjects of this nature. It is, that the French would not receive the
Envoys charged with this business, or permit their speaking to them,
although they waited for months at the palace-gate of Directorial
Arrogance supplicating in vain for an audience. Were the gentleman from
Maryland to go himself, or send one of his clerks, to present a demand
for a sum justly due to him, if his debtor, instead of discharging or
attending to the account, would not consent even to hear him on the
subject, but should kick him from the door, or order a servant to do it,
would not the gentleman consider such conduct as a refusal to satisfy
the demand. He who knows that claims of justice merit the respect of
Governments, as well as of individuals, and ought never to be neglected
without reasonable cause, must know that evasions, intentional
procrastination, and affected delays, are equivalent to a refusal of
satisfaction. This is the doctrine of reason, of common sense, of
municipal law, and of the law of nations. The facts stated in the
preamble, therefore, are strictly true; they are established by the very
statement which the gentleman has made to disprove them. And since he
has made a question on the subject, it is of additional importance for
the Legislature to declare its conviction of their truth.

Mr. CRAIK believed with the gentleman from Connecticut, last up, that
from the declaration of his colleague this question was of consequence.
He believed gentlemen were now called upon to testify to the truth of
this statement, since it had been doubted. The people ought not to be
left in doubt on this subject.

Mr. OTIS said, exactly the same effect which had been produced upon the
mind of the gentleman last up, was also produced upon his. Before he had
heard the arguments of the gentleman from Maryland in its favor, he
intended to vote for the motion of the gentleman from Delaware, as being
more concise, and as he thought stating sufficient ground for the act
about to be passed; but when that gentleman says we have no evidence of
reparation for the injuries committed upon our commerce being refused to
be made, the abhorrence he felt at the idea of being ranked among
members of this opinion would lead him to vote against it. He believed
the facts stated in the preamble unquestionably true, and he did not
think there could have been a man in the United States who had a doubt
on the subject. He believed there could be no doubt that when a sum of
money is neglected to be paid, when due, though the debtor may refuse to
see any person authorized to make the demand, that it is legally refused
to be paid.

If the documents on the table were examined, Mr. O. said it would be
found, that so far from Mr. Talleyrand having listened to the claims of
our Commissioners, he had expressed his surprise that they should have
been made, alleging that the priority of claim was on the part of the
French Government. Mr. O. made several other observations, when he
concluded by saying, that if any offers of pacification were made by men
of the description of those at present in power in the French Directory,
he should have no confidence in them: he should think them insidious,
and that they originated in their fears, and were intended to effect our
ruin.

Mr. HARPER said he would say only a few words in justification of his
vote in favor of the present motion. He disliked preambles altogether.
He voted against the one from the Senate, and he should be in favor of
reducing this; for, if we must have a preamble, he thought the less the
better. It is the business of the Legislature, Mr. H. said, to pass
laws; if a manifesto is proper to be published on this occasion, it
would more probably fall under the Executive Department. It is his
business to issue State papers, and he could do it much better than it
could be done in this House. He was sorry it should be thought necessary
to have any preface at all to the law, as it was departing from a good
old rule laid down by Congress.

Mr. S. SMITH was not convinced, by any thing that had been said against
this motion, that what he had before stated was ill-founded. It had been
asked whether, if he sent three persons to demand a debt, and the debtor
ordered them away without seeing them, he should not consider the act as
a refusal to pay. He answered, he should. But he would put a case, which
he thought more in point. Were he to send three persons to settle an
account with a debtor, and he were to send two of them home again, but
keep one, and promise to adjust the business with him, he should
naturally expect he would do so, and should not think of proceeding to
any rigorous measures with him, until he heard the result.

The gentleman from Massachusetts has said that he can never consent to
accept of any terms from the present Executive Directory, as he shall
consider them insidious, and not to be relied upon. After a two years'
war, perhaps, he may be of a different opinion. Mr. S. said he should be
as unwilling as any man to accept of any terms from the French
Government which would be derogatory to the United States; but if the
Directory will engage that all the depredations upon our commerce shall
cease, and will offer to treat with us on equitable terms, (which he did
not think improbable,) he should be for acceding, most cheerfully, to
the proposal.

Mr. GALLATIN said he should vote against the motion to strike out a part
of the preamble agreed to in the Committee of the Whole. He was of
opinion with gentlemen, that it was better to pass laws in general,
without preambles; but this proceeding is altogether of a novel nature.
He knew of no precedent of a Legislature repealing a treaty. It is
therefore an act of a peculiar kind, and it appeared to him necessary
that Congress should justify it by a declaration of their reasons. Nor
could he understand the argument of the gentleman from South Carolina,
when he said the Executive Department was better calculated for the
publishing of a manifesto than the Legislature, or, in other words,
could assign the reasons that influenced Congress better than Congress
themselves. If, then, a preamble is to be adopted, it ought to contain
those reasons which operated in producing the law. He thought this would
be more correctly stated by leaving the preamble as it is, than by
adopting the amendment.

There was also another reason for preserving the preamble as at present.
The French have violated the Treaty of Commerce made with this country;
but it would be rather difficult for any gentleman to show that repeated
violations have taken place of our Treaty of Alliance with France. The
ground of complaint is, that France has violated the Treaty of Commerce
between the two countries, and the laws of nations, and not the Treaty
of Alliance; and, therefore, a breach of that treaty is not the reason
why it is set aside. Besides, if repeated violations of a treaty are
sufficient reasons for setting it aside, it could not be forgotten that
certain orders had been issued by another country, which are not
conformable to our treaty with that power. So, that it is not sufficient
to say, that because a treaty has been violated, we will repeal it; but
we ought to show to the world that repeated attempts have been made, in
vain, to obtain redress.

But the gentleman from Maryland is apprehensive that the statement of
the French Government having refused to make reparation for the injuries
committed upon our commerce could not be correct, from the possibility
of Mr. Gerry having succeeded in making a treaty since the date of our
last despatches. He acknowledged there was a bare possibility of the
fact being so; but this ought to operate as a reason against passing the
bill at all, and not against the preamble.

Mr. EDMOND said, he voted for rejecting the Senate's preamble. It
appeared to him that no preamble was necessary. For, if it were
necessary to state the reasons which induced the passing of this act, it
would be proper to state all the reasons, and to do that would be a work
of considerable time; and, upon the facts stated, there might probably
be a considerable difference of opinion. If reasons were stated for
passing this law, and, at a future day, when an adjustment of
differences should take place, the negotiator on the part of the United
States were to adduce other reasons for passing this act than are stated
in this preamble, it might be stated by the negotiator, on the part of
France, why do you muster up complaints now, which you did not think of
when the law passed? He therefore thought it would be best to pass the
law without a preamble at all.

No question in the laws of nations, Mr. E. said, was more clear, than
that, when a treaty is violated by one nation, the other party, who has
maintained good faith, may either discharge themselves from the
obligations of it, or, if kindly disposed, they may set on foot a
negotiation, or they may declare war, without doing either of the other
two. He laid it down as a further principle, that where there are
several treaties in existence between two countries, and one of them is
violated, the injured party may demand satisfaction; and if it be not
given, they may declare the whole of the treaties void. He therefore was
of opinion that France having violated our treaty with her, we have a
right, without assigning any reason for it, to set it aside; and as we
have repeatedly applied to them for redress, and they have refused to
grant it, we have a right to reject the whole or to declare war, without
assigning any reason whatever. However, if we wish to appear fair in the
eyes of the world, we may, if we please, assign a reason for our act;
but, in this case, he would either give all the reasons which exist, or
make them as precise as possible. He should, therefore, vote in favor of
striking out the words in question.

The question to strike out was negatived; and the question being taken
on the preamble, it was carried--there being 53 votes for it.

The bill was ordered for a third reading this day. It afterwards
received its third reading, and was passed--yeas 47, nays 37, as
follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, Jas
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Stephen Bullock, Christopher G.
      Champlin, John Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, George Dent, William Edmond, Abiel
      Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn,
      Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon, Roger Griswold, William
      Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley, William
      Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, Jas. H. Imlay, John Wilkes
      Kittera, Samuel Lyman, William Matthews, Harrison G. Otis,
      Isaac Parker, John Read, John Rutledge, jr., James
      Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thos.
      Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith, Peleg
      Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark Thompson,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, and Peleg Wadsworth.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Thos. Blount, Dempsey
      Burges, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne,
      John Clopton, John Dawson, Thomas Evans, John Fowler,
      Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A.
      Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph
      Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston,
      Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, Blair
      McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, Anthony New, John Nicholas,
      Samuel Smith, William Smith, Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard
      Stanford, Thomas Sumter, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.


TUESDAY, July 10.

_Punishment of Crimes._

The bill, in addition to the act for punishing crimes against the United
States, and for other purposes, was read the third time; when

Mr. SITGREAVES wished the bill to be recommitted. It had been suggested
to him that great inconvenience arises in the Federal Courts, from its
having been conceived that they have not the power to bind to good
behavior, and he was desirous of removing this defect, by adding a
section to this bill for the purpose.

Mr. BAYARD thought the gentleman from Pennsylvania had better bring this
subject forward by itself, than have this bill recommitted, as it was no
way connected with it.

Mr. SITGREAVES consented.

The question was now on the passing of the bill.

Mr. MCDOWELL called for the yeas and nays upon it.

Mr. NICHOLAS rose, he said, to ask an explanation of the principles upon
which this bill is founded. He confessed it was strongly impressed upon
his mind, that it was not within the powers of the House to act upon
this subject. He looked in vain amongst the enumerated powers given to
Congress in the constitution, for an authority to pass a law like the
present; but he found what he considered as an express prohibition
against passing it. He found that, in order to quiet the alarms of the
people of the United States with respect to the silence of the
constitution as to the liberty of the press, not being perfectly
satisfied that the powers not vested in Congress remained with the
people, that one of the first acts of this Government was to propose
certain amendments to the constitution, to put this matter beyond doubt,
which amendments are now become a part of the constitution. It is now
expressly declared by that instrument, "that the powers not delegated to
the United States by the constitution, nor prohibited by it to the
States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people;" and,
also, "that Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech,
or of the press."

Mr. N. asked whether this bill did not go to the abridgment of the
freedom of speech and of the press? If it did not, he would be glad if
gentlemen would define wherein the freedom of speech and of the press
consists.

Mr. N. wished gentlemen, before they give a final vote on this bill, to
consider its effects; and, if they do this, he thought they would
consent to stop here. He desired them to reflect on the nature of our
Government; that all its officers are elective, and that the people have
no other means of examining their conduct but by means of the press, and
an unrestrained investigation through them of the conduct of the
Government. Indeed, the heart and life of a free Government, is a free
press; take away this, and you take away its main support. You might as
well say to the people, we, your Representatives, are faithful servants,
you need not look into our conduct; we will keep our seats for a little
longer time than that for which you have given them to us. To restrict
the press, would be to destroy the elective principle, by taking away
the information necessary to election, and there would be no difference
between it and a total denial of the right of election, but in the
degree of usurpation.

Mr. OTIS said, the professions of attachment to the constitution, made
by the gentleman from Virginia, are certainly honorable to him; and he
could not believe that an attachment so deeply engrafted, as he states
his to be, would be shaken by this bill. The gentleman had caught an
alarm on the first suggestion of a sedition bill, which had not yet
subsided; and though the present bill is perfectly harmless, and
contains no provision which is not practised upon under the laws of the
several States in which gentlemen had been educated, and from which they
had drawn most of their ideas of jurisprudence, yet the gentleman
continues to be dissatisfied with it.

The objections of the gentleman from Virginia, he believed, might be
reduced to two inquiries. In the first place, had the constitution given
Congress cognizance over the offences described in this bill prior to
the adoption of the amendments to the constitution? and, if Congress had
that cognizance before that time, have those amendments taken it away?
With respect to the first question, it must be allowed that every
independent Government has a right to preserve and defend itself against
injuries and outrages which endanger its existence; for, unless it has
this power, it is unworthy the name of a free Government, and must
either fall or be subordinate to some other protection. Now some of the
offences delineated in this bill are of this description. Unlawful
combinations to oppose the measures of Government, to intimidate its
officers, and to excite insurrections, are acts which tend directly to
the destruction of the constitution, and there could be no doubt that
the guardians of that constitution are bound to provide against them.
And if gentlemen would agree that these were acts of a criminal nature,
it follows that all means calculated to produce these effects, whether
by speaking, writing, or printing, were also criminal. From the nature
of things, therefore, the National Government is invested with a power
to protect itself against outrages of this kind, or it must be indebted
to and dependent on an individual State for its protection, which is
absurd. This essential right resulting from the spirit of the
constitution, was still more evident in the language of that instrument.
The people of the individual States brought with them as a birthright
into this country the common law of England, upon which all of them have
founded their statute law. If it were not for this common law, many
crimes which are committed in the United States would go unpunished. No
State has enacted statutes for the punishment of all crimes which may be
committed; yet in every State he presumed there was a Superior Court
which claimed cognizance of all offences against good morals, and which
restrained misdemeanors and opposition to the constituted authorities,
under the sanction merely of the common law. When the people of the
United States convened for the purpose of framing a federal compact,
they were all habituated to this common law, to its usages, its maxims,
and its definitions. It had been more or less explicitly recognized in
the constitution of every State, and in that of Maryland it was
declared to be the law of the land. If, then, we find in an instrument
digested by men who were all familiarized to the common law, not only
that the distribution of power, and the great objects to be provided for
are congenial to that law, but that the terms and definitions by which
those powers are described, have an evident allusion to it, and must
otherwise be quite inexplicable, or at best of a very uncertain meaning,
it will be natural to conclude that, in forming the constitution, they
kept in view the model of the common law, and that a safe recourse may
be had to it in all cases that would otherwise be doubtful. Thus we
shall find that one great end of this compact, as appears in the
preamble, is the establishment of justice, and for this purpose a
Judicial department is erected, whose powers are declared "to extend to
all cases in law and equity, arising under the constitution, the laws of
the United States," &c. Justice, if the common law ideas of it are
rejected, is susceptible of various constructions, but agreeably to the
principles of that law, it affords redress for every injury, and
provides a punishment for every crime that threatens to disturb the
lawful operations of Government. Again, what is intended by "cases at
law and equity arising under the constitution," as distinguished from
cases "arising under the laws of the United States?" What other law can
be contemplated but common law; what sort of equity but that legal
discretion which has been exercised in England from time immemorial, and
is to be learnt from the books and reports of that country? If it be
answered that these words comprise civil controversies only, though no
reason appears for this distinction, yet what is to be done with other
terms, with trial, jury, impeachment, &c., for an explanation of all
which, the common law alone can furnish a standard? It has been said by
the gentleman that the constitution has specified the only crimes that
are cognizable under it; but other crimes had been made penal at an
early period of the Government, by express statute, to which no
exception had been taken. For example, stealing public records, perjury,
obstructing the officers of justice, bribery in a Judge, and even a
contract to give a bribe, (which last was a restraint upon the liberty
of writing and speaking,) were all punishable, and why? Not because they
are described in the constitution, but because they are crimes against
the United States--because laws against them are necessary to carry
other laws into effect; because they tend to subvert the constitution.
The same reasons applied to the offences mentioned in the bill.

Mr. MACON said, the same section of the constitution which forbids any
interference with the freedom of speech and of the press, extends also
to religious establishments, and says, "Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof." This bill ought to be considered, therefore, as the
commencement of a system which might as well be extended to the
establishment of a national religion, as to a "restraint of speech, and
of the press." He acknowledged the bill was less exceptionable than when
it came from the Senate; but it yet contained the principle which he
considered as violating the constitution.

Mr. M. said, he had attended to all that had been said in support of
this bill; but could find nothing like argument in it. When the words of
the constitution were so express, it seems impossible they could be
understood as the gentleman from Massachusetts had represented them.
Several authorities, Mr. M. said, had been read to show that this bill
will form a constitutional law. He believed, however, far more might be
adduced to show the reverse. He believed the best way of coming at the
truth of the construction of any part of the constitution, was, by
examining the opinions that were held respecting it when it was under
discussion in the different States.

Mr. M. then proceeded to quote the opinions of the leading members in
several of the State conventions, in order to show, from the opinions of
the friends of the constitution, that it was never understood that
prosecutions for libels could take place under the General Government;
but that they must be carried on in the State courts, as the
constitution gave no power to Congress to pass laws on this subject. Not
a single member in any of the conventions gave an opinion to the
contrary. The following are the words of Judge Iredell, of North
Carolina, on the occasion. Judge Wilson, of this State, and several
others, were equally strong; but we have them not at hand, and if we
had, to give extracts from the whole would occupy too much room. In the
Convention of North Carolina, in reply to a member who had said that the
General Government might make it treason to write against the most
arbitrary proceedings, but who, it appears, afterwards corrected
himself, and said he meant only misprision of treason, and only that it
might be done within the ten miles square, where they were to have
exclusive legislation, Judge Iredell, thus spoke:

      "Where is the power given them to do this? They (Congress)
      have power to define and punish piracies and felonies
      committed on the high seas, and offences against the law of
      nations; but they have no power to define _any other crime
      whatever_. This shows how apt gentlemen are to commit
      mistakes. The powers of the Government are particularly
      enumerated and defined. They can claim no others but such
      as are so enumerated. In my opinion, they are excluded as
      much from the exercise of any other authority, as they
      could be by the strongest negative clause that could be
      framed."

Gentlemen, Mr. M. said, might call this a harmless bill; but however
harmless it may be, it is a beginning to act upon forbidden ground, and
no one can say to what extent it may hereafter be carried. He thought
this subject of the liberty of the press was sacred, and ought to be
left where the constitution had left it. The States have complete power
on the subject, and when Congress legislates, it ought to have
confidence in the States, as the States ought also to have confidence in
Congress, or our Government is gone. This Government depends upon the
State Legislatures for existence. They have only to refuse to elect
Senators to Congress, and all is gone. He believed there was nowhere any
complaint of a want of proper laws under the State Governments; and
though there may not be remedies found for every grievance in the
General Government, what it wants of power will be found in the State
Governments, and there can be no doubt but that power will be duly
exercised when necessity calls for it.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, that notwithstanding the sarcasms which had been
thrown out against those who oppose this measure; notwithstanding that
kind of accommodating principle which has been set up and reiterated,
that the powers of this constitution extend to every possible case--a
principle which goes to the destruction of State authorities, and makes
that instrument mean any thing or nothing--notwithstanding this, he
should again venture to engage the attention of the House while he
endeavored to show that this bill is not only contrary to the spirit,
but to the direct letter of the constitution.

The constitution declares that "no law shall be passed to abridge the
liberty of speech or of the press." Let us inquire, said Mr. L., what
was the liberty enjoyed at the time this declaration was agreed to, and
see whether citizens will enjoy the same liberty after this law passes
that they then enjoyed. Will gentlemen say that the same liberty of
writing and speaking did not exist then that now exists? If they will
not say this, must they not allow that the constitution is positive in
prohibiting any change in this respect? Gentlemen may call this liberty
an evil, if they please; if it be an evil, (which he was far from
believing,) it is an evil perpetrated by the constitution.

The constitution seems to have contemplated cases which might arise at a
future day. It seems to have foreseen that majorities (far be it from
him to believe the present majority is of the number) might be actuated
by dispositions hostile to the Government; that it might wish to pass
laws to suppress the only means by which its corrupt views might be made
known to the people, and therefore says, _no_ law shall be passed to
abridge the liberty of speech and of the press. This privilege is
connected with another dear and valuable privilege--the liberty of
conscience. What is liberty of conscience? Gentlemen may to-morrow
establish a national religion agreeably to the opinion of a majority of
this House, on the ground of a uniformity of worship being more
consistent with public happiness than a diversity of worship. The doing
of this is not less forbidden than the act which the House are about to
do. But, it is said, will you suffer a printer to abuse his
fellow-citizens with impunity, ascribing his conduct to the very worst
of motives? Is no punishment to be inflicted on such a person? Yes.
There is a remedy for offences of this kind in the laws of every State
in the Union. Every man's character is protected by law, and every man
who shall publish a libel on any part of the Government, is liable to
punishment. Not, said Mr. L., by laws which we ourselves have made, but
by laws passed by the several States. And is not this most proper?
Suppose a libel were written against the PRESIDENT, where is it most
probable that such an offence would receive an impartial trial? In a
court, the judges of which are appointed by the PRESIDENT, by a jury
selected by an officer holding his office at the will of the PRESIDENT?
or in a court independent of any influence whatever? The States are as
much interested in the preservation of the General Government as we are.
We do wrong when we attempt to set up interests independent of the
States. They are all desirous of preserving the constitution as it now
stands; and it is, therefore, much more probable that justice will be
found in a court in which neither of the parties have influence, than in
one which is wholly in the power of the PRESIDENT.

The bill was then passed--yeas 44, nays 41, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, George Baer, jr., Bailey Bartlett, James
      A. Bayard, David Brooks, Christopher G. Champlin, John
      Chapman, James Cochran, Joshua Coit, Samuel W. Dana,
      William Edmond, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster,
      Jonathan Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William
      Gordon, Roger Griswold, William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe
      Harper, Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L.
      Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman,
      Harrison G. Otis, Isaac Parker, John Read, John Rutledge,
      jun., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall, William Shepard,
      Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves, Nathaniel Smith,
      Peleg Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark
      Thompson, Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Allen, and Peleg
      Wadsworth.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Lemuel Benton, Thomas
      Blount, Richard Brent, Stephen Bullock, Dempsey Burges,
      Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne, John
      Clopton, John Dawson, George Dent, John Fowler, Albert
      Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna,
      Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph Heister,
      David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston, Matthew
      Locke, Matthew Lyon, Nathaniel Macon, William Matthews,
      Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell, Anthony New, John
      Nicholas, Samuel Smith, William Smith, Richard Sprigg,
      jun., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter, John Trigg, Philip
      Van Cortlandt, Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and
      Robert Williams.


FRIDAY, July 13.

_Capture of French armed vessels._

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for encouraging
the capture of French armed vessels by armed vessels belonging to
citizens of the United States; which was agreed to without debate or
amendment, and ordered to be read a third time to-day. It was
accordingly immediately read a third time; when

Mr. MCDOWELL said, he hoped this bill would not pass. Congress had
already passed laws authorizing public and private armed vessels to
attack and take French vessels; but they are now called upon to give a
bounty upon the guns that are brought in, according to their size. He
was not willing to allow this. It would open a door to innumerable
frauds. Plans would be laid between the owners of privateers here and
their friends in the West Indies, and vessels and arms would be thrown
in their way for the purpose of capture, and in this manner our Treasury
would be drained to an extent which no man could at present foresee. He
could see no use in the provision, as it would not induce merchant
vessels to go in search of French vessels; and, without some unfair
play, it would never be worth the while of persons fitting out
privateers for the purpose. He called the yeas and nays upon it. They
were taken accordingly, and were, yeas 34, nays 36, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, Bailey Bartlett, James A. Bayard, David
      Brooks, Christopher G. Champlin, Joshua Coit, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, William Edmond, Abiel Foster, Dwight
      Foster, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon,
      Roger Griswold, Robert Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley,
      William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John
      Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, Harrison G. Otis, Isaac
      Parker, John Read, John Rutledge, jun., James Schureman,
      Samuel Sewall, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Sitgreaves,
      Nathaniel Smith, George Thatcher, Mark Thompson, and John
      E. Van Allen.

      NAYS.--David Bard, Thomas Blount, Richard Brent, Dempsey
      Burges, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles Cole Claiborne,
      John Clopton, John Dawson, George Dent, Albert Gallatin,
      James Gillespie, William Barry Grove, Carter B. Harrison,
      Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph Heister, David Holmes, Walter
      Jones, Edward Livingston, Matthew Locke, Matthew Lyon,
      Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph McDowell,
      Anthony New, John Nicholas, Samuel Smith, William Smith,
      Richard Sprigg, jr., Richard Stanford, Thomas Sumter,
      Thomas Tillinghast, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.

And so the said bill was rejected.


SATURDAY, July 14.

The hour having arrived, at which the call of the House was to be made,
the names of the members were called over, eighty-two members (including
the Speaker) appeared in their seats, twenty-three absent, twenty of
whom have leave, one sick, and two for whom excuses were made, and
received by the House.


_Capture of French vessels._

Mr. SITGREAVES, called up for decision the resolution he laid on the
table yesterday, viz:

      _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to prepare and
      bring in a bill for giving a bounty on the capture of
      French armed ships or vessels, by armed ships or vessels
      owned by a citizen or citizens of the United States.

The question on the resolution, was then put and negatived--yeas 40,
nays 41.

And so the motion was rejected.


MONDAY, July 16.

_Intercourse with France._

Another bill was received from the Senate, to amend the act for
suspending the commercial intercourse between the United States and
France and her dependencies.

Mr. NICHOLAS moved to postpone this bill till next session.

Mr. HARPER hoped not. This bill, he said, was very different from the
one which had been negatived. That proposed to dispense with sureties
altogether; this only to lower the amount of the bond. Instead of the
owner giving security in a sum equal to the amount of vessel and cargo,
and finding two sureties in half the sum, this bill proposes that the
owner and master shall be bound in a sum equal to the amount of the
value of the vessel, and a surety in from one to ten thousand dollars.
To exact a bond equal to the amount of the vessel and cargo in every
case, would be very inconvenient. They are sometimes very valuable.
There is now, he said, a vessel in this port ready to sail, whose cargo
is worth $300,000. To exact from the owner a bond to the full amount,
and two sureties in half the sum, would be requiring a very heavy
security from them. It would be sufficient, he thought, to require a
bond equal to the profit which it is probable would be derived from any
voyage.

Mr. S. SMITH said, this bill was certainly very different from that
which had been rejected by this House, though it did not meet with his
approbation at present. It was capable, however, of amendment. The
security at present proposed was not worthy of the name. Had he a ship
ready to sail such as the gentleman last up had named, he would
willingly forfeit the sum proposed, to have the privilege of sending her
to a French market. The difference in price between a French and a
Hamburg market would make it well worth his while to do so. In many
cases, such a voyage would afford 50 per cent. A regulation something
like the present could only secure the fair trader; but the surety must
be a much larger sum than $10,000.

The committee rose, however, and Mr. SMITH renewed his amendment in the
House, when it was agreed to, after some objections to it from Mr.
BAYARD--36 to 28. The bill was then ordered to be read a third time,
received its third reading, and passed.

The House having received all the bills from the PRESIDENT, and the
business of the two Houses being finished, the SPEAKER adjourned the
House till the first Monday in December next.




FIFTH CONGRESS.--THIRD SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA, DECEMBER 3, 1798.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, December 3, 1798.

The third session of the fifth Congress commenced this day, conformably
to the provision of the constitution, and the Senate assembled at the
city of Philadelphia, in their Chamber.


PRESENT:

JOHN LANGDON and SAMUEL LIVERMORE, from New Hampshire.

THEODORE FOSTER and RAY GREENE, from Rhode Island.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, from Pennsylvania.

HUMPHREY MARSHALL, from Kentucky.

JACOB READ, from South Carolina.

JAMES GUNN, from Georgia.

DANIEL SMITH, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the State of
Tennessee, in the recess of that Legislature, in place of Andrew
Jackson, resigned, took his seat in the Senate.

The members present not being sufficient to form a quorum, the Senate
adjourned to 11 o'clock to-morrow morning.


TUESDAY, December 4.

HENRY LATIMER, from the State of Delaware, attended.

The members present not being sufficient to form a quorum, adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, December 5.

BENJAMIN GOODHUE, from the State of Massachusetts; ELIJAH PAINE, and
NATHANIEL CHIPMAN, from the State of Vermont; JOHN LAURANCE, from the
State of New York; and TIMOTHY BLOODWORTH, from the State of North
Carolina, severally attended.

No quorum being present, the Senate adjourned.


THURSDAY, December 6.

RICHARD STOCKTON, from the State of New Jersey, and JOSEPH ANDERSON,
from the State of Tennessee, severally attended.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the election
of a President _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides, and JOHN
LAURANCE was chosen.

The credentials of DANIEL SMITH, appointed Senator by the Executive of
the State of Tennessee, in place of Andrew Jackson, resigned, were read,
and the oath was, by the PRESIDENT, administered to him, as the law
provides.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, and acquaint him that a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and
that, in the absence of the VICE PRESIDENT, they have elected JOHN
LAURANCE, President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives,
that a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and ready to proceed to
business, and that, in the absence of the VICE PRESIDENT, they have
elected JOHN LAURANCE, President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of the House is assembled, and that they have appointed a joint
committee on their part, together with such committee as the Senate may
appoint on theirs, to wait on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES and
notify him that a quorum of the two Houses is assembled, and ready to
receive any communications that he may be pleased to make to them.

The Senate took into consideration the message from the House of
Representatives, and

_Resolved_, That they do concur therein, and that Messrs. READ and PAINE
be of the joint committee on the part of the Senate.

The return of service on the summons to William Blount, made by the
Sergeant-at-arms, pursuant, to the resolution of the Senate of the first
of March last, was read.

Mr. READ reported, from the joint committee appointed for that purpose,
that they had waited on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and had
notified him that a quorum of the two Houses of Congress were assembled,
and the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES acquainted the committee that he
would meet the two Houses on Saturday next at 12 o'clock, in the
Chamber of the House of Representatives.


SATURDAY, December 8.

JAMES ROSS, from the State of Pennsylvania, attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
they are now ready to meet the Senate, in the Chamber of that House, to
receive such communications as the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES shall
be pleased to make to them. Whereupon,

The Senate repaired to the Chamber of the House of Representatives, for
the purpose above expressed.

The Senate then returned to their own Chamber, and a copy of the Speech
of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, this day addressed to both Houses
of Congress, was read. [For which see proceedings in the House of
Representatives.]

_Ordered_, That Messrs. STOCKTON, READ, and ROSS, be a committee to
report the draft of an Address to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in
answer to his Speech this day to both Houses of Congress, and that the
Speech be printed for the use of the Senate.


MONDAY, December 10.

URIAH TRACY, from the State of Connecticut, attended.


TUESDAY, December 11.

JAMES WATSON, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of New
York, in place of John S. Hobart, resigned, produced his credentials,
which were read, and the oath was, by the PRESIDENT, administered to
him, as the law provides.

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee on
the draft of an Address in answer to the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES to both Houses of Congress, at the opening of the session;
which, being read in paragraphs and amended, was adopted, as follows:

      _To the President of the United States:_

      SIR: The Senate of the United States join you in thanks to
      Almighty God for the removal of the late afflicting
      dispensations of his Providence, and for the patriotic
      spirit and general prosperity of our country. Sympathy for
      the sufferings of our fellow-citizens from disease, and the
      important interests of the Union, demand of the National
      Legislature a ready co-operation with the State
      Governments, in the use of such means as seem best
      calculated to prevent the return of this fatal calamity.

      Although we have sincerely wished that an adjustment of our
      differences with the republic of France might be effected
      on safe and honorable terms, yet the information you have
      given us of the ultimate failure of the negotiations has
      not surprised us. In the general conduct of that Republic,
      we have seen a design of universal influence, incompatible
      with the self-government, and destructive of the
      independence of other States. In its conduct towards these
      United States, we have seen a plan of hostility pursued
      with unremitted constancy--equally disregarding the
      obligations of treaties, and the rights of individuals. We
      have seen two embassies formed for the purpose of mutual
      explanations, and clothed with the most extensive and
      liberal powers, dismissed without recognition and even
      without a hearing. The government of France has not only
      refused to repeal, but has recently enjoined the observance
      of its former edict, respecting merchandise of British
      fabric or produce, the property of neutrals, by which the
      interruption of our lawful commerce, and the spoliation of
      the property of our citizens, have again received a public
      sanction. These facts indicate no change of system or
      disposition--they speak a more intelligible language than
      professions of solicitude to avoid a rupture, however
      ardently made. But if, after the repeated proofs we have
      given of a sincere desire for peace, these professions
      should be accompanied by insinuations, implicating the
      integrity with which it has been pursued--if, neglecting
      and passing by the constitutional and authorized agents of
      the Government, they are made through the medium of
      individuals without public character or authority; and,
      above all, if they carry with them a claim to prescribe the
      political qualifications of the Minister of the United
      States to be employed in the negotiation, they are not
      entitled to attention or consideration, but ought to be
      regarded as designed to separate the people from their
      Government, and to bring about by intrigue that which open
      force could not effect.

      We are of opinion with you, sir, that there has nothing yet
      been discovered in the conduct of France which can justify
      a relaxation of the means of defence adopted during the
      last session of Congress, the happy result of which is so
      strongly and generally marked. If the force by sea and land
      which the existing laws authorize should be judged
      inadequate to the public defence, we will perform the
      indispensable duty of bringing forward such other acts as
      will effectually call forth the resources and force of our
      country.

      A steady adherence to this wise and manly policy--a proper
      direction of the noble spirit of patriotism which has
      arisen in our country, and which ought to be cherished and
      invigorated by every branch of the Government, will secure
      our liberty and independence against all open and secret
      attacks.

      We enter on the business of the present session with an
      anxious solicitude for the public good, and shall bestow
      that consideration on the several objects pointed out in
      your communication, which they respectively merit.

      Your long and important services--your talents and
      firmness, so often displayed in the most trying times and
      most critical situations--afford a sure pledge of a zealous
      co-operation in every measure necessary to secure us
      justice and respect.

                          JOHN LAURANCE,
                          _President of the Senate pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the committee who prepared the Address, wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and desire him to acquaint the Senate at
what time and place it will be most convenient for him that it should be
presented.

Mr. STOCKTON reported, from the committee, that they had waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and that he would receive the Address of
the Senate to-morrow, at 12 o'clock, at his own house. Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That the Senate will, to-morrow at 12 o'clock, wait on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES accordingly.


WEDNESDAY, December 12.

Agreeably to the resolution of yesterday, the Senate waited on the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and the PRESIDENT of the Senate, in
their name, presented the Address then agreed on.

To which the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES made the following reply:

      _To the Senate of the United States:_

      GENTLEMEN: I thank you for this Address, so conformable to
      the spirit of our constitution, and the established
      character of the Senate of the United States, for wisdom,
      honor, and virtue.

      I have seen no real evidence of any change of system or
      disposition in the French Republic towards the United
      States. Although the officious interference of individuals,
      without public character or authority, is not entitled to
      any credit, yet it deserves to be considered, whether that
      temerity and impertinence of individuals affecting to
      interfere in public affairs, between France and the United
      States, whether by their secret correspondence or
      otherwise, and intended to impose upon the people, and
      separate them from their Government, ought not to be
      inquired into and corrected.

      I thank you, gentlemen, for your assurances that you will
      bestow that consideration on the several objects pointed
      out in my communication, which they respectively merit.

      If I have participated in that understanding, sincerity,
      and constancy, which have been displayed by my
      fellow-citizens and countrymen, in the most trying times,
      and critical situations, and fulfilled my duties to them, I
      am happy. The testimony of the Senate of the United States,
      in my favor, is a high and honorable reward, which
      receives, as it merits, my grateful acknowledgments. My
      zealous co-operation in measures necessary to secure us
      justice and consideration may be always depended on.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      _December 12, 1798._

The Senate returned to their own Chamber, and proceeded to the
consideration of Executive business.


FRIDAY, December 14.

JOHN E. HOWARD, from the State of Maryland, attended.


MONDAY, December 17.

ALEXANDER MARTIN, from the State of North Carolina, and JAMES HILLHOUSE,
from the State of Connecticut, severally attended.


WEDNESDAY, December 19.

FRANKLIN DAVENPORT, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the State of
New Jersey, in the recess of the Legislature, in the place of John
Rutherford, resigned, produced his credentials; which were read, and,
the oath of office being administered to him as the law provides, he
took his seat in the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, December 26.

JAMES LLOYD, from the State of Maryland, attended.


THURSDAY, December 27.

THOMAS JEFFERSON, Vice President of the United States and President of
the Senate, attended.


MONDAY, December 31.

The VICE PRESIDENT laid before the Senate a letter from JOHN HUNTER,
notifying his resignation of his seat in the Senate.


MONDAY, January 7, 1799.

JOHN BROWN, from the State of Kentucky, and THEODORE SEDGWICK, from the
State of Massachusetts, severally attended.


TUESDAY, January 8.

STEPHENS T. MASON, from the State of Virginia, attended.


MONDAY, January 21.

HENRY TAZEWELL, from the State of Virginia, attended.


THURSDAY, January 24.

The Senate being informed that HENRY TAZEWELL, one of the members from
the State of Virginia, died this morning,

_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to take order for
superintending the funeral of the said HENRY TAZEWELL, Esq., and that
the Senate will attend the same, and that notice of the event be given
to the House of Representatives, and that this committee consist of
Messrs. MASON, BROWN, and MARSHALL.

_Resolved, unanimously_, That the members of the Senate, from a sincere
desire of showing every mark of respect due to the memory of HENRY
TAZEWELL, deceased, late a member thereof, will go into mourning for him
one month, by the usual mode of wearing a crape round the left arm.

_Resolved_, That the President of the Senate notify the Executive of
Virginia of the death of HENRY TAZEWELL, late Senator of that State for
the United States.


FRIDAY, January 25.

The VICE PRESIDENT communicated the credentials of WILLIAM HILL WELLS,
elected a Senator for the State of Delaware, in the place of Joshua
Clayton, deceased.


WEDNESDAY, January 30.

JOSIAH TATTNALL, from the State of Georgia, attended.


MONDAY, February 4.

WILLIAM HILL WELLS, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Delaware, in place of Joshua Clayton, deceased, attended; and his
credentials being read, and the oath required by law administered to
him, he took his seat in the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, February 6.

The bill sent from the House of Representatives, entitled "An act
further to suspend the commercial intercourse between the United States
and France, and the dependencies thereof, and for other purposes," was
read a third time.

On motion to add the following proviso to the fourth section:

      "_Provided_, That a notice of not less than nineteen days
      of the opening commerce with the French Republic, or any
      port or place under the Government thereof, by authority of
      this act, and of not less than thirty days of the
      revocation of any order issued by the PRESIDENT, by virtue
      of this act, shall be given:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 13, nays 14, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Brown, Chipman, Gunn,
      Langdon, Livermore, Lloyd, Marshall, Martin, Mason, Read,
      and Tattnall.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Davenport, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Hillhouse, Latimer, Paine, Ross, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tracy,
      Watson, and Wells.

On motion to amend the motion, to be read as follows:

      "_Provided_, That notice shall be given, of not less than
      thirty days, of the revocation of any order issued by the
      PRESIDENT, by virtue of this act:"

It was determined in the affirmative--yeas 18, nays 10, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Davenport, Foster,
      Goodhue, Greene, Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer, Livermore,
      Lloyd, Marshall, Paine, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tracy, Watson,
      and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Brown, Langdon,
      Martin, Mason, Read, Ross, and Tattnall.

And on the question to agree to the motion thus amended, it was
determined in the negative.

And having agreed to several amendments to the bill, the question on the
final passage thereof, as amended, it was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 18, nays 10, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Davenport, Foster,
      Goodhue, Greene, Hillhouse, Howard, Latimer, Livermore,
      Lloyd, Paine, Ross, Sedgwick, Tracy, Watson, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Brown, Gunn, Langdon,
      Marshall, Martin, Mason, Read, and Tattnall.


SATURDAY, February 9.

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill to amend the act,
entitled "An act providing for the sale of the lands of the United
States in the territory north-west of the river Ohio, and above the
mouth of Kentucky River."

On motion to strike out the 8th section of the bill as follows:

      "SEC. 8. _And be it further enacted_, That aliens residing
      within the United States or elsewhere, shall be capable of
      purchasing and holding lands in the territory of the United
      States north-west of the river Ohio, and their heirs may
      succeed to them _ab intestato_, in the same manner as if
      they were citizens; and they may grant, sell, and devise
      the same to whom they may please, whether citizens or
      aliens; and that neither they, their heirs, or assigns,
      shall, so far as may respect the said lands, and the legal
      remedies incident thereto, be regarded as aliens."

It was determined in the affirmative--yeas 13, nays 11, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Chipman, Foster, Goodhue, Greene, Hillhouse,
      Howard, Martin, Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tracy, Watson,
      and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bingham, Bloodworth, Brown, Gunn,
      Langdon, Livermore, Marshall, Mason, Ross, and Tattnall.


TUESDAY, February 12.

The bill vesting the power of retaliation, in certain cases, in the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, was read the third time; and, being
amended, the question on the final passage thereof was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 22, nays 2, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Chipman, Davenport,
      Foster, Goodhue, Greene, Gunn, Hillhouse, Latimer,
      Livermore, Lloyd, Marshall, Martin, Paine, Ross, Sedgwick,
      Stockton, Tattnall, Tracy, Watson, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Howard and Langdon.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass, that it be engrossed, and
that the title thereof be "An act vesting the power of retaliation, in
certain cases, in the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES."


WEDNESDAY, February 13.

The VICE PRESIDENT communicated a letter from the Executive of the State
of Virginia, in answer to his of the 24th ultimo, stating that an
appointment to fill the vacancy in the Senate, occasioned by the decease
of Henry Tazewell, would, probably, be deferred to the meeting of their
Legislature.


SATURDAY, February 16.

CHARLES PINCKNEY, elected a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
South Carolina, in place of John Hunter, resigned, produced his
credentials, and the oath prescribed by law being administered to him,
he took his seat in the Senate.

The Senate proceeded to consider the amendments reported by the
committee to the bill giving eventual authority to the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES to augment the Army.

On motion, to agree to the amendment reported to the 7th section, to
read as follows:

      "SEC. 7. _Be it further enacted_, That it shall be lawful
      for the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to call forth and
      employ the said volunteers in all cases, and to effect all
      the purposes for which he is authorized to call forth and
      employ the militia, by the act, entitled 'An act to provide
      for the calling forth the militia to execute the laws of
      the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions, and
      to repeal the act now in force for these purposes:'"

It passed in the affirmative, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Gunn, Howard, Laurance, Livermore, Lloyd, Marshall, Paine,
      Ross, Sedgwick, Tracy, Watson, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Langdon, Martin,
      Mason, Pinckney, and Tattnall.


SATURDAY, February 23.

The bill, sent from the House of Representatives, entitled "An act to
grant an additional compensation from the year one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-nine, to certain officers of the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States," was read the second time.

_Ordered_, That it be referred to Messrs. LIVERMORE, PAINE, and WELLS,
to consider and report thereon to the Senate.

The Senate proceeded to consider the report of the committee to whom was
referred the bill to augment the salaries of the principal officers of
the Executive Departments, which was adopted; and

The question to agree to the third reading of the bill as amended, was
determined in the affirmative--yeas 22, nays 3, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Bloodworth, Chipman, Davenport,
      Foster, Goodhue, Greene, Hillhouse, Howard, Laurance,
      Lloyd, Marshall, Martin, Paine, Pinckney, Read, Sedgwick,
      Stockton, Tattnall, Tracy, Watson, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Langdon, Livermore, and Mason.


MONDAY, February 25.

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, authorizing the
acceptance, from the State of Connecticut, of a cession of jurisdiction
of the territory west of Pennsylvania, commonly called the Western
Reserve of Connecticut; and the question on the final passage of the
bill was determined in the affirmative--yeas 16, nays 12, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Chipman, Davenport, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Gunn, Hillhouse, Livermore, Lloyd, Marshall, Paine, Read,
      Sedgwick, Stockton, Tracy, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Bloodworth, Brown, Howard, Langdon,
      Latimer, Laurance, Martin, Mason, Pinckney, Ross, and
      Watson.


FRIDAY, March 1.

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, sent from the House of
Representatives, entitled "An act to establish the Post Office of the
United States."

On motion, to add the following to the amendment of the 17th section:

      "_And, provided_, That all the letters and packets franked
      by any one member, in any one week, shall not exceed thirty
      ounces; and such privilege shall continue:"

It was determined in the negative--yeas 13, nays 17, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bingham, Davenport, Goodhue, Hillhouse;
      Howard, Livermore, Lloyd, Paine, Ross, Sedgwick, Stockton,
      Watson, and Wells.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bloodworth, Brown, Chipman,
      Foster, Greene, Gunn, Langdon, Latimer, Laurance, Marshall,
      Martin, Mason, Pinckney, Read, Tattnall, and Tracy.


SATURDAY, March 2.

The bill, sent from the House of Representatives, entitled "An act
authorizing a detachment from the militia of the United States," was
read the second time.

On the question to agree to the third reading of the bill, it was
determined in the affirmative--yeas 17, nays 12, as follows:

      YEAS.--Messrs. Bloodworth, Brown, Foster, Goodhue, Greene,
      Gunn, Howard, Langdon, Laurance, Lloyd, Marshall, Martin,
      Mason, Pinckney, Ross, Tattnall, and Watson.

      NAYS.--Messrs. Bingham, Chipman, Davenport, Hillhouse,
      Latimer, Livermore, Paine, Read, Sedgwick, Stockton, Tracy,
      and Wells.


SATURDAY EVENING, March 2.

A message from the House of Representatives, informed the Senate that
the House, having finished the business before them, are about to
adjourn without day.

The Senate then proceeded to the consideration of Executive business.

The Senate, then, resuming Legislative business, adjourned without day.




FIFTH CONGRESS.--THIRD SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

IN

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, December 3, 1798.

This being the day appointed by the constitution for the annual meeting
of Congress, a number of members of the House of Representatives
assembled in their Chamber.

The following are the names of the members present:

_From New Hampshire._--ABIEL FOSTER, JONATHAN FREEMAN, WILLIAM GORDON,
and PELEG SPRAGUE.

_From Massachusetts._--DWIGHT FOSTER, SAMUEL LYMAN, HARRISON G. OTIS,
GEO. THATCHER, JOSEPH B. VARNUM, and PELEG WADSWORTH.

_From Rhode Island._--THOMAS TILLINGHAST.

_From Connecticut._--SAMUEL W. DANA, CHAUNCEY GOODRICH, and ROGER
GRISWOLD.

_From New York._--DAVID BROOKS, HENRY GLENN, JONATHAN N. HAVENS, and
HEZEKIAH L. HOSMER.

_From New Jersey._--JONATHAN DAYTON, (the Speaker.)

_From Pennsylvania._--DAVID BARD, JOHN CHAPMAN, WILLIAM FINDLAY, ALBERT
GALLATIN, JOHN A. HANNA, BLAIR MCCLENACHAN, and RICHARD THOMAS.

_From Maryland._--GEORGE DENT.

_From Virginia._--JOHN CLOPTON, JOHN DAWSON, DAVID HOLMES, JAMES MACHIR,
and DANIEL MORGAN.

_From North Carolina._--MATTHEW LOCKE, NATHANIEL MACON, and RICHARD
STANFORD.

_From Tennessee._--WILLIAM CHARLES COLE CLAIBORNE.

_From Georgia._--ABRAHAM BALDWIN.

Three new members, to wit: JONATHAN BRACE, returned to serve in this
House as a member for Connecticut, in the room of Joshua Coit, deceased;
ROBERT WALN, returned to serve as a member for Pennsylvania, in the room
of John Swanwick, deceased; and JOSEPH EGGLESTON, returned to serve as a
member for Virginia, in the room of William B. Giles, who has resigned
his seat; appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats in
the House.

A little after 12 o'clock the SPEAKER of the House took his chair, the
names of all the members were called over by the Clerk, and there
appearing only forty persons, (fourteen short of a quorum,) a motion was
made to adjourn, and the House adjourned accordingly till to-morrow at
11 o'clock.


TUESDAY, December 4.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, STEPHEN BULLOCK; from
New Jersey, JAMES H. IMLAY; from Pennsylvania, JOHN WILKES KITTERA; from
Maryland, GEORGE BAER, Jr., WILLIAM CRAIK, and SAMUEL SMITH; from
Virginia, ANTHONY NEW, ABRAM TRIGG, JOHN TRIGG, and ABRAHAM VENABLE;
from North Carolina, THOMAS BLOUNT; and from South Carolina, WILLIAM
SMITH; appeared and took their seats in the House.

A new member, to wit: ROBERT BROWN, returned to serve in this House as a
member for Pennsylvania, in the room of Samuel Sitgreaves, appointed a
Commissioner of the United States under the sixth article of the Treaty
of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, with Great Britain, appeared, and
took his seat in the House.

But a quorum of the whole number not being present, the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, December 5.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, ISAAC PARKER, JOHN
READ, SAMUEL SEWALL, and WILLIAM SHEPARD; from Connecticut, NATHANIEL
SMITH; from New York, LUCAS ELMENDORPH, JOHN E. VAN ALLEN, and JOHN
WILLIAMS; from New Jersey, JAMES SCHUREMAN; and from South Carolina,
ROBERT GOODLOE HARPER and JOHN RUTLEDGE, Jr., appeared, and took their
seats in the House.

And a quorum consisting of a majority of the whole number, being
present,

The oath or affirmation, to support the Constitution of the United
States, as prescribed by the act, entitled "An act to regulate the time
and manner of administering certain oaths," was administered by Mr.
SPEAKER to the following new members, to wit: JONATHAN BRACE, ROBERT
BROWN, ROBERT WALN, and JOSEPH EGGLESTON, who took their seats in the
House on the third and fourth instant.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate to inform them that a
quorum of this House is assembled, and ready to proceed to business.


SATURDAY, December 8.

Several other members, to wit: from Connecticut, WILLIAM EDMOND; from
Maryland, JOHN DENNIS and WILLIAM HINDMAN; and from Virginia, THOMAS
EVANS and WALTER JONES, appeared and took their seats in the House.

The House having been called to order, and the journal read, the SPEAKER
observed that the hour was nearly arrived at which the President had
proposed to make his communications to both Houses, and read a
resolution which was usually entered into on such occasions, informing
the Senate that this House is formed, and ready to receive any
communications which the President may be pleased to make to them. The
resolution was adopted, and a message having been sent to the Senate
therewith, the members soon after entered and took the places prepared
for them.

At twelve o'clock, Lieutenant General WASHINGTON, with his Secretary,
Colonel LEAR, Major Generals PINCKNEY and HAMILTON, entered the Hall,
and took their places on the right of the SPEAKER'S chair. The British
and Portuguese Ministers, and the British and Danish Consuls, with their
Secretaries, had their places assigned them on the left of the chair.


_President's Speech._

A few minutes after 12, the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, accompanied
by his Secretary, and the Heads of the several Departments of the
Government, appeared. The PRESIDENT having taken his seat, and the
officers of Government theirs, near the general officers, he rose and
addressed the two Houses as follows:

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives:_

      While with reverence and resignation we contemplate the
      dispensations of Divine Providence, in the alarming and
      destructive pestilence with which several of our cities and
      towns have been visited, there is cause for gratitude and
      mutual congratulations that the malady has disappeared, and
      that we are again permitted to assemble in safety at the
      seat of Government, for the discharge of our important
      duties. But, when we reflect that this fatal disorder has,
      within a few years, made repeated ravages in some of our
      principal seaports, and with increased malignancy; and,
      when we consider the magnitude of the evils arising from
      the interruption of public and private business, whereby
      the national interests are deeply affected, I think it my
      duty to invite the Legislature of the Union to examine the
      expediency of establishing suitable regulations in aid of
      the health laws of the respective States; for, these being
      formed on the idea that contagious sickness may be
      communicated through the channels of commerce, there seems
      to be a necessity that Congress, who alone can regulate
      trade, should frame a system which, while it may tend to
      preserve the general health, may be compatible with the
      interests of commerce and the safety of the revenue.

      While we think on this calamity, and sympathize with the
      immediate sufferers, we have abundant reason to present to
      the Supreme Being our annual oblations of gratitude for a
      liberal participation in the ordinary blessings of His
      Providence. To the usual subjects of gratitude, I cannot
      omit to add one of the first importance to our well-being
      and safety: I mean that spirit which has arisen in our
      country against the menaces and aggression of a foreign
      nation. A manly sense of national honor, dignity, and
      independence, has appeared, which, if encouraged and
      invigorated by every branch of the Government, will enable
      us to view, undismayed, the enterprises of any foreign
      power, and become the sure foundation of national
      prosperity and glory.

      The course of the transactions in relation to the United
      States and France, which have come to my knowledge during
      your recess, will be made the subject of a future
      communication. That communication will confirm the ultimate
      failure of the measures which have been taken by the
      Government of the United States towards an amicable
      adjustment of differences with that power. You will, at the
      same time, perceive that the French Government appears
      solicitous to impress the opinion that it is averse to a
      rupture with this country, and that it has, in a qualified
      manner, declared itself willing to receive a Minister from
      the United States, for the purpose of restoring a good
      understanding. It is unfortunate for professions of this
      kind that they should be expressed in terms which may
      countenance the inadmissible pretension of a right to
      prescribe the qualifications which a Minister of the United
      States should possess; and that while France is asserting
      the existence of a disposition, on her part, to conciliate
      with sincerity the differences which have arisen, the
      sincerity of a like disposition on the part of the United
      States, of which so many demonstrative proofs have been
      given, should even be indirectly questioned. It is also
      worthy of observation that the decree of the Directory,
      alleged to be intended to restrain the depredations of
      French cruisers on our commerce, has not given, and cannot
      give, any relief; it enjoins them to conform to all the
      laws of France relative to cruising and prizes, while these
      laws are themselves the sources of the depredation of which
      we have so long, so justly, and so fruitlessly complained.

      The law of France enacted in January last, which subjects
      to capture and condemnation neutral vessels and their
      cargoes, if any portion of the latter are of British fabric
      or produce, although the entire property belongs to
      neutrals, instead of being rescinded, has lately received a
      confirmation, by the failure of a proposition for its
      repeal. While this law, which is an unequivocal act of war
      on the commerce of the nations it attacks, continues in
      force, those nations can see in the French Government only
      a power regardless of their essential rights, of their
      independence and sovereignty; and, if they possess the
      means, they can reconcile nothing with their interests and
      honor but a firm resistance.

      Hitherto, therefore, nothing is discoverable in the conduct
      of France which ought to change or relax our measures of
      defence; on the contrary, to extend and invigorate them is
      our true policy. We have no reason to regret that these
      measures have been thus far adopted and pursued; and, in
      proportion as we enlarge our view of the portentous and
      incalculable situation of Europe, we shall discover new and
      cogent motives for the full development of our energies and
      resources.

      But, in demonstrating by our conduct that we do not fear
      war, in the necessary protection of our rights and honor,
      we shall give no room to infer that we abandon the desire
      of peace. An efficient preparation for war can alone ensure
      peace. It is peace that we have uniformly and perseveringly
      cultivated, and harmony between us and France may be
      restored at her option. But to send another Minister,
      without more determinate assurances that he would be
      received, would be an act of humiliation to which the
      United States ought not to submit. It must, therefore, be
      left to France, if she is indeed desirous of accommodation,
      to take the requisite steps. The United States will
      steadily observe the maxims by which they have hitherto
      been governed. They will respect the sacred rites of
      embassy. And with a sincere disposition on the part of
      France to desist from hostility, to make reparation for the
      injuries heretofore inflicted on our commerce, and to do
      justice in future, there will be no obstacle to the
      restoration of a friendly intercourse. In making to you
      this declaration, I give a pledge to France and to the
      world that the Executive authority of this country still
      adheres to the humane and pacific policy which has
      invariably governed its proceedings, in conformity with the
      wishes of the other branches of the Government and of the
      people of the United States. But considering the late
      manifestations of her policy towards foreign nations, I
      deem it a duty deliberately and solemnly to declare my
      opinion, that, whether we negotiate with her or not,
      vigorous preparations for war will be alike indispensable.
      These alone will give to us an equal treaty, and ensure its
      observance.

      Among the measures of preparation which appear expedient, I
      take the liberty to recall your attention to the Naval
      Establishment. The beneficial effects of the small naval
      armament provided under the acts of the last session, are
      known and acknowledged. Perhaps no country ever experienced
      more sudden and remarkable advantages from any measure of
      policy than we have derived from the arming for our
      maritime protection and defence. We ought, without loss of
      time, to lay the foundation for an increase of our Navy to
      a size sufficient to guard our coast, and protect our
      trade. Such a naval force as it is doubtless in the power
      of the United States to create and maintain, would also
      afford to them the best means of general defence, the safe
      transportation of troops and stores to every part of our
      extensive coast. To accomplish this important object, a
      prudent foresight requires that systematical measures be
      adopted for procuring, at all times, the requisite timber
      and other supplies. In what manner this shall be done, I
      leave to your consideration.

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      I have directed an estimate of the appropriations which
      will be necessary for the service of the ensuing year to be
      laid before you, accompanied with a view of the public
      receipts and expenditures to a recent period. It will
      afford you satisfaction to infer the great extent and
      solidity of the public resources, from the prosperous state
      of the finances, notwithstanding the unexampled
      embarrassments which have attended commerce. When you
      reflect on the conspicuous examples of a patriotism and
      liberality which have been exhibited by our mercantile
      fellow-citizens, and how great a proportion of the public
      resources depends on their enterprise, you will naturally
      consider, whether their convenience cannot be promoted and
      reconciled with the security of the revenue, by a revision
      of the system by which the collection is at present
      regulated.

      During your recess, measures have been steadily pursued for
      effecting the valuations and returns directed by the act of
      the last session preliminary to the assessment and
      collection of a direct tax. No other delays or obstacles
      have been experienced except such as were expected to arise
      from the great extent of our country, and the magnitude and
      novelty of the operation, and enough has been accomplished
      to assure a fulfilment of the views of the Legislature.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives:_

      I cannot close this Address, without once more adverting to
      our political situation, and inculcating the essential
      importance of uniting in the maintenance of our dearest
      interests: and I trust that, by the temper and wisdom of
      your proceedings, and by a harmony of measures, we shall
      secure to our country that weight and respect to which it
      is so justly entitled.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

UNITED STATES, _December 8, 1798_.

The PRESIDENT having finished his Address, after sitting a few moments,
presented the President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of
Representatives, each of them, with a copy of it, and withdrew, and
after him the Heads of Departments, Senators, general officers, foreign
Ministers, &c. The SPEAKER then took his chair, and after calling the
House to order, proceeded, as is usual, to read over the Speech, which
being finished, it was committed to a Committee of the whole House for
Monday, and ordered to be printed. The House then adjourned.


MONDAY, December 10.

A new member, to wit: RICHARD DOBBS SPAIGHT, returned to serve in this
House as a member for North Carolina, in the room of Nathan Bryan,
deceased, appeared, produced his credentials, and took his seat in the
House; the oath to support the Constitution of the United States having
been first administered to him by the SPEAKER.


_Address to the President._

On motion, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on
the Speech of the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, Mr. DENT in the chair;
when

Mr. SPRAGUE proposed for adoption the following resolution:

      _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this committee, that
      a respectful Address ought to be presented by the House of
      Representatives to the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, in
      answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress at the
      commencement of this session, containing assurances that
      this House will take into consideration the various and
      important subjects recommended to their consideration.

The resolution was agreed to without objection, and the committee rose
and reported the resolution. The House took it up, concurred in it, and
appointed a committee of five to prepare an answer accordingly.

The committee consists of Messrs. DANA, VENABLE, HARPER, HOSMER, and
BALDWIN.


TUESDAY, December 11.

Two other members, to wit: THOMAS SINNICKSON and MARK THOMPSON, from New
Jersey, appeared and took their seats in the House.


WEDNESDAY, December 12.

Several other members, to wit: from Rhode Island, CHRISTOPHER G.
CHAMPLIN; from Pennsylvania, THOMAS HARTLEY; and from Virginia, CARTER
B. HARRISON; appeared, and took their seats in the House.


_Address to the President._

Mr. DANA, from the committee appointed to draft a respectful Address in
answer to the PRESIDENT'S Speech, made a report, which was committed for
to-morrow.


THURSDAY, December 13.

PHILIP VAN CORTLANDT, from the State of New York, appeared, and took his
seat.


_Address to the President._

On motion of Mr. DANA, the House resolved itself into a Committee of the
Whole on the Address yesterday reported, in answer to the Speech of the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and Mr. DENT having taken the chair, the
Address was read, as follows, omitting the words printed within
brackets, which were added as amendments: The words printed in italics
were struck out in the discussion, so that the Address to be presented
to the PRESIDENT contains the words printed within brackets, and does
not contain those printed in italics.

      JOHN ADAMS, _President of the United States_--

      SIR: The House of Representatives unite with you in
      deploring the effects of the desolating malady by which the
      seat of Government and other parts of our country have
      recently been visited. In calling our attention to the
      fatality of its repeated ravages, and inviting us to
      consider the expediency of exercising our constitutional
      powers, in aid of the health laws of the respective States,
      your recommendation is sanctioned by the dictates of
      humanity and liberal policy. On this interesting subject we
      feel the necessity of adopting every wise expedient for
      preventing a calamity so distressing to individual
      sufferers, and so prejudicial to our national commerce.

      That our finances are in a prosperous state,
      notwithstanding the commercial derangements resulting from
      this calamity, and from external embarrassments, is a
      satisfactory manifestation of the great extent and solidity
      of the public resources. Connected with this situation of
      our fiscal concerns, the assurance that the legal
      provisions for obtaining revenue by direct taxation will
      fulfil the views of the Legislature, is peculiarly
      acceptable.

      Desirous as we are that all causes of hostility may be
      _exterminated_ [removed] by the amicable adjustment of
      national differences, we learn with satisfaction, that in
      pursuance of our treaties with Spain and with Great
      Britain, advances have been made for definitively settling
      the controversies relative to the Southern and the
      North-eastern limits of the United States. With similar
      sentiments have we received your information, that the
      proceedings under commissions authorized by the same
      treaties, afford to a respectable portion of our citizens,
      the prospect of a final decision on their claims for
      maritime injuries committed by subjects of those powers.

      It would be the theme of mutual felicitation, were we
      assured of experiencing similar moderation and justice from
      _another Power_, [the French Republic,] between _whom_
      [which] and the United States differences have unhappily
      arisen. But this is denied us by the ultimate failure of
      the measures which have been taken by this Government
      towards an amicable adjustment of those differences, and by
      the various inadmissible pretensions on the part of that
      nation.

      The continuing in force the decree of January last, to
      which you have more particularly pointed our attention,
      ought, of itself, to be considered as demonstrative of the
      real intentions of the French Government. That decree
      proclaims a predatory warfare against the unquestionable
      rights of actual commerce; which [with] our means of
      defence, our interest and our honor, command us to repel.
      It therefore now becomes the United States to be as
      determined in resistance as they have been patient in
      suffering, and condescending in negotiation.

      While those who direct the affairs of France persist in the
      enforcement of decrees so hostile to our essential rights,
      their conduct forbids us to confide in any of their
      professions of amity.

      As therefore the conduct of France hitherto exhibits
      nothing which ought to change or relax our measures of
      defence, the policy of extending and invigorating those
      measures, demands our sedulous attention. The sudden and
      remarkable advantages which this country has experienced
      from a small naval armament, sufficiently prove the utility
      of its establishment. As it respects the guarding of our
      coast, the protection of our trade, and the facility of
      safely transporting the means of territoral defence to
      every part of our maritime frontier, an adequate naval
      force must be considered as an important object of national
      policy. Nor do we hesitate to adopt the opinion, that,
      whether negotiations with France are resumed or not,
      vigorous preparations for war will be alike indispensable.

      In this conjuncture of affairs, while with you we recognize
      our abundant cause of gratitude to the Supreme Disposer of
      events for the ordinary blessings of Providence, we regard,
      as of high national importance, the manifestation, in our
      country, of a magnanimous spirit of resistance to foreign
      domination. This spirit merits to be cherished and
      invigorated by every branch of Government, as the estimable
      pledge of national prosperity and glory.

      Disdaining a reliance on foreign protection, wanting no
      foreign guarantee of our liberties, resolving to maintain
      our national independence against every attempt to despoil
      us of this inestimable treasure, we confide, under
      Providence, in the patriotism and energies of the people of
      these United States for defeating the hostile enterprises
      of any foreign power.

      To adopt with prudent foresight such systematical measures
      as may be expedient for calling forth those energies
      wherever the national exigencies may require, whether on
      the ocean, or on our own territory--and to reconcile with
      the proper security of revenue, the convenience of the
      mercantile enterprise, on which so great a proportion of
      the public resources depends--are objects of moment, which
      shall be duly regarded in the course of our deliberations.

      Fully as we accord with you in the opinion, that the United
      States ought not to submit to the humiliation of sending
      another Minister to France, without previous assurances
      sufficiently determinate that he will be duly accredited,
      we have heard, with cordial _acquiescence_, [approbation,]
      the declaration of your purpose, steadily to observe those
      maxims of humane and pacific policy by which the United
      States have hitherto been governed. While it is left with
      France to take the requisite steps for accommodation, it is
      worthy the Chief Magistrate of a free people, to make known
      to the world, that justice on the part of France will
      annihilate every obstacle to the restoration of a friendly
      intercourse, and that the Executive authority of this
      country will respect the sacred rights of embassy. At the
      same time, the wisdom and decision, which have
      characterized your past Administration, assure us that no
      illusory professions will seduce you into any abandonment
      of the rights which belong to the United States as [a] free
      and independent [nation.]

The clerk having read the Address, it was again read by the Chairman by
paragraphs.

      [After a few slight amendments the answer was agreed to.]

Mr. THATCHER wished, as no objection was made to the Address, that it
might be entered on the journals as unanimously agreed to; but, on the
question being put, a few noes being heard, the SPEAKER declared it not
carried.

The usual resolution was then passed, that the SPEAKER, attended by the
House, do present the Address, and that a committee be appointed to wait
upon the PRESIDENT, to know when and where he will be pleased to receive
the same.

Messrs. DANA, VENABLE, and HARPER, were appointed a committee for this
purpose. They waited upon the PRESIDENT accordingly, and Mr. DANA
reported that the PRESIDENT would receive the Address to-morrow, at his
own house, at twelve o'clock.[37]


FRIDAY, December 14.

Several other members, to wit: JAMES COCHRAN, from New York; WILLIAM
MATTHEWS, from Maryland; JOSIAH PARKER, from Virginia; and THOMAS
PINCKNEY, from South Carolina, appeared, and took their seats in the
House.


_Answer of the President._

The hour having arrived at which the PRESIDENT had appointed to receive
the Address of this House in answer to his Speech to both Houses, the
SPEAKER announced it, and the House withdrew for the purpose of
presenting the Address.

In about a quarter of an hour, the members returned; when the SPEAKER,
having taken his chair, proceeded to read the answer to their Address, a
copy of which had been put into his hand by the PRESIDENT. It was as
follows:

      _To the House of Representatives of the United States:_

      GENTLEMEN: My sincere acknowledgments are due to the House
      of Representatives of the United States, for this excellent
      Address, so consonant to the character of Representatives
      of a great and free people. The judgment and feelings of a
      nation, I believe, were never more truly expressed by their
      Representatives than those of our constituents, by your
      decided declaration, that with our means of defence, our
      interest and honor command us to repel a predatory warfare
      against the unquestionable rights of a neutral commerce.
      That it becomes the United States to be as determined in
      resistance as they have been patient in suffering and
      condescending in negotiation. That, while those who direct
      the affairs of France persist in the enforcement of decrees
      so hostile to our essential rights, their conduct forbids
      us to confide in any of their professions of amity; that an
      adequate naval force must be considered as an important
      object of national policy; and that, whether negotiations
      with France are resumed or not, vigorous preparations for
      war will be alike indispensable.

      The generous disdain you so coolly and deliberately
      express, of a reliance on foreign protection, wanting no
      foreign guaranty of our liberties, resolving to maintain
      our national independence against every attempt to despoil
      us of this inestimable treasure, will meet the full
      approbation of every sound understanding, and exulting
      applauses from the heart of every faithful American.

      I thank you, gentlemen, for your candid approbation of my
      sentiments on the subject of negotiation, and for the
      declaration of your opinion, that the policy of extending
      and invigorating our measures of defence, and the adoption
      with prudent foresight of such systematical measures as may
      be expedient for calling forth the energies of our country,
      wherever the national exigencies may require, whether on
      the ocean or on our own territory, will demand your most
      sedulous attention.

      At the same time, I take the liberty to assure you, it
      shall be my vigilant endeavor, that no illusory professions
      shall seduce me into an abandonment of the rights which
      belong to the United States, as a free and independent
      nation.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _December 14, 1798_.


MONDAY, December 31.

Several other members, viz: from Connecticut, JOHN ALLEN; and from
Virginia, SAMUEL J. CABELL and THOMAS CLAIBORNE, appeared, and took
their seats in the House.


_Remonstrance of Georgia._

      RECLAMATION FOR SACRIFICED TERRITORY--COMPARATIVE
      EXPENDITURE IN DEFENDING NORTHERN AND SOUTHERN FRONTIERS
      FROM INDIAN DEPREDATIONS.

The House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
report of a select committee on the representation and remonstrance of
the State of Georgia; which was read as follows:

      "Report of the committee to whom was referred the
      representation and remonstrance of the Legislature of the
      State of Georgia:

      "That a certain tract of country, within the limits of
      Georgia, bounded by a line beginning at the fork of Oconee
      and Ocmulgee Rivers, and thence running in a south-west
      direction, until it intersects the most southern part of
      St. Mary's River, thence down the river to the old line,
      was ceded by the Creek nation of Indians, to the said
      State, by a treaty held between the Commissioner of said
      State, and the Creek Indians at Galphinton, on the 12th of
      November, 1785, which tract of country was, by the
      Legislature of said State, formed into a county, by the
      name of Talessee county; and the cession thereof was
      afterward confirmed, at a treaty held between the same
      parties, at Shoulderbone, on the 3d day of November, 1786.

      "Your committee further report, that, by the treaty made at
      New York, between the United States and the Creek Indians,
      bearing date on the 7th day of August, 1790, a boundary
      line was established between the said nation of Indians and
      the United States, whereby the above described tract of
      country, named Talessee county, was declared to be within
      the Indian territory.

      "The committee have not been able to discover upon what
      principles the relinquishment of the territory of the State
      of Georgia was acceded to on the part of the United States;
      it is therefore to be presumed that it was done upon
      principles of general policy, with the intention of
      establishing a permanent peace between the United States
      and the said nation. They are, therefore, of opinion that
      compensation ought to be made to the State of Georgia for
      the loss of this territory, and recommend to the House to
      adopt the following resolution:

      "_Resolved_, That the United States will make compensation
      to the State of Georgia, for the loss and damage sustained
      by that State, in consequence of the cession of the county
      of Talessee, made to the Creek nation, by the Treaty of New
      York, unless it shall be deemed expedient to extinguish the
      Indian title to the said land."

Mr. BALDWIN said, he should not call for the reading of the
remonstrance, as it had already been twice read, and had also been
published in the newspapers. The committee in their report have stated
such parts of it as they thought necessary to lead the House to a
decision. It is seen at once to relate to two objects: what they
consider as a dismemberment of the State, by giving back to the Indians
a district of country, called Talessee county, and the injurious
operation of the act for regulating trade and intercourse with the
Indians. He was himself at New York at the time when the treaty, called
the Treaty of New York, was made; he knew well it was with great concern
and reluctance that the Federal Government consented to an act which had
so much the appearance of dismembering a State, as giving back Talessee
county to the Indians; but that frontier was so extensive, the savages
who border upon it were so much more numerous and hostile than any
others in the United States, that they were induced to consent for a
time to the relinquishment of that district to them, as the counterpart
of all the other conditions which they obtained in that treaty. He was
sure it was at that time their expectation and design to have before now
peaceably repurchased it of the Indians. The act was not founded on any
defect in the right of the State to that county; but a short time
before, three Commissioners, viz: Gen. Lincoln, Judge Griffin, a former
member of Congress, and Mr. Humphreys, who is now our Minister at
Madrid, were sent to examine into the state of that frontier, and to
form treaties with the neighboring tribes; they were unwearied in the
execution of their trust, visited the frontier in person, collected the
Indian chiefs to meet them there, to learn what information they could
give; they afterwards returned to the seat of Government of Georgia, and
examined the treaties, laws, and journals, and examined individuals on
oath, so as to obtain all the information that it was possible to
procure, on the spot. On their return they made a special and very full
report, a copy of which is on the files of the House, and, without
doubt, is to be regarded on those subjects as a document paramount to
every thing else, at the time it was made. This document leaves no doubt
of the fairness of the transaction in the treaties of 1785 and 1786, in
which this Talessee county was purchased and contained, as stated by the
committee. The giving it back, by the subsequent Treaty of New York,
rested only on the importance and urgency of the case, as the only
possible means of obtaining peace.

On the other point contained in the remonstrance, viz: the injurious
operation of the law respecting trade and intercourse with the Indian
tribes, he did not think it necessary now to make many observations, the
report of the committee was, that it should be revised and amended; as
that law expires by its own limitation with this session, it is a
subject that must be taken up, and at that time he should submit to the
consideration of the House the various matters which seemed to impress
themselves so strongly upon the minds of his constituents.

Mr. B. said, the report of the committee was peculiarly grateful to him,
and he hoped the confirmation of it by Congress would be so to his
constituents, because the individuals who composed the committee were so
long and so well known in the United States, that their report will be
likely to have a great effect in finally settling the minds of people on
those old subjects of reproach and discord, especially as it is in
direct conformity with the copious report of the three Commissioners who
examined into the same subject on the spot, as he had before mentioned.
This appeared to him to be a matter of great importance.

From the close of the Revolution to the present time, these reproaches
have always been at the threshold, to encounter every thing that was
proposed in behalf of that growing and important part of the United
States. The Revolution had raged there to such a degree, and the minds
of men were so embittered against each other, that it required more than
the usual time for them to lay aside the fierceness of their hostility.
Though their enemies were driven from them, yet they were not driven
beyond the recoil of their resentment. This, joined to the
disappointment of some pecuniary enterprises of individuals for gain,
had been the cause of those malignant torrents of reproach which have
but too long poured forth upon the greater part of their councils, and
upon the most distinguished of their public servants.

It was well known to him, and to some who heard him, that their calls
for protection on a very extensive and very turbulent frontier, had,
till within these few years, always been repelled with reproaches, that
they had never been any thing but an expense; were totally delinquent in
bearing the burdens of the Revolution; that they had been carried
through entirely at the expense of the other States; and that they ought
not now to be protected any further till they were willing to pay
requisitions. When this reproach was wiped off by the report of the
General Board of Commissioners, on the settlement of the whole account
of the old co-partnership of the Confederation, and the very small
number there, at that time, appeared to have done the proportion of the
whole number by the census which was the rule of the settlement, and to
have reimbursed the great delinquency of the loan officers appointed by
Congress, for which they were made accountable, still they were told
they must protect themselves, for they wronged the Indians out of their
lands, and this was the cause of their suffering. It appears now, in the
result, that they have always discharged all their Federal obligations,
and much more, and instead of getting away the lands from the Indians,
the Indians have got away their lands, and they cannot get them back.

He believed there could not be much doubt left but that the principles
contained in the report of the committee were just and proper. These had
been to him for many years very sore objects; the position in which he
considered them immovably fixed gave him great pleasure. His
constituents had not sent him here to play the champion. He thought it
could not be denied that there was some ground for them to triumph over
those who had so long vilified and abused them. He begged leave still
further to urge the measures recommended by the committee, from the
consideration of the small expenditures which have been made on that
frontier, in proportion to the others.

The accounts of the military expenditures on the northern frontiers,
were now more than ten millions of dollars. This had been begun, and
principally originated from a regular expedition to destroy a village of
fugitive Indians, who committed depredations on the northern frontier; a
similar village on the southern frontier, called the Chehaw, was also
destined by the Government for a similar expedition; but the measure
failed in the Legislature, and that frontier was left to protect
themselves. This has been done; the fugitives in that village have been
driven off by a party of volunteers. He believed the whole amount of
military expenditures on that frontier, till the time of entire peace
with the Indians, did not exceed a quarter of a million, and nearly one
hundred thousand of that the militia had now been kept out of for four
or five years; though he hoped and trusted they would not much longer
have cause of complaint on that head. After the observations which he
had made, he thought no apology was necessary for some apparent
harshness in the language of the remonstrance.

As to the course which it is proper to pursue in granting relief on the
subject, he had not much to say. He was confident the expectations of
the State were not unreasonable; he was sure they would be satisfied
with any result which could be considered as fair and honorable; and his
confidence in the House forbade him to suppose for a moment that it
could be brought to any other. The course recommended by the committee
in their resolution now under consideration, is either to make
compensation to the State for the land which has been relinquished, and
for the damages which they have sustained, or else to repurchase that
district or another district, on that frontier, of equal value. He said
he had laid on the table a certificate from the Surveyor General of that
State, taken at that time, as to the length of the lines enclosing that
district, and the probable contents of it. If the report of the
committee should be agreed to, a bill might be reported in conformity
to one or the other, or all of those principles, as might be thought
proper. He was contented in leaving it to the judgment of the House.

On the call of Mr. BROOKS, the representation and remonstrance were
read. After which,

Mr. CHAMPLIN moved that the committee might rise, with a view of
postponing this subject till the next session of Congress. He thought
the language of the remonstrance too violent and indecorous to claim
attention from the House. This opinion was also supported by Mr. DANA.
Messrs. BAYARD and N. SMITH wished this motion to prevail, because they
doubted the propriety of the report, and supposed there would not be
time thoroughly to investigate the business during this session.

On the other hand, Messrs. PINCKNEY, RUTLEDGE, HARPER, GALLATIN,
VENABLE, W. CLAIBORNE, J. PARKER, and MACON, were against the
postponement. The objection to the language, it was said, was out of
time. If made at all, it ought to have been made when the remonstrance
was presented; that some allowance ought to be made for the language, as
it appeared to have been drawn in a moment of passion; that if the claim
was just, it ought not to be rejected because it was made in improper
language, especially, since the Legislature of Georgia were not the only
persons concerned, as the inhabitants on the frontier, while this
subject is undecided, are suffering severely from Indian cruelties and
depredations.

The question for leave to be given to the committee to sit again, was
carried by 69 votes.


TUESDAY, January 8, 1799.

_Impressment of Seamen._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:_

      In compliance with your desire, expressed in your
      resolution of the 2d of this month, I lay before you an
      extract of a letter from George C. Morton, acting Consul of
      the United States at Havana, dated the 13th of November,
      1798, to the Secretary of State, with a copy of a letter
      from him to L. Trezevant and William Timmons, Esqs., with
      their answer. Although your request extends no further than
      to such information as has been received, yet it may be a
      satisfaction to you to know that as soon as this
      intelligence was communicated to me, circular orders were
      given, by my direction, to all the commanders of our
      vessels of war; a copy of which is also herewith
      transmitted. I also direct this intelligence and these
      orders to be communicated to His Britannic Majesty's Envoy
      Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United
      States, and to our Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of
      Great Britain, with instructions to him to make the proper
      representation to that Government upon this subject.

      It is but justice to say that this is the first instance of
      misbehavior of any of the British officers towards our
      vessels of war, that has come to my knowledge. According to
      all the representations that I have seen, the flag of the
      United States, and their officers and men, have been
      treated by the civil and military authority of the British
      nation, in Nova Scotia, the West India Islands and on the
      ocean, with uniform civility, politeness, and friendship. I
      have no doubt that this first instance of misconduct will
      be readily corrected.

      _Jan. 8, 1799._

                          JOHN ADAMS.


[CIRCULAR.]

      _To the Commanders of Armed Vessels in the service of the
      United States; given at the Navy Department, December 29,
      1798._

      SIR: It is the positive command of the PRESIDENT, that on
      no pretence whatever, you permit the public vessel of war
      under your command to be detained, or searched, nor any of
      the officers or men belonging to her to be taken from her,
      by the ships or vessels of any foreign nation, so long as
      you are in a capacity to repel such outrage on the honor of
      the American flag. If force should be exerted to compel
      your submission, you are to resist that force to the utmost
      of your power, and when overpowered by superior force, you
      are to strike your flag, and thus yield your vessel, as
      well as your men; but never your men without your vessel.

      You will remember, however, that your demeanor be
      respectful and friendly to the vessels and people of all
      nations in amity with the United States; and that you avoid
      as carefully the commission of, as the submission to,
      insult or injury.

      I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

                          BEN. STODDERT.

Letters which accompanied the above Message:

      _Extract of a letter from George C. Morton, acting Consul
      of the United States at the Havana, dated there the 18th
      November, 1798, to the Secretary of State._

      "By the delegation of Daniel Hawley, Esq., I am at present
      acting as Consul of the United States in this district,
      with which he will most probably have acquainted you. It
      imposes upon me the mortifying task of informing you, sir,
      of the partial capture of an American fleet under the
      convoy of the Baltimore sloop-of-war, ---- Phillips, Esq.,
      commander, by a British squadron, off this harbor,
      accompanied with circumstances rather grating to the
      feelings of Americans, and by no means analogous to that
      good harmony which seems to subsist between the two
      Governments.

      "The answer of Messrs. Trezevant and Timmons to my annexed
      note of the 17th instant, requesting an exact relation of
      the occurrence, will I presume be deemed as impartial a
      narration as can be given of the whole transaction, they
      having been passengers on board one of the captured
      vessels, and removed to the Baltimore.

      "Mr. Morton adds, that Commodore Loring ordered the
      fifty-five men out of the Baltimore "on board of his ship,
      previous to any proposal of exchanging the natives of one
      nation for those of the other, and retained five of the
      hands as being British subjects, without giving an equal
      number of Americans, whom he acknowledged to have on
      board.""

                          HAVANA, _November, 17, 1798_.

      GENTLEMEN: As acting American Consul for this city and
      district, and of course obliged to forward the most
      correct statement possible to the Government of the United
      States officially, I would beg the favor of you, gentlemen,
      to furnish me with an exact relation, under your
      signatures, of the unpleasant occurrence which took place
      off the Moro Castle on the 16th instant, by which you will
      much oblige,

                          Gentlemen, your most obedient servant,
                          GEO. C. MORTON.

      L. TREZEVANT and W. TIMMONS, Esqs.

      N. B.--It would be proper to premise that you were
      passengers, and your distance from the Moro Castle at the
      time of capture.

                          G. C. M.

             *       *       *       *       *

                          HAVANA, _November 18, 1798_.

      SIR: Agreeably to your request, we now commit to writing
      the best account we are able to give you of the conduct of
      Captain Loring, Commodore of the British squadron which was
      lately off the Moro, towards the United States ship
      Baltimore. We must observe, however, that all we can say of
      it is from the information of Captain Phillips, as we were
      not on board the Baltimore when she was visited by Captain
      L.'s officers.

      In the morning of the 16th instant, we discovered this
      squadron when we were in sight of the Moro, and afterwards
      found it was composed of Captain Loring's ship, the
      Carnatic, of 74 guns; Captain ----'s ship, the Thunderer,
      of the same force; Captain Dobson's ship, the Queen, of 98
      guns; Captain Donnelly's frigate, the Maidstone, of 32
      guns; and Captain Hardy's frigate the Greyhound, of the
      same force. We were passengers in the brig Norfolk, Captain
      Butler, which, together with the ship Eliza, Captain Baas,
      and the brig Friendship, Captain Fuller, were cut off from
      their entrance into port, and were all made prizes within
      gunshot of the Moro. We obtained leave to go on board the
      Baltimore with our baggage, and did so. When Captain
      Phillips discovered they were English ships, (which was
      before we were taken,) he stood towards them, and spoke the
      Commodore. After we got on board the Baltimore, the Captain
      informed us that he had been on board the Carnatic, and the
      Commodore told him he should take out of the Baltimore all
      such men as had not American protections; that he had
      remonstrated with him against showing such an indignity to
      our flag; that to do so would leave his ship in a very
      defenceless state, and would deprive him of nearly all his
      men, as not even those who were really Americans, or at
      least very few of them, could show protections, because it
      was always thought that our flag on board of a Government
      ship, was a sufficient protection. All this, however, was
      urged in vain. Captain P. returned to his ship, and the
      Commodore sent an officer on board the Baltimore, who
      carried away fifty-five of her men to the Carnatic. Captain
      Phillips remained in expectation that nearly all the rest
      would be taken from him; but whether the Commodore, upon
      reflection, thought better of it, or whatever else might
      have been his motive, he sent back fifty, and kept five,
      among whom was the ship's boatswain. Captain Loring
      proposed to give up a number of American seamen, who, he
      said, were in his fleet, if Captain P. would give him
      English subjects for them. Captain P. refused this offer,
      and the American seamen were not delivered to him. Before
      any of the men were returned, he sent a message to Captain
      P. to let him know if he, or one of his officers, would go
      on board of him, and point out who were Americans and who
      were not, he would return all the Americans; but this was
      declined also. After we got on board the Baltimore, he sent
      a letter to Captain P. which he showed to us, in which the
      Commodore "demanded" that he would give up all the British
      subjects on board the Baltimore. To this, Captain P.
      replied that he could not know any of his men as British
      subjects, nor could he, as commander of a ship, in the
      service of the United States, voluntarily give up any of
      his men; but if he thought fit to send an officer on board,
      with orders to take any number of his men, he should not
      oppose it. In this answer, Captain P. mentioned he should
      lay before the Executive of the United States a full
      account of the occurrences of the day. Shortly after
      sending this reply, the squadron set sail, and left the
      Baltimore. Commodore L. was very polite to us, and was so
      to Captain P. when he went on board; but Captain P.
      complained of indecent behavior from the inferior officers.

                          LEWIS TREZEVANT,
                          WM. TIMMONS.

      G. C. MORTON, Esq., _Vice Consul of the U. S. at Havana_.

The Message and documents were read, and ordered to lie on the table.


MONDAY, January 14.

EDWARD LIVINGSTON, from New York, appeared, and took his seat.


MONDAY, January 21.

_Intercourse with France, and her Islands._

SAN DOMINGO.

The fourth section of the bill to suspend this intercourse being under
consideration,

Mr. NICHOLAS said, there are some words in this section [in italics]
which he did not understand, and if he could not get an explanation of
them in any other way, he would move to strike them out. They are not in
the former law; and they are very extensive. They go to this, that a man
in authority in one of these islands, be his authority as limited as it
may, may make an agreement on the subject of intercourse different from
what he is authorized to do by the Republic of France, and, in that
case, the island is to be open for our commerce. He wished for some
information on this subject.

Mr. S. SMITH understood, that the reason why these words had been
introduced into the bill was, in order to meet the case of
Hispaniola.[38] It was well known that a new agent had succeeded
Hedouville there; that he has published a proclamation, stating, that
notwithstanding the decree of the French Republic, which directs the
seizure of all American vessels and their cargoes, whenever there shall
be found on board an article of British manufacture, he was authorized
to suspend that decree so far as relates to vessels coming to that
island. And, Mr. S. said, if any agent in the West Indies could give
assurances that no capture should take place from the island of which
he is Governor, then the PRESIDENT shall be authorized to open our
commerce with that Island. It was on this ground that he had given his
consent to this clause of the bill.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, if the clause were intended to meet the case to which
the gentleman had alluded, the agent had his powers from the French
Government, and whatever he did must be considered as done by that
Government, until his power shall be revoked; but as the clause stood,
it would authorize the PRESIDENT to treat with usurpers; not merely with
persons in power, but with any persons having momentary possession of a
place, and he could not agree to such a principle. Why, asked Mr. N.,
was this law originally passed? Was it not an order to bring France to
terms by distressing her islands? Suppose France should say to one of
her agents in the West Indies, "You shall be authorized to make a
stipulation with the United States to take off the suspension of
intercourse with respect to your Island." Would not this be to
acknowledge that there our regulation pinched her? And would not the
opening of intercourse with such a place, by relieving the distresses of
France, defeat the original intention of the law? [Mr. HARPER asked if
there was any question before the committee?] Mr. N. said he would make
one by moving to strike out this section. A clause of this kind, Mr. N.
said, held out an invitation to agents to abandon their country, and to
set up Governments of their own. If it were to operate only in a partial
manner, for the relief of such of the French islands as are so far
distressed as that the Government should be willing to restrain her
depredations, so far as related to those particular places, where will
be the efficiency of the law afterwards? It will only prove a burden
upon our own citizens, without injuring France. If we are to have a free
trade with the West Indies, why deprive tobacco planters of going
immediately to the country where the article is consumed, instead of
going through Spain, and by other circuitous routes? But the other
aspect of the bill, Mr. N. said, was the most extraordinary and
exceptionable he ever saw. It authorized the PRESIDENT to treat with
persons "claiming authority." This provision may produce consequences
the most fatal. Suppose any of the islands make a separate negotiation
with this country; what will be the effect of our having thus enticed
them to disobey their Government? Will this Government not be chargeable
with having assisted in detaching such a colony from its Government? And
if so, could any thing afford a more lasting cause for war than an act
of this kind? If there be any disposition in the French Government to
treat, (which, however, the Secretary of State denies,) a conduct of
this kind would effectually root it out, and there could be no
treaty--no peace between the two countries--for years to come. If
gentlemen, therefore, can give no better explanation of this clause
than has already been given, he hoped it would be stricken out.

Mr. OTIS did not believe that a more unjustifiable jealousy ever entered
the heated imagination of the gentleman from Virginia, than that which
occupies it at this moment. He seems to think that this section of the
bill is intended only to encourage usurpation and rebellion, whereas a
slight attention should convince him, that when any one of the French
islands or dependencies revolt and declare for independence, neither the
law passed the last session nor this bill will apply to such a case. In
such an event, there is nothing in the existing laws to prevent our
carrying on a free trade with such revolted island. If attention be paid
to the first section of the bill, it will be seen to apply only to such
places as are under the acknowledged government of France; and the
moment a place is no longer under her government, both the existing law
and this section become null with respect to that place, and a new
relation would be created which would be regulated under the law of
nations. If a rebellion of this kind should break out, it would become a
question to what extent we ought to carry on commerce with the
rebellious place; and we should then be governed by existing
circumstances. If we should be at war with France, we should doubtless,
said Mr. O., avail ourselves of the trade to its full extent, without
respect to her wishes; but if an accommodation of differences should be
effected, and the mother country should prohibit all trade with the
revolters, it is not presumable that this Government would sanction any
commerce that would provoke a war, or protect adventurers from the
seizure and confiscation of their property.

But it is not enough, observed Mr. O., to say that this section does not
relate to rebellious colonies; it is merely a provision to meet such
conditions as the agents of the Executive Directory are entitled to
make, consistently with their allegiance to their own country--such at
least as they constantly undertake to propose. Without assuming to
define the powers of these agents, it was very clear that they have
undertaken to dispense with the decrees and laws of the Republic,
whenever the exigencies of their Governments have, in their opinion,
made it necessary or convenient.

At St. Domingo and at Guadaloupe, the agents seem to exercise an
unlimited control over the trade and maritime concerns of those islands.
He presumed they had a discretionary right given to them to relax or
suspend many of the decrees of the mother country, with respect to the
territory they are appointed to govern. The uniform conduct of Santhonax
and Polverel, and of all the Commissioners at St. Domingo, show this to
be the case; and at Guadaloupe, Victor Hugues has proved himself to be
nothing less than a despot. If this bill passed, these Commissioners may
open the commerce with this country, even though an open war should
exist between this nation and France. Nay, Mr. O. said, he had a
proclamation of Hedouville, the late agent at Cape Francois, in his
hand, which shows that he had determined to adopt this line of conduct.

[Mr. O. read the proclamation which states that neutral ships and
cargoes, that provisions and dry goods, shall be admitted into St.
Domingo in American bottoms, that they shall not be seized when destined
for French ports, but pass unmolested by French cruisers even if war
should break out between the mother country and the United States.]

Now, said Mr. O., the interests of this country, and of our mercantile
citizens in particular, require us to place ourselves in a situation to
meet these advances. Can there be any difficulty in giving to the
PRESIDENT a power with respect to the trade with a part of the French
dominions, which he at present possesses over the whole? Gentlemen have
said that an agent has arrived from a usurper in St. Domingo. Mr. O.
said he did not know the fact. He did not know of any usurper in St.
Domingo. He believed General Toussaint had succeeded Hedouville in the
government of that island; that he had, in imitation of his superiors,
sent him off in the same way as in the mother country are sent off those
who may be obnoxious to the designs of the reigning and the strongest
party. But it does not follow that these measures of General Toussaint
will not be ratified by the French Government. The same General had
heretofore sent off the commissioner Santhonax. He was not, however, for
this cause declared to have forfeited his allegiance, but pains were
taken to appease and reconcile him, and Santhonax came back. He was
afterwards succeeded by Hedouville, who is, in his turn, sent on a
voyage to France. But, said Mr. O., shall we now begin to examine into
the legality of the powers of persons in authority, either in France or
in her West India possessions? Have we not uniformly adhered to the
principle that those who exercise power _de facto_ are the only persons
that we are bound to recognize? From the first dawn of the Revolution,
we have, said he, never questioned the legitimacy of the power exercised
in France; to us it seemed indifferent whether Jacobins or Girondists
were at the helm of affairs; whether it was a reign of terror or of
moderation. We have constantly sung hosannas and offered adorations to
the great Republic, one and indivisible, without considering by whose
hands the power was exercised. It is now too late to change this system.
We have no way of knowing, said Mr. O., whether the agents of the
Directory act in conformity to the will of their masters or not, until
the Government declares them out of their allegiance. It will then be
soon enough for us to determine the posture which good faith and policy
require us to take.

But, the gentleman from Virginia says, we ought not to treat with
individuals under any circumstances; but it appears probable that the
French Republic may permit her agents to carry on this commerce, and to
give us satisfactory assurances of safety and protection without a
treaty; and such an arrangement would be advantageous to that Republic.

We find, indeed, said Mr. O., from the papers on the table, that one of
the complaints of that Government is founded on this suspension of
intercourse, and therefore to restore the trade in part is to diminish
the cause of complaint. With respect to the remark of the gentleman from
Virginia, that it was the object of the original act, by distressing
France, to bring her to terms, he differed in opinion from him. It was
merely a defensive measure. Our trade became so insecure, that it was
necessary to do--what? conquer France? No; but to prevent the ruin which
threatened our citizens, by prohibiting all intercourse with that
country and its dependencies; and whenever an end is put to those
aggressions and depredations, the suspension may be removed.

This, said Mr. O., is not a novel practice. At the commencement of the
late war, the citizens of the Bahamas were excepted from the general
regulations and orders prescribed to our privateers. It is very possible
to be at war with a nation, and yet at peace with a certain portion of
its territory. We find, by the papers on our table, that France says her
privateers have transgressed their authority, and that they have now
determined that no commissions shall be issued, except by their agents.
Let us be prepared to meet them, if they will act accordingly; and if
their agents in the Colonies restrain privateering, and depredations
within their respective jurisdictions, let us avail ourselves of their
good dispositions without any nice inquiries.

Mr. O. had said, that this law had no allusion to any country in
rebellion; but he could conceive it possible that St. Domingo may
declare itself independent, and become so, in spite of the opposition of
France, or the wishes of this country. Far be it from me, continued Mr.
O., to contend that it is desirable for the interest of the United
States that such an event should happen; such a doctrine at this moment
would be unseasonable and improper; but, if it does take place, he might
say, without offence, it would be good policy to be upon the best terms
with the persons in authority there; if not, the inhabitants of that
island may become pirates upon our trade, and do us more mischief than
we formerly suffered from the Barbary Powers. To prevent which, let us
feed and clothe them, and deprive them of inducements to quit their
island.

Mr. HARPER did not know that he could give an explanation of this
section which would be satisfactory to the gentleman from Virginia; but
he would state what was the intention of the bill, and what he thought
would be its effects. He conceived that the section now under
consideration is in strict conformity with the bill heretofore passed.
The object of that bill was twofold; first, to save our commerce from
that speculative and hazardous enterprise which the high profits made
by successful voyages enticed the merchant to go into, which was a
species of gambling by which some made large fortunes, and others
sustained heavy losses. This trade was something of the nature of
faro-banks, or lotteries, which all good Governments have thought proper
to prohibit. The Government of this country thought it wise to
interfere, and say to the merchants: "You shall not run these great
risks; for though a few of you make great gain by the trade, the loss
upon the whole is much greater than the gain." This was one object. The
other was, to deter the French nation, and those exercising authority
under it, from committing depredations upon our commerce, and thus
procure protection to our trade. By what means was this to be
accomplished? By withholding from the French those articles of prime
necessity which they were accustomed to receive through the medium of
commerce, to produce an effect which they should feel.

Let us examine, said Mr. H., whether this section is in conformity to
these two objects. There could be no doubt with respect to the first,
because if you can prevail upon those who heretofore encouraged
privateering, to forbear to make further depredations, our commerce will
unquestionably be rendered safe. The reason, therefore, for laying the
restriction, is thus removed; and he saw no reason why it should be
continued.

Mr. GALLATIN said, one of the objects of this bill when it passed at the
last session, was to prevent depredations upon our commerce; but a
majority of the House who voted for it, did so with a view of compelling
France, by the loss of our trade to her islands, to come to reasonable
terms of settlement with the United States. It was then said by some
gentlemen, that it was not improbable that the trade to the West Indies
was even more advantageous to the United States than to France, valuable
as it was to her; and that, therefore, it would not produce the effect
predicted. This was his opinion, and he therefore voted against the
bill. But, though he voted against this measure, and some others, which,
he thought at the time premature, yet a majority of Congress having, by
adopting them, placed the nation in its present situation, whatever his
opinion might then have been, and whatever it might now be, as to the
probability of an end being put to our differences with France, he
should think it bad policy, under present circumstances, to recede from
the ground then taken, since such a conduct could betray nothing but
weakness, and tend to defeat the object which all doubtless have in
view, whatever might be the different opinions of obtaining it, an
honorable peace. Though this law, therefore, was limited to the present
session, he was ready to vote for a continuance of it; but the section
now under consideration goes entirely upon new ground, and entirely
different to any either taken or avowed at the last session.

The law now in existence, said Mr. G., has a section something similar
to this, though widely different in substance. It is to this effect;
that if, before the next session of Congress, the Government of France,
and all persons under its authority, shall disavow and be found to
refrain from depredations upon our commerce, then it shall be lawful for
the PRESIDENT to suspend the operation of this law. Not to any part, but
with the whole. By that law, we said, "We are not yet at war with you,
we will adopt such measures as we think necessary for our present
situation. We will suspend commerce with you as a nation; but if you, as
a nation, shall disavow and refrain from depredations, we have given the
PRESIDENT power to renew our commercial intercourse with you."

But what, said Mr. G., is the language of this section? It is this. [He
read the section as above.] It is, that if any part of the nation, or
any commanding officer, or person claiming authority, in any one port,
or island, shall take those steps which we consider necessary for that
nation to take, it shall be lawful for the PRESIDENT to remit and
discontinue the restraints, prohibitions, &c. Instead of taking a
general national ground, it provides for the negotiation of an
individual, on his private account, who may either exercise, or claim to
exercise, authority in any island, &c.

We are not, said Mr. G., at war, and an act of this kind is an act
which, if it can be justified at all, can only be made use of in a state
of war. It is only in such a state that we are authorized to declare,
that we will act a different part with certain parts of a country at
war, from what we meant to act with the whole; that we will negotiate,
treat, make specific regulations with private individuals, provided they
shall do--what? Disavow what the French Republic does not disavow. The
present act makes it necessary for the disavowal to come from the
Government; but this section says, "that although the French Government
shall not disavow or restrain her depredations, &c., yet if an
individual shall do it, we will open a trade with this individual." This
would be to encourage insurrections. It is establishing a doctrine which
is reprobated almost every day on this floor--that it is right to divide
a people from their Government.

Mr. G. conceived, therefore, that the question comes to this: Is it
proper to give power to the PRESIDENT, under our present circumstances,
to stipulate with certain agents, that in case they will disobey their
Government, by declaring themselves independent, or by throwing
themselves into other hands, we will renew our commercial intercourse
with you? No man, said Mr. G., will deny that a trade of this kind would
be advantageous to the United States; he believed it to be one of the
most lucrative branches of our commerce; but it was nevertheless thought
proper, at the last session, to suspend it, in order, as then supposed,
to effect a greater good. Therefore, this commerce being advantageous
to the United States, is not a sufficient reason why this measure should
be taken, if it be wrong in itself, and may produce greater mischiefs
than the trade can do us good.

What, said Mr. G., are the inconveniences which would arise from a
measure of this kind? It must be allowed, in the first place, that it
would give the lie to all our former declarations of abhorrence against
the attempts of other countries to divide the people of a nation from
their Government; for we here, said he, assume the ground that it is
proper to negotiate and stipulate with a part of the people, with a
certain district of a country, with any person who shall choose to say
that he claims the right of governing in any place. We abandon the
general ground of treating with a foreign Government, and determine to
treat with any individual who may either have, or claim to have,
authority. Mr. G. believed a principle of this kind at all times
improper; and it would be peculiarly improper in us to act upon it, with
respect to a nation, against which we have so many grounds of complaint
of this kind. He had already stated, that it could only be justified in
a state of war, if then, to hold out encouragement to insurrection and
rebellion to the colonies of another country.

Mr. G. believed he might go so far as to say that this section was not
inserted to meet the case spoken of by the gentleman from Maryland; but
for the admission of one which had been a subject of discussion in the
newspapers for some time past. He meant what was generally understood by
the mission of Toussaint, a black General, of St. Domingo. It had been
asserted, from the moment of the arrival of a supposed agent, that he
came here with the late Consul of the United States at that port; that
he brought despatches from Toussaint to our Government. Further than
this, we have seen, in some of the newspapers printed at the eastward,
that this mission is likely to have some effect. We have seen it there
stated, "that the President is neither rash nor diffident, and that good
effects may be expected to flow from this mission." So far, on the
authority of the public newspapers, and none of these assertions have
been denied.

Should I be doing right, said Mr. G., to say that I believe that this
section of the bill is an effect of that negotiation? It is true I only
deduce this from probability, but the probability is strong. Mr. G. said
he knew that the independence of St. Domingo had been a favorite theme
with gentlemen, and they had made an appeal upon it to the avarice of
the people of the United States, that, in case of war, this independence
would be of advantage to the United States, and that, during a time of
peace, the minds of the people ought to be prepared for this event. But
gentlemen seem to think that the public mind is not yet ready for this
change, or they do not choose to avow the object of this mission. Which,
he could not tell; but he would advise those gentlemen who have
received information on this subject to communicate it. Mr. G. said he
should be happy to know the subject of the despatches of General
Toussaint. What is his offer to our Government? Whether his ideas go to
independence or not? Whether he is in any way connected with the British
Government, or not? Whether the sudden and extraordinary evacuation of
St. Domingo by General Maitland was to promote something of this kind,
or to support the force of General Toussaint? He should wish to know
what is the disposition of the Executive with respect to this business,
so far as it shall have come to the knowledge of any of these gentlemen.
He would also be glad to know the disposition of this agent, or the
nature of his object, at least so much of it as may have escaped at any
_petit soupér_ or _dinér_, at which these gentlemen may have been
parties? If any such information could be obtained, it might tend to
throw some light upon the subject. If he should be mistaken in his views
of it, it would be wholly owing to his being deprived of that
information, which he believed either the Executive, or some of the
members on this floor possess.

Mr. G. believed the object of this section is to give encouragement to
the black General in his present views. A single sentiment had dropped
from the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. OTIS) in the course of the
debate, which had given rise to part of what he had said on this
subject, and which led him to believe that he had some information which
he ought to communicate. He said, "if St. Domingo should finally be
independent, it was proper to cultivate a good understanding with that
island at present, and not refuse"--what? "to hold out certain
encouragement to them in such an event." When? Now; so that we are not
only to cultivate a good understanding with St. Domingo, if it should
become independent, but in the expectation of it, and before it takes
place, it is proper to cultivate a good understanding with that island,
by holding out the encouragement proposed by this bill. This was nothing
less than to confess that this section is inserted in the bill to
encourage Toussaint to declare the island independent. Nay, his views,
if he is a man of sense, must go further; he must not only secure a
temporary trade, but he would also desire to know whether it be the wish
of this country that St. Domingo should become independent; because he
should suppose that if the Government of the United States was opposed
to such an event, a temporary trade would not be a sufficient inducement
to him to throw off his present allegiance.

To me, however, said Mr. G., if it be the intention of the General to
declare it, the independence of St. Domingo is a very problematical
event. It would certainly be the interest of Great Britain to oppose an
attempt of this kind; since it could not be her interest to have a black
Government there. But supposing the event possible, he should consider
it as extremely injurious to the interests of the United States. Suppose
that island, with its present population, under present circumstances,
should become an independent State. What is this population? It is known
to consist, almost altogether, of slaves just emancipated, of men who
received their first education under the lash of the whip, and who have
been initiated to liberty only by that series of rapine, pillage, and
massacre, that have laid waste and deluged that island in blood; of men,
who, if left to themselves, if altogether independent, are by no means
likely to apply themselves to the peaceable cultivation of the country,
but will try to continue to live, as heretofore, by plunder and
depredations. No man, said Mr. G., wishes more than I do to see an
abolition of slavery, when it can be properly effected; but no man would
be more unwilling than I to constitute a whole nation of freed slaves,
who had arrived to the age of thirty years, and thus to throw so many
wild tigers on society.[39] If the population of St. Domingo can remain
free in that island, he had no objection; but, however free, he did not
wish to have them independent, and he would rather see them under a
government that would be likely to keep them where they are, and prevent
them from committing depredations out of the island. But if they were
left to govern themselves, they might become more troublesome to us, in
our commerce to the West Indies, than the Algerines ever were in the
Mediterranean; they might also become dangerous neighbors to the
Southern States, and an asylum for renegadoes from those parts.

This being the case, Mr. G. said, he must deprecate every encouragement
which may be held out to produce such an event. Did not gentlemen
recollect what an alarm was sounded last year, with respect to the
probability of an invasion of the Southern States from the West Indies;
an alarm upon which some of the strongest measures of the last session
were grounded? Mr. G. could not help hoping, there would be a general
wish not to take any measure which may embody so dangerous a description
of men in our neighborhood, whose object may be plunder, and who might
visit the States of South Carolina and Georgia, and spread their views
among the negro people there, and excite dangerous insurrections among
them. He did not wish, therefore, to see this black population
independent; and that the interest will be wholly black is clear. The
General is black, and his agent here is married to a black woman in this
city. Mr. G. did not mean by this to throw any reflection upon the
General. He believed he had behaved well to Americans. His remarks were
general, and were only intended to show that it would be with a black
population we must treat.


WEDNESDAY, January 23.

Mr. S. SMITH said, that if he thought with the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, that the clause under consideration was connected with the
mission from Toussaint, and the separation of Hispaniola from France, or
with an intention of dividing the people of that island from their
Government, he should also be opposed to it; but believing, as he did,
that it would be productive of none but good effects to this country, he
was in favor of retaining the clause.[40]

It might be well, Mr. S. said, to take a view of the relation which had
subsisted between France and her colonies for some years back. Early in
the Revolution, Santhonax and Polverel were sent as Commissioners to
Hispaniola, for the purpose of governing the island, and to carry into
effect the decree of the French Government for liberating the slaves.
They conducted themselves in a friendly manner towards America, but
destructively to the northern part of Hispaniola, and particularly
towards Cape Francois. The disastrous contest which took place between
the whites and blacks, to the destruction of the former, is well known.
From the abuse of their power, these Commissioners were recalled.
Polverel had not sufficient courage to appear before the French
Government, and put an end to his existence. Santhonax went to France,
and was sent out again to the island. Still he was favorable to this
country, until the decree of France declared that their vessels of war
should treat neutral vessels in the same manner as neutral powers
suffered Great Britain to treat them. Santhonax then issued his decree
of December, 1797, and American vessels were taken and carried into
Hispaniola indiscriminately, and unsuspectingly, not under the authority
of France, but under the authority of this agent. Not content with this
abuse of his power, Santhonax sent Deforneaux, the Commissioner of
Guadaloupe, to the south side of Hispaniola, to carry his plans into
effect there; but Rigaud, a man of color, and an honest man, who had
gained the esteem of the people, who was in power there, frustrated the
attempt. Deforneaux attempted to escape, but was taken and sent to
France. We see, therefore, that Santhonax made no scruple to set aside
the decrees of France; and in this manner has Rigaud ever done,
repealing and preventing the execution of the decrees of France,
whenever he disliked them. And was Rigaud punished by France for thus
exercising his power or not? No; he was made Commander-in-chief of the
south side of the island for having sent off Deforneaux. Hedouville
succeeded Santhonax in the Government, and brought with him the power
to execute or not, as he judged proper, the decree of the Directory
directing the capture of neutral vessels with British manufactures on
board. He determined that this decree should not be carried into effect
against vessels bound to Hispaniola. Did he carry his purpose into
effect? So far as his (Mr. S.'s) information went, he did.

Here, then, we see Hedouville setting aside the decrees of France; and
Rigaud has not only prevented American vessels from being condemned, but
has thrown the captains of privateers into prison for daring to bring in
American vessels, and has caused such as have been carried into
Jacquemel, on account of not having a _rôle d'equipage_, to be delivered
up immediately. Victor Hugues, upon the recall of Mr. Adet, ordered that
all vessels carrying on trade to what he called rebel ports, should be
brought in and made legal prizes of. This was another separate
authority. He afterwards issued orders for the condemnation of vessels
coming into Guadaloupe with a supercargo, who should either be an Irish
or a Scotchman, though they had every necessary paper on board to show
that they were bound to that port, and vessels were condemned for this
alone; and this is not seen in any of the decrees of France. Mr. S.
understood this clause as intended to meet cases of this kind; and, so
far from this being offensive to France, it must be quite the reverse.
Under this law, said Mr. S., the PRESIDENT will be enabled to say to
these special agents, "if you will suspend your decrees with respect to
your islands our trade shall be opened to you," and by this means give
to our citizens a commerce which is a mine of gold to them. Such a
conduct, he thought, must appear to every one perfectly reasonable.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania says that the independence of Hispaniola
would be dangerous to the Southern States. But does this bill, said Mr.
S., contemplate any such thing? Does it not say that the agents must be
under the Government of France? If the island were to declare itself
independent, we could not, said he, prevent our merchants from trading
with it; or if it should be in a state of rebellion, they would trade
with it at all risks, without coming under this act. This bill seems,
instead of encouraging the independence of the island, to place an
obstacle in the way of it. It promises to the commanding officer the
trade of this country, so long as he remains attached to France, and
forbears to depredate upon our commerce; but the moment he declares
himself independent, that promise is no longer binding.

Certain words in this clause are complained of; and Mr. S. owned he did
not like them himself. He meant the words, "shall clearly disavow;" and,
if this motion should not prevail, he would move to strike them out. He
should be satisfied if the islands refrained from depredating upon our
trade, without making any disavowal. Mr. S. said he could by no means
bring his mind to believe that this clause could give encouragement to
the people of Hispaniola to rebel against their country. Toussaint, said
he, is not the only Governor of that island. Rigaud, who, as he had
already stated, is a man of color and a man of excellent character, who
has great hold of the affections of the people, and whose attachments
are also strong to the French Government, has also a considerable share
of authority; and Toussaint, in his opinion, would not on this account
dare to declare the island independent.

But suppose, said Mr. S., this independence were to take place, would
all the danger to this country actually take place which has been
stated? In his opinion the reverse would be true. Refuse to these people
our commerce, and the provisions of which they stand in need, and you
compel them to become pirates and dangerous neighbors to the Southern
States; but, so long as you supply them, they will turn their attention
to the cultivation of their plantations. If, on the contrary, they once
get a taste for plunder, they will never settle to labor.

Mr. S. observed that it was the other day said that truth was the
characteristic of the Federal party. It might be so, though he had found
it otherwise; but the characteristics of party, he observed, always is
detraction, suspicion, and jealousy, whether it be called this or that.
On the present occasion he found jealousy and doubts had intruded on the
minds of gentlemen who would, at other times, see very differently. He
did not mean to throw any censure upon them on this account, because
they doubtless believe themselves right. This party spirit, said Mr. S.,
is every where to be found. The gentleman from Connecticut had the other
day said that he (Mr. S.) had constantly voted against every measure of
defence, yet if he would have read the journals, he would have found the
reverse the fact. [The Chairman doubted whether this was connected with
the question.][41] Mr. S. concluded by saying that the more gentlemen
think on the subject, the more they will be convinced the bill is not
pregnant with the mischiefs which they apprehend.

Mr. NICHOLAS said it would be difficult to ascertain precisely where
truth is to be found; whether in the extremes of party or in a middle
course. The gentleman from Maryland says party men are always in the
wrong; therefore he supposed that gentleman to be of opinion that those
who vibrate between two parties are always in the right. In considering
this question, he should do it according to his best judgment. If his
mind should be so operated upon by party spirit as not to see the truth,
it would be his misfortune.

He believed, as he had already stated, that this bill, as it now stands,
will authorize the PRESIDENT to negotiate with the subordinate agents
of a Government against the will of that Government, and thereby promote
a separation between the agent and his Government, by holding out a
temptation to do certain acts not warranted by the Government. The House
had been told, by two gentlemen from Massachusetts, that this cannot be
the operation of the law, because it has no relation to a revolted
colony; that when a revolt once takes place, the trade will open of
itself, as the territory will no longer be under the authority of
France. He wished to inquire into the truth of this doctrine, which one
gentleman has asserted and another has endeavored to prove. Mr. N. asked
if Toussaint should to-morrow declare himself independent, would the
PRESIDENT be authorized to direct the collector of the customs to
consider St. Domingo as no longer coming under the present law? In his
own opinion, he could not, because it would be contrary to the practice
of any other Government; and, if done, would give the lie to all the
professions made by us on subjects of this kind. When the separation
merely commences; when we know nothing of the means which the revolters
possess, but because some person chooses to declare a place independent,
shall our Government interfere and acknowledge such a place independent?
He asked whether any gentlemen in this House, who are so frequently
called disorganizers, had ever broached a doctrine like this? He knew
very well, without the authority of _Vattel_, which the gentleman from
Massachusetts had introduced, that any nation is at liberty to take part
in a rebellion; but it is a good cause of war. When a revolution is
effected, then the country revolting becomes independent, and any nation
may treat with it according to its will. But, if you take part with the
revolters, you place yourselves on the same ground with them in respect
to the Government revolted against. And, said he, in case we give any
assistance to any island belonging to France, in its revolt against that
Government, we place ourselves in a state of war.

Mr. N. believed gentlemen are wrong in their construction of the present
law, when they say if Toussaint were to declare himself independent
to-morrow, that the Executive might immediately consider him so, and
direct trade to be carried on with that island as heretofore. He
believed the PRESIDENT would not do it, and that the present clause of
this bill is founded upon the certainty that he would not. If this is
the case, the same objection is in full force against the wording of
this section. The gentleman from Massachusetts, first up, seems to
acknowledge that this law is to have this operation. He, says, St.
Domingo may become independent, and that therefore it is highly proper
we should let them know what dependence they may have upon us; to let
them know that they may expect all the advantages of independence. Is
not this, said Mr. N., an acknowledgment of the effect which this law
will have? That the moment they throw off the French yoke, they will
receive all the assistance from this country which a free commerce can
give them? Mr. N. thought the gentleman himself inflicted the deepest
wound on this bill, for gentlemen cannot say that such an assurance is
not a temptation to commit the act.

Mr. N. could readily believe that the trade of St. Domingo is very
valuable to this country, and the assertion of the gentleman from
Maryland, that it is a "mine of gold," had confirmed that opinion; and
he was really afraid that that gentleman's representing a commercial
part of the country, and being himself deeply engaged in commerce, the
importance of this trade may have too much weight in deciding a question
of this kind, and be a means of disregarding the evils which may arise
from it; but Mr. N. was of opinion, that a solid peace would be far more
beneficial to commerce generally, than any temporary advantage of this
kind. Besides, the principle upon which such advantages would be built,
is something similar to that which would actuate a man to fall upon the
property of his neighbor, because he is richer than himself.

But does not the same gentleman tell the House that the powers in St.
Domingo are pretty equally balanced between General Toussaint and
Rigaud, and that, therefore, if Toussaint attempted to establish the
independence of the island, there could be no certainty of his success?
Why, then, said Mr. N., should we go into a measure which might produce
war between the two countries, when the advantage to be derived from it
is so very doubtful? And he thought the danger from the proceeding was
heightened by the circumstance which gentlemen have mentioned of there
being so very large a body of people in arms there; for, since the
powers are so nicely balanced, is it not probable that the government
party, in case of a struggle, would have the advantage? And would it not
be the height of madness for us to run the risk of having the large
force of that island turned against us, in consequence of our improper
interference between the colony and its government?

Mr. N. said, he could not overlook some considerations connected with
this subject, which he thought of great importance. It is well known,
(and he begged gentlemen who have the same desire to preserve the
country in peace that he had, to pause at the suggestion,) that there
are many gentlemen in this House who have been long in favor of coming
to an open declaration of war against France; and he had every reason to
believe that the same disposition yet exists in these gentlemen; but the
same opportunity of making this declaration does not now exist. The
public mind is not now so well prepared for entering upon a war as it
was some time ago, because they believe things wear a better appearance.
If then, said Mr. N., the same disposition exists for war; if these
gentlemen think they or their country will be benefited by war, they
may be very willing that France should declare it; and if it be possible
that a wish of this sort may exist, it affords a full solution to the
meaning of this bill.

But we are told, said Mr. N., that we ought not to excite the animosity
of the people of St. Domingo. Is our present situation calculated to
produce this effect? Certainly not, since they are necessarily involved
with the mother country; and to take the part proposed, he had already
shown might be attended with the most direful consequences. He thought
this country ought not to wish for the independence of St. Domingo in
another point of view. However we may wish to see the naval power of
France put down, so that they may not have it in their power, if they
have the wish, to invade this country, it is highly important to us that
the naval power of Europe should be divided. He did not think that it
could be for the interest of this country that Great Britain should have
a navy which should keep the world in awe, and subject it to her views;
and if we assist in destroying the colonies of France, we shall be the
means of throwing them and their naval power into the hands of Great
Britain. He did not know that it mattered much to us whether St. Domingo
was a colony of France or England, only as it would add to the naval
strength of England. He hoped, therefore, the motion for striking out
would prevail.

Mr. PINCKNEY observed, that so much had already been said on this
subject, and the general principles of the bill had been so ably
defended, that it would be unnecessary to make more than one or two
remarks in reply to the gentleman from Virginia. That gentleman had gone
altogether upon the idea of this bill being of so obnoxious a nature to
the Government of France, that it must be considered by that government
as a cause of war. He thought it had already been shown, that the
gentleman was altogether mistaken; and, very unhappily for his position,
our own experience was sufficient to determine whether it has ever been
considered as a cause of war for neutral countries to trade with
colonies revolting from a mother country. We know, said he, very well
how neutral nations conducted towards us in our revolt from the
Government of Great Britain. Mr. P. believed it was never understood
that any nation with whom we traded was, in consequence, involved in war
with Great Britain. The fact was otherwise. It was never so looked upon
by that country, and gentlemen will admit that that Government was at
least hightoned enough. All that Great Britain did was to seize the
vessels whenever she could lay hold of them; and this is the risk which
the gentleman from Maryland mentioned our traders would run in carrying
commerce into any place in a state of revolution. It is well known that
we endeavored, during the whole course of our war, to draw foreign
commerce to this country, which was found necessary in order to enable
us to carry on the war. Agents were employed for this purpose, and we
saw no moral turpitude in this. And during the time that Holland was
separated from the dominion of Spain, was war declared in consequence of
any nation trading with Holland? The case was so different, he
recollected that Holland declared, that she would seize all vessels
going to Spain, though that had heretofore been considered as the mother
country. This was reversing the case.

With respect to the three points stated generally by the Secretary of
State, they are not said to go to the point for which the gentleman from
Virginia has taken them. With regard to the _douceur_ of £50,000, Mr. P.
would say, that if we believe this attempt to have been made to extort
this sum of money from our Envoys, for corrupt purposes, (and
notwithstanding all that has been said on the subject, he did believe
that X and Y were the agents of the French Government in that
transaction, and which has, indeed, been acknowledged by Y, Mr. Bellamy,
of Hamburg, who declares he has never written or said any thing to our
Envoys, but by the direction of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs,) no
reliance ought to be placed upon any of their declarations; for after
such an act, it may be supposed they will say one thing at one time and
another at another; and no reliance could be had upon any thing which
comes from so corrupt a source.

Mr. P. said he would not trouble the committee longer, except in one
point, and that was as to the consequences which might flow from a
declaration of independence on the part of St. Domingo. He should
endeavor to answer the gentleman from Pennsylvania as to the
consequences which it might produce to the Southern States. It was a
subject to which he had paid all the attention in his power. He did, on
all questions, endeavor as much as possible to divest himself of any
thing like party spirit; but in this case, where he had himself so much
at stake, in which his native country and every thing dear to him was
concerned, his sincerity could not be doubted. Mr. P. did not himself
believe that this bill would have the least tendency to procure the
independence of St. Domingo; but as some gentlemen think it is probable
that this may be the result, and as no one could say with certainty what
the effect of any measure would be, he had considered the subject, and
was clearly of opinion, that should the independence of that island take
place, the event would be more advantageous to the Southern States, than
if it remained under the dominion of France, considering the disposition
which France has evinced towards us, (and of which he saw no prospects
of a change,) and the present conduct of the inhabitants of St. Domingo.
Nothing which we can do, said Mr. P., can bring back the internal state
of that island to the state it was formerly in. Considering the
inhabitants, then, in the light of freemen, whether will it be better
for us, in the Southern States, to have to deal with them, as such, or
under the direction of the French Government, unreasonable and
arbitrary as we have found it? He had no hesitation in saying, that, it
would be more for the safety of the Southern States, to have that island
independent, than under the Government of France, either in time of
peace or war. If our dispute with France should not be accommodated, and
they keep possession of St. Domingo, they could invade this country only
from that quarter. There is there a large body of troops, and their
unofficial agents told our Envoys, that in case we did not submit to
their conditions, we might expect an attack from that quarter. It would
certainly lessen the danger from that island, were it to be separated
from France; but remaining in the hands of France, and supported by the
powerful navy of France, notwithstanding all the vigor we have shown on
the ocean, we might be very much annoyed from thence.

If these people in St. Domingo find that we withhold from them supplies
which are necessary for their subsistence, said Mr. P., though they are
friendly disposed towards us, they will look elsewhere for support; they
must either turn their attention to cultivating their land, look to
Great Britain, or become freebooters. Which situation is it most for the
interest of the United States that they should be in? Surely the
peaceful cultivation of the ground; and to induce them to take this
course, it will be our interest to supply them with what they have
occasion for, lest they should get the habit of freebooters, and make
our commerce the object of their plunder. He hoped, therefore, the
motion for striking out would not prevail.

Mr. MACON had no doubt the gentleman from South Carolina had paid
particular attention to this subject. It was to be expected that every
gentleman from the Southern States would pay attention to it. In one
respect, he was precisely in the same situation with the gentleman from
South Carolina. He lived in a country that would be affected by any
event, such as had been mentioned, and all his connections were there.
It was the same with all other gentlemen from the Southern States. He
differed in opinion, however, when the gentlemen said that we should
have less to apprehend from St. Domingo, in case it should become
independent, than whilst it remained a part of the French Republic. He
believed the state of society to be such in that country, as not to
admit of self-government. In case they separate from France, he should
apprehend that the consequence will be, that instead of being ruled by
one of the European powers, they would become the tools of them all, in
turn, and we should probably have the same game played off upon us from
thence, that we have heretofore had played upon us by means of the
Indians.

Mr. M. said, that although the part of the bill moved to be stricken
out, does not go directly to say that it has reference to St. Domingo,
it is a little extraordinary that no other case will fit it. There could
be no doubt, if the island became independent, we should have a right to
trade to it; but he believed it would puzzle gentlemen to find an
instance of a Legislature passing a law in order to fit a case which
might happen. As he thought it improper, he hoped it would be stricken
out.

Mr. GOODRICH said this amendment went to change the principle of the
bill. The bill goes upon the idea that when any island in the West
Indies shall cease to make depredations upon our commerce, our trade
shall be opened with them, without regarding by what authority or force
the change was effected. The matter is not placed upon the ground of any
treaty whatever; for, said Mr. G., we can neither increase nor diminish
the power of the PRESIDENT in this respect. A great deal of mist has
been thrown on this subject. The effect of this amendment will be, that
the person restraining from depredations upon our commerce must act
under the authority of the French Republic; on the contrary, the friends
of this bill wish not to examine by what authority the thing is done,
provided that it be done. We have a right to say that our vessels shall
go to any port we please; but, according to the doctrine of the
amendment supposing the island of St. Domingo was conquered, we could
not send our commerce there, nor could we send it to a place in
rebellion; so that our commerce was to be affected by every change of
circumstances which might take place. He hoped the committee would
recognize no principle which shall say we have not a right to send our
commerce wherever we please, whether the places to which our vessels go
are in war, peace, or rebellion.

Mr. GALLATIN was astonished to hear the gentleman from Connecticut say
that this is merely a commercial question. Let us, said he, examine the
effect of this amendment. We are told that the provisions of this bill
do not extend to any colony which may be conquered; for instance, to St.
Martin's, St. Lucia, or any other colonies which have been conquered.
Let us see, then, how it will apply if this amendment is rejected, and
whether the question is commercial or political. Let us inquire, said
he, what is the case provided for, if the amendment is rejected, and
which is unprovided for if it is adopted, and it will then appear what
ground is covered by the opposers of this amendment. If rejected, it
will result, that all persons who may claim or exercise any command in
any island, &c., although they have not that command under the
Government of France, and who shall refrain from privateering, shall be
entitled to a free trade with this country. The only case is a case of
insurrection and rebellion. Suppose, said Mr. G., I should agree with
the gentleman from Connecticut, that if once a rebellion takes place, or
any colony shall declare itself independent, (but, by the by, the
doctrine is not countenanced by the law of nations,) that we may trade
there as we please. Does it result that we have a right to pass a law
beforehand to contemplate such an event? If we do, it will be speaking
publicly, thus: "If any persons shall, in any island, port, or place,
belonging to the French Republic, raise an insurrection, and declare
themselves independent, and shall be found to refrain from committing
depredations upon our commerce, we will open a free trade with them."
And yet the gentleman from Connecticut calls this a mere commercial
question.

The committee have been told of a number of cases which he had been
astonished to hear--cases which happened in our war. Gentlemen who have
mentioned these have not attended to any of the facts of the war. Mr. G.
referred to the case of the treaty made in Holland, which has already
been explained in a former debate. Mr. G. said, gentlemen might put what
construction they pleased upon this section; but certainly publicly to
tell the French colonies that if they will rebel against their
Government, and restrain from depredating upon us, we will treat with
them, is to invite them to do it. A declaration of war has always been
the consequence of such a conduct in other countries; and he supposed
gentlemen are not ready for a declaration of war, though they tell us
there is no change in our affairs for the better; that negotiation is at
an end; that no idea can be entertained of the sincerity of any
professions of the French; and not being ready to bring in a declaration
of war, they are not surely ready to make it, or provoke it; and if not,
why assume a principle that may have this effect? He hoped the amendment
would be agreed to.

The committee now rose, and had leave to sit again.


THURSDAY, January 24.

_Death of Mr. Tazewell._

A message was received from the Senate, informing the House that HENRY
TAZEWELL, Esq., one of their body, died this morning, and that they had
directed orders to be taken respecting his funeral.

Afterwards, on motion of Mr. DENT, the House came to the following
resolution:

_Resolved_, That this House will attend the funeral of HENRY TAZEWELL,
Esq., late a member of the Senate of the United States, on to-morrow, at
half past four o'clock.[42]


_Intercourse with France._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
bill further to suspend the commercial intercourse between the United
States and France, and the dependencies thereof, and for other purposes.

Mr. SPAIGHT'S amendment being under consideration,

Mr. HARTLEY said the general policy of this bill had been considered at
the last session; and he had no doubt, that when any parts of the
French dominions cease to depredate upon our commerce, we might, with
propriety, open our intercourse with them. If, for instance, the Isle of
France had fitted out privateers, and depredated upon our commerce, and
chose to forbear to do so in future, and leave our passage to the Indian
seas clear, it would be a good reason for opening our commerce with that
place. The case of St. Domingo is still stronger, and has, as has been
shown, the power of doing as much mischief, should we refuse to furnish
them with the necessary supplies. If they call in their privateers,
therefore, it would certainly be right to open our intercourse with that
valuable island, especially since they appear to be abandoned by France,
who has withdrawn all her troops from the island.

After some other observations, Mr. H. concluded with hoping the
amendment would not be agreed to, as it would only tend to embarrass the
bill, by making it necessary to ascertain the legality of the governing
authority of the places with which we might open our intercourse.

Mr. BRACE was opposed to this amendment, as it came round to the same
point with that which the gentleman from Pennsylvania had proposed. It
struck him that, in the course of the debate, gentlemen have forgot the
ground on which we stand. Our treaties with the French Government have
been declared void, on account of the conduct of that Government. We
have proceeded further, and suspended all commercial intercourse with
France and her dependencies. It would be well to consider what kind of
connection now exists between the United States and France, and whether
a measure of the kind proposed can injure our present prospect of peace.
By the arguments of some gentlemen it would seem that we are under some
obligation or contract to that Government; whereas, we ought to consider
ourselves, with respect to it, in no other light than we consider
ourselves with respect to the governments of the world with which we
have no connection. We have, therefore, no object to pursue, but what,
in a dignified national view, it is our duty and our interest to pursue.

This separation having been effected by the wrong acts of the French
Government, she can have no claim upon us; we have taken our stand upon
such ground as can always be justified, whenever a spirit of justice
shall return. There is no man, said Mr. B., in the House, who does not
wish for peace, whenever it can be obtained on a solid foundation. But
it was well observed yesterday by his colleague, (Mr. GOODRICH,) that
this question is wholly a commercial one. This declaration gave offence
to the gentleman from Pennsylvania. He was surprised that any one could
suppose this to be the case. Mr. B. said he was equally surprised at the
arguments of that gentleman. What connection had we with the French
Government? or what connection had we with, any other, besides
commercial? He had heard much clamor out of doors about other
connections--about treaties offensive and defensive. He hoped no such
connexion ever would exist between this country and any nation whatever.

Mr. SPAIGHT said, he wished to have given the reasons which induced him
to make this amendment yesterday, but a motion being made for the
committee to rise, prevented him. Having been a member of the committee
who formed this bill, and having given his consent to it, he trusted it
would not be believed that he brought forward this motion to defeat the
bill; his object was to make it more palatable to many gentlemen, who,
if an amendment something like the present was not adopted, would vote
against the bill. The gentlemen from Massachusetts and Connecticut have
said, that if this amendment is adopted, it will destroy some of the
most important principles of the bill. He believed they had mistaken the
effect of the amendment. They state that it will be necessary for the
PRESIDENT to inquire whether the commander of any island with which he
was about to open our intercourse, had his authority from the French
Government? On the contrary, it appeared to Mr. S. that, so long as the
citizens of any island acknowledged France as the mother country,
whatever authority may exist there, the place must be under the
Government of France. If an open rebellion took place, it would alter
the case entirely. And if conquered by any of the belligerent powers, it
would not then come under the bill; so that, in either case, the
amendment could have no bad effect. The principal motive with him for
moving the amendment was, in order to take away the objection made to it
by many gentlemen, that the bill is calculated to produce the
independence of St. Domingo; for he himself had no such view, nor did he
think any other member of the committee, who reported the bill, had. He
believed, if the wants of these people are supplied from this country,
it will be better that they should remain under the Government of
France; but, if we refuse to supply them with provisions, they may act
as freebooters, or do still worse--throw themselves into the hands of
Great Britain, in order to procure supplies. These reasons had induced
him to make the amendment, and he should be glad to see it adopted.

Mr. CHAMPLIN could see no difference between this and the former
amendment, which had been negatived. The design of this section is, to
authorize the PRESIDENT to open the intercourse with any of the islands
and the United States, whenever he shall deem it consistent with the
honor and dignity of this country, without inquiring whether such place
is under the French Government. Frequent decrees are passed in France,
said Mr. C., for revoking the commissions of these officers, which are
not enforced; and yet, if this amendment is passed, such a person could
not be treated with, and it would always be difficult to ascertain
whether an officer acted under the French Government or not. If the
islands choose to cease from their depredations, he would openly trade
with them; for the intercourse was originally suspended, not with a view
of starving the islands, but to prevent depredations being committed
upon our commerce. He was astonished to find that nothing could come
before this House, but gentlemen are ready to object to it on account of
the effect it may have on France. For his part, if the measure be
beneficial to this country, he cared not what effect it might have upon
France. It was said this provision would have a tendency to provoke
insurrection, or the independence of the island; on the contrary, he
believed, if this law does not pass, they will throw themselves into the
hands of Great Britain, or become plunderers of our property. He hoped
to see the intercourse opened, not only with St. Domingo, but with the
Isle of France.

Mr. HARPER said, when this amendment was first made, he considered it as
making no considerable change in the section, and was, therefore,
inclined to vote for it; but the gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr.
VARNUM,) of whose discernment he had a very high opinion, having said
that he considered it as making a very considerable change in the
section, and declaring that he would, on that account, vote for it, he
was induced to take a further view of it, and he found, upon
reconsideration, that it would, indeed, make a very material change in
the section, and because he found this would be the case, he must vote
against it.

Mr. GALLATIN said, it appeared to him that this amendment goes no
further than to prevent any stipulations with persons who have usurped
the power of a country. It was yesterday stated by the gentleman from
Massachusetts, and repeated to-day by the gentleman from North Carolina,
that it did not extend to cases where men's commissions are doubtful. If
a man has once held a commission as an agent in any French colony, he
may be recognized as their agent, so long as he has not been publicly
declared to be otherwise. His exercising the power will be sufficient
proof that he has it; and, unless this principle is admitted, it must be
evident that the bill is intended to operate in favor of revolters.

There is a great difference, said Mr. G., between this amendment and the
one which had been moved by the gentleman from Virginia, the gentleman
from New York, or that which he had himself moved. It was the opinion of
the gentleman from Virginia, and it was his also, that the PRESIDENT
ought not to be authorized to open a trade with St. Domingo, unless the
constituted authorities of France had disavowed their former
aggressions, and refrained from them; they did not think it right to
permit a trade with particular parts of the possessions of France,
considering that the measure was originally taken to distress the French
Government, and bring it to terms; but this section gives the power of
opening a partial intercourse with St. Domingo, though the Government
of France should not disavow any of her former illegal acts; and the
present amendment only proposes to except cases of insurgency. Nor could
he see what possible objection can be made to it, except that it will
prevent a lure from being held out to promote the independence of St.
Domingo; for in nothing else does the amendment differ from the bill as
it now stands.

If we are to hold out this lure, said Mr. G., it must be because we have
the right, and it is our interest to do it. When he asserted we have not
the right to do it, he would remark upon the word "right." Gentlemen say
we have a right to do this, because we are an independent nation. No
doubt. But when he said we have not a right to do it, he meant that we
could not do it without infracting the law of nations, or those rules
which we have declared ought to govern every nation. And though the
gentleman from Connecticut has said that there is no connection of a
political nature between us and France, and therefore considers this as
merely a commercial regulation, Mr. G. said, he has mistaken his
meaning, by making use of the word "connection" instead of _relation_.
We have no connection, either commercial or political, with France; but
we stand, as a nation, in a political and commercial relation with
France and other nations. There is no connection between us, but there
is the same relation, both political and commercial, that there is
between all other nations. And, said Mr. G., it is, doubtless, an
infraction on the law of nations to offer any lure, or promote the
independence of a colony. We certainly have a right to give assistance,
in case of a rebellion, by running the risk of becoming a party in the
war, but not without infracting the law of nations; still less could we
do it without breaking that morality in politics, the breach of which we
have so often complained of. We may suppose the Government of France
radically wrong, and the people exercising it corrupt, but neither would
justify the overturning, or holding out any encouragement to others to
overturn, the Government of any part of her dependencies. A conduct of
this kind could only be justified in time of war.

In this country, in our speeches, at least, we have gone further, and
said that, even in case of war, it would not be right to sow the seeds
of insurrection; for, on what other grounds could we account for the
philippics which have been pronounced on this floor against France, for
her conduct not only against countries with whom she was at peace, but
also against those with whom she was at war. This was the case with
respect to all the charges made against France with respect to Holland,
or the Milanese (now Cisalpine Republic) with whom she was at war when
the attempts condemned were made. But we have said, war is at best an
unfortunate state, and it is not right to heighten its evils by exciting
insurrections and commotions. If this principle is right, and Mr. G.
believed it correct in most cases, it is clear that we shall not be
justified in promoting insurrections, even in war, much less in this
state which is a state of hostility, but not of war.

Notwithstanding the respect which he paid to the opinion of the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. PINCKNEY) he could not be persuaded
that the independence of St. Domingo could be a desirable object.
To-day, it had been avowed, in what fell from his colleague, (Mr.
HARTLEY,) that this was the ground upon which the clause was founded,
all the French force being withdrawn. He gave credit to the candor of
his colleague for the declaration, and it was in this point of view
which he had always considered it, because he had stated that, no doubt,
an agent from that quarter had come with propositions to our government.

Mr. G. repeated some of his former reasons against the policy of
promoting the independence of St. Domingo. He heard the gentleman from
Rhode Island, with regret, repeat one of those illiberal ideas that had
been so frequently introduced here, by saying that gentlemen seemed
opposed to this measure, because it would be injurious to France.

Mr. PINCKNEY wished to make a single observation upon what fell from the
gentleman from Pennsylvania. In order to defeat all that has been said
about this section holding out a lure for the establishment of the
independence of St. Domingo, it need only be said, that it is confined
to the colonies which are under the jurisdiction of France. The language
of this clause is, "so long as you continue dependent, we will treat
with you."

Mr. NICHOLAS explained.

Mr. SPRAGUE observed that the gentleman from Pennsylvania insisted upon
it, that, without this amendment, this bill would hold out a lure to
insurrections in St. Domingo, and that if gentlemen did not wish to
encourage these, they must agree to the amendment. What is this
encouragement? It is, "if you will forbear committing depredations,
which we have heretofore experienced from you, we will open our trade
with you." Then, according to the gentleman's reasoning, acts of
hostility against the commerce of this country, are favorable to France;
or rather, ceasing to commit them is an act of rebellion against the
mother country; and, to hold out a lure on our part, to stop these
depredations, is so contrary to the views of France, as to give a high
offence to that country.

Mr. MCDOWELL remarked, that gentlemen opposed to this amendment, all
agree that the section, as it stands, holds out no lure to insurrection
in the French West India islands; if not, why should they object to this
amendment, which is only calculated to make certain what is at present
doubtful to some members. He wished gentlemen to consider what might be
the consequence of authorizing the PRESIDENT to treat with unauthorized
persons. Gentlemen have stated, and he supposed truly, that the trade
of this island of St. Domingo is a gold mine to the merchants of this
country; and he was afraid that the richness of this trade had too much
attraction to be resisted by those concerned in it, though it might be
dearly purchased by the nation at large. He differed widely in opinion
from the gentleman from South Carolina, with respect to the effect which
the independence of that island would have upon this country; he
believed it was by no means a desirable event to this country.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS did not intend to have said any thing on this subject,
as it is principally a commercial concern, of which he knew but little;
but he also conceived that the agricultural interest is connected with
it. Gentlemen are afraid more is meant by this bill than meets the eye;
they are afraid to take a worm or a fly, lest a hook should be concealed
in them. Instead of war, he thought this bill calculated to promote
peace. It is admitted, on all hands, said Mr. W., that Hispaniola cannot
support itself. How must they, then, get support? Either we must supply
them, or they must depend upon neutral islands, or the people must bend
their whole force upon our commerce. What, said he, is most prudent to
do? He thought the regulation proposed by this bill the best that could
be hit upon. But the gentleman from Virginia said we are obliged to send
our tobacco through Spain to France; is this, said he, an advantage to
the people of this country? It may be presumed, Mr. W. said, that the
President will go no further in this business than the interest of the
country requires. This jealousy of the PRESIDENT has a bad effect;
because from a want of confidence in this officer, he will be unable to
do any thing for us. He hoped the amendment would not be agreed to.

It was negatived--49 to 41.


MONDAY, January 28.

_Intercourse with France._

The bill further suspending our commercial intercourse with France and
her dependencies, and for other purposes, having been read the third
time,

Mr. ALLEN moved for a recommitment of the bill in order to have expunged
a proviso introduced by the member from Tennessee, excluding the port of
New Orleans from its operation. He stated his reason to be, that he did
not believe that was likely to be a rendezvous for French privateers;
but that, if it should be, it ought to be liable to the same
restrictions with other ports; and, if it was not likely to become a
harbor of privateers, to insert a proviso of this kind, was to show a
distrust that the PRESIDENT would not exercise the power given to him
for the interest of the United States.

This motion was seconded by Mr. OTIS, and opposed by Messrs. VENABLE,
NICHOLAS, S. SMITH, W. CLAIBORNE, and HARPER. It was negatived, the
yeas and nays being taken--74 to 18.

The question on the passing of the bill was then taken, and stood, yeas
55, nays 37, as follows:

      YEAS.--John Allen, George Baer, jun., Bailey Bartlett,
      James A. Bayard, Jonathan Brace, David Brooks, Stephen
      Bullock, Christopher G. Champlin, John Chapman, James
      Cochran, William Craik, John Dennis, George Dent, William
      Edmond, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan
      Freeman, Nathaniel Freeman, jun., Henry Glenn, Chauncey
      Goodrich, Roger Griswold, William Barry Grove, Robert
      Goodloe Harper, Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah
      L. Hosmer, James H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel
      Lyman, James Machir, William Matthews, Daniel Morgan,
      Harrison G. Otis, Isaac Parker, Josiah Parker, Thomas
      Pinckney, John Reed, John Rutledge, jun., James Schureman,
      Samuel Sewall, William Shepard, Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel
      Smith, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Peleg Sprague, George
      Thatcher, Mark Thompson, Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van
      Allen, Peleg Wadsworth, Robert Waln, John Williams, and
      Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Thos. Blount, Richard
      Brent, Robert Brown, Samuel J. Cabell, Thomas Claiborne,
      William C. C. Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Thomas
      T. Davis, John Dawson, Joseph Eggleston, Lucas Elmendorph,
      William Findlay, Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew
      Gregg, John A. Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N.
      Havens, Joseph Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward
      Livingston, Matthew Locke, Nathaniel Macon, Anthony New,
      John Nicholas, Thompson J. Skinner, William Smith, Richard
      Sprigg, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, and Abraham Venable.


_French Affairs._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.

      _Gentlemen of the Senate, and Gentlemen of the House of
      Representatives:_

      An edict of the Executive Directory of the French Republic
      of the twenty-ninth of October, 1798, inclosed in a letter
      from our Minister Plenipotentiary in London, of the
      sixteenth of November, is of so much importance that it
      cannot be too soon communicated to you and to the public.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      _January 28, 1799._

      _Extract of a letter from Rufus King, Esq., Minister
      Plenipotentiary of the United States at London, to the
      Secretary of State, dated November 16, 1798._

      "The annexed arrêt would appear extravagant and incredible,
      if it proceeded from any other authority; but mankind is so
      accustomed to the violence and injustice of France, that we
      almost cease to express our surprise and indignation at the
      new instances that she continues to display."


[TRANSLATION.]

      _Decree of the Executive Directory, of October 29, 1798._

      The Executive Directory, upon the report of the Minister of
      Foreign Relations, considering that the fleets, privateers,
      and ships, of England and Russia, are in part equipped by
      foreigners.

      Considering that this violation is a manifest abuse of the
      rights of nations, and that the powers of Europe have not
      taken any measures to prohibit it. Decrees:

      1st. Every individual, native (_ou originaire_) of friendly
      countries, allied to the French Republic, or neutral,
      bearing a commission, granted by the enemies of France, or
      making part of the crews of ships of war, and others,
      enemies, shall be by this single fact declared a pirate,
      and treated as such, without being permitted in any case to
      allege that he had been forced into such service by
      violence, threats, or otherwise.

      2d. The Executive Directories of the Batavian, Lagurian,
      Cisalpine, and Roman Republics, shall be instructed to this
      effect.

      3d. The provisions contained in the first article shall be
      notified to those powers which are neutral or allied to the
      French Republic.

      4th. The Ministers of Exterior Relations is charged with
      the execution of the present arrêt which shall be printed
      in the Bulletin of the Laws.

                          (Signed)
                          TERILHARD, _President_.

The message and documents were read, and ordered to lie on the table.


TUESDAY, January 29.

THOMAS SUMTER, from South Carolina, appeared and took his seat in the
House.


FRIDAY, February 1.

JOHN FOWLER, from Kentucky, appeared and took his seat in the House.


_Remonstrance of Georgia._

On motion of Mr. BALDWIN, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the report of a select committee on the petition and
remonstrance of the Legislature of Georgia; and the resolution reported
by that committee being under consideration, its adoption was opposed
principally by Mr. ALLEN.

Mr. NICHOLAS thought the following resolution would be less
exceptionable than the one reported, and it was agreed to--55 votes
being in its favor.

      "_Resolved_, That provision ought to be made by law for
      complying with such treaty as the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
      STATES may think proper to make with the Creek Indians, and
      for obtaining possession, in behalf of the State of
      Georgia, of the lands lying within the country of
      Tallassee, or other lands on the frontier of the said
      State, which may be deemed equivalent thereto, and that
      ---- dollars be appropriated therefor."

The committee rose, and after some further remarks from Mr. ALLEN, the
resolution was concurred in--59 votes being in its favor. It was then
referred to the select committee to report a bill.

The House adjourned to Monday.


THURSDAY, February 7.

_Augmentation of the Navy._

On motion of Mr. JOSIAH PARKER, the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the bill for the augmentation of the Navy,
and fixing the pay of the captains of ships or vessels of war; when the
first section being under consideration--

Mr. GALLATIN moved to strike out the words "six ships of war, of a size
to carry, and which shall be armed with not less than seventy-four guns
each; and these shall be built or purchased within the United States;"
in order to take the sense of the committee on the propriety of
building, at present, ships-of-the-line. When this subject was last year
before the House, the general opinion was, that during the present war,
considering the crippled state of the French navy, frigates and vessels
of a smaller size, were sufficient to protect our vessels on our own
coast, and in the West India seas; nor did that opinion seem to have
undergone any material alteration; for, although the Secretary of the
Navy, and the select committee, had reported that the expense of
building the six seventy-four gun ships now proposed, would amount to
$2,400,000, yet the appropriation asked for the present year was only
one million of dollars. It was not expected that much more than
one-third of the work necessary to send those ships to sea, could be
executed during the present year. It was not expected that they could be
finished in less than two or three years. They were not wanted for any
immediate purpose. The proposed measure was not therefore a measure of
defence. It was a project of a general nature. The question is, whether
it be proper, at the present time, to lay the foundation of a navy, of a
fleet, that might be able, hereafter, to give us a certain weight in
relation to European nations; which might be able to cope with the
fleets of those nations: and it was in order to bring that question
fairly before the Committee of the Whole that he had made his motion.
Should that motion prevail, it would not affect the building of the six
sloops of war which were said to be immediately wanted, in addition to
our present naval force, for the purpose of protecting our commerce. It
would merely prevent the building, at present, of a fleet which was
supposed, by the friends of the bill, to be wanted only for future
purposes.

This led him naturally to consider the expense of that navy. It is
stated by the Secretary of the Navy, that the annual expense of a 74-gun
ship will exceed 216,000 dollars, and that therefore the annual expense
of six of these ships will be about 1,300,000 dollars. That the building
and equipping a 74-gun ship, exclusive of military stores, will be
342,700 dollars; and that the military stores will cost 48,000 dollars;
so that the first building and equipping six of these vessels will cost
about 2,400,000 dollars. This is the first expense, but nothing is said
of the yearly repairing and building which will be necessary to keep up
a fleet of this kind. It is estimated, in the navies of Europe, that a
ship-of-the-line will last from 12 to 15 years; so that, besides
ordinary repairs, the whole expense of building would have to be
renewed every 12 or 15 years.[43] It would have been desirable, and it
might have been expected, that the select committee should have laid
before the House an estimate of the peace establishment of a navy to the
extent proposed, in order to have enabled the House to have formed a
just opinion on the main question. This they have not done; but
supposing the other estimates to be perfectly correct; supposing that
the expense would not overrun the calculations laid before the House,
and, if so, it would be the first time it had not done it; supposing,
according to those calculations, that a 74-gun ship will hereafter cost
us less than two-thirds of what 44-gun frigates have heretofore cost us;
it results, that the first necessary expense (including $150,000 for
docks and timber) will exceed, for six ships only, two millions and a
half of dollars; and that the annual expense of supporting them, when in
commission, exclusively of annual repairs, and of building new ships,
necessary to supply those that from time to time will become unfit for
service, will amount to 1,300,000 dollars.

If these premises are true, and he knew they could not be contradicted,
the conclusion must be most forcible that it is improper at present to
build a navy, especially since there is no immediate demand for it. But
if once the foundation of a large navy is laid, no one can say where it
will stop. The Secretary of the Navy does not suppose that six 74-gun
ships will be sufficient. He supposes twelve necessary; six are now
proposed merely as an entering wedge. And when once twelve
ships-of-the-line are obtained, if our commerce and coast, extensive as
they are, must be effectually protected, these will not be deemed
sufficient. He drew this conclusion from the naval force of European
nations. Our tonnage exceeds that of any European nation, except Great
Britain and Holland; and if we must have a navy to protect our commerce,
it must bear some proportion to the extent of our coast, to the amount
of our tonnage, and to the navies of the European nations. And upon what
terms are we to cope with the powers of Europe with respect to any navy?
It would be recollected that when last year there was a mutiny on board
the British fleet, in order to put an end to it, the sailors' wages were
advanced to one shilling sterling per day, equal to thirty shillings
sterling, or six dollars and two-thirds per month, whilst we give our
seamen seventeen dollars a month, so that we pay nearly three times as
much for men to supply our navy, as England does.

Mr. G said, he would not detain the committee longer at present, though
he meant to have made some observations with respect to the expense of
navies to those nations who support them in order to show that the
expense of them far exceeds the benefits derived from them. If reference
were had to European nations, it would be found, Mr. G. said, that
navies were used more as engines of power, than as a protection to
commerce. Even with respect to Great Britain, which is the only nation
which has succeeded in effecting any material object by a navy, though
she has obtained a preponderancy at sea, and has been mistress of it for
the last hundred years, yet it has been the means of involving her in
almost continual war, and the support of it has always been attended
with enormous expense. He believed he was correct, when he stated that
from 1776 to 1789, the average expense of the navy of Great Britain
(including a period of seven years of war and six of peace) was six
millions of pounds sterling a year. Now, said Mr. G., if we calculate
the rate at which we shall be obliged to pay for every thing
appertaining to a navy, what will be the sum necessary to support a navy
of any extent here? Suppose a navy should only be one-tenth part of the
British, and instead of 120 ships-of-the-line, we should be content with
twelve. The expense, according to the British rate of expenditure, would
be £600,000 sterling, nearly three millions of dollars a year; but when
we know that we pay three times as much for our seamen as they do, it is
impossible precisely to calculate what the expense would be.

In relation to European nations, it would be found, that none had ever
derived any advantage from a navy, except Great Britain. It has been
said (and by high authority) that an extensive commerce cannot be
maintained without a navy. In answer to this it may be said, that Spain
has always had a considerable navy, but very little commerce; their
tonnage compared with ours was insignificant, yet theirs is the third
navy in Europe. Holland, for a time, had a powerful navy; but they gave
it up, as more expensive than beneficial, since the wars of Queen Anne.
Yet their commerce, on this account, never diminished in any
considerable degree. They are the second commercial nation in Europe;
and they never suffer for want of a navy, except when they become a
party in war; he conceived, therefore, that a navy is not necessary to
protect commerce. At this time, Mr. G. knew that the commerce of Holland
was in a great degree annihilated; but so was that of France and Spain,
notwithstanding their powerful navies. Holland being at the door of
Great Britain, may, in time of war, be altogether blocked up by the
fleets of that nation. Fortunately that was not our situation.

Mr. G. concluded by saying, that as he believed commerce might exist
independently of a navy; that a navy would cost far more than it would
ever benefit the country; and knowing our finances were not such as to
admit of the expense, he must hope his motion would prevail.


FRIDAY, February 8.

_Augmentation of the Navy._

The House then went into Committee of the Whole on the bill for
augmenting the Navy, Mr. GALLATIN'S motion for striking out what
relates to 74-gun ships being under consideration.

Mr. JOSIAH PARKER hoped this amendment would not be agreed to. He was
happy to find, however, that the gentleman from Pennsylvania did not go
farther, and oppose the whole force, as he had heretofore always opposed
every thing like a navy. Indeed, he has acknowledged that our infant
navy has done some service, though he does not give to it all the credit
which the committee who reported this bill thinks it deserves. He
attributes the fall in insurance to other objects than the navy, because
he says it has fallen more on vessels to Europe, where our navy could
have had no effect, than to the West Indies, where that effect was more
likely to be produced. But the gentleman should have recollected that
the fall to Europe may have been occasioned by the vigilance of the
British navy; but in the West Indies, the British, or at least the
officers of the British men of war, seemed rather to countenance, than
prevent, the depredations of the French; as, in many instances, they
have suffered captures to be made by the French, and immediately
afterwards recaptured the vessels, and by that means obtained a salvage
upon them. Nor did he suppose the British Government would regret these
depredations, since they knew such treatment would serve to rouse the
resentment of this country against her enemy. Mr. P. supposed that the
saving produced by our navy had even been greater than the committee had
supposed, as, by the report made yesterday on the subject of our
exports, it appears they have been ten millions more than the committee
calculated them at. He allowed that our navy had not been the sole cause
of safety to our commerce; the British navy had also contributed greatly
to it. But it would be recollected that when this navy was first fitted
out, French privateers and picaroons were not only upon our coast, but
in our very bays; and, but for these measures, there can be no doubt,
but our shores would at this time have swarmed with French privateers,
which the British would have suffered, in order to widen the breach
between the two countries.

Mr. P. hoped when the quantity of shipping, and the number of seamen we
employ, is considered--that these are the means of bringing us from
foreign countries all that we desire to have from thence, and that they
thereby fill our treasury with money--gentlemen will not hesitate to
allow our commerce a competent protection. No nation, except Great
Britain, exceeds this country in the number of vessels and men engaged
in this service, yet no nation has done so little to protect them. He
trusted we should be allowed to have a sufficient navy to protect our
commerce and coast, and to cause us to be respected abroad.

The British Government, Mr. P. said, has 141 sail-of-the-line,
(according to Steele's list, which he had lately seen,) and these,
according to the opinion of the first statesman and politician that
England ever possessed, Lord Chatham, require as many thousand seamen;
not that each vessel requires 1000 men, but it is necessary to have this
number in order to employ their frigates and sloops of war, not that the
ships of the line require 1000 men; yet, though Britain has this immense
navy, she has not double the number of merchant vessels and seamen which
this country possesses. If, said Mr. P., these six 74-gun ships and six
sloops are agreed to, we shall not want more than 12,000 seamen to man
our navy. At present we have only 4,000; and the whole annual expense
will be 4,230,149 dollars. Mr. P. believed, in order to give us
efficient protection, we ought to have eleven sail-of-the-line; but as
he considered six to be as many as our present finances will allow, he
should be satisfied with that number.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania wished to be informed as to the expense
of a peace establishment of our navy. A large navy in time of peace
would be unnecessary; he should wish it, however, to be kept on a
respectable footing. Many of our ships, Mr. P. said, will last much
longer than the gentleman from Pennsylvania had supposed; some of them,
he doubted not, would last forty or fifty years. The British have ships
which have been in service thirty years; when poorly built they may not
last more than seven years. He had not made an estimate of what would be
the expense of a peace establishment with respect to the navy; nor did
he know what force the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES might think it
necessary to maintain in time of peace, but he supposed it would be
small, and a single officer and thirty men would be sufficient to take
care of a ship where she is laid up in ordinary: that only a few of the
best ships would be kept, and the others sold.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania had represented the expense of a navy in
this country as being much greater than in England; but when he spoke of
the pay of British sailors being only one shilling sterling a day, he
was certainly mistaken. They have at least a guinea and an half a month,
which is seven dollars; and ours average fourteen dollars, which is
double to that of England. If the same means were taken here that are
taken in England, of raising men by means of press-gangs (which,
however, he rejoiced never could be suffered in this country,) they
might, perhaps, be gotten on easier terms, as the Government might
follow the example of Great Britain, by fixing the pay and pressing the
men. He would much rather pay higher wages; especially when it is
considered that a very small part of the money paid to seamen will ever
go out of the country; they spend their money freely, and the United
States will not, therefore, lose it.

And as to the number of men employed in the navy, if they were not thus
employed in our own service, they would go abroad, since this is the
employment they choose; indeed, if all our citizens were employed in
cultivating the ground, our produce would be so great, and sell for so
little, as to make it scarcely worth the trouble of raising. And if we
do not provide for our own defence, we shall be at the mercy of every
foreign power which chooses to insult or ill-treat us. The interests of
commerce and agriculture must always go hand in hand; and farmers who
now get so much better a price for their product than they heretofore
got, ought to be the first in supporting a navy sufficient to protect
our vessels in carrying that produce to foreign countries. When they see
their interests more clearly, Mr. P. trusted they would, like the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, be ready to allow that our navy is of
service. It would be happy for us, and for the world, Mr. P. said, if
there were no use for navies, and nations might be permitted to carry
their productions wherever they pleased without annoyance; but, while
nations continue to make war upon each other, we must expect to come in
for our share of the evils of such a system, and it will be necessary to
have some force not only to guard against injuries, but to keep foreign
belligerent nations in check, lest we should throw our force into the
scale against them. The French Directory, said Mr. P., have lately
passed a decree, which ought to be considered as a declaration of war
against the world, "that the citizens of neutral countries found on
board of any of their ships shall be considered and punished as
_pirates_!" Where is the man, exclaimed he, who will not defend his
country and his fellow-citizens against such a decree?

Mr. P. said he would take the liberty of quoting the authority, on the
subject of a navy, of a gentleman who deservedly ranked high in public
estimation, and whom he was proud to call his countryman. The authority
he referred to was Mr. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia. He read the
following extract.

      "But the actual habits of our countrymen attach them to
      commerce. They will exercise it for themselves. Wars, then,
      must sometimes be our lot; and all the wise can do, will be
      to avoid that half of them which would be produced by our
      own follies, and our own acts of injustice; and to make for
      the other half the best preparations we can. Of what nature
      should these be? A land army would be useless for offence,
      and not the best nor safest instrument of defence. For
      either of these purposes, the sea is the field on which we
      should meet an European enemy. On that element it is
      necessary we should possess some power. To aim at such a
      navy as the greater nations of Europe possess, would be a
      foolish and wicked waste of the energies of our countrymen;
      it would be to pull on our own heads that load of military
      expense which makes the European laborer go supperless to
      bed, and moistens his bread with the sweat of his brow. It
      will be enough if we enable ourselves to prevent insults
      from those nations of Europe which are weak on the sea,
      because circumstances exist which render even the stronger
      ones weak as to us. Providence has placed their richest and
      most defenceless possessions at our door--has obliged their
      most precious commerce to pass, as it were, in review
      before us. To protect this, or to assail us, a small part
      only of their naval force will ever be risked across the
      Atlantic. The danger to which the elements expose them here
      are too well known, and the greater danger to which they
      would be exposed at home, were any general calamity to
      involve their whole fleet. They can attack us by detachment
      only; and it will suffice to make ourselves equal to what
      they may detach. Even a smaller force than what they may
      detach will be rendered equal or superior by the quickness
      with which any check may be repaired with us, while losses
      with them will be irreparable till too late. A small naval
      force, then, is sufficient for us, and a small one is
      necessary. What this should be, I will not undertake to
      say. I will only say, it should by no means be so great as
      we are able to make it."

Mr. P. perfectly concurred in this opinion. He had frequently expressed
it. But the gentleman from Pennsylvania says we have no money, and
therefore we ought neither to have a navy nor any thing else, to defend
ourselves at home or at sea. He tells the House that our revenue will
not exceed ten millions, and that if we agree to have these ships built,
we shall want twelve millions. Mr. P. trusted that if these two millions
were wanted the ways and means will be found, rather than that we shall
suffer our commerce to be destroyed, and lose all our credit as a nation
abroad. Admitting, said Mr. P., that our debt is a hundred millions of
dollars, it must be recollected that its increase has been owing to a
number of causes which could not be avoided, amongst which was our war
with the Indians, the Western insurrection, our treaty with Algiers, and
the building of vessels for the protection of our commerce; but if our
debt is fifteen millions more now than it was at the commencement of the
present Government, our numbers have greatly increased since that time,
so that he supposed, considering the number of individuals who have to
bear it, it is not so heavy, in proportion to our population, as it was
at that time. Having the ability, therefore, he trusted there would be
found the will to provide a respectable naval force to protect us at
home, our commerce abroad, and leave us in a situation to be more
respected by foreign nations than we have heretofore been, and therefore
hoped the present motion would be rejected.

Mr. HARPER.--Notwithstanding, Mr. Chairman, the subject now before the
committee, the usefulness of a Naval Establishment for the United
States, has been so frequently and so fully discussed on former
occasions, I deem it important to enter once more into a particular
consideration of it, less on account of the general reasons so often
urged against the measure, than of those particular objections, founded
on the supposed state of our pecuniary resources, whereby it has, at
this time, been assailed.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania has proved, as he thinks, that no
possible navy could be equal to the protection of our commerce, extended
as it is. And how has he proved this? By the example of other
nations--of Holland, Spain, and Great Britain. Spain, he says, has a
very considerable navy, perhaps the third in Europe, and yet no
commerce. Holland found herself unable to support her navy, and even
while she supported it, was unable to protect her trade; and therefore
she gave it up, and yet, after she had done so, continued to possess a
very great commerce. Even Britain, according to him, mistress of the
ocean as she has been for a century past, has not fully protected her
trade by her marine; which, in the mean time, has cost her more than the
whole sum which her trade has yielded--and, therefore, she would have
been better without a navy. This, Mr. Chairman, is the calculation of a
schoolboy, not of a statesman; of the counting-house, not of the
cabinet; and if the judgment of the gentleman from Pennsylvania were not
warped on this, as on so many other occasions, by his particular
political system, he would be one of the last persons in the world to
present the subject in a point of view so much beneath a mind of the
least political discernment. The gentleman, in fact, forgets that
Britain is indebted to her navy, not for her commerce only, but for her
independence; not only for the dominion of the seas, but for her
existence as a nation. Every man, who is in the smallest degree versed
in history, knows that Great Britain, but for her navy, must long since
have been a province of France. Had not Britain been mistress of the
ocean, France would long since have been not only her mistress, but
mistress of the rest of Europe. That great people, uniting within itself
all the sources of military, pecuniary, and maritime strength, has never
ceased to contend for universal empire, with immense means, vast genius,
boundless ambition and unwearied perseverance, since the period when,
two centuries ago, its provinces became united under one Government, and
its immense resources, managed and called into activity by a minister
whose mind was equal to his station, were directed to the increase of
its power and extension of its limits. How has Britain been enabled to
check this formidable career, to maintain her own power, and to arrive
at her present high pitch of consequence in the scale of nations? Not by
her population, which is little more than one-third of that possessed by
France; nor by her insular situation, which heretofore could not protect
her from invasion and conquest; nor by her military power, which, when
compared with that of France, has never been considerable--but by her
navy. It was that navy, and the wealth which commerce, protected by it,
poured into her lap, that enabled her to support with glory so unequal a
contest, to call to her aid the military force of Germany, and thus to
establish a counterpoise to the power of France. But for this naval
force, and the commerce which it protected and cherished--but for this
union, cemented by the money, and aided by the maritime preponderance of
England--France, combining, as she did, greater means of strength of
every kind than any other nation, or even than all the nations of
Europe united, except Germany and Great Britain, must long since have
established her dominion over all. England must have fallen first, being
unable, without the command of the sea, to save herself from invasion;
and then the powers of the Continent, deprived of the pecuniary aid
wherewith England was enabled by her commerce, under the protection of
her navy, to supply and unite them, would have bent, one after another,
beneath her formidable and continually augmenting strength. Even now
this same navy enables England to ride secure amidst the most terrible
storm wherewith the political world has ever been afflicted; to brave
all the tremendous dangers by which she has been threatened; to baffle
every attempt against her safety, or that of her remotest possessions;
and amidst the dismay, the humiliation, or the total overthrow of so
many powers, to triumph over her rival, whose strength, always
formidable, is exercised, not more by her extension of territory and of
influence, than by the consternation wherewith her successes have
stricken other States, by the disunion and feebleness which has
characterized their counsels, by the terrible weapon of internal
commotion with which she threatens, or has actually assailed them, and
by the unheard of despotism of her own Government, which enables it to
employ, in a degree hitherto unexampled in the history of civilized men,
the physical forces of the nation, in executing its plans of plunder and
conquest. This same navy enables England not only to maintain thus
gloriously a conflict so dreadful and so unequal, but to stand the
barrier between independence and universal dominion, between liberty and
the most degrading despotism, between civilization and the barbarism of
the dark ages--to become the citadel of property, the storehouse and the
banker of the world, and to render all nations, with their own consent,
tributary, by means of her commerce, to the support of her greatness.

What, then, Mr. Chairman, must we think of that political system which
estimates the British navy by a calculation of the sums which it has
cost to maintain it; forgetting that, without this navy, there would
have been no wealth to supply these sums, and, perhaps, no nation to pay
them; that without this navy, Great Britain, instead of holding her
present exalted station among the powers of the earth, must long since
have sunk into a secondary and unimportant State; and, probably, into
the condition of a province of that very rival against whom she now so
nobly and so gloriously contends! Is it too much to say of such a
calculation, that it is a paltry calculation, unworthy of a statesman,
and befitting only a schoolboy?

But even the navy of Great Britain, the gentleman from Pennsylvania has
told us, formidable as it is, has not afforded complete protection to
her commerce. How, then, he asks, can we expect to protect our commerce
by a navy? If the gentleman means by "protection" the total prevention
of captures at sea, it is certain that no nation ever did, or ever can
protect its commerce, in that scale. But that is not the true idea of
"protection," which means nothing more than such a degree of safety as
may enable the merchants of a nation, taken as a body, to pursue their
commercial enterprises without discouragement, or eventual loss. This is
all the protection that is ever attempted, or that is necessary; and
this, I contend, we have it in our power to give.

Respecting the navy of Holland, the gentleman from Pennsylvania falls
into a mistake equally remarkable. Holland, he tells us, has no navy,
and yet maintains a very great commerce. Formerly she had a navy, but
could not maintain it, and was forced to give it up. But where did that
gentleman learn that Holland has no navy? Had she no navy in the
American war, when with great gallantry, though with unequal success,
she fought the English at sea? Had she no navy when she fitted out the
formidable armament under De Winter, in October, 1797, which, after a
dreadful conflict, was defeated rather by the superior address of the
British Admiral, than the superior force or bravery of his fleet? Do we
not know, that even now, after this fatal defeat, she possesses, in her
different harbors, a much more numerous fleet than is proposed by the
present bill for the United States? How then could the gentleman from
Pennsylvania say that Holland has no navy? He ought to have known that
until the marine of France and Spain were destroyed, in the present war,
that of Holland was sufficient to turn the scale in their favor and
against England; which gave her not only security for her commerce, but
respectability and weight among the maritime powers of Europe.

As to the other assertion of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that
Holland a long time ago found her navy too burdensome for her resources,
and therefore gave it up, it is equally erroneous. Holland, as we have
seen, never gave up her navy, and even now, exhausted and ruined as she
is by French fraternity and internal revolution, maintains a much
greater one than is proposed for the United States. There is, indeed, a
period in her history, the close of the last and the beginning of the
present century, when she ceased to be ranked with the first maritime
powers of Europe; but that happened, not through the want of means, but
a mistake in policy. Before that period her system had been wholly
maritime. All her resources were applied to her navy. A maritime armed
neutrality was her great object, and she long preserved it with success.
Her commerce, fostered by her marine, spread over every sea; and the
Northern maritime States, guided to the same policy by her influence,
acknowledged her as their umpire, their mediator, and their safeguard.
The great powers courted her alliance and respected her rights. She
interfered with weight in their disputes. Her village of the Hague
became the centre of their most important negotiations. She disputed
the empire of the seas with them singly; and, at one time, she held the
united forces of France and England in check at sea, and finally
compelled the French armies to retreat from her territory, which they
had overrun and occupied. All this she effected by means of her navy,
and of the resources which it had furnished to her by the protection of
her commerce.

At this period she altered her system, and instead of cherishing her
marine, and confining herself solely to the maintenance of her commerce,
by an armed maritime neutrality at the head of the Northern Powers, she
engaged in the land wars of the great military powers, and made
exertions disproportionate to her strength, whereby her resources were
exhausted. Into this fatal mistake she was drawn by the aspiring
ambition, the popularity, and the heroism of one of her own citizens,
stimulated and aided by the aggressions, the insults, and the alarming
encroachments of the French Monarch, Louis XIV., at the zenith of his
glory, evidently aspiring to universal dominion. William III., placed by
his birth and personal merit at the head of the Dutch nation, saw those
objects of French ambition, and roused his own country to resistance.
Called, at length, to the Government of England, he communicated to that
nation his own martial ardor. He finally succeeded in forming a
confederacy to check the progress of France. Of this confederacy,
Holland, his native country, was induced by his influence to become a
principal member. At the head of it he struggled against the power of
France, with unequal means, and sometimes with unprosperous fortune, but
with a genius and perseverance not to be subdued, and a heroism rarely
to be equalled. After his death, the impulse which his mind had given to
his own and other countries continued to be felt, and the confederacy
was renewed under his successor, on a different occasion, but with the
same views. At length its object was altered. France was completely
humbled and Europe secured against her enterprises, but the strength of
Holland was undermined in the struggle. The vast armies which she had
kept up had loaded her with debts. Her operations for so many years, by
land, had drawn off her attention from her marine; and from that moment
it declined, while that of England rose gradually on its ruins.

Hence, Mr. Chairman, the downfall of the maritime greatness of Holland.
Her resources were not equal to the maintenance of fleets and armies, of
both maritime and military strength. While she was left to attend solely
to her maritime concerns, she continued to be powerful, respected, and
prosperous; but her situation on the Continent, in the neighborhood of a
great and ambitious military power, drew her, perhaps unnecessarily,
into land wars, to which her strength was unequal, and, of course, her
naval power declined. But still she continued for a century to keep up a
navy sufficient to form a considerable weight in the scale, and to
secure attention to her rights as a nation; and under this security her
commerce continued to flourish, in a greater or less degree, till a
domestic revolution, aiding and aided by foreign oppression, dried up
all its sources.

What, then, Mr. Chairman, is the instruction which we may draw from this
example? A nation whose population never exceeded two millions and a
half, and whose territory, compared with ours, is but a mere speck on
the surface of the globe, a mere garden spot, was able to maintain a
most formidable marine, while it attended to that object solely, to
extend its commerce under the protection of this marine, and to maintain
not only an equal, but a distinguished rank, among the great powers of
Europe, by whose territories it was surrounded, and by whose formidable
armies it was liable to be invaded. Even this nation, after a mistake in
its policy, or the pressure of inevitable circumstances, it had been
induced to divert its attention from its marine to land wars, to exhaust
its resources, and burden itself with debts too great for its means, by
these disproportionate efforts, still was able to preserve a navy
sufficient to give respectability to its flag, and a degree of safety to
its commerce. Even now, when its resources are dried up by anarchy, or
diverted by foreign exaction into the coffers of another nation; when
its territory is curtailed, and its population reduced to one million
and a half; when it is compelled to maintain an army of 25,000 men for
France, still it has a navy greater than we propose. Shall it, then, be
said, that this country, with probably six millions of population, most
rapidly increasing, with an extent of territory capable of containing
fifty millions, with a commerce greater than that of Holland ever was,
and with more tonnage and sailors than she ever possessed, is not able
to support such a navy as she, even since the commencement of her
downfall, has always supported, and still supports? Yes, it is said by
the gentleman from Pennsylvania; but the good sense of this House and of
this country will, I trust, correct his mistake, as it has so often done
heretofore.

But if it were true, Mr. Chairman, that Holland had afforded no
protection to her commerce by the navy which she has been able to keep
up, does it follow that the same thing will happen to us? Will the same
navy be more efficacious in our case, than in the case of Holland, or
Spain, or Portugal? This must be taken for granted in order to give any
solidity to the argument of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, and yet
nothing can be more untrue. Those States are situated at the very door
of the great maritime powers, and their dominions are also exposed to
invasion by land. They must, therefore, either singly or by combinations
with other powers, contend against the whole maritime force of those
great States, and must maintain navies adequate to that purpose. But we
are under no such necessity. Placed at a vast distance from those great
powers, and in the neighborhood of those possessions which contribute
most to the support of their commerce and their navies, we can attack
them in a weak, and yet a vital part, with our whole force, while but a
small part of their force can at any time be brought to act against us.
It is with this part only that we shall have to contend, should they at
any time drive us into a war. Let us take England as an instance. Her
great and valuable possessions lie at our threshold. The uniform course
of the trade-winds compels all her vast and rich commerce with those
possessions, to pass almost in sight of our shores. The force which she
can send to protect this commerce and annoy us, in case of a rupture,
will not be her whole force, but that part of it only which she can
spare from Europe, after securing her preponderance there. France,
notwithstanding the prostrate condition of her navy at present,
possesses maritime means which will speedily enable her to raise it up
again, whensoever those means come to be directed, as one day they must,
by a Government of some understanding. This navy, and the maritime
combinations which will be formed under its protection, England must
watch and keep under. Her existence will depend upon it. She will,
therefore, have but little force to spare which she can bring to act
against us. A comparatively small maritime force, therefore, will compel
her to respect us, and to avoid a quarrel with us by all just and
reasonable means.

It follows that a moderate navy, a much smaller one than Holland, Spain,
or even Portugal, have supported, would be sufficient for our
protection, aided by the peculiar advantages of our situation. Those
nations, inconsiderable as they are when compared to us in population,
wealth, and extent of territory, have supported navies which, however
unequal to that of England, have yet afforded some degree of protection
to their trade, rendered their flags in some degree respectable, and
given them a weight in the scale, a consequence among nations, which
otherwise they could not have had. And shall not we, with our great and
increasing resources, and the peculiar advantages of our situation, be
able to effect still more?

Mr. NICHOLAS said this question was different from any former question,
with respect to the Navy, which had been before the House. Whatever
gentlemen may have heretofore said with respect to the advantages of a
navy for the protection of our commerce, they must agree that the
present question has a different aspect, as no man can say that
seventy-four gun ships are calculated to resist the kind of force which
has heretofore made attacks upon our commerce in the West Indies.

Mr. N. was far from believing that our armed vessels had produced the
effect which the committee, who reported this bill, stated them to have
done. He thought the gentleman from Pennsylvania had adduced many
sufficient reasons for the fall which had taken place in the price of
insurance, independent of our navy; and that, therefore, the committee
were wholly mistaken that the advantages already derived from our navy
have exceeded the cost of it; and that, if it had been established
several years ago, it would have proved a great saving to the United
States.

Mr. N. confessed he had always been opposed to a naval force for the
purpose of warring with European nations, and whether the force now
proposed is considered as necessary for defence or offence, it must have
that character. The propriety of a naval force for this purpose never
appeared to him in a questionable point of view; he thought every
consideration of policy and interest forbids it. We are well informed,
said he, by the best historians, that the British navy has been the
means of sinking that nation to its present state; for he could not
admire, like the gentleman from South Carolina, the splendor and
prosperity of a nation, which is brought into such a situation as to
render it doubtful whether it can exist for a day, a month, or any other
period. If the navy of Great Britain, then, commenced under different
circumstances from those in which we are placed--which, according to the
gentleman from South Carolina, was not only for the protection of her
commerce, but as a defence against neighboring nations, and to guard
against the worst revolutionary principles--has nearly ruined that
country by the immense sums necessary for its support, shall we, who,
according also to the confession of that gentleman, have nothing to fear
from European nations--[Mr. HARPER interrupted Mr. N. to deny that he
had said we had nothing to fear from Europe. He had said we had nothing
to fear but from the sea.] Mr. N. said this was the way in which he
understood the gentleman, and that no danger exists of any invasion by a
land force. If this is the case, the use to which a navy can be put will
only be to defend our commerce from cruisers, and passing fleets. We
have not, therefore, half the inducements to the establishment of a navy
which influence European nations, and many powerful reasons against such
a force.

The European nations have, most of them, distant colonies, which they
have to protect, and with which they have to keep up a constant
communication across the ocean, which renders a navy in some degree
necessary. But all the European nations commenced their navies under the
delusion that a small force would only be necessary, and that one or two
ships would give them an ascendency over other nations. Can we expect
this, said Mr. N.? No; we begin the business with fewer inducements than
any other nation ever begun a navy, and without necessity; for it is
acknowledged we have nothing now to apprehend from invasion, (and if we
had, this force could not be provided in time,) we have no colonies to
protect, and no intercourse which calls for a naval force.

We cannot, therefore, said Mr. N., embark in this business with the same
motives which influenced all European nations in establishments of this
kind. They built small navies because they would be equal to cope with
the small navies of their neighbors; but we are about to begin the
business with a navy staring us in the face, the most formidable that
any man could suppose to exist. According to his colleague, the British
have 140 sail-of-the-line; and yet our navy is undertaken with the
avowed purpose of keeping her, as well as the other nations of Europe,
in check. Mr. N. asked whether we could ever hope to succeed in a plan
of this kind? We certainly could not, since Great Britain would always
even in war have more than a sufficient force to meet all the ships
which we can build. Besides, if our situation, as gentlemen say, will
make a small force so operative in our hands in time of European wars,
will not our possessing it be sufficient to produce war with Great
Britain, when it is always a sufficient cause for war, in the opinion of
Great Britain, for any other maritime power to put a few more ships in
commission than their ordinary establishment? And, if Congress were to
order the building of fifty ships, it would only increase the certainty
of this effect. How is a naval force to guard us, which Great Britain
can destroy, whenever she pleases, even in time of war? For she has
frequently ships sufficient on our coast to destroy all the vessels
which are contemplated to be built. In short, this navy will be the
means of keeping this country in continual broils. On the first
appearance of arming any additional vessels on the part of Great
Britain, for whatever cause, we must set on foot a negotiation to
combine the other powers of Europe in our favor; and this country will
become the centre of intrigue and tricks for the agents of every
country.

But the gentleman from South Carolina says, this is the cheapest mode of
defence; but does the gentleman prove this? Can he prove that
£10,000,000 sterling is only the third part of the expense of defence,
as he says? Does he not recollect how much of the revenue of that
country goes to pay the interest of their enormous debt, and, therefore,
cannot be considered as a part of the expenditure for defence? The
gentleman will find, on reflection, he is much mistaken in his
calculation in this respect. The gentleman from South Carolina has been
loud in his encomiums on the British navy, on account of its usefulness
to the world; and he calls the calculation of the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, relative to the expenses of a navy, a paltry, schoolboy
calculation, because it has not taken into view this usefulness. That
gentleman, said Mr. N., only referred to the British navy so far as it
was useful in the way gentlemen say they expect ours to be advantageous.
But from the contradictions which the gentleman from South Carolina
seemed to run into on this subject, he did believe that he had not an
eye to a navy, merely for the defence of our commerce; he appeared to
wish that this country should take a stand like that of Great Britain,
that the safety of the world may, at a future day, depend upon us, as
it now does upon Great Britain. Mr. N. believed the ambition of this
country, the pride of its Government, and naval commanders, will all
operate this way; and we may, one day or other, if we proceed with this
navy scheme, be as aspiring, as domineering, as any other nation in the
world, and by this means be embroiled in continual war, and be saddled
with a debt equal to that of Great Britain.

Mr. N. believed there existed no good reason for going into the
establishment of a navy at all, because he believed it would never be
really useful to this country; but if it should be otherwise determined
by a majority of Congress, this, he thought, of all times the most
improper to commence the work.

Mr. J. WILLIAMS then moved to strike out what relates to 18-gun vessels,
on the ground that the thirty-nine small vessels which we have are
sufficient. The motion was negatived without a division.

Mr. J. PARKER proposed filling up the blanks in the section fixing the
pay of captains in the Navy, with an advance from $75 to $100 per month
to captains of 74's, and others in proportion; except the masters of
vessels under 20 guns, which were proposed to be lowered.

Some objection, however, being made to this, and particularly to the
mode of doing the business, this being the first time that the subject
had been before the House, the section was moved to be struck out, and
carried.

The committee then rose, and the House having concurred in the amendment
reported,

Mr. NICHOLAS renewed the motion for striking out the 74-gun ships, and
called the yeas and nays upon it. They were taken and stood, yeas 40,
nays 54, as follows:

      YEAS.--Abraham Baldwin, David Bard, Richard Brent, Robert
      Brown, Samuel J. Cabell, Thomas Claiborne, William Charles,
      Cole Claiborne, John Clopton, John Dawson, Joseph
      Eggleston, Lucas Elmendorph, William Findlay, John Fowler,
      Albert Gallatin, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg, John A.
      Hanna, Carter B. Harrison, Jonathan N. Havens, Joseph
      Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, Edward Livingston,
      Matthew Locke, Nathaniel Macon, Blair McClenachan, Joseph
      McDowell, Anthony New, John Nicholas, Thompson J. Skinner,
      William Smith, Richard Sprigg, Richard Stanford, Thomas
      Sumter, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt,
      Joseph B. Varnum, Abraham Venable, and Robert Williams.

      NAYS.--John Allen, George Baer, jun., Bailey Bartlett,
      James A. Bayard, Jonathan Brace, David Brooks, Stephen
      Bullock, Christopher G. Champlin, James Cochran, William
      Craik, Samuel W. Dana, John Dennis, George Dent, William
      Edmond, Thomas Evans, Abiel Foster, Dwight Foster, Jonathan
      Freeman, Henry Glenn, Chauncey Goodrich, William Gordon,
      Roger Griswold, William Barry Grove, Robert Goodloe Harper,
      Thomas Hartley, William Hindman, Hezekiah L. Hosmer, James
      H. Imlay, John Wilkes Kittera, Samuel Lyman, James Machir,
      William Matthews, Daniel Morgan, Lewis R. Morris, Harrison
      G. Otis, Isaac Parker, Josiah Parker, Thomas Pinckney, John
      Read, John Rutledge, jun., James Schureman, Samuel Sewall,
      Thomas Sinnickson, Samuel Smith, Richard Dobbs Spaight,
      Peleg Sprague, George Thatcher, Richard Thomas, Mark
      Thompson, Thomas Tillinghast, John E. Van Alen, Peleg
      Wadsworth, Robert Waln, and John Williams.

The bill was then ordered to be engrossed for a third reading [and
passed by the same vote].[44]


THURSDAY, February 14.

_Relations with France._

Mr. LIVINGSTON called up for consideration the resolution which he
yesterday laid upon the table, calling upon the PRESIDENT for any
information which he may possess touching the suspension of the French
arrêt, declaring neutral citizens pirates when found on board the
vessels of belligerent powers; which being read,

Mr. L. called the yeas and nays upon it. He said he understood that,
since yesterday, a member of this House had applied at the office of the
Secretary of State, and had been informed that some information had been
received relative to this subject. Perhaps the gentleman would himself
state to the House what he had learned from that office.

Mr. HARPER said, he had only to state, that he had made inquiry at the
office of the Secretary of State, and had been informed that a letter
had been received from our Minister in London, enclosing an extract from
the _Redacteur_ (supposed to be an official French paper) stating that
the Executive Directory had suspended the edict in question. This
extract, he understood, does not state the reason of this suspension;
but our Minister writes it was owing to a threat of the British
Government to retaliate upon French citizens within their power.

The yeas and nays were taken, and stood--52 to 38.


_Naval Pay._

On motion of Mr. JOSIAH PARKER, the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole, on the bill fixing the pay of captains of ships
and vessels of the United States; and after some amendments, the bill
was reported, and ordered to be engrossed for a third reading.

[This bill provides "that all vessels in the service of the United
States, mounting 20 guns and upward, be commanded by captains; those not
exceeding 18 guns (except galleys, which are to be commanded as
heretofore provided by law,) by masters or lieutenants, according to the
size of the vessel, to be regulated by the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES; that the pay of a captain, commanding ships of 32 guns and
upward, be $100 dollars per month, and eight rations per day; of
captains, commanding ships of 20 and under 32 guns, $75 a month, and six
rations a day; of a master-commandant, $60 per month, and five rations
per day; and of lieutenants who may command the smaller vessels, $50
dollars per month, and four rations per day; that whenever any officer
as aforesaid shall be employed in the command of a squadron, in separate
service, the allowance of rations to such commanding officer shall be
doubled during the continuance of such command, and no longer, except in
case of a commanding officer of the Navy, whose allowance, while in
service, shall always be at the rate of sixteen rations per day."]


FRIDAY, February 8.

_Relations with France._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

      _Gentlemen of the House of Representatives_:

      In pursuance of the request, in your resolve of yesterday,
      I lay before you such information as I have received,
      touching a suspension of the arrêt of the French Republic,
      communicated to your House by my Message of the 28th of
      January last. But if the execution of that arrêt be
      suspended, or even if it were repealed, it should be
      remembered that the arrêt of the Executive Directory of the
      2d of March, 1797, remains in force, the third article of
      which subjects explicitly and exclusively American seamen
      to be treated as pirates, if found on board ships of the
      enemies of France.

                          JOHN ADAMS.

      UNITED STATES, _February 15, 1799_.

      _Extract of a letter from Rufus King, Esq., Minister
      Plenipotentiary, &c., London, to the Secretary of State,
      dated 28th November, 1798._

      "Annexed I send you a copy of a note from Lord Grenville,
      respecting the French arrêt transmitted to you with my No.
      9. A late French paper contains a second arrêt which
      postpones the execution of the first."


_Lord Grenville to Mr. King._

      The undersigned, His Majesty's Secretary of State for
      Foreign Affairs, has the honor of communicating to Mr.
      King, Minister Plenipotentiary for the United States of
      America, for the information of his Government, that, by a
      decree, published officially at Paris, it appears to have
      been declared, in the name of the French Directory, that
      every person being a native of or originally belonging to
      neutral countries, or to such as are in amity and alliance
      with the French Republic, who shall bear any commission
      under His Majesty, or who shall form a part of the crews of
      any British ships of war, or other vessels, should, on the
      proof of that fact alone, be considered and treated as a
      pirate, and that it has been ordered that this resolution
      shall be notified to the neutral powers, and to those in
      alliance with France.

      Even this decree, contrary as it is to the usages of every
      civilized nation, cannot excite any surprise, as proceeding
      from those in whose name it has been published. To the
      different powers who are thus insulted, and whose innocent
      subjects are exposed to the most cruel treatment on the
      part of a Government professing friendship or alliance with
      them, His Majesty must leave it to adopt such measures as
      they will, without doubt, judge necessary, in the case of
      an outrage hitherto unexampled in the history of the world.

      The King, however, feels, that protection is also due from
      him to those who sail under his flag, either in His
      Majesty's ships of war, or in other British vessels; His
      Majesty has, therefore, not hesitated to direct it to be
      signified to the Commissioner for French prisoners in Great
      Britain, that the first instance of the execution of this
      decree shall be followed by the most rigorous retaliation
      against the French prisoners, whom the fortune of war has
      already, or may hereafter place at the King's disposal.

      It would certainly never be but with extreme reluctance
      that the King could yield to the painful necessity of
      exposing so many unfortunate individuals to the fatal but
      inevitable effects of this atrocious decree; but His
      Majesty will have at least the satisfaction of feeling that
      nothing has been omitted on his part to prevent its
      execution, and that the authors of it can alone be
      considered responsible for all its guilt and all its
      consequences.

                          GRENVILLE.

      DOWNING STREET, _November 27, 1798_.

Mr. LIVINGSTON moved that this communication be printed.

Mr. ALLEN objected to the motion as it would delay the consideration of
the bill proposing to vest the PRESIDENT with the power of retaliation
in certain cases; and it was clear, from this communication, it ought to
have no effect upon that bill.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said he was not possessed of that intuitive faculty which
the gentleman from Connecticut seemed to have, as he seems prepared to
act on the bill alluded to, without scarcely hearing this communication
read; and, perhaps, without knowing the dates of the different decrees.
The PRESIDENT has told the House that though the obnoxious decree has
been repealed, there is still left in force another decree. Does the
gentleman from Connecticut recollect the words of that decree? Or has he
had time to examine whether that decree is really in force, or not? If
he had done this, Mr. L. said he had not done it. It would appear, from
what happened the other day, that the House ought not to move quite so
rapidly in this business. The House was then told by the gentleman from
South Carolina, that it was impossible that this information could have
been received by the PRESIDENT, because, if it had been received, the
PRESIDENT would undoubtedly have immediately sent it to the House. [Mr.
RUTLEDGE said, he did not use the word impossible, but improbable.] Mr.
L. admitted this might be the word. But it now appears, that the
PRESIDENT has not only received the information then alluded to, but
received it officially.

Mr. ALLEN interrupted Mr. L. by withdrawing his motion. The
communication was ordered to be printed, and was committed to the same
Committee of the Whole to whom was referred the bill vesting the power
of retaliation in the PRESIDENT.


MONDAY, February 18.

_Army Increase._

A bill from the Senate giving eventual authority to the PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES to augment the army. [This bill gives the PRESIDENT
authority, in case a war shall break out between the United States and
any foreign power, or in case of imminent danger of such war, in his
opinion to exist, to organize and raise twenty-four regiments of
infantry, one regiment of riflemen, and three regiments of cavalry. The
PRESIDENT is also authorized to call out the volunteer corps, on all
occasions in which he is at present authorized to call out the militia,
provided that he does not call a greater proportion from any one State,
than he is authorized to call out of the militia, by the law which
directs the 80,000 militia to be held in readiness. If it be necessary
to carry this law into effect, two millions of dollars are appropriated
for the purpose.]

On the question for reading this bill a second time, it was carried--45
to 37.


_Capture of French Vessels._

On motion of Mr. OTIS, the House went into a Committee of the Whole, Mr.
RUTLEDGE in the chair, on the bill encouraging the capture of French
armed vessels, by armed ships or vessels, owned by a citizen or citizens
of the United States, and for allowing salvage in certain cases. The
bill, which proposes a bounty on guns, according to their sizes, having
been read,

Mr. MCDOWELL observed, that this bill is similar to the one which was
two or three different times negatived at the last session. At that
time, he considered the situation of this country more alarming than at
present, and the conduct of France more likely to drive us to
extremities than it has since been. Knowing this, he did not expect
gentlemen would have introduced a bill of this kind. Finding however
that gentlemen are not satisfied with things as they are, but are
desirous of hiring the people of the United States to make war upon
France, though they are unwilling to declare war, and not being willing
to give his vote to any such measure, he should move to strike out the
first section of the bill.

The question was put, when there appeared 43 votes for it, and 42
against it, and the Chairman said "it is carried," before he declared
his vote to be in the negative.

A motion was made for the committee to rise, and negatived--43 to 42.


WEDNESDAY, February 20.

MATTHEW LYON, from Vermont, appeared, and took his seat in the House.


_Alien and Sedition laws._

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, he had received, under cover, a number of petitions
from the State of Vermont, praying for a repeal of the alien and
sedition laws, which he begged leave to present to the House. One of
which having been read, in which, among their other objections to the
laws, the petitioners complain of having been deprived, by the sedition
law, of their Representative in Congress for the greater part of the
present session; Mr. L. moved to have the whole referred to the select
committee to whom was referred the other petitions relative to this
subject; but on Mr. GALLATIN's suggesting that he understood that
committee is ready to report, and that it would therefore be better to
suffer the petitions to lie on the table until that report is made, and
then have the whole referred to the same Committee of the Whole; that
course was taken.


_Capture of French Vessels._

The House took up the report of the Committee of the Whole on the bill
for encouraging the capture of French privateers, by allowing a bounty
on guns, and the motion being to concur in the agreement of the
committee to strike out the first section of the bill,

Mr. MACON said, there were some other observations made the other day,
when this subject was under consideration, which he thought very foreign
to the subject. The history of this bill during the last session was
given. The House was told it was three times rejected--once by trick. He
was surprised to hear two gentlemen make use of this expression. If
there