Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






The American Missionary,

NOVEMBER, 1885.

VOL. XXXIX

NO. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS

       *       *       *       *       *

EDITORIAL.


                                                                   PAGE.

    THE FIGURES--FINANCIAL                                           297
    WHAT OUR FRIENDS THINK AND SAY                                   298
    DEATH OF PRESIDENT WARE                                          300
    IYAKAPTAPI                                                       301
    INDIANS IN THE DAKOTA ASSOCIATION                                303

THIRTY-NINTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    GENERAL SURVEY--CHURCH WORK SOUTH                                304
    EDUCATIONAL WORK SOUTH                                           306
    INDUSTRIAL TRAINING                                              309
    MOUNTAIN WORK                                                    310
    WORK AMONG THE INDIANS                                           311
    WORK AMONG THE CHINESE                                           313
    THE WOMAN'S BUREAU--FINANCES                                     315
    CONCLUSION                                                       316

RECEIPTS                                                             317

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post-Office at New York. N. Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL. D., Mass.


_Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D. D., Mass.


_Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. JAMES POWELL, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Auditors._

    W. H. ROGERS,
    PETER McCARTEE.


_Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._

    LYMAN ABBOTT.
    A. S. BARNES.
    J. R. DANFORTH.
    CLINTON B. FISK.
    A. P. FOSTER.

    _For Two Years._

    S. B. HALLIDAY.
    SAMUEL HOLMES.
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
    CHARLES L. MEAD.
    ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For One Year._

    J. E. RANKIN.
    WM. H. WARD.
    J. L. WITHROW.
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.
    EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D. D., _21 Cong'l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J. E. ROY, D. D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.
  Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON, _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions_.
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, _Field Superintendent_.


_Bureau of Woman's Work._

  Secretary, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N. Y._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields, to
Rev. James Powell, D. D., or to the District Secretaries: letters for
the "AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

May be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or,
when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A
payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE  AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

VOL. XXXIX.     NOVEMBER, 1885.     NO. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

$365,000

NEEDED FOR THE CURRENT YEAR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your Committee are convinced that not less than a THOUSAND DOLLARS a day
are imperatively demanded to perfect the admirably organized plans of
the Association, even for the present, to say nothing of the pressing
needs of the early future--

[FINANCE COMMITTEE'S REPORT ADOPTED BY ANNUAL MEETING AT SALEM.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIGURES.

                                   Donations.      Legacies.

  Oct. 1, 1884, to Sept. 30, 1885 $249,392.10     $41,501.66   $290,894.06
  Oct. 1, 1883, to Sept. 30, 1884  223,034.77      64,559.42    287,594.19
                                   ----------     ----------    ----------
                               Inc.$26,357.63 Dec.$23,057.76 Inc.$3,299.87

The figures given above mark the close of our fiscal year. While they
show a gratifying increase of receipts from living donors over those of
the preceding year, the falling off in legacies has been so heavy that
our books balance on the wrong side, and we are obliged to report a debt
of $15,451.87, which, with the debt of the preceding year, makes a total
indebtedness of $29,237.73.

For an analysis of the figures, we refer our readers to the report of
the Executive Committee on the finances of the year, published in
another part of this number. It was a grand rally our friends made to
save us. We fear that some of them sacrificed more than they ought in
contributing so generously as they did. We pray that God may abundantly
reward them. We thank them, one and all, with a heartiness greater than
we can express. We would not sit in judgment upon the churches and
professed friends who have contributed nothing to our treasury during
the year. We know that some of them were not financially able. But we
cannot believe that this was true of a majority of them.

The Congregational Year Book of 1885 reports 4,092 Congregational
churches in the United States. We received during the year contributions
from 1,677. What can be done to bring the non-contributing churches into
line is a question we beg the pastors of contributing churches and the
friends of the Association to help us answer. The pastors and members of
these non-contributing churches as a general thing do not read our
magazine. They are ignorant of our needs, and we do not know how to
reach them so as to wake them up. Had we an army of agents to visit and
talk to them, we might move them to take our work upon their thought and
sympathy. Our appeals by circular, by newspaper, resolutions of State
conferences and of the National Council, all fail to move them. They
still continue not to hear and not to do. There is only one way that we
can think of by which they can be reached, and that is for the local
conferences to take the matter in hand, and select a committee of "a
persistent ONE," who by letter, and, if need be, by personal visitation,
will bring the delinquents up to meet the obligations of fellowship and
denominational honor.

But as seen over against this long list of _do-nothings_ what a grand
army the 1,677 contributing churches appear! Theirs has been the work
and theirs is the glory of "_a well done_" both from God and man. They
form a base of supplies from which the army at the front can be
recruited and sustained, and which can be counted on for support till
the victory is won. We enter upon the new year with fresh confidence and
renewed strength. No such word as "_fail_" finds place in our vocabulary
so long as we have such friends behind us and God above and around us.
The work will not be permitted to suffer. We shall throw off the debt.
The faithful 1,677 will be reinforced. Our friends will be multiplied,
and the work carried triumphantly forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT OUR FRIENDS THINK AND SAY.

EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS RECEIVED BY THE TREASURER DURING THE PAST FEW
WEEKS.


"If any part of the country is to be put first, the South should be, and
helped most. Hence the inclosed, half of it from myself and the other
half from the Congregational church here. Your work and that of your
compeers is above criticism. All there is of you is put in with a skill
and completeness which are not surpassed; and your plans are as large as
the field and as complete as its needs. No one could get more out of the
money or put it where it would do more good. You and yours are as
unmingled beneficence as rum shops are unmitigated maleficence. Were it
in my power, I would build a new school-house in the South every year.
My heart never thinks of you and your work without blessing you in it;
and I have written the above as a sort of relief." (We hardly feel
ourselves worthy of such generous praise, but we do very heartily thank
our brother for his warm indorsement.--ED.)

"Inclosed find a small sum to help elevate and Christianize the colored
freedmen. Grains of sand make the mountains, and drops of water the
ocean, and the invisible workmen rear the coral islands; so may God's
people one and all _do what they can_, and your debt will be wiped out."

"At our meeting last evening, I read your appeal and took up a
collection of $6, which I send you. It is a little Home Missionary
church of only 10 members, but they are good ones, and in earnest. Hope
all other churches will do as well and your society be saved from debt."

"Got your final appeal before last Sunday, but were so happy to think we
had not waited for it, having taken our collection and subscription two
weeks before. But owing to the general poverty among my people, we had
to give time, and the sum is only now made up. I may say that this
little amount at this time represents more real _giving_ than any
collection I ever secured. May a blessing go with it."

"I feel myself, like Paul, a debtor to all men, especially the classes
you represent. Accept, then, my single mite, in the spirit in which I
desire to send it, and may the Lord free you from the threatening debt
by leading your constituency to feel their indebtedness to these classes
and to Himself."

"I inclose $10, and wish I might increase it a hundred-fold. I had
already given all that I intended, but could not resist the urgent
appeal for the needy."

"The notices of your financial need came and touched a responsive chord
in my heart. A week ago I gave a preparatory notice that a collection
would be taken yesterday in your behalf. The people responded quite
liberally. Inclosed find draft for the amount. You have my earnest
prayer for the success of your effort to raise what you lack. May God
bless you in your work and labor of love." (It was indeed a generous
contribution, yet nearly one-third of it came out of the pastor.--ED.)

"I had thought I had done all I could afford in these times, but
coincident with your appeal came the inclosed, for which I had another
place; but here, take it. The Lord will provide."

"In response to your society's importunity, I inclose $2. I took the
collection up after a sermon I preached on Foreign Missions. We
surprised our people by the amount, as we don't usually get by a
collection one dollar. I hope you will realize soon that there is no
debt." (We have always believed that one of the best ways to rouse
people up to Home Missions is to stir them up on Foreign Missions.--ED.)

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH OF PRESIDENT WARE.


Edmund A. Ware was born in North Wrentham, now Norfolk, Mass., Dec. 22,
1837, and died suddenly of heart disease in Atlanta, Ga., Sept. 25,
1885. He passed the early years of his life under conditions which made
him acquainted with hardships, and fitted him to have warm sympathy for
those who struggled against obstacles and trials.

He was graduated from Yale College in 1863. During his college course
his attention was often turned to the field for Christian work, then
being opened in the South by the steady advance of our armies, and his
sympathies were strongly enlisted for a race just coming out of the
prison house of bondage, and he was ambitious to have a part in laying
the foundations of a new and better society in the regions desolated by
war.

He was appointed an officer of the Freedman's Bureau in 1867, with
charge of the schools opened under its auspices in the State of Georgia,
which position he held for three years, until the closing of that branch
of the work of the government.

His great work, however, was in connection with Atlanta University, an
institution for higher education, whose foundation he was active in
securing, and over whose interests he presided until the day of his
death. He labored for its welfare and that of the people in whose
interests it was established with rare devotion, and rejoiced in its
steady growth and prosperity with special personal gratification.

Owing to some peculiar circumstances the institution early secured the
favorable attention of the State authorities, and an annual
appropriation from the State treasury. In the endeavors to secure and
confirm this grant he was conspicuously and honorably active, and during
the many years of its continuance his relations to the officers of the
State with whom he has thus been brought into contact have been
exceptionally pleasant, and in some cases cordial.

During the last year of his life he took great interest in the
successful opening of an industrial department in the institution, and
for the last few weeks his great anxiety had been to secure the
furnishing of a large new building whose erection he had personally
overlooked. He had returned to Atlanta in advance of his family to make
preparations for the school year soon to open, had completed most of his
plans, and seemed in unusual good health and spirits. Soon after dinner
on Friday, Sept. 25, feeling dizzy while in his own house, where he was
alone, he sought the open air and walked toward the house of Professor
Bumstead, but becoming alarmed by increasing faintness he made loud
calls, which were promptly responded to by Mr. and Mrs. Bumstead; but in
spite of all remedies and efforts he speedily passed away to enter upon
his well-earned rest and his glorious reward. The crushing effects of
this sudden blow upon his household, upon his associates and the people
who loved and revered him, cannot be described. At his funeral services
all classes of the community were largely represented, and sympathy for
the bereaved was profound. The grief of former pupils was touching, and
was like that of children bereft of a father.

So passed away in the maturity of his powers and the midst of his
usefulness, one of the earliest and most efficient of that great company
who have toiled since the war in this broad and needy field. His
departure seems like a translation; being taken suddenly without the
pains and anxieties of wasting sickness, in the full tide of his
greatest success, before any impairment of vigor or any calamity had
overtaken the work he loved so well. He was a man of great power over
other men, especially over young people, who were caught up by his
enthusiasm, and borne along sometimes to the attainment of surprising
results. He was well fitted to be a leader in the sphere he chose for
himself, and made his mark upon his generation, and had a large and
honorable share in securing the results already achieved, which are to
bless the State and nation with increasing power.

A good man has fallen, and a great gap is made in the ranks of laborers
at the front; but the Lord who loves his own cause better than we do
will see that it suffers no loss. As the Lord has taken care that his
servant rests from his labors, it is ours to see that they follow Him.

       *       *       *       *       *

IYAKAPTAPI.


That is, the _ascent_ from the plains of the head-waters of the
Minnesota River to the Coteau du Prairie, or high table-land to the
west. The old trail up-hill here gave the name _Ascension_ to the place.
There the tribes--Dakota tribes--met together for their annual autumn
feast--the missionary conference on the 24th of September. On the
Sabbath the little church was too small, and 400 Indians, with a
sprinkling of white people, sat outside in the sun, some on benches, and
most on the grass, around the Communion table. The tents of those who
had come in from long distances were pitched on either side in the
ravines, among the fall foliage, and the wide brown plain, with a long
gleam of shining lake far off, lay below. As we took the bread and hid
our faces in our hands, we thought of that distribution by Galilee, when
they sat in companies on the grassy slope by the lake. It was not "the
touch of a vanished hand and the sound of a voice that is still," but
the real presence of Him who said "I am the bread of life," to these
400 Christian Indians whom He had brought up from the low, dead level of
barbarism to the present heights of Christian life.

One little dark baby in a white dress was baptized, and four young
people publicly confessed their faith in a newly-found Saviour.

Solomon, "His Own Grandfather," who has gathered a church of the Dakota
refugees from the Minnesota troubles of 1862, over in Manitoba, spoke to
us of the spiritual nature of God's kingdom; and Ehnamani, who years ago
laid down his warrior weapons, administered the bread, telling us of the
tribulation and fire through which Christ went to become bread for our
life. Then the "beloved John," our brother missionary who threw his
young strength into the Dakota work at its darkest hour twenty-five
years ago, could hardly control the emotion with which he spoke of the
trials out of which the Dakotas had been brought to this present joy and
strength through "His stripes."

It has been a long _ascent_ for fifty years, but now fourteen churches,
with a thousand members; eleven young men's Christian associations; a
native missionary society, receiving contributions amounting this year
to $1,165, much of it the fruit of hard labor by Dakota women, with the
needle and at the wash-tub; a Christian community with its own native
justices of the peace, rigidly enforcing temperance and marital law,
and, according to the testimony of the United States agent on the
ground, more careful of religious observances than white communities,
and no less exemplary in morals; thousands of acres of cultivated land;
these are some of the outward signs of the inner life of God in the
heart.

Add to this the 1,000 or more converts gathered in later years and
claimed by Episcopalians and Roman Catholics; add the long roll of those
who have ascended to their Lord; add the white people who have been
saved and inspired by the example of their Dakota brethren, and compute
if you can the spiritual fruit of the Dakota Indian Mission.

Then think of this result wrought out, in the midst of what is fast
becoming one of the most influential communities of our land. Christian
churches by hundreds, Christian colleges and Christian homes, all built
on this early Indian work as a foundation. Then, as we rejoice in the
present interest in work for Indians, remember the obloquy and
opposition of the past through which the early workers struggled.

To appreciate this ascent, one should come up from Western Indian
barbarism, and not down from Eastern culture.

Leave the nightly drumming and dancing and revelry, the daily offering
to heathen gods, the daily wailing and cutting of the flesh at the
scaffold of sepulture, and one will acknowledge that God alone has
wrought this change.

Before the regular sessions of the conference a "theological institute"
occupied two days. This was attended by some thirty pastors and leading
members of the churches. There were lectures on Bible history, on
family relations, on preaching and pastoral work. Then the general
meeting opened with a hymn written for the occasion by the organist, a
young Indian, and the singing was led by native young men. The topics at
the conference were such as the education of children, the missionary
cause; and the one that seemed to call out most discussion was, "How to
secure the spiritual growth of the Church." The young men showed great
interest in their Christian associations, and voted to affiliate with
their kindred in the white communities, of whom they heard through the
Rev. Mr. Williams, who represented the Christian association of the
young men of Minneapolis. The Indian women, too, had their missionary
meeting, and show the same traits and give evidence of the same activity
and zeal that make their white sisters the main strength of the
Christian Church.

So we bid all take heart, and go on upward--iyakaptapi. C. L. HALL.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIANS IN THE DAKOTA ASSOCIATION.


This is an ecclesiastical body of a hundred churches that has the
opportunity to show the unity of the spirit in race fellowship. Besides
the local German Association, one of the five belonging to it, the
Indian Mission churches and pastors of the Santee Agency and of Fort
Sully, with their superintendents, Revs. Alfred L. and Thomas M. Riggs,
are among the members. At the recent annual meeting, held at Huron,
September 17th to 20th, there were present the Riggs brothers, three
lady missionaries, and two female and four male Indians. The service of
Rev. A. L. Riggs, as moderator, was justly commended for its urbanity
and promptness. At the meeting of the Woman's Missionary Society, held
with the mixed assembly, the two Indian women, Estelle Ward and Ellen
Spotted Bear, were brought forward, in their usual white woman's garb,
to make talks, which were interpreted by Mrs. T. M. Riggs. During some
discussion upon Indian work, the Riggs brothers supplemented their
remarks by addresses from Frank Frazier and Stephen Yellow Hawk, a
deacon and a pastor. At the Communion, on the Lord's Day, this deacon
was associated with three white men in distributing the elements. At the
final meeting, on Sunday night, with a crowded house, between the
addresses of Rev. Drs. Jos. B. Clark and Jos. E. Roy were sandwiched two
hymns, sung by the natives and their teachers, and also an address by
the dignified pastor at the Santee Agency, Rev. Artemas Ehnamani,
interpreted by Rev. A. L. Riggs. This, and the talks of the other
Indians, reported their former condition as heathen and their coming to
the light through their missionaries. Particularly touching was the
allusion of Pastor Ehnamani to the sainted men, Drs. Williamson and
Riggs. All showed the one spirit, that of the common Redeemer.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAKE MOHONK CONFERENCE.


On the 6th, 7th and 8th of October the third annual meeting of the Lake
Mohonk Conference was held. Hon. Albert K. Smiley and Mrs. Smiley, as
usual, extended the hospitality of their magnificent mountain retreat to
the friends of the Indian. The sessions of the conference were of great
interest. Eminent men and women read historical and suggestive papers,
and ably discussed the great questions of the Indian problem. The
conference, after much earnest debate, were unanimous in recommending
such legislation by Congress as will give allotments of land in
severalty to the Indians--the sale of lands not required for occupancy,
and funding of proceeds therefor for their benefit--the early
discontinuance of rations and annuities, increased educational
facilities, including industrial and especially agricultural, and the
dispersion and diffusion of the Indians among the other people of the
country, with all the rights and immunities of other citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRTY-NINTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

       *       *       *       *       *

GENERAL SURVEY.


This Association by its chartered rights is authorized to go anywhere
that it finds people destitute of Gospel privileges. Limitation of means
and coöperation with other societies may compel it to a narrower sphere
than the demands call for; but this is the principle that underlies the
Association's organization, and that has characterized all its historic
development. The work is at present confined to this country. We have
missions in sixteen States and three Territories. The combined
population of these States and Territories is 17,459,610, and at least
one-third of that number are the legitimate objects of this
Association's care. By reason of the necessities of the people our work
is both evangelistic and educational: the church and the school in their
united aim securing the salvation of body, mind and soul; reaching home
life, social life and business life; laying the only foundation on which
can rest a progressive and enduring civilization. These mighty forces of
Christianity--mother and daughter--in mutual helpfulness and in close
proximity, are the agencies through which, with God's blessing, we hope
to reach and save the people.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHURCH WORK SOUTH.


STATISTICS.

  Churches                                          112
  Missionaries, of which 89 are pastors             119
  Members                                         6,881
  Added during the year                           1,127
  Sunday School scholars                         10,569


In this department of our work we are permitted to report very decided
growth. Heretofore, the average number of churches organized each year
has been six. This year the number runs up to seventeen. This increase
comes from the maturing of enterprises that have been nursed for a
longer or shorter time, and also the fruiting of our school process and
the enlarging of our mountain work. These new churches are at Pleasant
View and Rockhold, Ky.; at Cedar Cliff, Melville and Johnson's, N. C.;
at Jellico, Pleasant Hill, Robbins, Jonesboro, Grand View and Helenwood,
Tenn.; at Rutland, Ga.; Ironton, Ala.; Greenville, Miss.; Abbeville,
La.; and at Dallas and Austin, Tex. They have all been supplied with the
ministry of the word, though several have been yoked two and two under
one pastor. Eight of them have houses of worship, the others use
school-houses or chapels of school buildings.

Of the 89 pastors who have ministered to our 112 churches, 30 were from
the North and 59 were raised up in our own institutions at the South.
The average membership of these churches is 61. Total additions for the
year, 1,127, of which, on confession of faith, 883. Raised for church
purposes, $12,394.78; for benevolence, $1,625.86.

The evangelist, Rev. J. C. Fields, accompanied by his wife, who aids him
by song, has continued his service through the year. He has labored at
Louisville; in our three churches at Nashville; at Meridian, Jackson and
Greenville, Miss.; and at Athens, Tecumseh, Montgomery, Marion, Selma,
Talladega, Birmingham, Ironton and Shelby Iron Works, Ala. As a result,
between seven and eight hundred souls were hopefully led to Christ, and
about one half of them gathered into our churches; while other
denominations shared in the precious harvest. At several of the places
visited, the religious interest assumed marvelous power.

At Marion there were 55 who professed Christ, the work spreading from
our church into the State Normal school located there. Two-thirds of the
converts were young men, ranging from fifteen to twenty years of age,
who gave themselves earnestly to prayer and labor for the conversion of
their comrades. A little girl, eight years old, was the first of a
family to accept Christ. Her mother followed. The father, a drunkard,
through the persuasion of friends, visited the church for the first
time. When opportunity was given those desiring salvation to express
their desire, the little child crossed over to where her father was, and
begged him to come. He did not that evening, but a few nights later he
yielded and gave his heart to the Saviour. It is a custom among the
colored people to give the hand of welcome to those who have made up
their minds to become Christians; and we can well believe, as an
eye-witness describes, "it was a beautiful as well as a touching scene
when this little girl stepped forward to welcome father and mother on
the Lord's side."

At Talladega College there were 116 conversions, including every inmate
of the ladies' hall, and, with a single exception, every boy in the
Stone Hall. The meetings, as distinctively revival, had to come to a
close for lack of material upon which to work, and take the form of
praise and thanksgiving unto God for the marvelous display of His grace.
It was a literal fulfillment of the Divine promise to "pour out a
blessing that there should not be room enough to receive it."

At Selma there were 300 who confessed their Saviour. Gray-haired men,
grandmothers, men and women in the prime of life, youth and children,
were among the converts. "The most glorious work of grace," writes
Pastor Curtis, "it has ever been my privilege to see."

Revivals have also been enjoyed in the Central Church and Straight
University, New Orleans; in the Tougaloo University, where nearly all
the students were led to Christ; at New Iberia, La., where, under the
labors of the pastor, fifty-nine were brought into church fellowship;
in the First and University churches, Atlanta, and at several other
places. It has been a year of marked religious interest and progress
nearly all over the field.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDUCATIONAL WORK SOUTH.


STATISTICS.

  Chartered Institutions                              6
  Normal and Graded Schools                          14
  Common Schools                                     36
  Instructors                                       250
  Pupils                                          8,823

  Classifying the students, we have: Theological, 96; Law, 67;
  College, 52; College Preparatory, 113; Normal, 814; Grammar,
  Intermediate and Primary, 7,681.


The resignation during the year of Professor Salisbury, Superintendent
of our school work, and the transfer to Chicago of Dr. Roy,
Superintendent of our church work at the South, raised the question
whether, in view of the system to which these brethren had reduced the
work of their respective fields, the two departments might not be
consolidated and their care assigned to one man. With much hesitation it
was decided to try the experiment. Rev. C. J. Ryder, of Medina, O., has
been selected to take the new position, and has entered upon its duties.
His headquarters will be at Cincinnati, from which point, by reason of
its central location and excellent railroad facilities, the whole field
will be easily accessible. We regretfully part with Professor Salisbury.
The three years of his service have been very valuable to our work, and
it is largely because of this service we are permitted to report that
our schools were never before so well organized nor so efficient as now.

The exhibit of our schools in the World's Exposition at New Orleans
attracted much attention from visitors. The New Orleans papers spoke of
it in very complimentary terms. Descriptions of it were written and
widely published in the newspapers all over the country. President
Hitchcock, of Straight University, Rev. S. E. Lathrop and several of our
colored students, took charge successively of the exhibit, and were on
hand to answer questions regarding the American Missionary Association,
its schools and its work. A large number of pamphlets and tracts were
distributed. Representatives from every State in the Union, and from
nearly every nation on the face of the earth, dropped in to learn the
object-lesson the exhibit taught of what Christian education had done
for the Indian and the Negro.

At Midway, Ga., an additional building has been erected for the
Dorchester Academy. The Storrs School, Atlanta, by the sale of bullets
dug from the battlefields around the city, realized enough to secure a
much-needed kindergarten building. Mrs. F. L. Allen, of Waterbury,
Conn., has donated us a property in Quitman, Ga., containing three acres
of land, on which stands a hotel building, nearly new and thoroughly
furnished, to be used as a school for girls. The ladies of the First and
Second Congregational churches of Waterbury promptly seconded Mrs.
Allen's gift by raising $1,000 to make the necessary alterations to put
the building in order for the school, and the ladies of the
Congregational churches of the State have so far responded to an appeal
for them to assume the support of the school, that it starts out with an
assurance of success from the beginning. Rev. J. H. Parr, formerly of
the Tillotson Institute, is to have the school in charge.

We have not been able to spend much money this year in brick and
mortar. We have been obliged to put our funds almost exclusively into
the more practical work of mind and character building.

Fisk University celebrated its twentieth anniversary this year by
graduating from its college course fifteen, two of the number being
young ladies. This makes 52 who have been graduated from Fisk. The
Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of Tennessee, several
State officials, many Senators and Representatives attended the
Commencement exercises and alumni dinner. A series of speeches in
commendation of the good work done at the institution were made by these
gentlemen, who bore testimony to the high standing of the Fisk students
as teachers and citizens throughout the State. Of the 37 graduates
previous to the class of this year, the record shows that 24 of them are
principals and teachers in different schools; 5 are pastors of churches;
1 is a missionary in Africa under the American Board; 2 are practicing
lawyers; 2 are studying for the professions--1 in a theological, the
other in a medical school; 1 is a member of the Tennessee Legislature;
and 2, who were teachers, have died. Its roll numbers 427, including
representatives of 21 States and 1 Territory.

Talladega College has had 365 students. This was more than it could
comfortably care for. The girls' hall was crowded. Some applicants had
to be refused for lack of room. The new Cassidy School building, having
been used by over 200 pupils, continues to justify its right to be.
Prosperity has marked the life of this college in all its departments.

Atlanta University maintains its well-earned reputation for school work
of the highest order; 297 students have shared its privileges. Colonel
L. W. Avery, Chairman of the State Board of Visitors, in his report last
year, was so emphatic and strong in his praise of what he had seen and
heard at the University, that the other members of the Board would not
believe him, and he was compelled to modify his praises before they
would accept his report. This year the whole Board was present at the
examinations, and the result is that they have every one been converted,
and are now ready to go even farther than the Colonel in testifying that
"the proficiency attained in the scholastic results has been simply
astonishing." The University continues to receive the annual
appropriation of $8,000 from the State--a fact that is all significant
respecting the undeniable worth of the school.

Tougaloo University, located on the Illinois Central R. R., about eight
miles north of Jackson, the capital of Mississippi, receives State aid
to the amount of $3,000 annually. Two hundred and sixteen students last
year have taxed its utmost capacity for accommodation. Governor Lowry
and the State Board of Visitors attended the commencement exercises, and
were surprised at the evidence of the Negro's capacity for education.
Four students took degrees in the elementary Normal course that requires
ten years to complete it, and one took the degree from the higher Normal
course, to complete which requires twelve years.

Straight University, New Orleans, notwithstanding the devastation of
floods and the failure of cotton crops that last year so severely
affected the very limited finances of the colored people of Louisiana,
was filled with students at the beginning of the school year, and
continued not only crowded, but _over_crowded to the end; 584 scholars
were enrolled, including representatives from Cuba, Honduras, New
Mexico, Texas, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Illinois, and even Old
England.

Tillotson Institute, Texas, has also had a very crowded and successful
year. This is the youngest of our chartered schools. It has the modesty
that in every way is becoming the youngest member of the family, but in
all that is excellent in work it stands not a whit behind the oldest and
the best. It has already outgrown the comfortable limits of its
habitation. The crowding process has struck it, and its cry for relief
is growing sharper and sharper. We shall have to heed its cry one of
these days. The great and rapidly-growing State of Texas challenges our
forethought and our care. The State Superintendent of Public
Instruction, Hon. B. M. Baker, was present at the commencement
exercises, and after commending the teachers for their faithful work and
testifying that the best teachers of the colored schools in Texas were
graduates of the Tillotson Institute, he publicly thanked the people of
the North for the establishment and maintenance of the school. Judge
Fullmore, a county school superintendent, who was also present, not only
indorsed all that Mr. Baker had said, but added that in his appointments
of teachers he always gave Tillotson graduates the preference, and that
a certificate of graduation from Tillotson in the hands of an applicant
was all the evidence of character and ability he needed.

Were we to continue sketching the salient points in the work of our
other schools scattered all over the South, it would be simply to give
fresh illustrations of the five facts already made prominent--crowded
schools, growing necessities, faithful work, good results and outside
commendation.

As compared with last year, the statistics in our school work show a
falling off of two chartered institutions and seven common schools. On
its face, this looks like loss; in reality, it is gain. The two
chartered institutions dropped out of our statistics are Berea and
Hampton, that, as a matter of fact, have been for several years
self-sustaining and independent, and which, as formerly fostered by us,
we have hitherto reported; they are still in the field, doing a greater
work than ever, while the seven common schools, dropped because they
ceased to be needed where they were located, are more than represented
in the better work of the other schools, to strengthen which the money
thus set free has been transferred.

We are steadily but slowly coming to the realization of the idea that
was the inspiration of the American Missionary Association's school
system--Christian colleges and Normal schools for the training of
leaders, and Christian preparatory schools to furnish them with the
right kind of material. The South is year by year, as its financial
ability increases and its public sentiment improves, doing more for the
rudimental instruction of its children. It is the duty of the State to
provide elementary education for every child within its borders, and to
that point the Southern States must one day come; but just in proportion
as they come to that point, the necessities for our work increase. The
demand for Christian teachers and preachers and professional men in all
ranks at the South will grow as facilities for the elementary education
of the children multiply. Our aim is not only to save the land from
ignorance, but to save it from godless intelligence. Infidelity is as
much the enemy of free institutions as ignorance; and when the children
are intelligent, an ignorant leadership is almost as effective as an
infidel leadership to raise up an infidel people; so that, as
intelligence spreads among the youth of the South, we are placed under
accumulating obligations, by virtue of our loyalty to the kingdom of our
Lord, and by virtue of our interest in the perpetuity of republican
institutions, to strengthen, enlarge and multiply this work. Of course,
just now, and for a great many years to come, by far the greater part of
our school work must be in the lower grades of instruction. So long as
it can be said, that in the Southern States eighty per cent. of the
colored and thirty per cent. of the white population are illiterate;
that there are not educational facilities enough to furnish fifty per
cent. of the children with even a chance to learn their letters; that
there are whole communities and sections in which there are no schools
whatever; that there are thousands and tens of thousands of children and
youth who would be glad to go to school did they have opportunity; so
long we must continue to furnish elementary instruction in all our
schools, and as far as possible to open such small schools as may meet
the present but transient exigency, to be dropped, as we have the seven
common schools above referred to, when, from whatever cause, the
necessity for them has passed away. The Executive Committee desires to
emphasize and to have the constituents of the American Missionary
Association keep it constantly before them, that as the cause and means
of popular education extend in the South, the necessity for the work of
the Association becomes stronger and stronger.

As seen from this stand-point, the desirability of bringing our larger
institutions as speedily as possible, where they shall be able to take
care of themselves, becomes clear and urgent. They should be at once so
far endowed that the question of their permanence as conservators of the
supremacy of Christian leadership in the thought, character and life of
the people should be settled beyond peradventure for all time.

We commend these schools to the special regard of those who are looking
about to invest money where, in the name of the Lord, it will yield rich
and enduring returns.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDUSTRIAL TRAINING.


  Schools in which industries are taught             16
  Special industrial teachers                        10
  Teachers combining industrial with other work      21


Industrial teaching is made prominent at Santee, Oahe, at all of our
chartered institutions, at Le Moyne Institute, Memphis, Tenn., Lewis
High School, Macon, Ga., and incidentally at six other schools. Aid has
been received from the Slater Fund for this work at Macon, Atlanta,
Nashville, Tougaloo, Talladega, Memphis and Austin. Nearly all the
scholars in attendance pursue some of the branches of industry taught.
Housekeeping, cooking, dress-making, care of the sick, agriculture,
blacksmithing, harness-making, type-setting and printing are made
prominent, according to the conveniences at hand. Atlanta, Talladega and
Tougaloo have farms which are worked by the students under the
instruction of practical farmers. At several other points farming could
be successfully taught if only we had the farms, and we could have the
farms if only we had the money.

For the teaching of the trades we need special buildings. Progress has
been made in this direction. Atlanta University has erected "The Knowles
Industrial Building," a memorial of the late Mr. L. J. Knowles, of
Worcester, Mass., whose widow not long before her death appropriated
$6,000 for this object. It is a brick building 100 by 44 feet, with two
stories and a basement, and, for its use, is one of the finest in the
South. At Macon, a two-story building has been constructed--the upper
story for the Lewis Library and the lower for a carpenter shop. At
Talladega has been also built a two-story structure, the upper story to
be used for carpentry and the lower for blacksmithing. The citizens of
Memphis two years ago gave Professor Steele $1,000 to put a girl's
industrial department into the Le Moyne school, and now they have
pledged him $600 more to secure a workshop for the boys. Fort Berthold
in Dakota and Fisk and Straight Universities at the South greatly need
industrial buildings, and there are other schools of which the same
might be said with equal emphasis.

It is difficult to overestimate the importance of industrial training.
Latest in development in connection with our schools, it may yet prove
first in value. Labor is heaven-ordained. It is the chief
instrumentality through which a people are elevated. Grace saves the
soul and transforms character instantly. It makes the savage and
sinner kind and good instantly; but it will not instantly make him a
good farmer, a skilled mechanic, a trained scholar. Up from the lowest
to the highest, man must toil patiently and laboriously. Nature will
tolerate neither jumps nor deceptions. It is no kindness to put a man
where he is out of place, and still less is it a kindness to make him
believe that he has a right to be there. He who climbs up into position
or who is foisted into it by any other instrumentality than by the toil
necessary to fit him for the position, the same is a thief and a robber.
The police forces of Nature will speedily put him under arrest. The
judicial forces of Nature will soon cast him into a prison, out of which
he shall not come until beginning at the bottom, by diligent labor, he
is willing to pay the last farthing at every step in the process of his
advancement. The implements and the products of industry are the gauges
of civilization. Between the roughly-hewn stone hatchet and the
finely-polished steel axe lies all the history of the world's progress.
The college, the library, the fine residence and the factory of modern
civilization are at one end of the line, the other end of which starts
from the dug-out and the hut. Man, in the highest estate, forget or
ignore it as he may, has that in him which connects him with the lowest,
and labor, the hard labor of his ancestors, extending through the ages
as well as his own, has been the means of bringing him where he is. If
the Indian and the negro are to be elevated, they must rise by the same
steps as have others. They must _work_ their way up. But they who are
above them, remembering the pit out of which they themselves have been
dug, must give them a chance to rise, and help them as they try to rise.
That they have the capacity for elevation along every line of human
development has been abundantly proved over and over again. The
industrial exhibit of the colored people at the recent Centennial
Exposition in New Orleans, was in every way gratifying to their friends.
Though these people are only 20 years out of the house of their 250
years' bondage, antedated by millenniums of barbarism, they sent
articles showing their progress in the industries that more than filled
the entire gallery assigned them in one end of the immense Government
building.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOUNTAIN WORK.


This work has gone forward the past year with marked success. In
Kentucky, Rev. J. T. Ford, having taken the pastoral charge of the
church at Williamsburg, Rev. A. A. Myers was at liberty to give himself
to more extended missionary work; and, as might be expected, he has gone
into it with a will. He has organized three new churches; one at
Jellico, with 11 members; one at Pleasant View, with 13 members, and one
at Rockhold, with 15 members. Under his superintendency the Jellico
church has erected a good, commodious house, but it needs a bell. The
congregations number from 250 to 300, and the pastor, Rev. E. W.
Bullock, reports the interest as increasing.

Pleasant View Church has also put up a house of worship, now complete
except seats. At Rockland, stone is on the ground. Mr. Myers using his
own team to haul it, himself being teamster, and the lumber is all ready
to begin work. A chapel is soon to be erected at South Williamsburg,
where there are hundreds around the mills who cannot be induced to
attend church up town. Eleven Sunday-schools, with an enrollment of
1,200 and an average of 750, have been maintained. These schools extend
from Jellico on the State line to the northern part of Whitley County
along the railroad. Besides these, several students from the Academy
have conducted Sunday-schools at their homes, reporting an enrollment of
160.

Day schools have been kept at Woodbine, Rockhold, Dowlais and Jellico
with marked success.

The Williamsburg Academy has had an enrollment of 203. The reputation
and influence of this school are extending far and wide. The teachers,
imbued with the missionary spirit, have been a power in the church and
in the community as well as in the school. The question whether our
schools could be kept up if colored students were admitted, has been
squarely met and answered, and right at our central station,
Williamsburg, we have had colored pupils during the past two terms. When
they were first admitted, there was a stampede of the white scholars,
reducing the number of pupils from 120 to 40, but as they had a chance
to think the matter over, and they saw the school going right along as
if nothing had happened, and that it was going to keep right along, they
began to come back again, with still others to join them, so that the
school closed with a larger enrollment than the previous year. The
excitement caused a discussion that found its way into the newspapers of
the State, and gave the school such an advertisement as could not have
been secured by years of ordinary work. We shall have no more trouble
with the color question in Whitley County. It has been settled, and
settled right.

In Tennessee, the Independent Church at Sherwood, and its pastor, Rev.
A. B. Smith, have entered our fellowship by joining the Central South
Association. On the Cumberland plateau, Pastor B. Dodge has secured the
organization of a church with 16 members, which is associated with his
church at Pomona. An organ and hymn-books were furnished by the Pilgrim
Church, Cambridgeport, Mass. The people have subscribed $300, chiefly in
lumber, toward a much-needed chapel for church and day school. At both
these points day schools have been maintained. At Grand View, the first
year of the Academy has proved a success, and now a church has been
organized in association with it, both to be under the care of Rev. C.
B. Riggs.

The school work of Mrs. St. Clair in Scott County has been remarkable.
Three years ago there were 27 saloons and two Sunday-schools in the
county, one school held in Mrs. St. Clair's tent and the other in a
blacksmith shop; now there are three saloons and 25 Sunday-schools, and
the good people are praying with much confidence that their prayers will
be answered for three less saloons and three more Sunday-schools. Mr. R.
F. Taft, of Worcester, Mass., was sent down to help in this field. His
labors were wonderfully blessed. Two churches, one at Robbins, the other
at Helenwood, were organized. He is not able to continue in our service,
but, in speaking of what has been accomplished, he has this to say:
"Wherever I went the people were so eager to hear the Gospel that it was
a joyous work to me. All came together, natives and Northerners, and our
colored brethren. If the A. M. A. has accomplished nothing more, it has
broken down the line of color, and to-day all mingle together in seeking
after the pearl of great price." The work of Mr. Taft has been taken up
by Rev. W. E. Barton, a recent graduate of Berea College, who finds
already so much on his hands that he is crying for help.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORK AMONG THE INDIANS.


STATISTICS.

  Churches                                            5
  Members                                           301
  Ministers                                           7
  Schools                                            15
  Teachers                                           52
  Pupils                                            706
  Sunday-school scholars                            776


Our Indian work is chiefly in Nebraska and Dakota, among the great Sioux
nation that numbers about sixty thousand, and the tribes that mingle
with, or are located around, them. We have three main stations, Santee,
Oahe and Fort Berthold, all situated on the Missouri River, and at
points strategic for pushing missions out among the people.

_Santee._--Here is planted the Santee Normal School, under the care of
Rev. A. L. Riggs. This institution, pioneer of its kind, began work for
the higher training of Indian pupils fifteen years ago. Its history and
experience show the great advancement that has been made by the Indian
mind. At first the pupils came as to a sort of picnic, and expected to
slip out when the fun stopped. But now the discipline, attendance and
class work are of a high order and will compare favorably with schools
of similar grade elsewhere. One thing quite noteworthy about Santee is
that while it is often impossible to fill the desired quota of girls for
other schools, applications at Santee from girls and young women far
exceed the ability to receive them. This school, with its 177 pupils
busily engaged in their studies under the instruction of an able corps
of teachers, in possession of buildings that are up to the times in all
their equipments, reaching by its influence every Indian village of the
great empire of the Missouri River basin, is an institution from which,
with God's blessing upon its work, we have a right to expect great
things in the future.

Pilgrim Church, under the joint pastorate of the Rev. Artemas Ehnamani
and Rev. A. L. Riggs, honors the faith and polity of the Pilgrim Fathers
in its co-operation with the school, nurturing and extending the cause
of Christian education. Its roll numbers 164 names, and its
Sabbath-school reports an attendance of 183.

Great and urgent fields inviting missionary occupancy lie all around
Santee. Swift Bear's colony, numbering sixteen families, an offshoot
from Rosebud agency, has located along the Niobrara. Others are coming
down this fall as soon as their little crops are harvested. All the land
on the north side of the Niobrara, twenty miles east of the mouth of the
Keya-paba, and much of the land on the Ponca Creek close by, is now
taken. Here has just been built a school-house given by Deacon Burrill,
of Oberlin, Ohio, a little building of two rooms, one for the teacher's
residence, and the other for the school room and chapel. A son of Pastor
Ehnamani, of the Santee Church, is to take charge of this station.

Among the Poncas, since last December, we have had a missionary, Rev. J.
E. Smith, who, while maintaining Sabbath services with good attendance,
has during the week taught a government school. At the Upper Ponca
settlement, during the months of February and March, a mission day
school was kept by Albert Frazier, a native teacher.

_Oahe._--This mission, with its out-stations, is in charge of Rev. T. L.
Riggs. The native helpers are Titus Jugg, Elizabeth Winjan, William Lee,
Daniel Lee, Samuel Smiley, Stephen Yellow Hawk and Edwin Phelps, all,
with one exception, full-blood Dakota Indians.

The Indians of the Rosebud Agency on the White River have long been
calling for missionaries to be sent among them. The Park Street Church,
Boston, has given $400 to open a mission in that needy region, and Mr.
Riggs expects to have a well-established out-station on the White River
before the beginning of the coming winter.

During the year a movement has been made to establish an industrial
school at Oahe. The Indian Bureau gave twenty scholarships. Alonzo
Trask, Esq., executor in the Marquand estate, gave $1,500 toward a
building, on condition that an additional $1,500 be raised. This
additional amount Mr. Riggs secured. The beginning of the school was
made in January. Twelve scholars were all that could be accommodated.
They were promptly secured. The school has been continued by the
exercise of strictest economy and the willing self-sacrifices of all
concerned. The experiment has proved a success, and a good beginning has
been made for another year. The new building is now about, if not quite,
ready, and fitted to receive forty scholars.

The church at Oahe bears the significant name of Shiloh. A place of rest
it has proved to many a weary soul--yet of rest only as it has prepared
for activity. During the year God has been pleased to manifest His grace
in saving power. Seventeen new members have been received on profession
of their faith and three by letter. The total membership is 54. The
greater part of these are young men and women, not more than half being
over thirty years of age and not more than five being past forty-five
years. This church enjoys the ministrations of Stephen Yellow Hawk and
David Lee.

_Fort Berthold._--This point with the territory adjacent is held by Rev.
C. L. Hall. The day school has had 129 pupils during the year. Six of
the Indian girls have been taken into the teachers' home, with marked
benefit to the mission work. Increased interest has been manifested in
the church services, the average attendance being 75. At Fort Stevenson
a Government school (75 pupils) has been kept by Mr. and Mrs. B. F.
Wells. Religious meetings have been held fortnightly on Thursday evening
and Sabbath school each Sunday. The Crow agency, after waiting two
years, is still begging for us to send a missionary.

Leaving Fort Berthold and striking westward about 1,000 miles, we come
to Skokomish Agency, Washington Territory, where Rev. Myron Eells stands
almost alone to represent the interest our denomination takes in the
salvation of the Indians of that region. At Skokomish he has a church of
46 members; at Dunginess a church of 28 members, where he spends two
Sabbaths and the intervening week each month; and at Squakson, a small
reservation formerly in charge of the Presbyterians, who have now
withdrawn, he conducts public worship once a month. In these three
places he has under his pastoral care 102 families; average attendance
at public worship, 150; at Sabbath school, 84; at prayer meeting, 62.
Infant baptisms, 19; adult baptisms and reception to church membership,
11. Many of the Christian Indians are efficient helpers in the prayer
meeting and the Sunday school, assisting Mr. Eells when he is present
and carrying on the work when he is absent.

At Santa Fé, New Mexico, we have maintained during part of the year four
teachers who have had under instruction Pueblo Indian children, for whom
Government scholarships had been secured.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORK AMONG THE CHINESE.


STATISTICS.

  Schools                                            18
  Missionaries                                       38
  Pupils enrolled                                 1,457
  Average attendance                                810
  Ceased from idol worship                          171
  Giving evidence of conversion                     112


These figures show three more missions and twelve more missionaries than
the statistics of last year. In the missionary force there are eleven
Chinese helpers.

Four new schools have been opened at the following points: Alturas,
Fresno, San Diego and Tulare. The school at Alturas, in the
northeastern part of California, though established for the Chinese,
like all other A. M. A. schools, is open to everybody, irrespective of
race or color, and the Indians in the vicinity have so largely availed
themselves of the privilege that they greatly outnumber the Chinese.
This school is under the care of Mrs. Griffiths, wife of the pastor of
the Congregational Church in the place. She has the constant coöperation
of her husband, who welcomes to his church all who can be induced to
attend from the school. The mission at Stockton, the first one
established by us in California, was closed last year, but has been
reopened with an attendance and promise such as it never had before. Our
schools are all in the hands of devoted and efficient teachers, are well
located and well rooted. We are justified in feeling that they are all
fairly on the way to become permanent.

The California Chinese mission, whose superintendency has been under the
care of Rev. W. C. Pond ever since its organization in 1875, is
auxiliary to the American Missionary Association. It has its own
President and Board of Managers. It works in closest harmony with the
parent society, and while it must look to us for by far the largest part
of the funds necessary to carry its work forward, yet it does not rely
wholly upon our appropriations, but makes continuous efforts to raise
money itself.

It reports as having received into its own treasury the past year
$3,141.20. Its property consists of the Barnes and the West Mission
Houses in San Francisco, together with an interest in the North Mission
House of San Francisco and the new Mission House in Tulare. Mr. Pond has
made strenuous efforts to secure sufficient contributions to bring to
pass, without incurring debt, a transfer of these properties to the A.
M. A., and he informs us that this result is now assured and that the
transfer will soon be made. We shall thus come into possession of
property worth upward of $9,000, free from debt.

The past year has not been in garnered results so fruitful as our
Superintendent and his co-workers had expected; yet they have been
faithful in the cultivation of the field. Early in the year they
determined to be more aggressive than formerly. If the Chinese would not
come in greater numbers to the schools, then the missionaries would go
to them. Three men in the providence of God were at hand who were
impressed with the importance of this aggressive work, and who were able
to preach to the Chinese in their own language; Rev. D. D. Jones, who
had returned from missionary work in South China, Jee Gam and Wong Ock.
These brethren have been engaged in evangelistic work both at the
mission houses and on the streets in San Francisco and at several other
points. But "hard hearts," threatened persecution, and actively working
prejudice have everywhere stood in the way of progress.

Still God did not leave His children altogether without some evidence of
His favor. There were eighteen who professed conversion and twelve who
received baptism. The reflex influence of these evangelistic services
has been productive of great spiritual blessing to our missionaries and
to the Chinese Christians. It has driven them to realize that they must
more than ever trust in the power of God's spirit to overcome the
difficulties; that they must faithfully hold and work every point now
occupied; that they must pray on and labor on until the Holy Spirit
descend in power to break the stony hearts and dissipate the opposing
forces of Mongolian heathenism on the one hand and Caucasian
inconsistency and infidelity on the other. "Brethren, pray for us!" is
the almost heart-agonizing appeal Superintendent Pond makes to the
constituents of this Association. "Never before," he writes, "were we so
well prepared to do good service to the Master, and to move on with
saving power among these dark souls purchased with His blood, as now,
at the opening of this new fiscal year. Yet never before did we look on
into the year with such a sense of utter helplessness or such a despair
of real success except through the co-working of the Holy Ghost."

We commend this appeal for prayer to all our friends. Let there go up
such a cry to God for help that in Pentecostal power His spirit may be
outpoured upon our Chinese missions; and not only will the good results
be felt in our own country, but they will reach in blessing even the
vast empire of China and make strong and glad the hearts of our
Christian brethren there.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WOMAN'S BUREAU.


The Woman's Bureau has proved a most efficient agency in our work during
the past year. The family and the home where mother and sister are the
strong guard of purity and moral strength, the newly-freed people knew
nothing about from experience. Our missionaries, more than two-thirds of
whom were women, found themselves face to face with the duty of caring
for their unfortunate sisters. When the Christian women of the country
were taking up and discussing the special claims of degraded and lost
women for woman's special effort, and organizing societies to meet that
claim, the American Missionary Association had the whole business in
operation on a large and successful scale. When, therefore, the Woman's
Bureau was created, it was neither to inaugurate a new work nor in
imitation of other organizations. The purpose was to make the Christian
women of the country more intelligently acquainted with a branch of our
mission long in operation, and induce them by an increase of their
contributions and sympathy and prayers to make it more widely
successful. Miss D. E. Emerson, who not only by her experience as a
missionary in the field, but also by her experience as a clerk in the
New York office, was admirably qualified to take the Bureau in charge,
was made its Secretary. She has opened direct channels of communication
between the lady missionaries on the field and the Christian women of
the churches. Sunday schools and ladies' missionary societies have been
furnished an opportunity to assume, either wholly or partially, the
support of an assigned missionary from whom they have regularly received
letters. She has arranged to have addresses given upon the work at
missionary meetings and conferences, either by herself or by a lady
missionary, so far as she could, wherever and whenever such service has
been desired. The work has been steadily growing upon her hands. The
interest is widening and deepening. With no increase of machinery, with
but little increase of expense, and with no divisive disturbance, either
in the Association or in the churches, our Woman's Bureau quietly and
effectively carries forward its operations at the North and at the
South, at the East and at the West.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINANCES.


_Receipts for 1884-5._

  Donations from Churches and Individuals   $191,698.35
  Legacies                                    41,501.66
  U. S. Government for Indian Schools          9,458.13
  Slater Fund for Industrial Training          8,600.00
  Tuition, Rents, etc.                        39,635.92
                                            -----------
    Total                                   $290,894.06


As compared with the receipts of last year, these figures show
$191,698.35 collections and donations this year, as against $164,056.77
last; legacies, $41,501.66 this year, as against $64,559.42 last; a gain
in contributions from the living of $27,641.58, a loss from legacies of
$23,057.76. The receipts from all sources for the past year,
notwithstanding the heavy loss in legacies, are in excess over the
receipts of the preceding year $3,299.87. The expenditures for the year
have been $306,345.93, leaving a debt on the year just closed of
$15,451.87. This, added to the deficit of the previous year, leaves us
with a total indebtedness of $29,237.73. But over against this and in
close connection with it, should be stated the fact that in both years
the indebtedness has been owing to an increase of appropriations to meet
the absolutely necessary demands of the new Indian missions transferred
to us by the American Board. In 1883-4, we expended on these missions,
including $11,495.19 received from the U. S. Government, $33,204.95. In
1884-5, including $9,458.13 from the Government, we spent $41,283.75.
The churches had laid this work upon us, and we could not avoid these
expenditures.

We began the year with a debt of $13,785.86. The task before us,
therefore, if our work was to be kept to its former scale, was to
increase our receipts over the previous year $27,571.72, or twice the
deficit. We have made that increase in donations from the living, with
$69.86 to spare, and that, too, in the face of the stringency of the
times. Had the legacies remained the same as the preceding year (which
were $61,807.31 less than the legacies of the year preceding that), we
should have closed this year without a debt, and had $7,605.89 on hand
to apply on the debt with which we started out.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONCLUSION.


In conclusion, this review of the year inspires first of all songs of
thanksgiving to our Heavenly Father for His manifold blessings upon the
work and workers, and then our heartfelt gratitude to the pastors,
churches and friends that have so nobly and generously, many of them at
great self-sacrifice, contributed to sustain the work. With such
evidence from heaven that the work is God's, with such evidence from
earth that it rests upon the hearts and consciences of His people as a
sacred trust, we cannot but feel that in it all Providence is saying
unto us, _Go forward_. But what say our constituents? We present them
our report. We await their answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR SEPTEMBER, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAINE, $1,078.85.

  Albany. Cong. Ch.                                         $1.00
  Augusta. Joel Spalding                                    10.00
  Bangor. Hammond St. Ch., 100; Cen. Cong. Ch. and
    Soc., 75                                               175.00
  Bangor. Dudley Coe, 1; C. M., M. F. and A. B. Duren,
    30c., _for Rosebud_ _Indian M._                          1.30
  Bath. "A Friend"                                           5.00
  Belfast. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
  Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch.                               75.00
  Brownfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.00
  Brownville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.75
  Cumberland Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     31.17
  Deer Isle. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
  Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
  Gardiner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.25
  Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.00
  Gilead Cong. Ch.                                           4.50
  Gorham. Miss E. B. Emery                                   5.00
  Kennebunkport. South Cong. Ch., 12; First Cong. Ch., 3    15.00
  Machias. Center St. Cong. Ch.                              9.30
  Madison. "Friends in Cong. Ch.," by Mrs. Ezra Dinsmore    20.00
  Oldtown. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Orono. Cong. Ch.                                           7.00
  Portland. Second Parish Ch., 182.17, to const. HORACE
    H. RICKER, G. R. FURBISH, E. A. BASCOM, MRS. LUCY A.
    FOGG, MRS. MARY E. MERRILL and NATHAN WESTON L. Ms.;
    State St. Ch., 150; Williston Cong. Ch., 95: West
    Cong. Ch., 11; Abyssinian Cong. Ch., 10; T. B.
    Percy, 5                                               453.17
  Princeton. "A Friend"                                      2.00
  Presque Isle. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
  Saco. First Cong. Ch.                                     10.42
  Scarboro. Cong. Ch.                                       13.15
  Sherman Mills. Washburn Memorial Ch.                       5.00
  South Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 14.20; "Miss'y
    Soc.," 5                                                19.20
  Turner. Cong. Ch.                                          7.50
  Wells. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           20.00
  Westbrook. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      13.26
  West Brooksville. Cong. Ch.                                4.00
  Windham. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Winslow. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  10.00
  Wintersport. Miss. M. M. Morrell                           2.50
  Winthrop. Mrs. Otis Packard, 30, to const. DEA. GEO.
    O. PACKARD L. M.; Cong. Ch. and Soc., 12.10             42.10
  York Corner. Second Cong. Ch.                              8.28


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $963.04.

  Amherst. Miss M. C. Boylston                              20.00
  Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         14.00
  Bennington. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
  Canterbury. "Friend"                                       5.00
  Chester. Mrs. Mary E. Hidden                              10.00
  Concord. First Ch., 125; Friend in North Cong. Ch., 5    130.00
  Danbury. "A few members Cong. Ch."                         6.00
  Derry. First Cong. Ch.                                    23.85
  Durham. Cong. Ch.                                         27.00
  East Derry. Rev. H. M. Penniman                            5.00
  Epping. "Friend"                                           1.00
  Fitzwilliam. Louisa Hill, 10; Fanny Hancock, 5; Cong.
    Ch., 3.50                                               18.50
  Franklin Falls. J. C. Neal                                 1.00
  Goffstown. Mrs. M. A. Stinson                             10.00
  Gorham. Cong. Ch.                                          6.29
  Great Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              43.40
  Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             44.10
  Hanover. Cong. Ch. Dart. College                          79.90
  Harrisville. Darius Farwell                                2.00
  Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               7.25
  Jaffrey. N. P. Phelps                                      1.00
  Keene. Mrs. D. W. Buckminster, and Miss Mason              3.00
  Kensington. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
  Laconia. Cong. Ch.                                        35.00
  Manchester. Mary A. Allison                                3.00
  Meriden. Cong. Ch.                                        21.00
  New Boston. "A Friend" (50 of which _for Cal. Chinese
    M._)                                                   100.50
  New Market. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 3.55, Dea. T. H.
    Wiswall, 10                                             13.55
  North Conway. Cong. Ch.                                   20.00
  North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 17.25; S. H. Leavitt,
    Isabella Smith and Julia M. Philbrook, 10 ea., to
    const. MORRIS H. SMITH, L. M.                           47.25
  Peterborough. Cong. Ch.                                    5.50
  Piermont. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  9.00
  Pittsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.00
  Portsmouth. Rev. W. W. Dow                                 5.00
  Rye. Cong. Ch.                                            11.75
  Shelburne. Cong. Ch.                                       1.50
  Sullivan. Cong. Ch.                                        6.10
  Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.95
  Temple. Mrs. Geo. Goodyear and Sister                      5.00
  Troy. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                      8.42
  Walpole. First Cong. Ch.                                  22.07
  Webster. "A Friend"                                        5.00
  West Concord. J. W. Chandler                               1.00
  Wilton. Second Cong. Ch.                                  12.00
  By Geo. Swain--Amherst Cong. Ch., 11.40--Brookline
   Cong. Ch., 8.82--Peterboro' Union Evan. Ch., 13.50       33.72
                                                          -------
                                                          $852.63

  LEGACY.

  Lebanon. Estate of Mary A. F. Tracy, by Stephen A.
    Tracy, Ex.                                             110.41
                                                          -------
                                                          $963.04


VERMONT, $2,216.07.

  Bakersfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            9.00
  Barton Landing. Children's Miss'y Soc. by Katie B.
    Joslyn, Treas. _for Share_                              13.00
  Bradford. Mrs. C. D. Redington, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
    _for McIntosh, Ga._                                     10.00
  Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               21.86
  Brattleboro. "A Friend," 33.35; Joseph Wilder, 10         43.35
  Brownington. Dea. William Spencer, 5; S. S. Tinkham, 5    10.00
  Burlington. First Cong. Ch.                              188.58
  Cambridge. Madison Safford and wife                       38.52
  Cambridge. E. Wheelock, B. Holmes, O. W. Reynolds, S. M.
    Safford and Madison Safford, 5 ea.; Mrs. M. Blaisdell,
    3; Mrs. M. Waterhouse, 2; J. W. Turner, 2; Mrs. L.
    Eaton, 1; E. Bentley, 1                                 34.00
  Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.50
  Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             32.58
  Chester. J. L. Fisher                                      5.00
  Enosburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              25.00
  Fair Haven. "Light Bearers" Cong. Sab. Sch. (3 of which
    _for Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._)                       17.57
  Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               5.00
  Glover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                15.50
  Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch.                              4.00
  Greensborough. "A few friends," by Rev. S. Knowlton       12.00
  Guildhall. Cong. Ch.                                       3.26
  Hartford. E. Morris, 100; Mr. and Mrs. Albert Buel, 10   110.00
  Hartland. Class in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for McIntosh, Ga._    5.00
  Lunenburg. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  Lyndonville. Cong. Ch.                                    14.00
  Manchester. Samuel G. Cone, 20; Mrs. S. G. Cone, 5        25.00
  Marshfield. Rev. J. D. Bailey                              7.44
  Milton. "M. L. D.," 3; B. Fairchild, M. D., 2              5.00
  Montgomery Centre. Cong. Ch.                               7.77
  Morrisville. Cong. Ch.                                    14.00
  Newbury. Mrs. E. P. Keyes, 30, to const. J. T. ATKINSON
    L. M.; H. E. Keyes, 30, to const. HELEN R. AIKEN L. M.  60.00
  New Haven. Cong. Ch., 25, and Sab. Sch. 5, _for Indian
    M._                                                     30.00
  North Pownal. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
  Norwich. Ashley Blodgett, 5; Mrs. H. Burton, 2; Cong.
    Ch., 1                                                   8.00
  Peacham. Miss Varnum, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._                                           2.00
  Pittsfield. Cong. Ch. 5; "D.," 2                           7.00
  Pittsford. Mrs. E. H. Denison                              5.00
  Quechee. Rev. N. F. Carter                                10.00
  Royalton. A. W. Kenney, 30; First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
    17.75                                                   47.75
  Rutland. Mrs. Wm. D. Marsh                                10.00
  Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch., 200; Rev. Henry
    Fairbanks, 100                                         300.00
  Saint Johnsbury. Union Meeting, North and South Chs.,
    _for Indian M._                                        168.81
  Saxton's River. "Friend"                                   1.00
  South Royalton. Mrs. S. H. Jones                          10.00
  Springfield. Mrs. Frederick Parks, 100; A. Woolson, 100  200.00
  Stowe. Joseph Pike                                         1.00
  Swanton. C. C. Long                                       10.00
  Underhill. Chas. A. Birchard                               5.00
  Vergennes. Cong. Ch.                                      20.00
  West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                               32.53
  Willamstown. Cong. Ch.                                    12.00
  Windham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  13.01
  Wolcott. Rev. J. F. Whitney                                2.00
  Woodstock. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Henry
    Fairbanks                                               10.50
  Worcester. Cong. Ch.                                       5.63
  ----. "A Friend"                                         300.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,992.16

  LEGACIES.

  North Ferrisburg. Estate of Sylvia Dean, by J. M.
    Dean, Ex.                                               15.00
  Wilmington. Estate of Judah Moore                        208.91
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,216.07


MASSACHUSETTS, $10,843.55.

  Acton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Atlanta U._                  10.00
  Amesbury. MRS. EDMUND MORRILL, to const. herself L. M.    30.00
  Amherst. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 85, to const. MISS
    LULU LOUISA LAWTON and CEPHAS F. FRARY L. Ms.; First
    Cong. Ch., 35; "C.," 30                                150.00
  Andover. John Smith                                      500.00
  Ashland. G. M. Perry, 5; Edwin Perry, 5                   10.00
  Attleboro. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      6.24
  Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         66.00
  Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            42.00
  Boston. "Wilberforce," 300; Mrs. C. A. Spaulding,
    100; "Friend in Need," 100; Jona. A. Lane, 25;
    Dr. Edward Strong and Wife, 25; Mrs. O. H. White,
    20;  "A Friend," 10; "A Friend," 5; Rev. R. B.
    Howard, 5.--Cambridge North Av. Ch. and Soc.,
    209.55--Cambridgeport, Pilgrim Ch., 127.55--Chelsea,
    A. C. Tenney, 25--Dorchester, Second Cong. Ch. and
    Soc., 187.61; Mrs. R. W. Prouty, 5--East Boston,
    Maverick Ch. and Soc. 26.25--Somerville, Franklin St.
    Ch., 125; Franklin St. Ch., "M.," 50; Miss M. C.
    Sawyer, 10; Woman's Home Miss'y Soc. of Prospect
    Hill Ch., 10                                         1,365.96
  Ballardvale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
  Barre. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           51.75
  Berkley. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  13.28
  Bernardston. Orthodox Cong. Soc.                           8.75
  Billerica. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              8.00
  Boxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         40.70
  Bridgewater. "A Friend"                                   30.00
  Brockton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75; Porter Evan.
    Ch. and Soc., 61.53, to const. MISS CORNELIA EDDY
    and MISS LIZZIE F. TROW L. Ms.; Mrs. L. C. Sanford,
    5                                                      141.53
  Carlisle. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               5.18
  Centreville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           22.50
  Chatham. Cong. Ch.                                         6.50
  Chester Center. First Cong. Ch.                            5.22
  Conway. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                31.23
  Cummington. Cong. Ch.                                     11.30
  Danvers. Maple St. Ch.                                    75.00
  Dedham. "Three Friends"                                    4.50
  Duxbury. Mrs. R. R. Holmes                                 1.00
  East Charlemont. Cong. Ch.                                16.00
  Easthampton. First Cong. Ch., 47; First Cong. Ch. and
    Sab. Sch., 25; Rev. A. M. Colton, 5                     77.00
  East Granville. "Y. P. Soc. of Christian Endeavor"         5.00
  Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               50.00
  Essex. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 45.00
  Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.28
  Fitchburg. Rollstone Ch. and Soc., 128.59; "A Friend,"
    30 to const. MRS. CLARA W. HUBBARD L. M.; C. C. Ch.,
    25.50                                                  184.09
  Florence. Cong. Ch.                                       12.35
  Foxborough. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                              51.65
  Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc., 25; E. H. Warren, 1    26.00
  Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         35.00
  Gilbertville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                     50.00
  Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. ALFRED H.
    RICHARDSON L. M.                                        25.00
  Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch., 15; Mrs. M. A.
    Harrington, 10                                          25.00
  Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc                          44.31
  Granby. Mission Circle, by Mrs. A. W. T. Fisk, _for
    Miss'y, Atlanta, Ga._                                   15.00
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., 69.25; Cong. Ch., 10;
    First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10                            89.25
  Greenwich. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  Groveland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             18.50
  Hanover. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                     5.00
  Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                    100.00
  Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols                           100.00
  Hinsdale. J. Hosmer, 10; Mr. and Mrs. G. T. Plunkett,
    7; C. J. Kittredge, 3; Rev. J. H. Laird, 2; S.
    Kittredge, 2; Miss S. Warriner, 1; L. Payne, 1;
    Others, 4                                               30.00
  Housatonic. "Friends," 15; Cong. Sab. Sch., 10; Cong.
    Ch. (ad'l), 1                                           26.00
  Huntington. Second Cong. Ch.                               7.25
  Ipswich. Mission Band of So. Ch., 6.30; "A Friend," 50c    6.80
  Kingston. Mayflower Ch.                                   40.00
  Lancaster. Ev. Cong. Ch.                                  36.55
  Leverett. Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           9.50
  Longmeadow. "M. C. G."                                    10.00
  Ludlow Centre. "A Friend"                                  1.00
  Lowell. Pawtucket Ch. and Soc.                            18.00
  Mansfield. P. M. Edwards                                   1.00
  Medway. Village Ch. and Soc.                              27.00
  Melrose. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        65.62
  Middleborough. Central Cong. Ch.                          52.00
  Middlefield. "A Friend"                                    2.00
  Middleton. Mrs. Loring Carleton                            4.50
  Milford. "A Friend"                                        1.00
  Millbury. By Lizzie M. Garfield                            5.75
  Millers Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          4.60
  Mill River. Miss M. R. Wilcox                             10.00
  Monson. E. F. Morris, 50; Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Holmes,
    Jr., 50; Mrs. N. M. Field, 25; Mrs. C. O. Chapin, 5    130.00
  Monument Beach. Wm. R. Vining                             50.00
  Neponset. Miss S. L. Tuttle's S. S. Class, Bbl. of C.,
    _for Wilmington, N. C._, 1 _for Freight_                 1.00
  New Bedford. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     50.00
  Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Le Moyne Inst._    8.00
  Newburyport. Freedmen's Aid Soc., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                20.00
  Newton. Eliot Ch.                                        130.00
  Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   50.00
  Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
  North Abington. Cong. Ch., 5; Rev. J. H. Jones, 5         10.00
  Northampton. First Cong. Ch., 279.23; "A Friend," 100;
    Edwards Ch. Benev. Soc., 87.50; Jared Clark, 25        491.73
  Northborough. Evan. Cong. Ch., 68; Sab. Sch., 10          78.00
  Northbridge Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.              10.00
  North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., 50; and Sab. Sch.,
    30, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                          80.00
  North Brookfield. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., 35.59; Mrs.
    Hannah M. Nye, 5; Miss Abbie W. Johnson, 5              45.59
  North Chelmsford. Second Cong. Ch., to const. MISS ADA
    M. SHELDON L. M.                                        50.00
  North Middleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. DEA.
    SOLOMON WHITE L. M.                                     45.00
  Oakham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.62; Miss Susan Fairbanks,
    10                                                      40.62
  Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          50.00
  Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                         16.75
  Pigeon Cove. Mrs. M. L. Thalheimer, deceased, by M. E.
    Thalheimer                                              25.00
  Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 100; Second Cong.
    Sab. Sch., 5; E. R. M., 2.50                           107.50
  Plymouth. Second Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  Prescott. "A Friend"                                       5.00
  Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                      20.50
  Provincetown. First Cong. Ch.                             14.63
  Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17.00
  Randolph. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       201.80
  Reading. Old South and Bethesda Chs., to const. FRANK
    W. B. PRATT and E. P. FITTS L. Ms., 87.85; J. M.
    Carleton, 5; "A Friend," 4.50                           97.35
  Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75; Elijah Shaw, 50        125.00
  Rutland. Children of Cong. Ch., 10, and Papers, _for
    Robbins, Tenn._                                         10.00
  Salem. Crombie St. Ch. and Soc., 50.15; George Driver,
    2                                                       52.15
  Sandwich. Mrs. Card                                        2.00
  Saundersville. Cong Ch. and Soc.                          15.00
  Scituate. Cen. Cong. Ch. and S. S.                        24.55
  Scotland. Miss Mary H. Leonard                             2.00
  Shelburne Falls. Sab. Sch. Concert, 8.01; Three Classes
    Cong. S. S., 5.99, _for Indian M._                      14.00
  Shrewsbury. Mr. and Mrs. William A. Greene, 500; Cong.
    Ch. and Soc., 112.33                                   612.33
  South Abington. Miss C. H. Whitman, 100; Cong. Ch.
    and Soc., 47.59                                        147.59
  South Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                   7.72
  South Dartmouth. Cong. Ch.                                 9.00
  South Egremont. Mrs. Huldah Bills, 30, to const. REV.
    P. T. FARWELL L. M.; Cong. Ch., 25                      55.00
  South Franklin. Union Cong. Ch.                            5.25
  South Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 31.25; Cong. Sab.
    Sch., 8.85                                              40.10
  South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Parish                  31.00
  South Natick. John Eliot Ch.                               6.16
  South Plymouth. Second Cong. Ch. (ad'l)                    2.12
  South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 49; "A
    Friend," 25                                             74.00
  Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         68.10
  Springfield. "A Friend," 500; A. C. Hunt, 10,
    "L. E. W.," 10                                         520.00
  Springfield. Infant Class, Cong. S. S., 2; Miss L.
    Fay's S. S. Class, 1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         3.00
  Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                    23.90
  Stoughton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.72
  Sudbury. Union Evan. Ch. and Soc.                         37.00
  Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc. and Sab. Sch.             100.00
  Swampscott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            25.00
  Taunton. Winslow Cong. Ch. and Soc. (30 of which to
    const. GEO. W. ANDROS L. M.)                            49.27
  Taunton. Union Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._      39.00
  Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. FRANK H.
    KASSON L. M.                                            32.00
  Topsfield. "A Friend"                                      1.00
  Townsend. "Member Cong. Ch."                               5.00
  Uxbridge. Evan. Cong. Co. and Soc.                        29.45
  Ware. C. C. Hitchcock                                     10.00
  Warren. Cong. Ch., 100; "N. G.," 5                       105.00
  Warren. Mrs. Joseph Ramsdell, _for Chinese M._             5.00
  Wayland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               30.00
  Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             11.00
  West Barnstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
  Westboro. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           50.00
  West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.00
  West Boylston. G. W. Ames, 3; Polly W. Ames, 3; Mrs.
    A. Campbell, 1.50                                        7.50
  West Cummington. Cong. Ch.                                 3.00
  Westfield. Mrs. C. W. Fowler, 5; Dr. H. Holland, 3         8.00
  Westford. Union Ch.                                       17.00
  West Gardner. M. B. Knowlton                              10.00
  West Gardner. Nettie M. Bartlett, _for Rosebud Indian
    M._                                                      2.00
  Westhampton. Miss Mary Edwards, "in Memory of Mrs.
    Catharine Edwards"                                       5.00
  Westminster. F. Lombard, 5; Mrs. Mossman, 25c              5.25
  West Springfield. Mrs. Lucy M. Bagg                      200.00
  West Tisbury. First Cong. Ch.                              9.63
  Whately. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Whitinsville. S. F. Morse                                  2.00
  Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            24.50
  Winchendon. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                       50.00
  Winchester. S. Elliot                                     25.00
  Woburn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         204.60
  Woburn. Ladies' Charitable Reading Soc., Bbl. of C.,
    val. 52.40, _for Williamsburg, Ky._, 1.17 _for
    Freight_                                                 1.17
  Wollaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              8.05
  Woods Holl. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
  Worcester. "Friend," 500; Piedmont Ch., 400; Plymouth
    Cong. Ch. and Soc., 130; Samuel R. Heywood, 100;
    Hiram Smith and family, 30; Mrs. S. A. Howard, 5     1,165.00
  Worcester. "A Friend," _for Charleston, S. C._             4.00
  Worthington. Cong. Ch.                                    19.34
  Yarmouth. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                10.29
  By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass'n--Ludlow,
    23.90--Palmer, Second, 15--Springfield, Mrs. E.
    Clarke, 5--Westfield, Second, 108.80--West
    Springfield, Park St., 23                              175.70
                                                       ----------
                                                       $10,261.55

  LEGACIES.

  Boston. Estate of Rev. H. B. Hooker, D. D.                50.00
  Enfield. Estate of Dea. Henry Fobes, by W. B.
    Kimball, Ex.                                           500.00
  Oakham. Estate of Perly Ayres, by William Spear, Ex.      32.00
                                                       ----------
                                                       $10,843.55


RHODE ISLAND, $2,432.84.

  Bristol. Mrs. Rogers, 100; First Cong. Ch., 30           130.00
  East Providence. Samuel Belden, to const. REV.
    WILLIAM FITZ, HARMON S. BABCOCK, SAMUEL BELDEN
    BABCOCK, RICHARD W. CONE, JOHN CHURCHILL, and
    SAMUEL BELDEN CHURCHILL L. Ms.                         180.00
  Pawtucket. Cong. Ch.                                      58.50
  Providence. George H. Corliss, 1000; Central Cong.
    Ch., 718; Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc., 119.22;
    James Coats, 100; Beneficent Cong. Ch., 50; "A
    Friend," 5                                           1,992.22
  Slatersville. Cong. Ch.                                   31.00
  Westerly. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.12; Emeline Smith, 5     35.12
  Woonsocket. Globe Cong. Ch.                                6.00


CONNECTICUT, $10,360.07.

  Abington. Cong. Ch.                                       14.50
  Andover. "A Friend"                                       20.00
  Berlin. "A Friend," 50; Second Cong. Ch., 19.24           69.24
  Bethlehem. "A Friend"                                      5.00
  Birmingham. Cong. Ch.                                     35.35
  Bolton. By Mrs. L. H. Barber, _for Conn. Sch.,
    Quitman, Ga._                                            5.00
  Branford. H. G. Harrison                                  10.00
  Bristol. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Sch.,
    Quitman, Ga._                                           55.00
  Brooklyn. First Trin. Ch. and Cong. to const.
    WILLIAM WOODBRIDGE L. M.                                38.00
  Buckingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             2.65
  Canaan. Estate Daniel Norton, Package Books and 50c         .50
  Chaplin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
  Cheshire. "A Friend," 25; Cong. Ch., 21.25                46.25
  Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        35.00
  Cobalt. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
  Cromwell. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._         1.00
  Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
    FANNY L. KEECH and MISS CHLOE P. DAVISON L. Ms.         60.00
  Durham. Cong. Ch.                                         23.00
  East Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  East Hampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    22.25
  East Hartford. H. L. Goodwin, 100; First Ch., 30;
    Abraham Williams, 10; South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 15     155.00
  East Granby. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
  East Windsor. "A Friend"                                   5.00
  Elliott. Wm. Osgood                                        1.00
  Fairfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Santee
     Agency, Neb._                                          20.00
  Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                    140.49
  Glastonbury. James B. Williams (ad'l), 200; First
    Cong. Ch. and Soc., 82.58                              282.58
  Goshen. Mrs. Moses Lyman                                   5.00
  Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. WM. H. LEE L. M.     30.00
  Hampton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Share_                     20.00
  Hartford. Mrs. Catherine R. Hillyer                       20.00
  Hebron. "Friends"                                          7.00
  Hockanum. Mrs. E. M. Roberts                               5.00
  Huntington. Cong. Ch.                                     30.00
  Huntington. Oliver Baird, _for Rosebud Indian M._          1.00
  Kensington. Lucy J. Upson, Arthur W. Upson, Alice O.
    Upson and Mary H. Upson, 5 ea.                          20.00
  Kensington. Mrs. M. Hotchkiss                              5.00
  Kent. First Cong. Soc.                                    25.64
  Lebanon. "A few Friends"                                  30.00
  Manchester. "C. S. S."                                    10.00
  Meriden. First Cong. Ch., 100; First Cong. Ch.,
    "A Friend," 25; Edmund Tuttle, 30, to const.
    MISS ELLEN E. TUTTLE L. M.                             155.00
  Milford. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                150.00
  Milford. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 50, and Sab. Sch., 25.59     75.59
  Mount Carmel. Mrs. J. M. Swift bal. to const. WILLIAM
    E. SWIFT L. M.                                          10.00
  Nepaug. South Cong. Ch.                                    3.25
  New Britain. First Ch. of Christ, 69.30; Members South
    Cong. Ch., 40 (30 of which to const. EMMA GERTRUDE
    ROGERS L. M.); Rev. J. W. Cooper, 25                   134.30
  New Canaan. "Friend E."                                   10.00
  New Haven. Nelson Hall, 50; Alfred Walker, 10             60.00
  New London. "First Ch. of Christ"                         64.60
  New Preston. Mrs. Betsy Averill                           10.00
  Norfolk. Mrs. Mary D. Bassett                              4.00
  Northford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
  North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett, 50; "A friend's
    mite," 2                                                52.00
  North Stamford. Cong. Soc.                                 6.76
  North Stonington. Dudley R. Wheeler                       20.00
  Norwich. ----                                          1,000.00
  Norwich. First Cong. Ch., 50; Othniel Gager, 24;
    Sarah A. Huntington, 10                                 84.00
  Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                       64.34
  Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                   18.00
  Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                      5.27
  Plainville. William Cowles                                20.00
  Plymouth. "A Friend," 500; "A Friend," 50                550.00
  Preston. Long Soc. Sab. Sch.                               2.00
  Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          24.00
  Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Ridgebury. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
  Ridgefield. First Cong. Ch.                               38.00
  Rockville. Second Cong. Ch. (4.30 of which _for
    Tillotson C. and N. Inst._)                             71.76
  Rockville. J. N. Stickney                                 10.00
  Rockville. Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson
    C. and N. Inst._                                         9.44
  Roxbury. "A Friend, Birthday Offering"                     3.00
  Salisbury. "The Twins," Miriam and Rose Goddard, aged
    5 weeks, by Rev. J. C. Goddard                           1.00
  Saybrook. Second Cong. Ch.                                30.00
  Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                     14.60
  Southbury. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 5; "A Friend," 1           6.00
  Southington. First Cong. Ch.                              60.80
  South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 3.00
  Southport. "A gift in the name of Frederick Marquand"
    (4,000 of which _for Special Indian Work in
    Dakota_)                                             4,500.00
  Southport. "A Friend," to const. Miss ABBIE B. LORD
    L. M.                                                   30.00
  South Windsor. Sam'l T. Wolcott                           20.00
  Stamford. Friends, Cong. Ch., by Rev. S. Scoville        100.00
  Stanwich. David Banks, 100; John Brush, 5; Mrs. Chas.
    Brush, 5; Mary A. Lockwood, 1; Cong. Ch., 5            116.00
  Stratford. "A Friend"                                      2.00
  Talcottville. Cong. Ch.                                   80.00
  Terryville. A. S. Gaylord, 10; Mr. & Mrs. Elizur
    Fenn, 5 ea.                                             20.00
  Thomaston. Cong. Ch., 43.25; P. Darrow, 15.51             58.76
  Thompson. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn. Sch.,
    Quitman Ga._                                            27.00
  Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                        11.82
  Torringford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           36.14
  Torrington. L. Wetmore, 150; First Cong. Ch., 10         160.00
  Vernon Center. Miss H. B. Chapin                           2.00
  Voluntown and Sterling. Cong. Ch., bal. to const.
    MISS MARY E. P. ELDERKIN L. M.                          17.28
  Washington. Cong. Soc.                                    34.75
  Waterbury. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., by Mrs. H. M.
    Dutton, _for Conn. Sch., Quitman Ga._                  200.00
  Waterbury. "Sunshine Circle," _for Macon, Ga._             8.00
  Waterbury. "A Friend," 10; "A Friend," Second Cong.
    Ch., 5                                                  15.00
  Watertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             44.55
  Wauregan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.00
  West Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
  Westbrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 56.54; "Cash," 2           58.54
  West Hartland. Deacons of Cong. Ch.                        4.00
  West Haven. "A few Ladies," by Mrs. Emeline Smith         20.00
  Westminster. Mr. and Mrs. W. W. Mallory                    5.00
  Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch.                             19.66
  Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               21.35
  Windham. Westminster Cong. Ch.                             9.06
  Windsor Locks. "A Friend"                                 10.00
  Winsted. Miss Emeline Catlin and Sister                   10.00
  Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
  ----. "A Friend"                                         300.00
  ----. "Connecticut Friend"                                10.00
  ----. "A Friend"                                          10.00
                                                       ----------
                                                       $10,110.07

  LEGACY.

  New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven,
    _for Talladega C._                                     250.00
                                                       ----------
                                                       $10,360.07


NEW YORK, $3,493.43.

  Amsterdam. Mrs. Mary A. Bartlett                           2.00
  Amsterdam. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              1.00
  Bangor. Cong. Ch.                                          4.09
  Bay Shore. Cong. Ch.                                      11.65
  Berkshire. First Cong. Ch.                                54.00
  Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
  Binghamton. Sheldon Warner                                 5.00
  Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                    20.16
  Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch., 468.55; Member Plym. Ch., 25;
    Julius Davenport, 100; "A Member of Central Ch. Sab.
    Sch.," Dr. Behrend's, 30, to const. MRS. DAVID M.
    STONE L. M.; Rev. E. P. Thwing, 2; "A Friend," 1       626.55
  Brookton. Rev. I. Bradnack                                 3.00
  Cambridge. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
  Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     42.00
  Candor. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
  Central New York. "Thank Offering"                        10.00
  Chateaugay. Rev. C. C. Torrey                             10.00
  Chenango Co. "Life Member"                                10.00
  Copenhagen. Cong. Ch. and S. S.                           10.00
  Coventry. First Cong. Ch.                                  6.54
  Coxsackie. Mrs. E. F. Spoor, 2.50; Miss A. G. Fairchild,
    2.50                                                     5.00
  Crown Point. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 49; Second Cong.
    Ch., 5                                                  54.00
  East Watertown. Mrs. T. Merwin                            10.00
  East Wilson. Rev. H. Halsey, 30; C. M. Clark, 3           33.00
  Flushing. "Friends"                                        5.00
  Gerry. Mrs. M. A. Sears                                  128.36
  Goshen. "A Friend"                                         2.00
  Hammondville. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
  Havana. J. F. Phelps                                       5.00
  Hopkinton. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  Hudson. Abraham S. Peet                                    3.00
  Jamestown. First Cong. Ch., 7; Sab. Sch., 14.49           21.49
  Kiantone. Cong. Ch.                                        8.56
  Le Roy. Mrs. L. A. Parsons                                 4.50
  Little Valley. First Cong. Ch.                             6.14
  Maine Village. Cong. Ch.                                  15.40
  Malone. Mrs. H. R. Wilson                                  3.00
  Massena. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
  Middletown. First Cong. Ch.                               36.17
  Millville. By Henry L. Hommedieu                          10.00
  New York. John Dwight, 200; A. S. Barnes, 100;
    "H. W. H.," 60 to const. WILLIAM HUBBARD and MISS
    D. E. EMERSON L. Ms.; S. T. Gordon, 30; ----, 11.25;
    Joseph S. Hol, 10; "Colored Orphan Asylum and its
    Chaplain, Stephen Angell," 10; James W. Treadwell,
    5; M. H. Bartow, 2; "A Friend," 1                      449.25
  Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              115.79
  Norwich. By Rev. A. G. Upton                               5.00
  Nunda. "A Friend," (10 _of which for Chinese and
    Indian M._)                                             15.00
  Nyack. John W. Towt                                      100.00
  Oneonta. Mrs. L. I. Safford                                5.00
  Orient. Cong. Ch.                                         18.58
  Owego. Dr. L. H. Allen                                    10.00
  Parishville. Cong. Ch.                                     6.00
  Pekin. Abigail Peck                                       25.00
  Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                       30.00
  Richford. Cong. Ch.                                        6.66
  Rochester. Geo. Thayer                                    25.00
  Rodman. Miss Eliza Gates, 20; John S. Sill, 5             25.00
  Rome. Rev. Wm. B. Hammond                                  5.00
  Salamanca. Cong. Ch. and Pastor                            7.00
  Seneca Falls. Cong. Ch.                                   10.25
  Sherburne. "A Friend"                                     10.00
  Silver Creek. Mrs. Simeon Howes, 7.50; W. Chapin, 7.50    15.00
  Syracuse. Plymouth Ch., 133.03; C. A. Hamlin, 25         158.03
  Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                 5.00
  Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge, 10; Bethesda Welsh Cong.
    Ch., 10; Plymouth Cong. Ch., 7                          27.00
  Wading River. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
  Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah M. Overton                            5.00
  ----. ----                                                 2.00
  By Mrs. L. H. Cobb, Treas., for _Miss'y, Tougaloo,
    Miss._--Copenhagen, Ladies' Aux., 50--Danby, Mrs. S.
    Johnson's S. S. Class, 9.18--Poughkeepsie, Ladies'
    H. M. Union, 20--Rushville, Ladies' Soc., 10--Saratoga
    Springs, Aux. Soc., 20--West Groton, Y. P. Miss'y
    Soc., 20                                               129.18
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,457.35

  LEGACY.

  Walton. Estate of Elizabeth Bassett (500 of which
    _for Mendi M._) by G. W. Fitch and T. S. Hoyt,
    Executors                                            1,036.08
                                                        ---------
                                                        $3,493.43


NEW JERSEY, $10,154.40.

  Bernardsville. J. L. Roberts                              30.00
  Bordentown. L. Beeuwkes                                    3.00
  Bound Brook. Cong. Ch., 75.39; and Sab. Sch. 25, _for
    Tillotson C. and  N. Inst._                            100.39
  Chester. Cong. Ch., 35.45, and Sab. Sch., 4.68            40.13
  Closter. Rev. G. W. Plack                                  5.00
  Englewood. Rev. Geo. B. Cheever, D. D., and Wife       9,716.88
  Jersey City Heights. "A Friend"                            2.00
  Montclair. First Cong. Ch., 110; First Cong. Ch. Sab.
    Sch., 50; Mrs. Edward Sweet, 50                        210.00
  Trenton. S. T. Sherman                                    20.00
  Westfield. Children's Mission Band of Cong. Ch.,
    _for Share_                                             20.00
  Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $1,640.91.

  Cambridgeboro. Woman's Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.           10.00
  Clark. Mrs. Elizabeth Dickson and Miss Eliza Dickson,
    15 ea.                                                  30.00
  Guy's Mills. Mrs. F. Maria Guy                             1.00
  Jeanesville. Welsh Cong. Ch.                               5.00
  Mercersburg. Thomas C. Johnston                            4.00
  Morris Run. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                3.00
  Philadelphia. "Member of Central Cong. Ch.," 50; Chas.
    Burnham, 50; John Edmands, 25                          125.00
  Pottsville. Cong. Ch., 1.48; Rev. D. T. Davies, 3          4.48
  Ridgeway. Rev. O. D. Crawford                              2.00
  Shamokin. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
  Troy. Chas. C. Paine                                     100.00
  Washington. Mrs. M. H. McFarland                          10.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $298.48

  LEGACY.

  Pittsburg. Estate of Chas. Avery                       1,342.43
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,640.91


OHIO, $1,035.87.

  Alliance. Welsh Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                        6.00
  Alliance. Mrs. J. M. Thomas                                5.00
  Barton. Miss A. C. Hitchcock, 5; Cong. Ch., 2.83;
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                               7.83
  Berea. Cong. Ch.                                          11.50
  Berlin Heights. Cong. Ch., 5, and Sab. Sch., 5            10.00
  Bowling Green. Mrs. Mary H. Leet, _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                 5.00
  Brownhelm. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
  Canfield. Cong. Ch.                                       13.00
  Castalia. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00
  Chagrin Falls. John S. Bullard, 20; Cong. Ch., 12.07      32.07
  Chardon. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             5.00
  Cincinnati. Mr. and Mrs. C. B. Ruggles, 10; Lawrence
    St. Welsh Cong. Ch., 10; Mrs. Charlotte Ruggles, 2      22.00
  Claridon. L. T. Wilmot, 10; Cong. Sab. Sch., 7.50; Mr.
    and Mrs. D. B. Ladd, 5                                  22.50
  Cleveland. Mrs. H. B. Spelman (25 of which _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._)                                       30.00
  Cleveland. Mrs. S. A. Bradbury, 50; First Cong. Ch.,
    22.75; Euclid Av. Cong. Ch., Friend, 10; J. J. Low,
    5; Mount Zion Cong. Ch., 1                              88.75
  Columbus. Dr. W. Gladden, 10; Geo. W. Bright, 10; Mrs.
    Walter Craft and Children, 7; Miss Beatrice Terrell,
    1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                           28.00
  Columbus. Mrs. M. K. Bates, 10; Benj. Talbot, 1           11.00
  Conneaut. H. E. Pond                                       5.00
  Conneaut. H. E. Pond, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           2.00
  Garrettsville. Cong. Ch., 23.25, and Sab. Sch., 1.75;
    Woman's Miss'y Soc., 5, to const. REV. J. R. NICHOLS
    L. M.                                                   30.00
  Greenwich. Rev. C. H. Phelps                               5.00
  Gustavus. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.20
  Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Hudson. Mrs. H. Baldwin                                    5.00
  Ironton. First Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Lafayette. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
  Lorain. First Cong. Ch.                                   28.89
  Madison Lake. Mrs. H. B. Fraser                           25.00
  Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                                  2.00
  Marysville. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
  Medina. Woman's Miss'y Soc., First Cong. Ch.              20.00
  Mount Vernon. "A Friend"                                   5.00
  Newark. Welsh Cong. Ch., 9.27; Lewis Jones, 2             11.27
  Newburg. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  North Bloomfield. W. C. Savage                             5.00
  North Ridgeville. Cong. Ch.                               10.30
  Norwalk. "A Sower beside all Waters.," bal. to const.
    REV. T. F. HILDRETH L. M.                               20.00
  Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., 121.98; Homer Johnson,
    M. D., 5                                               126.98
  Oberlin. Young Woman's Miss'y Soc., Oberlin C., _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
  Painesville. Rev. S. W. Pierson                            5.00
  Randolph. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Richfield. Mrs. Uri Oviatt, 5; Dea. T. E. Ellsworth, 2     7.00
  Rochester. Cong Ch.                                        4.00
  Rock Creek. Young Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of New Lyme Inst.,
    _for Model Sch. Building, Straight U._                  10.00
  Rootstown. "Young Peoples' Band of Christian Endeavor,"
    by H. M. Reed, Treas.                                   17.00
  Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       18.50
  Steubenville. First Cong. Ch.                              5.00
  Tallmadge. Tallmadge Benev. Ass'n                         25.49
  Toledo. Central Cong. Ch., 20; State Line Ch., 2;
    Washington St. Cong. Ch., 5.50                          27.50
  Wakeman. Cong. Ch.                                        15.65
  Wayne. First Cong. Ch.                                    25.00
  Willoughby. Mrs. C. A. Garlick                             2.00
  York. Cong. Ch.                                           24.00
  Youngstown. "Two Friends"                                  7.00
  By Mrs. Wm. Clayton, Treas. O. W. H. M. U., _for Lady
    Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._--Oberlin W. H. M. S. of
    Second Cong. Ch., 75--Cleveland, Y. P. M. Soc. of
    First Ch., 20--Hudson, W. H. M. S., 5.44               100.44
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,005.87

  LEGACY.

  Hanging Rock. Estate of Rachel R. Hamilton, by
    Robert Peebles, Executor                                30.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,035.87


INDIANA, $58.00.

  Auburn. James Adams                                       20.00
  Brooklyn. Rev. Wm. Richey, 1; Mrs. F. J. Richey, 1         2.00
  Liber. Thomas Towle                                        1.00
  Michigan City. Cong. Ch.                                  35.00


ILLINOIS, $2,284.64.

  Albany. ----                                              10.00
  Amboy. First Cong. Ch.                                    45.00
  Aurora. N. L. Janes                                       10.00
  Bartlett. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
  Bellmont Cong. Ch. and "Friends"                           8.51
  Brimfield Cong. Ch.                                       12.25
  Camp Point. Mrs. S. B. McKinney                           10.00
  Carthage. Mrs. Elizabeth Bernethy                         50.00
  Chenoa. Mrs. M. A. Ketcham, 1; Mrs. Cutter, 50 cents       1.50
  Chicago. N. E. Cong. Ch., 110.04; J. M. Williams, 100;
    Lincoln Park Cong. Ch., 20.43; Rev. J. M. Williams,
    10; Lake View Cong. Ch., 7.50; H. J. Kilbourn, 3;
    "M. W.," 1                                             251.97
  Chicago. Ladies M. Soc. N. E. Cong. Ch., _for Miss'y,
    Mobile, Ala._                                           25.00
  Collinsville. J. F. Wadsworth                             10.00
  Crystal Lake. Cong. Ch.                                   24.08
  Elgin. Cong. Ch., 175.78; W. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
    26.12                                                  201.90
  Englewood. Cong. Ch.                                      20.60
  Forest. Cong. Ch.                                         16.90
  Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                                66.73
  Galesburg. "A Friend," _for Emerson Inst._                25.00
  Garden Prairie. Mrs. A. A. Dawson, 75c.; Willie L.
    Dawson, 25c.                                             1.00
  Geneseo. Mrs. Henry Nourse                                50.00
  Glencoe. Arthur H. Day                                     5.00
  Griggsville. Mrs. A. W. Green                              5.00
  Highland Park. L. S. Bingham                               5.00
  Hinsdale. Cong. Sab. Sch., 10; J. W. Bushnell, 5          15.00
  Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                       264.18
  La Harpe. Cong. Ch.                                       17.50
  La Salle. "An aged Friend"                               200.00
  Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                          7.18
  Lyndon. Cong. Ch.                                         11.05
  Lyonsville. Cong. Ch.                                     11.00
  Metamora. Members Cong. Ch. (Christian Union)             32.15
  Millburn. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., _for Miss'y, Mobile,
    Ala._                                                   30.00
  Nebraska. Mrs. Carse and Daughter, 1 ea.                   2.00
  Nora. Cong. Ch.                                           13.00
  Oak Park. First Cong. Ch., 100; Rev. J. E. Roy, 30, to
    const. EDGAR C. ELLIS L. M.; "E.," 10                  140.00
  Olive. Cong. Ch.                                           8.76
  Olney. First Cong. Ch.                                     8.00
  Peoria. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                             25.00
  Peoria. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Tougaloo U._                                             9.00
  Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               15.00
  Princeville. Mrs. Olive L. Cutter                         10.00
  Providence. Cong. Ch.                                     42.38
  Rantoul. Cong. Ch.                                         3.25
  Ravenswood. Cong. Ch.                                     40.00
  Rochelle. C. F. Holcomb                                   15.00
  Rockford. Thomas D. Robertson                             50.00
  Rockton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 5.50; "A Friend," 5.50;
    "C. P.," 5                                              16.00
  Roseville. Mr. and Mrs. L. C. Axtell                       1.00
  Rutland. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
  Shirland. Rev. E. Colton                                   5.00
  Sycamore. Hon. Henry Wood                                 10.00
  Wataga. Cong. Ch.                                         11.00
  Winnebago. N. F. Parsons, 15; O. T. Holcomb, 2;
    J. L. McLain, 25c.                                      17.25
  Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                        7.45
  Wyanet. Rev. F. C. Cochran                                10.00
  ----. "A Friend in Illinois"                              75.00
  By Mrs. E. F. Williams, _for Lady
    Missionaries_--Galesburg Ladies' Miss'y Soc.
    of Brick Ch., 11; Lombard, by Women's H. M. U.
    of Ill., 10.05--Moline Ladies' W. H. M. U., 13.00       34.05
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,034.64

  LEGACY.

  Peoria. Estate of Moses Pettengill, by Rev.
    A. A. Stevens                                          250.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,284.64


MICHIGAN, $2,089.35.

  Addison. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
  Alpena. First Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._                41.00
  Ann Arbor. Mrs. Walker, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._          .50
  Banks. Cong. Ch.                                           4.04
  Bedford. Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._                      6.22
  Benton Harbor. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             8.00
  Benzonia. Cong. Ch., 49.50 (ad'l) to const. E. P.
    SMITH and DEA. J. R. BARR L. Ms.; Rev. Joseph S.
    Fisher, 30, to const. JAMES T. BRISSENDEN L. M.         79.50
  Bradley. First Cong. Ch.                                    .96
  Calumet. Dr. Chas. W. Niles                               25.00
  Calumet. Boys' Class in Cong. Sab. Sch., by John
    Knauf, Treas., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._            4.00
  Carson City. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
  Church's Corners. Cornelius Clement, 10; Dea. N. R.
    Rowley, 5; A. W. Douglass, 5; Mrs. John Williams,
    2; James Robins, 2; C. Alpaugh, P. Hallock, H.
    Reed, Dea. G. S. Wells, D. H. Gardner, John Wells,
    and P. Cunningham, 1 ea; J. Robins, W. Hazen and
    W. C. Robins, 50c. ea; Cong. Ch., 8.80                  41.30
  Coloma. Cong. Ch.                                          3.09
  Croton. Cong. Ch.                                          2.85
  Detroit. First Cong. Ch., 139.40; First Cong. Ch.
    and Sab. Sch., 50; "A Friend," 61.50, by Rev. J.
    Porter, to const. CALVIN THOMPSON GARLAND and MARY
    EVANS GARLAND L. Ms.; Woodward Ave. Cong. Ch., 87.71   338.61
  Dexter. Dennis Warner                                     20.00
  Dowagiac. Cong. Ch.                                       11.35
  East Saginaw. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                25.00
  East Saginaw. Mrs. A. M. Spencer                           2.00
  Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._          16.00
  Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                                16.56
  Grand Blanc. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.25
  Grand Blanc. "Willing Workers," _for Teacher, Santee
    Agency, Neb._                                           10.00
  Grand Rapids. Members First Cong. Ch.                     25.00
  Greenville. M. Rutan                                     500.00
  Homer. Mrs. C. C. Evarts                                   5.00
  Hopkins. First Cong. Ch., 2.88; Second Cong. Ch.,
    13.54                                                   16.42
  Hubbardston. Cong. Ch.                                     3.25
  Hudsonville. Cong. Ch.                                     1.46
  Jackson. "A Friend"                                        5.00
  Johnston and Barry. Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._            .75
  Imlay City. Cong. Ch.                                      4.50
  Irving. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
  Kensington. John Thompson                                  5.00
  Lansing. Plymouth Ch., 40; Prof. R. C. Kedzie, 10;
    Mrs. A. Wheeler, 50c.                                   50.50
  Leroy. Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._                        7.00
  Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               17.20
  Manistee. Cong. Ch.                                       23.50
  New Baltimore. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.00
  New Haven. S. E. Mills                                     5.00
  New Haven. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._        2.00
  Orion. Mr. and Mrs. C. S. Berridge                         5.00
  Ovid. Cong. Ch.                                            3.60
  Owosso. Cong. Ch.                                         14.03
  Robinson. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
  Saint Ignace. Cong. Ch.                                    2.25
  Saint Johns. H. M. Perrin, 50; A. J. Baldwin, 10;
    C. A. Shaw, 5; _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               65.00
  Tipton. Rev. A. A. Wall                                     .50
  Union City. "A Friend"                                   200.00
  Union City. Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for Straight U_)     139.41
  Vermontville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
  Wacousta. Cong. Ch.                                        4.50
  White Cloud. Rev. John Jeffries                            1.00
  Ypsilanti. M. G. Wood, _for Talladega C._                  5.00
  By Mrs. A. McDougall, _for Straight U._--"A Friend,"
    100--Charlotte,75--Edmore, 6.25--Nashville,
    4--Olivet, 39--Vermontville, 21                        245.25


WISCONSIN, $653.66.

  Baraboo. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
  Beloit. First Cong. Ch., 25; Second Cong. Ch. Sab.
    Sch., 8.19; Mrs. H. Nelson, 1.50                        34.69
  Bloomer. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
  Bloomington. Cong. Ch.                                     3.20
  Brandon. Cong. Ch.                                        17.75
  Brodhead. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Clinton. John H. Cooper                                    5.00
  Columbus. Olivet Ch. (20 of which _for Miss'y, Austin,
    Tex._), 42.50; Olivet Sab. Sch., 5                      47.50
  Cooksville. Cong. Ch.                                      3.50
  Darlington. "Two Friends" in Cong. Ch.                     1.00
  Eagle. Pleasant Hill Presb. Ch.                            3.75
  Eau Claire. First Cong. Ch.                               35.00
  Emerald Grove. Cong. Ch.                                  11.00
  Fox Lake. Miss M. J. Adams                                 5.75
  Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                       15.50
  Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                       22.00
  Kaukauna. "A Friend"                                       5.00
  Kinnickinnick. Cong. Ch.                                   4.41
  Lake Geneva. Y. P. Soc., _for Miss'y, Austin, Tex._        5.00
  Lancaster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
  Lancaster. Ladies' Aid Soc., _for Macon, Ga._              2.35
  Leeds. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
  Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch.                            75.00
  New Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                      5.59
  Peshtigo. Rev. and Mrs. H. C. Todd                         2.00
  Pewaukee. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
  Platteville. Ladies' Soc., _for Miss'y, Austin, Tex._      4.16
  Ripon. Cong. Ch., 69.50; Mrs. C. T. Tracy, 5              74.50
  River Falls. Cong. Ch.                                    17.50
  Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                       5.50
  Salem. William Munson                                     50.00
  Sheboygan. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Library,
    Macon, Ga._                                             15.00
  Sheboygan. "A true Friend of the Freedmen"                 5.00
  Sparta. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
  Spring Green. Welsh Cong. Ch., 2; English Cong.
    Ch., 1.30                                                3.30
  Whitewater. Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.,                       78.18
  _For Missionary, Austin, Tex_--Appleton, Ladies Soc.
    Cong. Ch., 12.75--Arena, Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
    4.08--Eau Claire, Cong. Sab. Sch., 10--New Lisbon,
    Ladies Cong. Ch., 1.50--Stoughton, "A. B. S.,"
    1--Birthday Box Cong. Sab. Sch., 1.20--Whitewater,
    Cong. Sab. Sch., 20                                     50.53


IOWA, $859.15.

  Algona. Cong. Ch.                                         11.00
  Almoral. Cong. Ch.                                         7.37
  Amity. Cong. Ch.                                           9.00
  Atlantic. Cong. Ch., 20.93; Sab. Sch., 5.75               26.68
  Bear Grove. Cong. Ch. (6 of which from Mrs. O. C.
    Warne and family)                                        7.25
  Belknap. Cong. Ch.                                         2.10
  Big Rock. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                              5.00
  Cedar Rapids. Cong. Ch., 43.49; Mrs. E. O. Price, 2       45.49
  Central City. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch., 10;
    Cong. Ch., 10                                           20.00
  Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 26.00
  Danville. Cong. Ch.                                        8.80
  Decorah. Cong. Ch.                                        31.26
  Denmark. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  18.50
  Des Moines. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 262.13; North Park
    Cong. Ch., 5.89                                        268.02
  Des Moines. Plym. Cong. Ch., 23.75; Ladies of Plym.
    Ch., 13; North Park Ch., 7.05; Ladies of Pilgrim
    Ch., 2.50; _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                   46.30
  Des Moines. T. S. Wright, _for Talladega C._              10.00
  Dubuque. German Cong. Sab. Sch.                            5.00
  Durant. "Friends"                                         10.00
  Earlville. Cong. Ch.                                       6.35
  Eldora. Cong. Ch.                                         12.31
  Elkader. Mary H. Carter                                    5.00
  Grinell. Samuel F. Cooper, _for Fisk U._                 100.00
  Grand View. German Cong. Ch.                               5.00
  Green Mountain. "Lady in Cong. Ch."                        2.00
  Independence. Cong. Ch., 11.44; Rev. Daniel Chapman, 2    13.44
  Kersauqua. Infant Class Cong. S. S.                        2.00
  McGregor. J. H. Ellsworth, 10; Cong. Ch., 8; Ladies'
    Miss'y Soc., 3.50                                       21.50
  Miles. Cong. Ch.                                           7.50
  Mitchell. Cong. Ch.                                        5.55
  New Providence. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
  Newton. Cong. Ch.                                         18.00
  Oakland. Cong. Ch.                                         5.55
  Onawa. Cong. Ch.                                           5.85
  Pattersonville. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
  Postville. Cong. Ch.                                      11.36
  Preston. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
  Salem. Rev. D. D. Tibbets and Members Cong. Ch.            5.00
  Sheldon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.50
  Sioux Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                    2.40
  Spencer. Rev. G. G. Perkins                                2.00
  Victor. "A Friend"                                         1.00
  Wayne. Cong. Ch., 5.56; D. C. Smith, 1                     6.56
  Webster City. Cong. Ch.                                    7.21
  Winterset. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore                            15.00
  By Mrs. G. W. Reynolds, Treas., _for Miss'y, New
    Orleans, La._--Chester Center, Ladies, 3.25--Clay,
    Y. L. Bible Class, 5; Rosebud Class, 4.20; Ladies,
    85c.--Wayne, Ladies, 5                                  18.30


MINNESOTA, $308.47.

  Alexandria. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                8.00
  Appleton. Madison and Lac Qui Parle Churches, 1 ea.        3.00
  Brownsville. Mrs. S. M. McHose                             2.00
  Cannon Falls. Cong. Ch.                                    4.35
  Clearwater. Cong. Ch.                                      2.40
  Edgerton. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
  Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                         1.50
  Hastings. D. B. Truax                                      5.00
  Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      8.00
  Mankato. Woman's Miss'y Soc.                               8.89
  Minneapolis. Mrs. Irene E. Hale, 50; Plymouth Ch.,
    15.42; The Open Door Ch., 9.15; Rev. E. S. Williams,
    5                                                       79.57
  Montevideo. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        3.00
  Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         11.29
  Owatonna. First Cong. Ch.                                  6.06
  Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        2.20
  Saint Paul. "Cheerful Giver"                              25.00
  Springfield. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
  Waseca. Cong. Ch.                                          5.58
  By Mrs. J. N. Cross, Treas.--Clearwater, M. S.,
    25c.--Cottage Grove, Ladies Aux. Union S. S.,
    11.50--Glyndon, W. M. S., _for Miss'y, Austin,
    Tex._, 10--Minneapolis, Plym. Ch., W. H. M. S.,
    98.28 (50 of which _for Student Aid Fisk
    U._)--Waseca, W. M. S., 8.60                           128.63


KANSAS, $113.98.

  Arkansas City. "A Friend"                                 20.00
  Atchison. "Mission Band," by Mrs. Ellen Patton,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          5.00
  Deerton. Cong. Ch.                                          .33
  Eureka. Cong. Ch.                                          3.77
  Highland. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Lawrence. Second Cong. Ch., 3; Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 2        5.00
  Milford. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
  Muscotah. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
  Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                       30.00
  Topeka. Tuition                                           18.88


MISSOURI, $207.06.

  Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                     13.76
  Cameron. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Carthage. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
  Kahoka. Cong. Ch.                                          1.00
  Laclede. Rev. E. D. Seward and wife                        3.00
  St. Louis. First Cong. Ch., 100; Cong. Ch., 5; Pilgrim
    Cong. Ch., 61                                          166.00
  St. Joseph. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               10.00
  Springfield. Central Ch.                                   1.30


COLORADO, $25.70.

  Colorado Springs. First Cong. Sab. Sch., 6.50; Mrs.
    J. W. Pickett, 5                                        11.50
  Crested Butte. Cong. Ch.                                   3.00
  Denver. Cong. Ch., 5, and Sab. Sch., 5                    10.00
  Manitou. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._          1.20


NEBRASKA, $115.52.

  Blair. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
  Camp Creek. Cong. Ch.                                      3.20
  Crete. Cong. Ch., 24.50; J. R. Little, 10                 34.50
  Friend. Cong. Ch.                                          1.70
  Maineland. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00
  McCook. "A Friend"                                         9.00
  North Platte. "A Friend"                                   1.00
  Omaha. Mrs. Gaylord                                       10.10
  Sutton. First Cong. Ch.                                    4.62
  Syracuse. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
  Waco. Cong. Ch.                                            2.40
  Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
  York. First Cong. Ch.                                     15.00


DAKOTA, $94.36.

  Badger. Firesteel Cong. Ch.                                1.58
  Dawson. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
  Deadwood. Cong. Ch.                                       26.05
  Elk Point. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
  Harwood. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud Indian M._          1.00
  Hope. Cong. Ch.                                            6.03
  Iroquois. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
  Jamestown. Mrs. M. S. Wells                                5.00
  Springfield. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
  Springfield. Chas. Seccombe, _for Rosebud Indian M._        .20
  Valley Springs. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.           2.50
  Windsor. Mrs. Sarah P. Wirt                               10.00
                                                           ------
                                                           $69.36

  LEGACY.

  Wahpeton. Estate of Mrs. L. H. Porter, by Rev. Samuel
    F. Porter                                               25.00
                                                           ------
                                                           $94.36


CALIFORNIA, $30.00.

  Los Angeles. Mrs. Milo Whiting                             5.00
  Lugonia. C. H. Lathrop                                    15.00
  Oakland. Rev. J. M. McPherron                             10.00


OREGON, $50.70.

  Oregon City. Friends in Cong. Ch.                         10.00
  The Dalles. Rev. E. P. Roberts, 30, to const. MYRA
    H. ROBERTS L. M.; First Cong. Ch., 10.70                40.70


MONTANA, $3.00.

  Glendive. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00


ARIZONA, $6.01.

  Benson. Rev. R. T. Liston, _for Rosebud Indian M._         1.00
  Benson. Rev. R. T. Liston                                  5.01


WASHINGTON T., $12.75.

  Houghton. First Ch. of Christ                              5.25
  Skokomish. Rev. M. Eells                                   5.00
  Tacoma. Mrs. Eliza Taylor                                  2.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $7,610.62.

  Washington. U. S. Gov., _for Education of Indians_     7,570.62
  Washington. Gen. E. Whittlesey, 20; Lincoln Mem.
    Ch., 10; ----, 10                                       40.00


MARYLAND, $200.00.

  Baltimore. "A Friend"                                    200.00


TENNESSEE, $4,060.75.

  Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00
  Memphis. Slater Fund                                   1,200.00
  Nashville. Slater Fund                                 2,800.00
  Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition, 30.44; Jackson St.
    Cong. Ch., 5                                            35.44
  Pomona. Cong. Ch.                                          4.94
  Sherwood. Union Ch.                                        8.37


NORTH CAROLINA, $89.05.

  McLeansville. First Cong. Ch.                              1.05
  Oaks. Cong. Ch., 11.64; Mission Band, 2.36                14.00
  Raleigh. Geo. S. Smith                                    10.00
  Wilmington. "Tithes, 30," to const. MISS A. E.
    FARRINGTON L. M.; Cong. Ch., 34                         64.00


SOUTH CAROLINA, $30.00.

  Charleston. Cong. Ch.                                     30.00


GEORGIA, $524.75.

  Atlanta. Kindergarten, Tuition                             8.25
  Belmont. Cong. Ch.                                          .50
  Cypress Slash. Cong. Ch., 6; Rev. Geo. C. Rowe, 4         10.00
  Macon. Slater Fund                                       500.00
  Miller's Station. Rev. Wilson Callen and Wife              5.00
  Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke                        1.00


ALABAMA, $2,181.15.

  Athens. Rev. H. S. Williams                               12.00
  Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
  Selma. Cong. Ch., 27.15; Lady Teachers Cong.
    S. S., 7                                                34.15
  Talledega. Slater Fund                                 2,000.00
  Talladega. Cong. Ch.                                     120.00


FLORIDA, $69.00.

  Orange City. First Cong. Ch.                               3.00
  St. Augustine. Rent                                       66.00


MISSISSIPPI, $1,588.25.

  Tougaloo. Slater Fund                                  1,500.00
  Tougaloo. Rev. G. Stanley Pope and Wife, 50; Cong.
    Ch., 20; Wm. D. Hitchcock, 10; Miss Kellogg, 1;
    Sidney Daniels, 1; Rent, 6.25                           88.25


LOUISIANA, $17.20.

  New Orleans. Central Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. and
    Individuals                                             17.20
  New Orleans. Pres. Hitchcock, Box of Minerals,
    _for Talladega C._


TEXAS, $625.48.

  Austin. Slater Fund                                      600.00
  Austin. Tuition                                           16.23
  Dallas. Cong. Ch.                                          2.25
  Paris. Cong. Ch., 3; Sab. Sch., 45c.; Woman's
    Miss'y Soc., 1.55                                        5.00
  Paris. Woman's Miss'y Soc., _for Indian M., Fort
    Berthold, Dak._                                          2.00


INCOMES, 1,349.69.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             1,023.57
  Crane Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                  8.34
  Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                              50.00
  General Endowment Fund                                    50.00
  Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                       160.00
  Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                       57.78


CANADA, $110.

  Montreal. Rev. John Fraser                                10.00
  ----. "A Friend"                                         100.00
                                                       ----------

  Total for September                                  $69,587.32
  Total from Oct. 1 to Sept. 30                        290,894.06
                                                       ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for September                              $48.00
  Previously acknowledged                                1,209.68
                                                        ---------
    Total                                               $1,257.68

       *       *       *       *       *

  Watertown. Conn. Estate of Dr. John De Forest, by
    Erastus L. De Forest, Ex., _for the benefit of
    Hampton N. & A. Inst._                              $5,000.00


ENDOWMENT.

  Watertown. Conn. Estate of Dr. John De Forest, by
    Erastus L. De Forest, Ex., _for President's Chair,
    Talladega C._                                       $5,000.00
                                                        =========

  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
  56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD]

    Horsford's
    ACID PHOSPHATE
    (LIQUID.)

A preparation of the phosphates of lime, magnesia, potash and iron with
phosphoric acid in such form as to be readily assimilated by the system.

Prepared according to the directions of Prof. E. N. Horsford, of
Cambridge, Mass.

    FOR DYSPEPSIA,
    MENTAL and PHYSICAL EXHAUSTION

    Weakened Energy,

    NERVOUSNESS, INDIGESTION, Etc.

Universally recommended and prescribed by physicians of all schools.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to take.

It is the best tonic known, furnishing sustenance to both brain and
body.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

    Invigorating, Strengthening,
    Healthful, Refreshing.


Prices Reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free.
Manufactured by the

    Rumford Chemical Works, Providence, R. I.

[Illustration: (pointing hand)]BEWARE OF IMITATIONS.[Illustration:
(pointing hand)]

       *       *       *       *       *

    LUNDBORG'S
    PERFUMES.


Lundborg's Perfume, Edenia.

Lundborg's Perfume, Marêchal Niel Rose.

Lundborg's Perfume, Alpine Violet.

Lundborg's Perfume, Lily of the Valley


    LUNDBORG'S
    RHENISH COLOGNE.

A box containing Samples of all the above five articles prepaid to your
nearest Railroad Express Office (which should be named) for Fifty
Cents--Money Order, Stamps or Currency.

Address: YOUNG, LADD & COFFIN, 24 Barclay St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNCLE TOM'S CABIN.

[Illustration: (signature) H B Stowe]

NEW POPULAR EDITION. CLOTH, $1.00.


"I cannot refrain from expressing to you the deep gratitude that I feel
to Almighty God who has inspired both your heart and your head in the
composition of 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.' It would be out of place here to
enumerate the various beauties, singular, original, and lasting, which
shine throughout the work."--THE EARL OF SHAFTESBURY.


ON THE THRESHOLD.

BY T. T. MUNGER. $1.00.

A book of sensible, helpful talks to young people on Purpose, Friends
and Companions, Manners, Thrift, Self-Reliance and Courage, Health,
Reading and Intellectual Life, Amusements, and Faith.

"It is sensible, earnest, candid, and discriminating, and, withal,
thoroughly interesting."--_The Congregationalist_ (Boston).

"It is worth, for young men, dozens of average Sunday-school
books."--_The Well-Spring._


THE PROPHET OF THE GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS.

BY CHARLES EGBERT CRADDOCK, author of "In the Tennessee Mountains,"
"Down the Ravine," etc. 16mo, $1.25.

This is one of the most noteworthy of American novels. The striking
figure and fate of "the prophet," the cave and stealthy operations of
the "moonshiners," and the engaging love story which runs as a golden
thread through it all, are depicted with great power and fascination.


EIGHT STUDIES OF THE LORD'S DAY.

1 vol. 12mo, $1.50.

This book sets forth distinctly the Sabbatic origin and character of the
Lord's Day. The subject is treated historically and with great fullness.


[Illustration: (asterisks)] _For sale by all Booksellers. Sent by mail,
post-paid, on receipt of price by the Publishers._

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO., Boston, Mass.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 39, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1885 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.