Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: Crouching in the shadows of the shrubbery they waited
while two figures strolled toward them. (Page 59)]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                          THE ADVENTURE GIRLS

                           AT HAPPINESS HOUSE

                                   By

                              Clair Blank

                    THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY
                        Akron, Ohio    New York


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Copyright MCMXXXVI
                    THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY
                 The Adventure Girls at Happiness House

                  Made in the United States of America

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                CONTENTS

                           I BRIARHURST
                          II A RESCUE
                         III BELL NIGHT
                          IV TROUBLE AHEAD
                           V THE HOCKEY GAME
                          VI A NOTE
                         VII NO CLUES
                        VIII MYSTERIOUS STRANGER
                          IX BAD NEWS
                           X MISS FIELDS' VISIT
                          XI PHYLLIS
                         XII FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS
                        XIII STARTLING NEWS
                         XIV DISCOVERED
                          XV PHYLLIS' STORY
                         XVI THE FIRST LESSON
                        XVII OMEGA CHI
                       XVIII CAROL SLIDES
                         XIX WHITE STAR
                          XX THE END OF THE TERM

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                 THE ADVENTURE GIRLS AT HAPPINESS HOUSE


                               Chapter I

                               BRIARHURST


With a final chug and screech of brakes the train slid to a halt before
the two story frame building that did duty for a railway station in the
little college town of Briarhurst.

A group of girls proceeded with much hilarity and little speed to
transport themselves and their luggage from the railway coach to the
station platform. From there they viewed the rusty bus that was to
transport them up the hill to the college grounds.

"It will never hold all of us and our luggage," Carol Carter declared
with firm conviction. "Perhaps we had better walk."

Janet Gordon looked at the dusty road winding up the hill behind the
station and then at the bus. "You can walk," she said. "I'll take a
chance on this antiquated vehicle."

"Are you the six young ladies goin' to Briarhurst?"

The girls turned to see a wizened old man approaching from the station.
"If ye are, climb aboard. I'm the bus driver."

"I'll wager the bus is even older than he is," Madge Reynolds murmured
to Valerie Wallace.

"Will the contraption hold together?" Carol wanted to know.

"It's been a-runnin' for nigh onto twenty years and ain't fell apart
yet," the driver said, climbing into his seat and waiting for the girls
to get aboard.

"That isn't saying it never will," Phyllis Elton commented.

After much dickering the girls got into the bus, their luggage for the
most part piled on the roof, and the ancient vehicle with its ancient
driver started with a roar.

"It reminds me of a peanut roaster," Carol murmured. "The way the
radiator is steaming and the noise it makes."

"Everything but the peanuts," agreed Janet. "Which reminds me, I hope
dinner is early."

"Dinner is at seven," the driver informed them conversationally.

The bus started the long tedious climb up the hillside and the driver
settled back comfortably in his seat. He was in no hurry.

"I thought Briarhurst was a prosperous college," Phyllis Elton said to
Gale Howard, "wouldn't you think they would have a more modern bus? This
thing might scare new students."

The driver frowned on her with all the disgust possible to his wrinkled
features.

"Lizzie, here, has belonged to the college since she was new. She's good
enough for you yet. Even the new Dean can't junk old Lizzie." He patted
the steering wheel with all the affection and prized possessiveness of a
loving father.

"New Dean?" Gale questioned. "Isn't Professor Harris the Dean any more?"

"Nope," the driver said. "Professor Harris resigned an' this new one
come up here about three weeks ago. She's been tryin' to make changes we
old ones don't like."

The girls exchanged glances. They had heard so much about Professor
Harris and her rule at Briarhurst. The Dean had been much beloved by the
girls. The prospect of a new r√©gime at the college did not particularly
appeal to them.

"What's she like--the new Dean?" Janet asked interestedly.

"Young and purty," the sour old man said grudgingly. "But she got no
business tryin' to change things that been goin' on all right for thirty
years. She won't stay long," he added darkly.

"Why won't she stay?" Phyllis wanted to know.

"The old ones don't like her," he said firmly.

"By 'the old ones' I take it you mean the teachers and other members of
the faculty," Gale said.

"That's right," he agreed.

"What has she done to make them dislike her?" Janet inquired.

The man shook his head. "We don't aim to make this a modern
institooshun. She has newfangled notions about a new bus and sports for
the young ladies. We old ones ain't goin' to stand for it," he repeated
firmly. Evidently he considered himself an important part of the college
personnel.

"The idea about a new bus is enough to prejudice him," Carol laughed to
Janet. "Whoops!" She made a wild lunge for her handbag as the bus
navigated a deep rut with a series of protesting groans from the
framework. "However, it is enough to put me on her side. If she wants a
new bus I am for the new Dean!"

The bus halted first in front of the registrar's office and the girls
were assigned to their prospective quarters. Because of crowded
conditions only Phyllis and Gale were fortunate enough to win a room in
the sorority house of Omega Chi, and this was only through the efforts
of their former High School teacher. The other four girls were assigned
to the dormitory house on the east lawn of the campus. At first the
separation rather put a damper on their spirits.

"You might get into the sorority house next year," consoled Phyllis.

"As it is," Janet commented, "we will leave you two to face the dragons
of the sorority by yourselves."

The next stop of the bus was to let Gale and Phyllis off in front of the
Omega Chi Sorority house. They surveyed their future home interestedly
while standing in the midst of their baggage which the driver had dumped
unceremoniously at their feet. The bus rattled away and the girls
exchanged glances.

"We might as well go in," Phyllis said finally.

Several girls were on the veranda and these viewed with interest the new
arrivals.

"We might as well," Gale agreed with a sigh. With a traveling bag in
either hand she followed Phyllis up the steps and into the building that
was to be their home for the next four years.




                               Chapter II

                                A RESCUE


"I am not going to like it!" Janet announced firmly when she met Phyllis
and Gale on the campus the next morning after breakfast.

"You are lucky so far," Phyllis told her. "The upper classmen in the
dormitories haven't come back for the term yet. We have some of the
sorority girls already in the house and do we get looked over!"

"Where is Carol?" Gale inquired.

"Gone to get our tennis racquets," Janet replied. "We are going to take
advantage of the empty courts now before the upper classmen get here."

"I'll come along and watch," Phyllis offered magnanimously.

"I want to take a walk and explore," Gale informed them. "I'll see you
at luncheon, Phyl."

Classes would not begin for three days yet, but the girls had timed
their arrival at Briarhurst for days ahead to become acquainted with the
general position of their classes and the dormitories.

Gale headed in the direction of the lake that lay on the western border
of the campus. There had been erected diving boards for the students and
canoes were anchored to the shore. Gale watched for several minutes the
cavortings of the gay young girls who frolicked in the water, and then
continued with her stroll.

Readers of The Adventure Girls at K Bar O and The Adventure Girls in the
Air are already familiar with the six girls from the little town of
Marchton. Old friends already know of the desire of the girls to attend
Briarhurst College and of the difficulties along that line experienced
by Phyllis Elton. Now it seemed their dreams were in a fair way of being
fulfilled. All of them, even Phyllis, were actually present at the
college and starting out on an entirely new branch of life. They were
prepared to study hard and also prepared to face the fun and trials of
college life.

On the grassy bank beneath a low-hanging willow tree Gale sat down to
view the water and to think.

Last night they had been met at the door by a welcoming committee of two
Juniors. She remembered her own and Phyllis' surprise at the odd things
which they saw on their journey to their room on the third floor.

Some delightful soul had christened the staircase the "Golden Stairs,"
but whether they led to heaven or not the girls had not yet discovered.
On the landing of the second floor was a huge poster which might have
been the street sign for a Boulevard proclaiming "Senior Avenue." On
each floor the corridor was named and some of the rooms themselves had
names.

Phyllis and Gale found themselves in "Sunshine Alley" but there was no
name tacked upon their door.

"How come?" Phyllis wanted to know.

"You have to do something to deserve a name. Then a special committee of
sorority girls gets together and selects one for you. For instance, next
door to you, you have the champion swimming team of last year's Freshman
class. Their room is named 'Mermaid Mansion.' Get the idea?"

"Also farther up the hall is 'Harmony Heaven,'" the other upper classman
informed them. "That was so named because the girls there are forever
quarreling. The name anything but fits them."

It was a little confusing to Gale and Phyllis. They could not
immediately adapt the terms for the different floors and rooms in the
house. At dinner when someone asked them what floor they were on, they
innocently said "Third," and were made to run around the table three
times for not using the correct title "Sunshine Alley."

For the most part, though, the girls were friendly. The two were shown
about with due ceremony and the rules carefully explained. The house
mother, Mrs. Grayson, who had charge of the building was most courteous
and the girls immediately liked her. Next they met the sorority
president, Adele Stevens. They were at once taken under her wing.

Gale dangled the end of a willow branch in the swirling lake water. The
water at this point was flowing rapidly toward a waterfall where it
joined a rushing river and went on to the sea.

This afternoon she had an appointment with the President of the college
and then one with the Dean. It was customary for all new students to be
thus interviewed, but Gale wondered if they all felt as nervous as she.
She had a strong curiosity and yet a reluctance to meet the new Dean.
She wanted to see the new authority because the girls had talked about
her so much at dinner last night. It seemed the Seniors all sympathized
with the bus driver. They were prepared to strongly oppose any new
policies installed by Dean Travis. From what Gale and Phyllis had heard,
the new Dean's policies would better things on the campus. At least they
appealed favorably to the new Freshmen. Certainly there could be nothing
wrong in wanting new laboratories for the Chemistry classes, a new organ
for the chapel, stables and horses to teach the girls riding and a few
other such things. Why the older students were so set against them
Phyllis and Gale could not understand. However, they both agreed, in the
privacy of their room, to take neither side until they knew more about
things. At any rate, they were only Freshmen and Freshmen were to be
seen, not heard.

Gale was about to turn back to the campus to meet Phyllis for luncheon
at the sorority house when she halted. Had that been a voice calling?
Faintly another call came across the water. Parting the low thick
branches of the willow tree, Gale looked across the lake.

A canoe was drifting down the center of the lake. It was going more
swiftly every moment, caught in the rush of waters leaping on toward the
waterfall at the other end. In the canoe was a figure, waving
frantically to the shore.

Either the canoeist had lost her oars or she was so panic-stricken at
being caught in the swirling waters that she could not think
conclusively or quickly enough to save herself.

A tree branch had been broken from a tree in a recent storm and now it,
too, swirled around in the lake waters. Gale watched breathlessly while
the branch bore down on the canoe. She was helpless to aid even though
the onslaught would probably upset the canoe. But such was not the case.
Instead of toppling the canoe over the boat became entangled in the wet
leaves still clinging to the wood and so, locked together, the two moved
toward the waterfall.

Gale started to run swiftly back to where, in the calmer waters, the
college girls had been swimming. Someone must rescue that woman in the
canoe. Perhaps there would be a motor boat at the diving boards. Another
canoe would not be much help. Gale kept close to the shore as she ran,
always keeping in view of the canoe. Once she stopped to wave to the
tragic figure being swept to destruction. She saw an answering wave and
heard a call, but she could not distinguish the words.

Fortunately she did not have to run all the way back to the swimmers.
Hidden close to the mossy bank in a thick growth of shrubbery along the
shore was a motor boat. Gale found it with a sense of immeasurable
relief. With trembling fingers she untied the anchor rope and jumped
into the boat. How thankful she was that she had had ample experience
with motor boats back in Marchton! It stood her in good stead now. The
motor responded promptly and she turned the nose of the boat out into
the lake. She drew speed from the boat and wondered what the owner might
say.

The canoe, still tangled with the dead tree branch, was even closer to
the tumbling waters going over the waterfall. Gale was glad the motor
boat was a large, sturdy affair. With its powerful motor working
rhythmically it should be able to withstand the pull of those rushing
waters.

Flinging a heavy spray back over Gale the boat sped eagerly through the
water. It rapidly closed the distance between the drifting canoe and the
would-be rescuer. Almost upon the canoe Gale tried to think of the best
means of getting the woman safely aboard the motor boat. She certainly
could not be transferred from the canoe in the middle of the water.
Therefore, the best procedure would be to tow the canoe to shore. But
first the tree branch must be disposed of. It might drag both the canoe
and the motor boat to the falls.

"Hang on," Gale shouted to the figure in the canoe, "we'll make the
shore all right."

She ran the motor boat as close as she could to the canoe. The swell of
water threatened to upset the smaller craft. Gale shut the motor off.
The boat was immediately swept into the current. Grasping a long, heavy
boat hook which she found lying on the deck, Gale stepped onto the
closed cabinet-like doors which sheltered the engine.

"Go back--you'll be killed!" the other figure implored.

Gale sent the woman a reassuring smile. She had done such crazy stunts
on Bruce Latimer's boat back in Marchton. Now she felt no fear at all
for herself, only a fear that she might not be able to push the tree
branch far enough away to loosen the canoe. She tied one end of a coil
of rope to the anchor bolt on the motor boat and threw it toward the
canoe. It fell directly across the small craft. The canoeist grasped it
and made it secure.

Cautiously Gale worked herself farther out to the bow of the boat. She
had only a few seconds now in which to loosen the tree branch and
restart the motor to save them both. At the first thrust of the boat
hook Gale nearly toppled herself into the water. She heard a muffled cry
from the woman in the canoe. She regained her posture. She could never
do it standing upright. Therefore, she lay down flat on her stomach on
the boat. That gave her a freer use of her right arm and less chance of
losing her balance. A gigantic push and the branch swept away from the
canoe and onward to the destruction of the falls.

Gale lost no time in making her way back to start the motor. Luckily it
started with the first try and the motor boat pulled clear of the
swirling waters, dragging behind it the canoe.

Once on shore Gale tied the motor boat securely to its former position
and helped the slender figure from the canoe. The canoeist was a woman
older than Gale, but Gale felt immediately that they could be firm
friends. She liked the other's frank smile and clear gray eyes.

"You are a brave girl!" the woman said when she was safe and her first
words of thanks were over. "I might be over the falls now if it were not
for you," she shuddered.

Gale smiled. "It was a lucky thing someone was here. What happened? Did
you go out without any oars?"

"I know better than to do that," the woman said. "I was sitting in the
canoe farther up along the shore, reading. I often do that. I had no
desire to go out on the lake so I left the oars on shore while the boat
remained anchored. I must have fallen asleep. The next thing I knew I
awoke and I was in the middle of the lake, caught in the rapids."

Gale looked at the boat and noted the short bit of rope dangling from
its stern.

"It rather looks as though that rope was cut," she said, noting the
sharpness of its edge as though a knife had severed it.

"You must never mention that to anyone," the other said quickly.
"Promise me you will never speak such a thought!"

Gale laughed. "Of course--but why shouldn't I?"

"I can't explain now, but there is a very good reason." She held out her
hand. "I would like to say thank you again. Will you come to see me this
afternoon?"

Gale put her hand into the one offered her. "I'm sorry," she said
regretfully. "You see I am new at the college and I have an appointment
with the Dean."

A whimsical light came into the gray eyes. "You don't seem very
enthusiastic."

"I'm not," Gale confessed.

"Have you been listening to the upper classmen?"

"A little," Gale said. "But it isn't that. I'm not prejudiced against
her. She may be perfectly all right--it is only that--I'm a little
nervous. I guess all Freshmen are. I hope she is nicer than what I hear
about her."

The other woman laughed. "I hope you find her so. Now I----"

The patter of running feet interrupted her and a group of girls burst
upon them.

"We saw what happened from up the shore," one gasped. "Are you all
right, Dean Travis?"

Dean Travis! Gale felt the world whirling around her. This was the new
Dean!

"I am quite all right, thank you," the Dean was saying composedly.

A second later she was gone and the other girls with her. Gale was alone
and she sank down dejectedly on a tree trunk. For a long time she sat
there staring out over the water. Finally she made her way slowly back
to the sorority house where Phyllis was waiting for her.

                  *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon Gale went to the office of the Dean. If she had been
nervous this morning before she met the Dean she was ten times more so
now. To think of the things she had said! They made her cheeks burn now.
How could she have talked so and to the Dean! She sat on the hard outer
office chair and thought of all the places she would rather be. She
thought of Phyllis and Madge and Valerie swimming in the lake. She
thought of Janet and Carol again playing tennis. How she longed to be
with them. How she longed to be anywhere where she did not have to face
the Dean!

"You may go in, Miss Howard," the secretary said.

Gale stood up and took a deep breath. She covered the distance into the
office in little less than a run. She felt she had to go as quickly as
possible before she turned and fled out of sheer panic.

There was another woman with Dean Travis, a woman with brown curly hair
and a flashing, whimsical smile, absurdly young to be the school
physician, but such Gale found her to be when they were introduced. She
stayed to talk with Gale and the Dean for several minutes and the
Freshman felt all her self-consciousness and timidity melting away
before the warmth of the Doctor's smile. However, when the Doctor had
gone and the Dean was seated behind her desk, Gale in the chair before
her, the girl felt her discomfiture returning. After all, this woman was
the Dean and she had talked to her and treated her much as she might
have Phyllis or Valerie. Hereafter she must remember to treat the Dean
with the respect and deference required by the head of the girls'
college.

"Is your room at the Omega Chi Sorority house satisfactory?" the Dean
was asking pleasantly. She tapped a white envelope before her. "I have
had a long letter from your former High School teacher, Miss Relso."

"Everything is perfect, thank you," Gale said politely.

"Your roommate is your friend from home?"

"Oh, yes."

"I hope you are going to like Briarhurst, Miss Howard."

"I am sure I shall."

"The girls are all pleasant, that is for the most part. Of course there
are some who are selfish and like their own way, but one finds them in
every walk of life. Briarhurst tries to fit the girls to take a definite
place in the world, to help them live the kind of life worth living. We
don't say we fit you to immediately take charge of whatever line of
endeavor you go into when your four years here are up. All we try to do
is give you the prime essentials for your life--courage, determination,
ambition, the desire to play fair and to take gallantly whatever life
offers you." She smiled. "What is the matter, Gale?"

"Matter?" Gale was surprised out of her respectful silence.

"You have been sitting there politely listening, but I doubt if a word
I've said has remained in your memory," the Dean said humorously.

"Oh, I assure you, it has," Gale said hastily.

"Are you still nervous about meeting--the Dean?" the older woman asked,
rising and walking around the desk to Gale's side.

Gale also rose. "I'm sorry if I was rude this morning," she said in
embarrassment. "I had no idea----"

"That I was the Dean?" the other said. "Otherwise you would have let the
canoe drift over the falls, is that it? I'm sorry, that was a terrible
thing to say," she continued breathlessly. "Forgive me." She laid a hand
lightly on Gale's shoulder. "This isn't the type of interview I usually
have with a Freshman."

"I gathered that much," Gale smiled. She continued after a while, rather
hesitantly, "You aren't really worried about--about the things the girls
are saying, are you?"

"No," the Dean smiled, walking to the door with Gale. "Not really
worried. Goodbye, my dear, and come to see me often--as a friend, if not
in my official capacity."

Gale stepped out into the world red with the glow from the setting sun
and thought what a grand person Dean Travis was. She had a personality
that made one immediately want to be the best sort of person one could.
That she would in a short time win all the girls over to her side, Gale
did not doubt. She was so pleasant, so easy to approach, so interested
in the girls, that they could not resent her for any length of time no
matter how much they missed their former Dean.

A hand touched her arm and she jumped in surprise, so deep in thought
had she been.

"Did I frighten you?" a laughing voice asked.

Doctor Norcot fell into step beside her. "I waited for you," she added
with a look around.

Gale saw a few girls across the campus watching her and the Doctor. She
hoped they weren't the Adventure Girls. If such was the case, she would
be teased intolerably about already being friends with two such
important people as the Dean and the Doctor.

"I wanted to ask you more about that cut rope."

"Cut rope?" Gale repeated, puzzled. "Oh, you mean on the canoe."

"Yes. Are you positive it was cut?"

Gale nodded. "There couldn't be any doubt about it. You see it was just
a new rope. That is, the end that was left was new. It couldn't have
worn through. The edge was straight and not at all frayed. It had been
cut," she said firmly. "Did Dean Travis tell you about it?"

"Yes. You haven't told anyone, have you?"

"No," Gale said in mystification. "But why shouldn't I? Anyone who looks
at the canoe will be sure to see it."

"Freshmen have enough on their minds without adding other people's
troubles," the Doctor teased. "Good afternoon, Miss Howard."

Eyes grown stormy with indignation and then calmer with humor, Gale
watched her stride across the campus and into the red brick building
which housed the infirmary and the Doctor's quarters.

"What a nice, polite way of telling me to mind my own business," she
laughed to herself. "But just the same," she added mischievously, "I
won't mind it. I, too, would like to know why that rope was cut so Dean
Travis' canoe would drift out and be caught in the rapids."

She walked across the campus toward the sorority house. The building was
gray and ivy covered. The sun's last rays made the vine leaves gleam
silver and gold in turn. "Happiness House!" She smiled. What a fitting
name for the place. Whoever had substituted such a name for the intimate
use of the girls had chosen it rightly enough. There seemed to be
nothing but peace, contentment and utter harmony among the girls. At
least so far she and Phyllis had discovered nothing else. Of course when
the rest of the girls arrived for the semester things might be
different.

She mounted the steps and entered the living room. There were several
girls there, gathered about the piano. One held a ukulele and as Gale
went toward the staircase she started to sing:

              "There was a happy young Freshman,
              Who rescued the Dean from the water,
              But alas and alack, now the Freshman is sad,
              Cause she did something she hadn't oughter."

Gale laughed and ran lightly up the Golden Stairs to Sunshine Alley. The
rhyming was decidedly bad in the girl's song.

Just as she reached the door to her room the most blood-curdling yell
came through the panels that she had to pause and put her hands over her
ears. From all along the hall doors opened and heads were poked out.

Gale turned the door knob and entered. Phyllis was sitting on the bed
convulsed with laughter. Astride the footboard of her bed was another
girl, evidently the one who had given voice to that shout because her
mouth was still open.

"What on earth----" Gale began.

"My roommate," Phyllis managed to gasp between giggles.

"Howdy!" The girl who was using the bed footboard as a horse said,
extending a brown hand. "I'm Ricky Allen. I'm in the room across the
hall."

"I'm glad to know you," Gale said, laughing in spite of herself, "but
would you mind telling me what that noise was just now?"

Phyllis wiped the tears from her eyes. "Ricky is from Wyoming and she
was illustrating a cowboy round-up whoop for me."

There was a heavy knock upon the door. Gale opened it.

"Who is being murdered?" Adele Stevens asked calmly.

Gale shook her head. "It was a mistake. It seems only a cowboy war-whoop
got loose. We have it under control now," she added.

When the Sorority president was gone Ricky grinned at the two girls.

"Reckon I'm goin' to like this place now I've met you. I didn't at
first. I was lonesome for my ranch and my horses."

"I understand the new Dean plans to have stables and horses installed to
teach the girls riding," Gale said.

"Yipeeee!" Ricky greeted the news eagerly. "That'll be great. I've gotta
tell my roommate that!"

She was gone with the same suddenness and whirlwind speed that
characterized all her actions. Gale and Phyllis looked at one another
and burst out laughing.




                              Chapter III

                               BELL NIGHT


Classes started and with them the Freshmen's troubles. New
acquaintances, new scenes, new studies, and new instructors came with
such rapidity that the girls were dizzy with it all. Carol and Janet
were in the same dormitory building as Valerie and Madge. Consequently
their close friendship was by no means interrupted. Gale and Phyllis
went to see their friends quite often. When they were in their own room
they found that Ricky Allen and her roommate joined them frequently. The
girls were fast becoming friends.

Ulrich Allen, Ricky to her friends, was a breezy, friendly girl from the
West and there was not a soul in the class who did not know all about
her. Her roommate was a quiet, sweet young girl from Georgia. Ricky took
pains to see to it that everyone should know about her, too.

Janet declared that Ricky was as clear and as unassuming as the country
from which she came. Nevertheless, Janet and Ricky could be seen with
heads close together very often, planning mischief or laughing over
their latest bit of gossip.

Gale, since the afternoon she had rescued the Dean from the lake, had
seen the older woman only once. On that occasion the Dean walked across
the campus to the library with her. It was something she would take care
not to let happen again, she told herself. It seemed that girls from the
sorority house had seen her. The upper classmen looked with the utmost
distaste upon such familiarity. They saw to it that Gale should regret
such friendliness with the head of the institution. She was teased
unmercifully and chided and scoffed at upon every occasion. Most of the
girls did it in fun, the fun that upper classmen usually have with a
Freshman, but one girl in particular seemed to personally resent Gale.

Marcia Marlette had been one of the very last Juniors to arrive for the
semester. She lived in Penthouse Row, the fourth floor, in a room
directly over Gale and Phyllis. She had heard the story of Gale and the
Dean. She had seen for herself that the Dean did smile and stop to talk
with Gale when such occasions presented themselves. She was one of the
girls who was voluble in her protestations against the new Dean. She had
been favored and especially privileged the two terms before. Now that
there was a new Dean and a new regime her privileges were swept away.
She was to be no more favored than any other girl. That didn't please
Marcia, and since she couldn't very well spite the Dean she decided to
torture Gale--supposedly a close friend of Dean Travis.

Gale bore the girls' teasing silently, in amused indifference. She
didn't mind the stunts she and Phyllis had to perform to appease their
sorority sisters, but from the minute Marcia Marlette appeared on the
campus things were different. Gale could bear the other girls' teasing,
their songs, their sly pointed remarks, but she couldn't and wouldn't
stand for it from Marcia.

"I tell you, Phyl," Gale said stormily, flinging her books onto her
desk, "I won't stand for it. I'll--I'll tell Dean Travis."

Phyllis smiled patiently. "Can't do that, Gale. We've got to take it.
Our turn will come."

"I know," Gale said. She flung herself upon the bed and glared at the
ceiling. "But I will blow up and explode if Marcia Marlette doesn't stay
away from me."

"What has she been doing now?"

"Met me after Chemistry class and walked to the house with me--making
nasty remarks about the Dean all the while. I'll--I'll slap her face
some day," Gale threatened.

"Whoa, there," Ricky Allen murmured, sticking her head in at the open
door. "Who is gonna slap who?"

"Are we missing anything?" added Gloria Manson.

Gale sat up and laughed. "I am boiling over with suppressed wrath."

"Only it isn't suppressed any more," Phyllis murmured. "Girls, you see
before you a volcano about to erupt."

"Go ahead and erupt," Ricky invited, settling herself comfortably on
Phyllis' bed.

"What happened?" Gloria asked sympathetically.

Gale sat on the window sill and took a deep breath of the autumn air.
"That awful Junior has been pestering me again. I suppose it is only a
matter of months before I become immune to it."

"That awful Junior heard what you said," a voice declared nastily.

Gale put her head out the window and looked up. Marcia Marlette was
leaning out her window and grinning with exasperating superiority.

"Perhaps you would like to say it directly to me," she invited.

Gale was not lacking in courage and her anger now made her more daring.

"Certainly I'll say it," she answered firmly. "I said you were pestering
me again. So what?"

The Junior's face was more irritating.

"Freshmen are supposed to be polite to upper classmen--especially
sorority sisters. Rebellion will cost you a month's special privileges."

"But that isn't fair!" Gale cried indignantly. "I didn't do
anything--wait, Marcia----"

But the Junior had disappeared into her room. Gale swung about and
confronted the others. She strode to the door, but Phyllis preceded her.
With her back against the door Phyllis asked:

"Where are you going?"

"Up to Marcia's room," Gale said hotly. "I'm going to tell her a few
things! Things I've been aching to say ever since I first saw her. I'm
going----"

"You are going to stay right here," Phyllis said calmly. "Sit down,
Gale, and get hold of your temper again. I never saw you so fiery. I
don't know what Marcia might have done or said, but I'll wager it was
only to make you angry. She wants you to do something like this. You
will only injure yourself in the end."

"Ignore Marcia," Ricky advised.

Gale submitted reluctantly to their advice. She knew it was wiser to
ignore Marcia's slights and cutting remarks, but just the same she was
still angry. Her resentment was growing deeper every hour. Oh, she had
taken instant dislikes to people before, but she had never felt so
unreasonably, so thoroughly hateful toward another girl. The minute she
had seen Marcia stroll into the dining room on the night of the latter's
arrival Gale could have told Phyllis she wouldn't like her. Before
Marcia ever said a word to her, Gale felt resentment burning within her.
She didn't know why. Then, when Marcia started to annoy her and Phyllis,
Gale more than ever disliked the Junior. So far she had been successful
in hiding it. She avoided all possible contact with Marcia, but after
all they were bound to meet sometimes. They sat at the same table at
dinner, and it was there Marcia was worst of all. Gale and Phyllis
accepted everything she said with a slight smile and silence. That only
seemed to make matters more difficult. Marcia was deliberately picking
an open quarrel and the upper classmen fully realized the position of
the Freshmen. Their attitude softened somewhat and for that the girls
were grateful. But it still did not solve the question of Marcia.

"Are you going out for hockey?" Gloria asked, idly thumbing Gale's
Chemistry book.

"Sure," Ricky declared, "aren't we, Phyl?"

"I am," Phyllis said. "How about you, Gale?"

"For class hockey? The first meeting is tomorrow afternoon." With
difficulty Gale turned her attention to other things.

"We only have five minutes before dinner," Gloria announced next.

Ricky dragged herself upright. "Shall we go downstairs and wait?"

Phyllis flung a hasty glance at Gale. If they went downstairs now Marcia
would most likely be there. It would be bad enough at dinner with her
sitting across from them.

"No," Phyllis said vaguely, "I want to brush my hair and----"

"You had better hurry," Gale murmured.

Phyllis remained close to Gale when they descended the stairs behind
Ricky and Gloria. The girls were moving toward the dining room. Phyllis
looked hastily around for Marcia. She was not in sight. When Phyllis
slipped into her seat beside Gale she looked across the table. Marcia's
chair was empty.

"Where's Marcia?" she murmured to the girl on her other side.

"She has permission to eat at the West Campus Dormitory," was the
answer.

Phyllis sighed with relief. She did not want to see a quarrel between
Gale and Marcia. It would mean only trouble for Gale. Marcia was used to
having her own way, girls naturally catered to her. She would not stand
to be ignored by a Freshman. That Gale should be friends with the Dean
was all the more reason for Marcia to resent her. Last year Marcia had
been close to the old Dean. Marcia had had special privileges. She had
not been tied to the college grounds to observe the rules as the other
girls had. But now Dean Travis did not grant Marcia those special
privileges. Phyllis believed that was all that stood between the Dean
and popularity with some girls. A lot of the girls wanted special
privileges and the Dean did not grant them. Phyllis could not help but
admire the Dean for treating all the girls exactly the same. There would
be even more dissatisfaction if some girls were allowed to do things and
others weren't.

Phyllis, upon learning that Gale and Marcia would not possibly meet
tonight and quarrel, was gay with relief.

"I know how you feel," Gale murmured to her friend. "But you really
shouldn't have worried, Phyl. I would never make a scene here--before
all the others."

"Are you a mind reader? How did you know what I was thinking?" Phyllis
demanded.

Gale laughed. "You are an open book to me," she giggled.

Phyllis sighed. "Woe is me! Nothing is a secret any more."

The girls did not linger with the others long after dinner. They went to
their room, Phyllis to read and Gale to write letters. She owed one to
her parents, one to Miss Relso, who was still taking an interest in
their school life, and one to Brent Stockton. The one to Brent was the
longest and well it should be. Gale did not often see the young aviator
with whom she was so much in love, but their letters were long and
frequent and filled with many pictures.

"Send Brent my love," Phyllis told her as she struggled into her
pajamas. "Doesn't that make you jealous?" she wanted to know teasingly.

"No," Gale said promptly. "I even sent him a picture of you--and me,"
she added.

"Foiled!" Phyllis murmured, smothering a yawn in the pillow, "Aren't you
ever going to bed?"

"Lights-out bell hasn't rung yet," Gale reminded her.

"You can go to bed anyway," Phyllis informed her. "The Dean won't mind."

"Go to sleep," Gale laughed.

The moonlight came into the room with illuminating brilliance. The girls
slept peacefully, sweetly dreaming delightful dreams. The campus was
still with the peace of an autumn night. The sorority house was dark. It
was as if another world of glorious peace and accord had opened where
previously had been the trill of voices and patter of running feet. Now
nothing moved but the silent clouds over the moon and the gentle sifting
of leaves in the wind.

But suddenly the night was shattered by a bell, a bell riotous and loud,
somewhere close to the ear of the sleeping Phyllis. She sprang out of
bed with a shriek. Gale sat up and put her hands over her ears. Another
bell joined the first and together their voices made a clatter that
disturbed sleepers all over the building. Phyllis dashed wildly about,
seeking the cause of the clatter. She found an alarm clock under the
bed, whose bell was the cause of the initial outburst. She turned it off
while Gale sought the second bell. But Gale had no sooner found the
clock hidden in her suitcase than another bell broke forth and another
and another. The place was alive with bells, each louder and more shrill
than the one before.

The girls sat in the center of the floor and looked helplessly at one
another.

"Let 'em ring," Phyllis advised.

"That's all we can do," Gale conceded laughingly. "I wonder whose idea
this was?"

"What?"

"I said----" Gale began to repeat patiently, but it was no use. Phyllis
could not hear her above the clatter. It seemed a million bells were
ringing. Never had the girls heard such a varied assortment of bell
sounds.

Gradually the bells began to stop. Gently the tinkling died out and the
girls climbed back into bed. But they were no sooner settled than the
loudest and most disturbing gong of all started.

"Sounds like a fire alarm," Phyllis shouted.

She was hastily rummaging in her closet. Her search disclosed a big
alarm clock hidden in a hat box. She brought it out.

"How do you shut it off?" she yelled to Gale.

Gale shook her head, laughing. The two tried everything, but the most
effective was stuffing the clock under two pillows. That softened its
siren shriek somewhat.

"What a night!" Phyllis groaned, as she climbed back into bed. She very
slowly and carefully stuffed cotton in her ears. "I am going to sleep
the rest of the night even if the roof caves in!" she prophesied.

"What was going on in your room last night?" Ricky demanded the next
morning when she paid them a visit before breakfast.

"Somebody hid a hundred alarm clocks in here to scare us," Phyllis
explained, crawling from under Gale's bed. She had discovered two more
clocks.

"Going to start a store?" Gloria asked, motioning to the array of clocks
standing on Phyllis' desk.

Phyllis shook her head. She opened the door and pushed a chair out into
the hall. On it she set all the clocks. In front of them she put a sign
"To be claimed," and then they all went down to breakfast.

"Look!" Ricky pointed dramatically to the chair when they returned to
get their books for classes.

The chair was empty. The clocks were all gone.




                               Chapter IV

                             TROUBLE AHEAD


Gale tucked her books under her arm and started down the steps of
Happiness House.

"Gale! Wait!" Adele Stevens called and fell into step beside her. "Even
Seniors go to classes sometimes," she smiled. "Nice morning, isn't it?"

"Very," Gale agreed.

"Last night was a nice night, too," the Senior said, with twinkling
eyes.

Gale laughed. "Yes. The sound of a million bells always lends
enchantment to an autumn night."

Adele laughed, too. "You and Phyllis have been good sports, Gale. Don't
think we haven't noticed it."

"We've gotten fun out of it, too," Gale said.

"You are the kind of girls we want in Happiness House," the Senior
declared. "But," she frowned, "Gale, we are sorry for some things----"

"Freshmen expect a lot," Gale said, smiling.

"I mean--such as Marcia Marlette."

"Oh." Gale looked across the campus, letting her eyes dwell on the red
and golden brown of the leaves stirring in the breeze.

"Gale, don't ever think that the things she does have the approval of
the whole sorority," Adele continued seriously. "She is one of our
members, true. She was elected to our house when she was a Freshman. Now
we can't exactly put her out--it wouldn't be the nice thing to do and
she won't quit of her own accord. She knows we don't like what she has
been doing lately. Our sorority house is Happiness House. We want to
keep it that. We don't want quarrels or bickering. We want friendship
between the girls, friendship that lasts much longer than our college
days. Do you see what I mean?"

Gale nodded. "I think so."

"Well, I leave you here. Remember, Gale, you and Phyllis are the sort of
girls we want in Happiness House--and we hope you want to stay there."

Gale watched the Senior enter the Hall where she was to attend her
class. Slowly Gale strolled along to her own class. She liked Adele
Stevens.

"Was our noble president giving you some good advice?" a voice asked
dryly.

Gale merely glanced at Marcia Marlette as the girl walked beside her.
"Yes."

"Thought so. I suppose you think she is just the noblest person," Marcia
laughed. "Freshmen always take to Adele. They plan to be like her, but
then Freshmen are idealistic and----"

"I've got to go," Gale said, and hastily ran up and into the nearest
building. Inside she stood in the shadows until Marcia had turned away
and was almost out of sight. Then she came out and went on more
peacefully to her own class.

Gale was finding college life more and more interesting. She did want to
make something of her life and she seriously thought of studying
medicine. She didn't want to be a nurse--rather a doctor. The other
girls were inclined to treat such ambition with lightness. They didn't
think much of women doctors, but Gale was still determined. Whether she
would achieve her doctor's degree was dim in the future, but at least
she had chosen to take the pre-medical course at college. She figured
that was a step in the right direction.

Her favorite subject right now was Chemistry. She found Professor
Lukens, the Chemistry teacher, willing to answer all and any questions.
Often she lingered after classes for a further talk or experiment. On
one occasion Doctor Norcot was there and the three of them had a most
interesting talk until the Dean and Professor Powell, assistant
Chemistry teacher, arrived.

"I came for you," the Dean said to the Doctor. "My secretary was
suddenly taken ill. She is in the infirmary and the nurse advised
calling you."

"I'll come at once," the Doctor said.

Gale, too, gathered up her books and made her way to the door. There the
Dean joined her.

"Gale, I haven't seen you for a week or more."

"No," Gale agreed.

The Freshman went down the stairs with the Dean and the Doctor. They
stopped on the steps outside to talk before separating. Gale was talking
to the Dean when the Doctor suddenly pushed them roughly to one side.

"Look out!" she shouted.

There was a tinkle of glass and a dark stain spread on the stone steps
at their feet. The three bent over it before the Doctor whirled and ran
into the building.

"A test tube of acid!" Gale cried in amazement. "I wonder how that came
to fall out the window?"

"Fall? Perhaps it was thrown," the Dean murmured, looking up at the
windows to the Chemistry room which fronted on the campus.

"Thrown!" Gale gasped. "But if that had hit one of us--the way acid
burns we might have been scarred for life! No one would do such a
thing!"

"No," the Dean agreed unenthusiastically, "no one would do such a
thing."

Gale looked at her strangely. The Dean was white, whether with fear or
anger, Gale did not know. From the Dean, Gale looked at the shattered
glass and up at the window. Doctor Norcot was leaning out, looking
directly down at them. She disappeared and a few minutes later rejoined
them on the campus. Her face was sternly set and she answered the Dean's
questioning glance with a shake of her head.

"There was no one in the room--and the test tubes and materials are all
locked in the closet."

The Dean flashed a glance at Gale, The Doctor smiled in understanding.

"Shall we go on to the infirmary now?" she asked.

A few minutes later Gale was walking across the campus toward the field
in back of the tennis courts where the Freshman class was practicing
hockey. So deeply in thought was she that she passed several girls from
the sorority house without recognizing them at all. That night she
talked the whole affair over with Phyllis.

"Do you think the Dean actually suspects that the acid was thrown?"
Phyllis asked in consternation. "That is an awful thing for anybody to
do!"

Gale frowned. "That is what she said. Remember, too, that somebody cut
her canoe adrift and she was almost caught in the rapids."

"It would seem somebody doesn't like the new Dean," Phyllis murmured.
"Do you know what was wrong with her secretary?"

Gale shook her head. "No, but I am going to find out. I have a hunch
that the three incidents are tied together in some way."

"Ah! Mystery at Briarhurst!" Phyllis said gayly. "But both things might
have been accidental, you know."

"I don't think so," Gale said firmly. "A rope doesn't cut itself and
secondly, a test tube of acid doesn't walk from a locked closet and fall
out the window."

"Then you think someone is really trying to injure the Dean?"

"It looks like it," Gale said. She crossed to the window. Her studies
were forgotten, the open text book on her desk did not exist. "Heavenly
night, Phyl."

From the campus below floated up a chorus of friendly voices. The
Seniors were singing their sorority song:

                    "Secure in love and laughter,
                    Our voices blend on high,
                    We link our hands in friendship,
                    The girls of Omega Chi."

"So far so good," Phyllis said, putting her arm about Gale and leaning
with her on the window sill.

"What? The song?"

"No, I mean us. We've been here three weeks now and like it more every
day. At least I do," she added.

"Let's go and see Janet and Carol," proposed Gale mischievously.

"It is study hour," Phyllis returned. "Freshmen are supposed to slave
away over their books. We are to remain indoors." She continued with
twinkling eyes, "How shall we get out? By the back door?"

Gale switched out the light. On tiptoe the girls went to the rear
stairs. With the silence of shadows they descended to the ground. Once
outside they stood for several minutes in the shadows of the building,
waiting for the Seniors to disappear from view. Finally they were safely
away from the sorority house. Quickly they ran to the dormitory building
where Janet and Carol were housed. Once there, another problem presented
itself.

"How'll we get in?" Phyllis wanted to know.

There were two Juniors sitting on the steps in front of the building so
that was closed to them. Gale pointed suggestively to a trellis from
which only lately the dried vines had been cut to leave room for new
growth in the spring.

"Acrobats, eh?" Phyllis giggled. "Well, why not? We used to climb ropes
in gym at High School. I guess we can climb that to the second floor. It
is a good thing they don't live on the fourth," she added in a stage
whisper as she rested halfway to their goal.

Carol and Janet were bent over their books. Out of the corner of her eye
Carol saw a head slowly appearing at the open window.

"Help! Burglars!" she shrieked.

"Shshsh," Phyllis laughed. "It is only us."

"Such hospitality," Gale said disgustedly, climbing into the room after
Phyllis. "You should have a stepladder at least for your callers."

"Our callers don't usually enter through the window," Janet returned.
"Am I glad to see you! I was about to burst with all the biology I am
cramming into my head."

"I don't see how she does it," added Carol lightly. "Bugs, bugs----"

"Speaking of bugs," Janet put in, "when does the Freshman team play the
Sophomores in hockey?"

"Next week," Phyllis answered.

Noiselessly the door opened. Valerie and Madge stole into the room.

"Ah, a family reunion," Janet beamed. "We will have to celebrate. Carol,
get the chocolate."

"We have a box of cookies in our room," added Madge generously.

"Ah, perhaps we had better go to your room," Carol declared brightly.

"I'll bring them here," Madge offered.

Neither the hot chocolate nor the cookies lasted very long when once the
six girls set seriously about the task of devouring them.

"You know," Janet said, munching the icing off her cookie before she ate
the rest of it, "I heard that one of the Chemistry teachers is sending
the Dean candy and flowers."

"Mmmmm," Carol hummed.

"Romantic idiots!" Madge called them. "Because the Dean is young and
good looking you think there is a romance."

"Well, why not? Even college professors aren't immune to it. Look at
Gale----" Janet offered mischievously. "Even she was conquered by a
birdman."

"That isn't all about the Dean," Valerie said in a whisper and the
others leaned forward in interest. "I heard someone is trying to murder
her--or something."

"What do you mean?" Gale asked tensely. "Tell us!"

"I heard," Valerie said, "that her house was set afire yesterday."

"What?" Both Phyllis and Gale were on the edge of their chairs with
renewed interest. "How?"

"No one knows," Valerie replied. "The maid saw the curtains blazing in
the library. She called the caretaker and he ripped them down and
stamped the fire out. There was nothing they could have caught fire
from. It must have been done deliberately."

"But who?" Carol scoffed. "Why?"

"Things like that aren't done," Janet added. She looked at Phyllis and
Gale. "You two look as though you actually believed it."

"Tell them what you know, Gale," Phyllis advised. "But," she added, "you
mustn't go around telling the other girls. We can't prove anything--it
is only what we think."

"We'll be as mum as mice," Carol promised. "If we have been missing
anything, tell us!"

Gale told them of the things she had discovered and of the things she
suspected. The other girls were astounded.

"We will have to appoint ourselves solvers of the mystery," Carol
suggested.

"We are the best mystery-solvers at Briarhurst," added Janet. "But where
do we begin? There aren't any clues or anyone to suspect."

"Good detectives find those things," Madge informed her.

"But for goodness sake," cautioned Phyllis, "be careful about it. Dean
Travis might not like our bothering with her affairs. After all, it
isn't our business, you know."

"We'll make it our business," Gale proposed.

"And it might mean adventures for us," added Valerie.

"We have been falling rather low on adventures," commented Janet.
"Things have been too quiet. We must stir something up."

"We will do that, never fear," prophesied Carol.

"And now we have to go back to the sorority house," Phyllis said,
consulting Janet's desk clock. "Lights-out bell rang twenty minutes
ago."

"Perhaps we can use the front door instead of the window this time,"
suggested Phyllis.

Gale and her friend cautiously descended to the campus and there took a
deep breath of relief. They had gotten out of the dormitory house
without detection, but now to get back into their own room!

They sped across the campus, keeping in the shadows. Almost at the very
door of the sorority house they were forced to halt. Crouching in the
shadows of the shrubbery they waited while two figures strolled toward
them. Two women stopped directly in front of them. One was speaking and
they recognized the voice of the Dean.

"But don't you see--that candy was meant for me. If Miss Horton became
ill eating it----"

The doctor nodded. "You had a narrow escape. You don't know who sent it
to you?"

They continued on their way and the girls glanced at one another. When
they had safely and secretly entered Happiness House by the rear door
which they had left unlocked when they went out and were again in their
room Phyllis smiled:

"I guess your hunch was correct."

"Mmm," Gale murmured, staring into the darkness as she lay in bed. "Do
you suppose they were talking about her secretary? If so, she became ill
eating candy that was originally sent to the Dean."

"Poisoned?" Phyllis hazarded.

"I don't know." Gale raised herself on one elbow and looked across at
Phyllis. "Do you remember Janet saying one of the Chemistry teachers was
sending her candy?"

"Say----" Phyllis sat up suddenly. "Chemistry Professor, acid, poisoned
candy--they all fit together."

"We aren't sure the candy was poisoned, but that is what I was
thinking," Gale murmured. "However, there are four Chemistry
professors."

"The question is which one of them threw the acid and poisoned the
candy," Phyllis agreed. She yawned. "I am afraid the puzzle will have to
wait until morning. This detective is getting sleepy."

Gale wanted to lie awake and think over the puzzling circumstances
surrounding the Dean and her reign at Briarhurst, but she didn't, and it
was to be many weeks before the mysterious occurrences were solved.




                               Chapter V

                            THE HOCKEY GAME


The Freshman class proved to have a very fine hockey team. The girls,
including Phyllis, Gale, Ricky and Gloria, were all very agile, swift
and determined. The spirit of co√∂peration which existed between the
members of the team was largely responsible for their victories. They
made goal after goal in perfectly timed co√∂peration. They triumphed over
the Sophomore team with such a crushing score that the whole Freshman
class was delighted and held a party in their honor.

Then came the election of class president. Phyllis, to her astonishment
and delight, was elected the Freshman president. Valerie was elected
secretary. Altogether, the Adventure Girls were delighted to think two
of their number held offices in the class.

The room in Sunshine Alley became the headquarters for all sorts of
meetings to discuss class activities. There was scarcely any time at all
when someone wasn't there.

Still, with the activities of her office, Phyllis found time to practice
with the Freshman hockey team. They practiced often and diligently. The
team was next scheduled to play the Junior class and that, they were
sure, would be more difficult than the Sophomores. For one thing, Marcia
Marlette was on the Junior team. That fact made Gale sure of a difficult
encounter.

As the days went by the Adventure Girls could discover nothing new about
the strange events that had occurred to the Dean. Gradually their
interest began to fade. Occasionally Gale saw the Dean and Doctor
Norcot, but even she learned nothing new.

Gale left the Chemistry class on this afternoon without a moment's
wasted time and went to the gymnasium and the lockers. There the girls
were gathering for the pending hockey game between the two classes. Some
of the girls were already in their playing suits and Gale hastened into
hers. Phyllis helped her into the pads which, as goalie, Gale needed.
Phyllis, in her position of forward, preferred to wear as little
protection as possible. She considered herself agile enough to dodge the
flying sticks when in a tussle for the ball and was of the opinion that
the shin-guards only deterred her when she was in a hurry.

There was a big turnout for the game. Janet and Carol had elected to try
out for the cheer leaders' club and they were on duty this afternoon to
see that their class should get a large measure of support from the
fans.

Gale and the opposing Junior took their positions at the goals. The
teams were in line and the game began. The fans cheered lustily on the
slightest provocation but there was no goal scored.

Marcia Marlette was playing a brilliant game, even the Freshmen had to
admit that. She was here and there and everywhere. She had the ball
headed toward the goal every chance she got. Once Gale parried a
desperate shot of Marcia's that would have meant the first score had it
been a little harder and a little straighter.

But the Junior team did not have the same spirit of co√∂peration that
characterized the younger girls. Marcia was playing for personal glory.
The girls could all see that. More than once, if Marcia had passed the
ball to a team mate who was in the clear, a score might have been made,
but she preferred to play it herself and each time irrevocably lost.

Such was not the case with Phyllis and her team mates, however. They did
not hesitate to pass to one another. They were not playing for their own
brilliant performances, rather for the game. They wanted their team to
win and they did everything in their power to make it so. So
unconquerable was their enthusiasm that the score mounted in favor of
the Freshmen. Goal after goal was made.

"Lucky for us, Marcia isn't particularly brilliant," Janet told Carol on
the sidelines. "If she didn't want to be the whole show herself, the
Juniors would easily win over us."

"Treason in the Freshman class!" Carol frowned upon her. "Don't you
think we have a good team?"

"Of course," Janet said. "But look at Marcia. She is casting daggers
from her greenish eyes at Phyl. One would think there was no one else on
the field but Marcia and Phyllis. They have been watching and
checkmating each other all afternoon."

"She would dearly love to wrap her stick around Phyllis' neck--or
Gale's," giggled Carol. "There they go!"

Marcia and a class mate were dribbling the ball ever closer to the
Freshman goal. Gale was on guard. Phyllis and Ricky swept in to rescue
the ball and save the game.

There was a sudden mix-up of flying sticks, arms and legs. Two of the
players sprawled into the goalie. Gale had a fleeting vision of Marcia
Marlette striking out viciously with her stick before she went down
under the impact of another Junior.

Gale scrambled to her feet. The others did likewise--that is all but
Phyllis. She lay perfectly still, her one leg twisted under her. Janet
and Carol dashed out from the sidelines. A sudden hush had fallen over
the spectators.

"Phyl!" Gale cried and dropped beside her friend.

"What's the matter?" Doctor Norcot and Professor Lukens had appeared
from among the spectators.

After a brief examination by the doctor, Professor Lukens picked Phyllis
up in his arms and started toward the infirmary with her.

Gale tore off the padding of her position and ran after them.

"But the game----" mildly protested a Junior.

"Get another goalie," directed Gale and was gone.

Gale was forced to wait in the doctor's office. She wriggled impatiently
in the uncomfortable leather chair. Getting to her feet she walked
restlessly to the window and around the room. There were a lot of
medical books here which at another time would have interested her
immensely. However, now she could think of nothing but Phyllis, of the
whiteness of her friend's face and the stillness with which she had lain
on the field.

The door knob turned and the doctor came into the room. She was in the
white clothes of her profession and wore the professional smile.

"Phyl----" Gale said.

"She'll be all right," the doctor assured her, "but her leg is
fractured."

"B-Broken?" Gale managed to whisper.

Doctor Norcot nodded. "She must have been hit with a hockey stick--a
vicious hit."

"But she will be all right?" Gale insisted.

"After a few weeks she will be as good as new," the doctor promised.
"Would you like to see her?"

"Oh, yes!"

Gale found Phyllis awake and grumbling. The sight of her friend made
Gale's heart twinge with pity. Phyllis was trying so hard to be brave.

"I've climbed ivy trellises, even jumped out of an airplane with a
parachute--and I break my leg playing in a hockey game," Phyllis said
disgustedly. "A fine class president you picked!"

"We picked a good one!" Gale said quickly. "We----"

"In here?" a voice said and the door was opened.

"Hi," Janet said.

"We came as quickly as we could when we thought we could see you," added
Carol.

"Who won the game?" Phyllis demanded.

"We did," Ricky said, "because you played so well before----"

"Before Marcia Marlette cracked you with her hockey stick," Janet added
savagely.

"She didn't do it," Phyllis said wearily. "No one can say who did it.
Sticks were flying in all directions."

Janet said nothing more but she and Gale exchanged significant glances.
The girls did not stay long after that. It was evident that Phyllis was
tired and they thoughtfully took their leave early, but Phyllis detained
Gale long after the others. Gale held her friend's hand until Phyllis
was asleep then she softly left the room.

Slowly, deep in thought, Gale stepped from the infirmary building to the
campus. A chill night wind had sprung up. She turned toward the
gymnasium. She was still in her hockey suit. She would have to go to the
lockers and change before going to the sorority house.

Dinner had been an hour ago but she scarcely missed the comfort of her
meal. She had been so worried about Phyllis she did not realize how time
had flown past. Finding the janitor was an easy task. He unlocked the
door to the gymnasium for her and she wasted no time in going to the
lockers for her things. Stepping again onto the campus, now warm in her
woollen jacket, Gale caught sight of the Dean crossing the campus to her
home. Dean Travis beckoned to Gale and waited until the Freshman joined
her.

"How is your friend?" she asked immediately.

Gale told her.

"You missed your dinner, didn't you?" the Dean continued. "Come home
with me. We will dine together."

"Oh, but I----" Gale began confusedly.

"Forget I am the Dean for this one night," Dean Travis invited
humorously. She smiled and Gale could not resist. "I've wanted to talk
with you often, Gale. You aren't merely one of the Freshmen to me, you
know. You are a friend."

Gale found the living room of the Dean's home cozy and warm. A wood fire
burned in the fireplace. She sat on the divan before it and let the
warmth of the flames ease away some of the nervousness she still felt
from her worry over Phyllis. The dinner was the best she had had at
Briarhurst, at least she enjoyed it the most. She talked to the Dean as
she might have to one of the girls. There was no stiffness or formality
between them. She found herself telling the Dean about Phyllis and about
the letter she, Gale, must write when she returned to the sorority
house. It was a letter to Phyllis' aunt, the cold, austere woman who was
paying Phyllis' tuition at Briarhurst. Gale did not like Miss Fields.
She resented the way the woman so completely dominated Phyllis' life and
the blind obedience she exacted from the girl.

It was late when Gale got back to the sorority house. Adele Stevens met
her at the door.

"How is Phyllis?"

Gale told her all the details she could and together they walked up to
Gale's room. There the sorority president stopped to chat a while. When
she left Gale found it lonesome. It would be hard to get used to living
alone for a few weeks. Phyllis was always so gay, so friendly and
understanding, Gale would certainly miss her.

She sat down at her desk to write to Miss Fields. It was the most
difficult task she had ever had to do. She didn't like Phyllis' aunt and
her letter was not the friendly, sympathetic epistle it might have been
had she been writing to one of the other girls' mothers. When she
finished she read the note through. It was decidedly stiff and
unfriendly. She tore it up and began another. She finally enclosed her
fifth attempt in an envelope and stamped it. She was sure Phyllis would
receive scant sympathy from Miss Fields. The woman, in all the years
since Phyllis was small, had given the girl no obvious affection, no
love. Phyllis always had been afraid of her, always had to obey her
blindly and implicitly. Gale remembered how difficult it had been for
Phyllis to come to Briarhurst with the rest of the Adventure Girls. And
now this had to happen! How would Miss Fields accept the news? That
worried Gale quite as much as it did Phyllis.

Standing at the window, watching shadows moving slowly on the campus as
clouds drifted past the moon, Gale thought of what Janet had said that
afternoon. Had Marcia deliberately hit Phyllis with her hockey stick?
Gale's more charitable nature rebelled at the thought. Marcia might be
selfish, stubborn, not at all likeable, but surely she wouldn't do
anything like that!

The Freshmen had won the game but at what a cost. Her zeal for the game
would cost Phyllis days of suffering and weeks of inactivity that would
be even harder to bear. Mentally Gale made a promise to help Phyllis all
she could.




                               Chapter VI

                                 A NOTE


"Surprise!" Phyllis said gaily.

Gale stared in amazement. Phyllis was in her own bed in their room in
Sunshine Alley yet she hadn't been there that morning. Doctor Norcot
stood beside the bed smiling. Adele Stevens was on the other side.

"Phyl!" Gale stuttered. "What--why--how--my dear, I'm so glad to see
you!"

"She wouldn't give me a moment's peace until I said she could come back
here," Doctor Norcot explained, smiling.

"I'll get well twice as quickly here," Phyllis declared. "I feel a
hundred per cent better already."

"Sunshine Alley will cure her," Adele Stevens laughed.

When the doctor and Adele were gone Gale sat beside Phyllis and hugged
her.

"Gee, I'm glad to have you back. If you hadn't come soon I would be
talking to myself."

"Tell me everything that has happened in these weeks," Phyllis demanded.
"Who has done what and why?"

"Well, the teacher gave us a corking examination in Biology today but I
don't know why," Gale laughed.

"I suppose it was to see how brilliant you were," Phyllis smiled. "Gale!
Guess what! Monday I start classes again. I'll have to go on crutches
for a while but at least I won't have to stay in one room any longer.
Isn't it marvelous?"

"We'll have a party and celebrate," Gale proposed. "I'll tell Janet and
Carol to come over. Let them climb our trellis this time. I'll make
fudge and----"

"Wait a minute! You take my breath away," Phyllis declared. "Oh, Gale,
you have no idea how lonesome it was over there in the infirmary."

"I know how lonesome it was here," Gale countered. "This was bad enough.
All by myself at night, I'd dream I saw ghosts--I almost moved over to
the infirmary to be with you," she laughed.

"I hear that the Dean has started the work on the stables for the horses
we are to have in the spring," Phyllis said. "We will have a lot of fun
riding. Remember that summer in Arizona?"

"We'll have fun if we can stay on the horses," Gale giggled. "Ricky is
an authority on the subject and she doesn't know we can ride so she has
been giving us some lessons."

"Without horses?"

"We use chairs and things," Gale explained, "but a real live horse will
be more difficult to handle than a chair with a pillow on it."

"Rightly spoken, my friend," Ricky herself declared, entering
unannounced at that moment. "Phyllis! You're back! Gee! Hi, Glory," she
shouted across the hall to her roommate, "look who is here! Our star
hockey player is back!"

Sunshine Alley became alive with figures eager to welcome Phyllis back.
The Freshman president had been sadly missed.

That night the room was the scene of a secret rendezvous of the
Adventure Girls. Valerie and Madge had managed to unobtrusively sneak
out of their dormitory house with Janet and Carol. A light hidden under
a tilted wastepaper basket enabled just enough light to escape to dispel
the darkness while the girls sat around and talked in whispers and ate
Gale's fudge.

"Has anybody heard anything more about strange things happening to the
Dean?" Phyllis asked.

The others shook silent heads. However, Janet spoke up.

"I was in French class late the other day and when I came out two
teachers were talking in the hall. I dropped my book accidentally and
while I was picking it up I couldn't help but hear what they said. It
was strange."

"Well? What did they say?" Carol inquired lazily.

"One said 'Then the President hasn't yet discovered who took the money
from the fund?'"

"Yes?" Gale and Phyllis leaned forward.

"The other one said 'No.' Then they saw me and walked away."

"You scared them," Carol accused.

"What do you suppose they meant?" Madge murmured.

"By a simple act of deductive reasoning I have come to the conclusion
that there is a crook loose on the campus," Janet announced.

"Did you think of that all by yourself?" Carol chided.

"Someone took money from the school funds?" Gale murmured. "Things are
getting worse."

"Why don't they call a policeman?" Carol asked, juggling a book on her
head.

"And get the college name spread over every newspaper in the country?
That would be a nice scandal for the school!" Janet scoffed.

"It's better than having our things disappear from under our very
noses," Carol retorted.

"No one has touched any of the students' things," Valerie reminded them.
"It seems to be the college and the Dean who are in difficulty."

"I wonder who is doing it?" Phyllis murmured. "It must be someone in the
college."

"Did you see Marcia Marlette this afternoon?" Carol started to giggle.
"Where was she going? She was dressed in all her finery."

"She had everything on but the kitchen sink," added Janet with a laugh.

"I hear that Professor Lukens, the Chemistry teacher, has conferences
with her after classes sometimes," Madge murmured.

"He has with Gale, too," Valerie smiled.

"Aha! Rivals!" Carol jeered and dodged a magazine thrown by Gale.

"How about the stables going up over behind the Chemistry Hall? Wait
until I dash down College Avenue on a pure white steed----" Carol began
theatrically.

"You will fall off," Janet said dryly.

Carol made a face at her. "How do you get down from a horse?" she
inquired sagely.

"Jump," offered Janet.

"Step down," Madge said.

"You don't, you get it from a duck," Carol said sweetly.

Janet choked on her fudge. Madge threw a handy pillow while Carol took
refuge behind Phyllis.

"In case you don't know," she continued, "down is what you stuff pillows
with."

"You don't have to explain," Janet said distastefully. "After that
terrible pun I think I had better take you back to the dormitory. Come
along, infant."

"See you tomorrow, Phyl," Valerie said in parting.

"But I don't want to go to bed yet," protested Carol.

"Shshsh," Gale warned. She listened at the door. "Someone is coming."

"Where'll we hide?" whispered Janet frantically.

Carol dived under the bed. Janet did likewise while Valerie and Madge
ran to the closet. Gale put the light out and hopped into her bed.
Innocent silence settled down over the room. Footsteps halted at the
door. Cautiously the doorknob turned, but the door did not open.
Instead, something white was shoved under the door. When the footsteps
had retreated along the corridor again the girls cautiously came out of
hiding.

"Now go ahead and sneeze!" Janet stormed at Carol. "If we had been
discovered it would have been your fault. You always have to sneeze at
the strangest times!"

"I can't help it," Carol giggled. "You tickled me."

"We had better get out before we are discovered," Madge whispered
fearfully.

"Wait until we see what is in the note," Janet proposed. "Open it,
Gale."

Gale lit the light again, under its protective shield, and picked up the
square white envelope lying on the floor. She turned it over in her
hand. There was no address upon it. She tore it open and while the other
girls waited read the few words. She stared retrospectively at the
floor.

"Well?" Carol hissed. "Is it a secret?"

"What? Oh----" Gale turned to the note again. "It says 'Do not interfere
in affairs that are none of your concern.'"

"Is that all?" Carol said in disappointment. "No--no threats?"

"What can it mean?" Phyllis whispered to Gale.

"Just what it says," Janet declared bluntly. "We are to mind our own
business--or else."

"Or else what?" Carol demanded.

"Mind our own business," Madge repeated. "But what have we interfered
in?"

"True," Valerie admitted. "We haven't done anything."

Gale sat on the bed beside Phyllis. "I wonder if this was meant only for
you and me--or for all of us," she murmured.

"No one knows we are here tonight--at least I hope no one knows," Janet
said.

"It is obvious someone doesn't want us to discover something," Phyllis
murmured.

"But what?" Carol insisted. "Mixed up, I call it."

"You're always mixed up," Janet said loftily. "Can't you understand,
darling, that whoever wrote this note is afraid of us?"

"We aren't that bad looking," Carol protested humorously. "What are they
afraid of?"

"I wish we knew," Gale said. "However, now that we are accused of prying
into whatever it is, we will really do some prying."

"I'll sleep with my eyes and ears wide open," Carol promised.

The girls took their leave then, sneaking as noiselessly as possible
down the corridor and out the back door of the building. Gale went
downstairs with them, locked the door and returned to her room. She
found Phyllis still awake and pondering the strange note.

"Who left it, Gale?" she asked.

Gale shook her head. "I wish I knew. It might make things clearer."

"At any rate, we must know something that we shouldn't," Phyllis said
wisely. "What will we do about it?"

Gale ran restless fingers through her curls. "I don't know, Phyl. I was
beginning to think things were calming down. Now this----"

"Stirs them up again," Phyllis said. "You had better go to bed, Gale,
you are tired."

"And you, Phyl," Gale said contritely. "This has been a day for you,
hasn't it? The Doctor would scold if she knew you have had scarcely any
rest since this morning."

"Bother the Doctor," Phyllis said fretfully. "Gale, promise me you won't
do anything about that note until I can go with you."

Gale nodded slowly. "When I do something I'll tell you--but I don't know
what we could do," she added helplessly.




                              Chapter VII

                                NO CLUES


Gale hastily deposited her own and Phyllis' books in their room and went
flying downstairs again. Phyllis, out on her new crutches, was waiting
for her on the campus. Together the two slowly made their way to the
home of the Dean. They had seen her leave the office only a few minutes
earlier and hoped she would interview them. Or rather, Gale corrected
her thoughts, let them interview her.

The girls had talked things over long and earnestly. They had let
several days elapse, but now they had decided the best thing to do was
to go to the Dean with the note that had mysteriously appeared in their
room.

Gale proposed to tell the Dean everything that the girls knew or
suspected--things which the Dean, herself, already knew. The attempts on
the Dean had been interpreted by the girls to mean direct attempts to
seriously injure her. Now they wanted to know why. Since someone had
chosen to link them to the mysterious events, by means of that note,
they felt they had a right to share the mystery whatever it was.

Gale was trying to fit the pieces of the puzzle together as they walked
along. First there had been the canoe, then the acid hurled from the
Chemistry room window, the candy eaten by Dean Travis' secretary--and
other things that had come to her ears such as the fire in the Dean's
home and the stolen funds from the college treasury. But what was it the
girls knew that someone feared? Try as she would, Gale could not think
of a thing that pointed directly to any one person. There was no reason
anyone should suspect the Adventure Girls of being interested in the
Dean's difficulties.

"It is glorious being able to be about again," Phyllis sighed as she
rested a moment. "I can hardly wait for the time I'll be able to play
hockey again."

"I shouldn't think you would want to play," Gale said laughingly.
"You've been so brave, Phyl," she added more seriously.

"Tush!" Phyllis smiled.

But Gale was not deceived. She knew Phyllis well, she knew her friend's
moods and lately she had recognized the strain Phyllis was under. The
confinement Phyllis had undergone was desperately trying. Phyllis was
active, she was full of life. She had to be doing things, accomplishing
things to be content. If anything should happen to take away Phyllis'
activities and zest for enjoyment, life would not mean much to the girl.
The courage she had displayed these past weeks had been strongly aided
by the knowledge that with patience she would be able to go back to her
old activities again. It was only because she knew her indisposition was
but temporary that Phyllis had been able to bear it so cheerfully.

Gale ran lightly up the steps of the Dean's home while Phyllis waited.
Steps were difficult for her to negotiate and she would not do it unless
she were certain the Dean would see them.

The maid answered Gale's ring. She said the Dean was home and would see
them. When the girls were in the living room the Dean entered. She
smiled naturally upon Gale and shook hands with Phyllis.

"I'm delighted to see you about again, Miss Elton."

"I'm delighted to be about again," Phyllis said happily.

"Dean Travis, we came to see you because--that is we think----" Gale
paused for breath then continued more resolutely, "The day I towed your
canoe to shore you made me promise not to mention the subject. I
haven't--generally. Since then I've heard of things that have happened
to you. What you said made me think the acid was thrown out the window
that day and----"

The Dean held up her hand for silence. She was staring past Gale. The
Freshman turned. The door behind her was slowly closing.

"Suppose we walk on the campus," the Dean proposed in a low voice. "We
can be sure there will be no prying ears there."

"Do you want to wait for us, Phyl?" Gale asked.

"No, indeed!" Phyllis said vigorously. "It may be hard for me to get
around but I won't remain behind. I'm not going to miss anything."

The three walked slowly in the direction of the Chemistry Hall in back
of which work was being carried on building the new stables. The workmen
were finished for the day so the girls and the Dean could inspect the
scene while they talked. Lumber was piled high in readiness for the
building, the foundation was already dug and the ground was littered
with implements and discarded stones and bricks.

The three halted near a pile of lumber. No one was in sight, so Gale
continued with the tale she had. When she had finished the Dean looked
at both Gale and Phyllis thoughtfully for a moment before she spoke.

"What you say is true," she agreed. "Strange things have been happening,
but I see no reason why you should be connected with me."

"You see," Phyllis put in, "we have always been mystery fans and we have
been keeping our eyes and ears open. Perhaps someone found out we were
snooping----"

"But we haven't discovered anything," Gale said. "Dean Travis, what
about the money that was stolen? Did someone take money from the college
funds?"

The Dean nodded slowly. "Since you know so much I will tell you what
little more there is to be told. Someone, we don't know who, took
money--cash--from the safe in my office. The balance of the money,
however, is in the bank and quite safe."

"Haven't you any idea who might have taken it?" Phyllis pursued.

"Four people have the combination, and I am convinced that each one is
trustworthy. About the other occurrences--you already know as much as
I."

"Why did Professor Harris give up her position as Dean?" Gale asked
suddenly. She had for a long time been thinking that the former Dean
might be trying to revenge herself upon the new head for taking her
position.

"She went abroad to live in England, I believe," Dean Travis said. "She
had been planning it for quite a while."

"And then you were appointed," Gale murmured.

"Wasn't there an election or something?" Phyllis asked. "Wasn't there
anyone else trying for the position the same time as you?"

"I believe there was," the Dean smiled. "Are you trying to make me
believe that my rival for the position has sworn revenge? No, girls, I
don't think that is possible."

"What does Doctor Norcot think about these things?" Gale asked.

"She is at quite a loss to explain them," the Dean murmured.

"The day she ran back to the Chemistry room--she saw no one?" Gale
continued hopefully. "I'm sorry, Dean, this sounds like a cross
examination, doesn't it? We are being terribly nosey, but it is only
because we are so interested."

"Since someone is sending us notes it makes us all the more curious,"
added Phyllis. "I would like to know who sent us that note."

"Do you have it with you?" the Dean asked.

Gale pulled it from her coat pocket and unfolded it.

"You see," she said, "it is typewritten so there is no danger of
recognizing the handwriting."

"About every other person at Briarhurst has a portable typewriter,"
Phyllis frowned. "We are absolutely stumped for clues."

"Aren't you afraid to stay here with so many things happening?" Gale
asked the Dean.

The Dean shook her head smilingly. "I've been entrusted with this
position and I am going to see it through to the best of my ability. I
am going to make Briarhurst an even finer and larger college than it
already is. That is, of course, with the co√∂peration of the girls."

"You have our co√∂peration," Phyllis said promptly. "All the Adventure
Girls and some others are keenly interested in everything you
propose--the new organ for the chapel, the new and different classes,
the horses for spring riding, all of them. It will be really wonderful.
I've always wanted to ride well," she continued softly.

The Dean tapped Phyllis' crutch. "Doctor Norcot tells me it will be only
a week or so and you won't have to use these any more. I'm glad."

"So am I," Phyllis said vigorously. "I----"

Her words froze in a cry of horror on her lips. The pile of lumber
against which Gale and the Dean were leaning was tottering. Phyllis
threw herself forward, shoving and dragging Gale and the Dean clear, but
in so doing was herself caught in the avalanche of lumber as it toppled
down upon them.




                              Chapter VIII

                          MYSTERIOUS STRANGER


Gale could never quite clearly remember her dash to the infirmary after
Doctor Norcot, but finally Phyllis was there, shut into a room with the
doctor and nurse and Gale and the Dean were in the corridor. Gale was
pacing up and down, the Dean watching her. It was dark outside and a
single light made a white circle on the tile floor and walls.

Gale stopped her pacing long enough to glare at the door to Phyllis'
room. She had a wild desire to throw it open and burst in.

"Be patient a little longer, Gale," the Dean said compassionately. "You
can see her in a few minutes."

"Why did it have to be her?" Gale asked in an agonized whisper. "She
suffered so much these past weeks after the hockey accident and now----
She did it saving us! We might have been crushed under that lumber."

The door opened and the Doctor came out followed by a nurse.

"May I go in?" Gale asked.

The Doctor nodded wearily. "Be cheerful, make her smile but don't let
her get excited or talk too much."

"I'm so full of splinters I can't even smile," Phyllis said gloomily
when Gale was beside her. "You had better go get your dinner."

"You aren't going to get rid of me so easily," Gale laughed.

Phyllis' face was all scratched and she looked white and tired.

"Honestly, Phyl----" she began when she remembered the Doctor's warning.
"This was a fine thing for you to do. Now I'll be by myself in our room
tonight again. See that you are back tomorrow, young lady, or I shall
move in here with you. After all, I believe you did it so you wouldn't
have to go to Biology class tomorrow. There is more than one way of
escaping an exam. Though I can't say I would choose this way."

"Don't talk so much," Phyllis said bluntly. "You don't know a word you
are saying."

Gale nodded soberly. "Right you are. I can't think of a thing but the
way you pulled us out of danger this afternoon and now you----" She took
her friend's hand. "I'll make it up to you sometime, Phyl."

"Go way," Phyllis said tenderly. "Go get your dinner and study your old
Biology and come and see me tomorrow."

Gale went out and found the Doctor and the Dean in conference in the
corridor.

"She seems to be all right," Gale said.

"She has the courage of six girls," the Doctor said firmly. "But, Miss
Howard, I am afraid your friend is right where she was five weeks ago."

"You mean her leg----"

"Crushed under the lumber this afternoon," the Doctor said. "Not too
badly crushed but enough to undo the healing of these past weeks."

"Poor Phyllis!" Gale whispered.

"Do you think she would want to go home until she is well again?" the
Dean asked as she walked to the door with Gale.

Gale shook her head. "No," she said decidedly. "Phyllis wouldn't want to
go home." Strange, perhaps, that she should choose to stay here, but
even the college infirmary was brighter, more cheerful than the house on
the hill to which Phyllis would have to go.

"Come and have your dinner with me," the Dean invited.

"Thanks, no," Gale said when they were on the campus. "I--I'd rather be
alone, thank you. I have to write Phyllis' aunt again," she sighed.

The Dean turned toward her office and Gale toward Happiness House. She
walked along, hands in her pockets, deep in thought until at last she
reached the sorority house. She met Adele Stevens and Ricky and conveyed
to them the news of Phyllis. After her dinner she went upstairs to study
but she found she could not concentrate.

Phyllis was on her mind. Alternated with thoughts of her friend were
remembrances of the conversation they had had with the Dean that
afternoon. She was completely at sea as to who could be doing the
mysterious things. Quite suddenly she sat erect before her desk and
stared with narrowed eyes at the wall opposite. That had been a goodly
pile of lumber this afternoon. It had been piled, perhaps a bit
precariously, but nevertheless it had not wavered until that moment
before it fell. Could it be--was it possible--that someone had pushed
it? The pile really had needed but a bit of pressure to send it over.
Who had exerted that bit of pressure?

At first Gale laughed at herself. It was a wild idea! No one would do
that! But the more she thought about it the more plausible it became.
She had thought no one would throw acid out the Chemistry Hall
window--but evidently someone had!

Then she remembered the note the Dean had had in her hand when the
lumber fell upon Phyllis. She had a fleeting vision of the same note
lying in the mud unheeded. Their one valuable clue gone!

Catching up her coat Gale switched out the light and stepped into the
hall. No one was in sight. She sped down the stairs and at the bottom
bumped into Adele Stevens.

"Where are you going, Gale?" the Senior asked. "It is study hour."

"I know," Gale said breathlessly. "I--I can't study. I thought I'd go
for a short walk."

"Thinking about Phyllis?" Adele said kindly. "All right, Gale. I suppose
you can tonight. Be back before lights-out bell."

"I will," Gale breathed and was gone before the sorority president could
change her mind.

The late autumn evening was clear and cold. The leafless branches of the
trees rubbed together making queer eerie noises. Windows of the
dormitory and sorority houses shone yellow with light. Gale stepped
along briskly. She passed the dormitory houses and halted before the
Chemistry Hall. There was a light burning in the third floor laboratory.
Was one of the Professors working late? Probably. She turned away into
the shadows behind the building.

It was terribly dark in here. She took the small flashlight from her
coat pocket and switched it on. She had been just about to stumble into
a mud puddle. Now she jumped across it and proceeded with caution. She
came to the scene of the afternoon. The lumber lay as it had fallen. In
her mind's eye Gale could still see Phyllis lying there. She shivered
and turned away. Carefully she went over the ground. Caught under a
board, torn almost in half, Gale found the note. It was dirty and
wrinkled and torn but she carefully folded it in the original creases
and stored it in her coat pocket. She switched off her flashlight and
stood listening. Had she heard a sound?

The moon was completely hidden behind a cloud. The wind whistled in her
ears. She shivered in her warm coat. It wasn't the cold, it was the
darkness, the shadowy world about her, and the knowledge of another's
presence. She strained her ears to catch the faintest sound. There was a
sudden creak and a smothered exclamation as someone stumbled over a bit
of lumber. Gale crouched against half-piled boards and waited.

A man's figure was outlined against the light from the moving clouds. A
hat pulled low on his forehead and a long overcoat with collar turned up
completely hid his identity. Gale considered jumping in front of him and
flashing her light in his face. She would know who he was then! But she
reconsidered the next moment, and waited to see what he was after. It
was obvious that he was searching for something. He crouched low to the
ground, examining every foot of space thoroughly with a small pocket
lamp. What could he be searching for? Could it be the note in her
pocket? Convulsively her hand closed about the muddy piece of paper. It
must be this! There was nothing else here. Gale took a step backward as
the figure moved closer. That was the fatal moment. She stumbled wildly
over something and fell. The clatter was distinct and as loud as a
cannon shot in the stillness. The man whirled. He flashed his light full
into Gale's face. She blinked in the sudden glare and did not move. In
another second the light was gone and the figure had fled toward the
campus.

Gale scrambled to her feet but it was hopeless to think of pursuit. If
only she hadn't fallen! Her clumsiness had spoiled everything! The man
was gone now and so was her chance of solving the mystery. She shook the
mud from her coat and picked her way back to the campus.

The light was gone from the Chemistry laboratory. A lot of windows in
the other dormitories were dark, too. It was growing late. Gale hastened
her steps. She had to be in before lights-out bell rang. She had
promised Adele, and not only that, she didn't fancy being out late on
the campus with that mysterious stranger--the mystery man who knew her
identity but whom she did not know. He had her at a decided
disadvantage. He knew, now, who was spying on him and noting his
movements. She knew she must guard against someone, but whom? If only
she had discovered his identity! She rebuked herself again. She would
have given nearly all she possessed to know who else wanted the note.

When she returned to her room she examined the bit of paper more
closely. Through the dirt, after she had carefully pasted the torn parts
together, the brief typewritten message was still clearly legible. There
was nothing to distinguish this typewriting from any other except--the
letter R was slightly raised above the level of the other letters. That
might help a little in identifying the typewriter. If she found a
machine which had that little peculiarity it might lead to the
mysterious stranger.

She smiled to herself as she switched off her light and got into bed.
She would turn all the girls into Sherlock Holmeses seeking and trying
all the typewriters they could find.




                               Chapter IX

                                BAD NEWS


Noiselessly Gale closed the door behind her. Swiftly her glance traveled
over the room. Girls' things were strewn about in disorder. Gale smiled
to herself with mingled pride and humor. At least her own room and
Phyllis' didn't look like this and this room belonged to Juniors!
Cautiously she bent down and looked under the bed. Yes, it was here. She
pulled out the black case and snapped back the lid. With nervous fingers
she inserted a sheet of paper in the portable typewriter. She typed a
few words and tore the sheet out again. She had just snapped the lid and
shoved the case beneath the bed once more when she heard voices.

Marcia was returning! Gale ran for the closet. There was no time to slip
out of the room without being seen. She hid in the depths behind the
dresses. The door was open a crack. She could hear but she could not see
what went on in the room.

"Now where did I leave them?" Marcia's voice demanded fretfully.

Another lazy voice belonging to Marcia's roommate inquired:

"Delivering more notes for Professor Lukens?"

"No. It's my Latin notes--here they are! Let's go, we'll be late."

The two girls were gone as quickly and as suddenly as they had come.
Gale lost no time in making her way out of their room. She went
downstairs to her room where Valerie was waiting for her.

"Did you get it?" Valerie asked.

Gale sank onto the bed and heaved a sigh of relief. "I did, and I nearly
got caught. Marcia and her roommate came back while I was there."

"Did they see you?"

Gale shook her head and unfolded the sheet of paper. "I hid in the
closet. Now, where is that note?"

"Here." Valerie produced the note which the girls had received under the
door.

Carefully the two checked the letters. The letters produced by Marcia's
typewriter were even and clear cut. It was evident that the notes had
not been produced by the same machine.

Valerie sat back and looked at Gale. "Well?"

Gale shrugged and folded the papers together. "Exhibit A is a failure.
We'll try some more."

"We got it!" Carol burst in followed by Janet.

"Is it catching?" Valerie asked.

"Whose is it?" Gale wanted to know.

"The Chemistry Professor's," Carol said proudly.

"And the assistant's," added Janet. "We covered them both. Are we good
detectives or are we?"

The check-up of the typing on the last two notes was the same as it had
been with Marcia's. None of them were alike and none of them resembled
the typing in the mysterious note. The type of the Chemistry Professor's
machine was much larger while that of his assistant was smaller.

"Shucks," Carol said disgustedly. "We had all that work for nothing."

"Perhaps it wasn't written by any machine here at the college," Valerie
said.

Gale nodded. "True, it might not have been."

"I think it was," Carol said. "There are no visitors on whom we could
blame all these mysterious happenings, and certainly the same person is
responsible for the notes!"

"We will have to find some more typewriters."

"Tell you what," Janet said, "I've a bright idea. Let's give a party and
hold a scavenger hunt. We will make the items for the girls to bring in
mostly typewriters. In that way we will have all the typewriters brought
to us and we can try them."

"It would immediately make the one person we want suspicious. He could
smash his machine then," Carol said. "You will have to have a brighter
idea than that."

"My next bright idea is to go and visit Phyllis," Janet said. "All in
favor----"

"Aye!" The vote was unanimous.

The girls descended to the campus. It was while they were passing the
East Campus Dormitory where Janet and Carol abided that another Freshman
hailed them.

"Hi, Carol, the house mistress wants to see you--and she is angry," the
girl added confidentially.

"If it is that little matter of a broken window----" Carol began calmly.

"Broken window?" Gale asked. "In your room?"

Janet giggled. "I threw a book at Carol. She dodged and it went through
the window."

Valerie shook her head sadly. "A Freshman trick! I am ashamed of you. To
think----"

"She wants to see you too," the Freshman said smiling, "about the broken
vase in the hall."

"A Freshman trick!" Janet mimicked.

"It was an accident," Valerie said firmly. "I slipped and fell against
it. I couldn't help it if the table wiggled and the vase fell off."

"Did it fall or was it pushed?" Carol winked at Janet.

"I suppose I'll have to go in," Valerie sighed.

That left Gale to go on alone to the infirmary to see Phyllis. That
young lady was chafing at the delay in her recovery. It was a week now
since the second accident and she wanted to get back to Happiness House
and on her feet. She did not like the restrictions placed on her by the
Doctor and frankly told her so. Doctor Norcot merely smiled and told her
to be good.

Gale told Phyllis all the news of the campus and only when it was
nearing dinner time did she leave. When she closed the door to Phyllis'
room behind her she noticed the Doctor standing in the hall. She
beckoned to Gale and the Freshman followed the physician to her office.
There Gale sat in the chair facing the Doctor across her desk.

"Is anything the matter?" Gale asked when she noted the tenseness of the
Doctor's expression and the frown on the usually smiling features.

The latter nodded gloomily. "There is--a great deal."

"Has anything happened to the Dean?" Gale asked, the mystery still
uppermost in her mind.

"No," the Doctor said getting up and pacing to the window. "No, she is
quite safe."

"Then it is Phyllis," Gale said with quiet conviction. "What is it? Tell
me!"

Doctor Norcot came across and leaned against the corner of the desk at
Gale's side.

"What sort of a woman is Miss Elton's aunt?"

Gale was taken somewhat by surprise. Why should she ask about Phyllis'
aunt?

"She----" Gale fumbled for words. "She isn't exactly pleasant," she said
at last quite frankly. "Cold--aloof--stern. Why?"

"Has she money?" Doctor Norcot asked next.

Gale was more astounded than ever.

"I--I don't know," she said finally. "She keeps a big house--but not
lavishly. She is sending Phyllis to college. I suppose she must have."

"Does she love her niece? I mean, would she do anything for Phyllis?"

Gale sat back in her chair and looked squarely at the Doctor.

"I don't understand, Doctor. Why don't you ask Phyllis these things? Why
do you want to know?"

"Because----" Doctor Norcot laid her hand gently on Gale's shoulder.
"Because unless your friend has an operation she will never walk
again--not as other girls."

"Oh!" Gale shrank at the picture presented to her. Phyllis helpless!
Phyllis never to run or dance or play with the girls again.

"But isn't there something we can do? I'll do anything!" she told the
Doctor passionately. "Anything!"

"An operation will cost money. Unless she has it----"

"Unless she has it," Gale echoed faintly. "How much would you charge for
the operation, Doctor?"

"Oh, I wouldn't perform it," the Doctor said. "I'm not a surgeon. But we
would have to get a good one--the best in the East. Otherwise she hasn't
a chance."

"Have--have you told her?" Gale asked.

"No--quite frankly, I haven't the heart."

"She is so brave," Gale agreed simply. "It is horrible to think----"

"I had to tell you," the Doctor said. "Between us perhaps we can think
of something to do."

Gale passed a dazed hand across her eyes. "I can't think of anything
right now."

"It has been a shock. We will talk about it again tomorrow."

Gale rose and went to the door. "Do you think we should tell Phyllis
yet?"

Doctor Norcot smiled slowly. "Suppose we wait a little while. There is
no use to frighten her. When we tell her we might be able to promise her
recovery later."

Gale was in a daze as she walked across the campus. Phyllis, the girl
who had always been so active, so gay in the face of tremendous odds,
was faced now with a sterner bit of life than had yet confronted her. It
would take every bit of courage Phyllis possessed to face the news when
the Doctor told her.

Gale had no rosy hopes that Miss Fields would help. Phyllis' aunt was
not the sort to be generous and kind especially when it hurt herself. If
she did not consent to put up the money for the operation Phyllis would
suffer. The injustice of it hurt Gale. She was Phyllis' friend, Phyllis
had saved her and the Dean at this expense! She must do something! But
what? She didn't have the money--none of the girls had. They were
helpless, as helpless as Phyllis herself, to do anything.

Gale, instead of going immediately to the sorority house, went down to
the village. The long walk was what she needed. The bracing air invested
her with a little optimism. After all, Miss Fields couldn't be as harsh
as all that! She wouldn't want Phyllis to suffer if she could help. At
the railway station Gale sent a telegram to Marchton asking Miss Fields
to come to Briarhurst as soon as possible and signed her own name.

Then she walked slowly back up the hill, scorning the ride offered her
by the old bus driver. She wanted to be alone and think and not have to
listen to his garrulous chatter.

Dinner was in progress when she arrived at Happiness House. Instead of
going into the dining room she went upstairs. Once there she flung
herself upon the bed and smothered her sobs in the pillow. Her tears
were all for Phyllis; for her own helpless position, helpless to aid the
friend who had tried to aid her, Gale, in like circumstances; for the
friend who had saved Gale serious injury that day from the falling
lumber.

"Aren't you hungry?" Ricky demanded bursting in. "My eagle eyes caught
sight of you sneaking in just now and I--say, what's the matter? Gale!
You aren't sick!"

Gale sat up, wiping away her tears. "Nope."

"Then why the anguish? Bucking Bronchos! Don't tell me you flunked your
Biology!"

"Nothing so simple," Gale said.

"Simple? Biology is anything but simple! I never heard of so many bugs
back on the ranch," Ricky mourned. "I sometimes wish I had stayed
there." She put her arm about Gale. "Tell Auntie what the trouble is."

Haltingly Gale told Ricky everything the Doctor had said.

"We gotta do something," Ricky said. She sniffed. "You'll have me crying
too in a minute. Does Phyllis know?"

Gale shook her head. "We don't want her to--yet."

"Then you had better not tell the other girls," Ricky advised wisely.
"One of them is sure to let it slip."

Gale nodded. "It will be between you and me. I've telegraphed her Aunt
to come. The Doctor can talk to her before we tell Phyllis."

"Come downstairs and have your dinner," Ricky coaxed.

"I'm not hungry."

"Neither am I--now," Ricky sighed. "But we have to eat something.
Remember, we have hard classes tomorrow."




                               Chapter X

                           MISS FIELDS' VISIT


"I am going with you!" Ricky said firmly. Gale looked at Doctor Norcot
helplessly. When Ricky was determined upon a thing nothing could change
her mind.

"Why?" Gale ventured.

"I want to see what this female Simon Legree looks like," Ricky said
calmly. "You may need my sunny presence to help persuade her."

"There won't be much use for persuasion I'm afraid," Gale said drearily.
"Either she has the money or she hasn't."

Yesterday Gale had received a telegram with the news that Miss Fields
would be in Briarhurst this afternoon for merely an hour. As a result
Doctor Norcot and Gale were going to the railroad station to meet her
when Ricky had descended on them with the news that she was going along.
Gale was glad of the other girl's companionship for the Doctor was
strangely silent.

The train was late and Gale found it hard to conceal her impatience. She
was impatient for Phyllis' Aunt to arrive and yet she dreaded meeting
her. The Adventure Girls had always feared the silent woman in the house
on the hill. Now Gale did not fancy giving her the news about Phyllis.
She would let Doctor Norcot handle the situation.

The woman that descended from the train was the same stern person Gale
had known in Marchton. What change she had expected Gale did not know.
She only felt now, suddenly, definitely, that Phyllis' case was lost
before it was ever presented. This woman would not be charitable or
generous.

The three had planned to take her to the one restaurant in the little
village for luncheon. There, seated in a booth by themselves, Gale let
Doctor Norcot tell Miss Fields all about Phyllis while she and Ricky
listened.

The Doctor was eloquent in her praise of Phyllis. In the end she
stressed particularly the need for the operation.

Gale forgot the dessert before her. With the silent Ricky she watched
the sharp features of the woman opposite her. Miss Fields was regarding
the plate before her with unwavering eyes. Not a flicker of emotion
disturbed her features. Doctor Norcot glanced at Gale and smiled, a
peculiarly baffled smile. Phyllis' chances now lay in Miss Fields' hands
alone. Beneath the table Ricky's hand caught hold of Gale's.

Miss Fields glanced at her watch and rose. "It is almost time for my
return train. Perhaps we should go."

The girls exchanged glances with the Doctor and followed Miss Fields
from the restaurant. Silently they walked back to the station. The hour
that Phyllis' Aunt proposed to spend in Briarhurst was up. Already her
train was approaching.

"But aren't you going to see Phyllis?" Ricky demanded finally. She could
be quiet no longer.

"What have you decided?" Gale asked breathlessly.

Miss Fields looked at Gale and actually smiled. It was a brief smile,
and her eyes did not light with friendly warmth. Then she turned to the
Doctor.

"I want to thank you, Doctor Norcot, for taking so much interest in
Phyllis. I regret that I am not able to do what you suggest."

"You mean----" Gale began.

"You haven't the money?" Ricky put in brusquely. "But you are sending
Phyl to college. You must have money!"

Miss Fields' eyes froze the garrulous Ricky with a single glance.

"My affairs are only my concern. My association with Phyllis concerns a
promise I made many years ago. Believe me, I am truly sorry."

"But you must do something!" Gale said.

Phyllis' Aunt stepped onto the train. "It is impossible for me.
Goodbye."

"A promise! Sorry!" Ricky stormed when the train had gone and they were
on their way back to the campus. "She couldn't keep a promise or be
sorry for anything!"

"I wonder what she meant?" Gale murmured. "Doctor Norcot," she said
later, "are you going to tell Phyllis today?"

The Doctor took a deep breath. "She must know sometime. I'll go and see
her this afternoon."

"I'll go with you," Gale said immediately.

"And I," Ricky added.

The Doctor smiled. "I would wait until tomorrow if I were you."

"She won't want to see us," Ricky agreed upon second thought.

"Wait until tomorrow when she will feel better. Then you must act as if
nothing has happened--you must be perfectly natural. Don't make it any
harder for her," the Doctor cautioned.

"You can count on us," Gale sighed. "When can she come back to the Omega
Chi house?"

"In a few days," the Doctor promised. "She may feel better if she is
with the girls."

"Then she won't have to leave college?" Ricky asked fearfully.

"No," the Doctor said, "not unless she wants to. She will be able to
attend classes and get about but not without a cane or crutch--ever."

"There isn't any justice!" Ricky said savagely as she went up the Golden
Stairs with Gale and entered the latter's room. "Why did such a thing
have to happen to Phyl? Who----" she stopped in amazement and looked
about the room. "What's happened?"

The room was topsy turvy. Bureau drawers were pulled out and the things
tumbled about. The desks had been thoroughly searched. Even the closet
door stood open and the girls could see the tumult within.

Gale smiled. "Someone was hunting for that note, I'll wager."

Ricky had been taken into the girls' confidence. Now she stared
wide-eyed at Gale. "Did they find it do you suppose?"

"Hardly!" Gale pulled the note from her coat pocket. "Since I know
someone else would like to have it, I keep it with me."

"Have you discovered the typewriter that wrote it?"

"No. The girls are still hunting," Gale laughed. "Every time they see a
typewriter they run for it."

Ricky and Gale set things to rights and then Ricky departed to find
Gloria. Gale went downstairs and over to the dormitory house to tell
Valerie and the others about Phyllis. They might as well all know now.

She was still puzzling over Phyllis' Aunt's words. A promise? To whom?
No promise was important enough to stop her aiding Phyllis now!

Miss Fields had been a mystery to the girls in Marchton ever since they
knew her. They had always looked with awe upon the grey silent house and
the woman who lived there. Through Phyllis they had glimpsed the life of
Miss Fields--cold, always calm. Gale reminded herself that she had
really been prepared for this. She had not thought in the very beginning
that Miss Fields would have the money. Yet she had hoped against hope
for Phyllis' sake. Now there was nothing to be done.

Over and over again the words recurred to Gale. Miss Fields' association
with Phyllis concerned a promise she had made several years ago. But
what sort of a promise? Gale, quite suddenly, had a brilliant idea. At
first she had thought she must wait until the Christmas vacation or at
least until she went home for Thanksgiving before she could question
Miss Fields more closely, for question her she was going to! Certainly
she was not going to consider the matter closed now! Gale was determined
to do everything in her power to help Phyllis. She knew she could count
on the other girls to feel the same. Gale was going to get to the bottom
of Miss Fields' reserve! She determined to find out just what the woman
meant. But Thanksgiving was several weeks away--Christmas even more so.
She would write to David Kimball. He was a boy in Marchton who had been
Phyllis' staunchest ally. He would help. He could set in motion the
wheels of their action. While he studied law in Marchton he could aid
Phyllis. She would write to David tonight!




                               Chapter XI

                                PHYLLIS


Phyllis sat by the window and looked over the campus. It was the last
day of classes before Thanksgiving. Tomorrow the girls would be going
home for the holiday. But she was going to stay right here. Her
Thanksgiving dinner would be served here in her room as so many other
meals lately had been. Oh, there would be other girls in the building,
she would not be alone. But she would feel lonely nevertheless.

Gale was going home. Phyllis smiled reminiscently. Gale had been sweet
these last weeks and so had the other girls. They had all been
marvelously good to her--but that, to her, was worse than if they had
quarreled and shouted at her. If only something would happen to break
the even tenor of her days! If only the girls weren't always so sweet,
so considerate! They felt sorry for her, she knew, and it irked her. She
was going to classes again now, studying, but college life wasn't the
same. There were no extra activities for her. She could not partake of
the basketball games in which Carol and Janet starred. She could not
join the dancing classes which claimed all Valerie's attention. She
could not hope to ride in the spring riding classes to which Ricky and
the others were looking forward so joyfully.

She threw her book at the opposite wall with such vigor that the book
bounced back and landed on the floor with a dull thud. If only something
would happen! She was sick of being pampered. If they would only treat
her as they had before her accident. They argued with her then,
scolded--anything! Anything but this eternal sweetness and light! She
herself felt anything but sweet. She was tired of having to be
courageous, always appearing to be cheerful! She wanted to let out some
of the pent-up energy.

She looked down upon the campus. Gale and Valerie with Carol and Janet
were coming toward the sorority house. They seemed to be in a hurry and
kept glancing up at the window where she sat. She smiled ruefully. At
last she had given them something to stir them. Now perhaps something
would happen--at least, they wouldn't change her mind! Phyllis laid her
cane on the floor beside her chair and turned to face the door. Sunshine
Alley was about to have a bit of a thunderstorm.

"We won't stand for it!" Carol said the second the door opened.

Phyllis merely smiled.

"What do you mean by it anyway?" added Janet.

"Just what I said," Phyllis replied. "I am resigning as president of the
Freshman class."

"But why? You must have a reason!" Valerie put in.

"I have a reason," Phyllis said stubbornly. "I can't go to all the class
activities, I can't run around and be in everything that the president
is supposed to--so I am resigning."

"We won't accept it," Gale said determinedly.

"You have to call a meeting of the class and it will be accepted. It has
to be!" Phyllis said.

"But, Phyl," Janet pleaded, "we want you to be the president. All the
girls feel the same."

"It wouldn't be fair to the class," Phyllis insisted. "A president is
active--she has a lot to do. Well, I can't do it so I'm resigning. It is
very simple."

"We won't let you," Carol said finally. "Val, you are secretary. Do
something about it."

"I already have," Valerie said surprisingly. "I and the Vice President
and the Treasurer."

"Well?" Phyllis said eagerly. "The officers agreed to accept my
resignation, didn't they?"

"They did not," Valerie said. "We agreed, and posted a notice in the
East Campus Dormitory to the effect, that you are still our president.
Gale is president pro tem, and any one who disagrees must see one of us.
How does that suit you?"

"You mean Gale is to act in the places where I can't?" Phyllis asked.

Valerie nodded.

"Then I'm president in name and Gale does the work," Phyllis said. "That
isn't fair."

"I'll love it," Gale assured her bouncing on the bed. "That will give me
authority. And will I use it!"

"That is what I'm afraid of," Carol grimaced. "See here, Miss President
pro tem, don't think you can order me around."

Gale laughed. "I am going to try. Tonight there is a party here and you
gals can come providing you go home now and let Phyllis rest."

"I don't want to rest," Phyllis put in fretfully. "Stay here and talk to
me."

Carol looked from Gale to Phyllis.

"To go or not to go, that is the question!" misquoted Janet.

"Gale is so hospitable," laughed Carol.

"I don't know about the rest," Valerie said, "but I have to go. The
Christmas entertainment given by the Freshman class is being planned and
the secretary has a lot of work."

"While the president takes things easy," Phyllis said bitterly.

"Who is going to sing?" Janet asked.

"Yes," added Carol, "I heard the class is in need of a good contralto.
Who is the star who is to sing in the chapel?"

Valerie shook her head. "Something else to keep me awake at night. I am
on the committee to put the entertainment over and I haven't the
faintest idea who we will choose."

"How about Phyl?" Gale asked.

"Phyl!" Janet echoed. "Of course! You've a fine voice, Phyl."

Phyllis laughed. "But I won't be in the entertainment!"

"All you have to do is sing," Carol seconded.

"But it is impossible," Phyllis said. "Me? Sing in the chapel? Don't be
ridiculous."

"But----"

"I won't listen to another word," Phyllis said. "You don't know what you
are asking."

"Phyl, you would----"

"No!" Phyllis almost shouted. "I would be scared to death."

Gale winked at Valerie. "She would be scared to death, girls," she
murmured. "So that settles the question. Now will you go home? Go home
and pack your things and get ready to leave tomorrow morning."

"We won't have time to pack tonight," added Janet. "See you tonight for
the party," she added.

The early evening was already descending on the campus and Gale lighted
the light.

"You didn't have to chase the girls home," Phyllis said peevishly.

Gale said nothing, merely seated herself at her desk and opened her
French book. She did not try to concentrate her attention on the pages
before her. She was acutely aware of Phyllis moving about. Gale longed
to help Phyllis but she sat in her place not paying the slightest heed
to the slow and difficult movements of her friend. Suddenly when Phyllis
stumbled and would have fallen Gale sprang up and saved her.

"Let go!" Phyllis said indignantly. "I can make it by myself."

Instantly Gale's arms relaxed. She knew Phyllis must get used to the
difficulties of her movements now but it was hard to sit by and do
nothing. Gale turned away to her desk again. A few seconds later she
felt Phyllis' hand on her shoulder.

"Sorry, I didn't mean to snap at you," Phyllis said.

"It is all right," Gale said.

"But it isn't all right," Phyllis insisted stormily. "I snap at you--I
snap at all the girls. It is only because----"

"I know," Gale said. "But you mustn't think about things so much, Phyl.
Something will be done. This may only be for a little while. We'll think
of a way----"

"A way!" Phyllis murmured helplessly. "My Aunt was here, wasn't she, and
refused to do anything? She was my only hope."

"How did you know?" Gale demanded sharply.

"Ricky," Phyllis said. "She said something that set me thinking. I asked
her point blank and insisted on her telling me." She laughed a little.
"Poor Ricky, she tried so hard not to let me know."

"We will do something, Phyl," Gale assured her friend more hopefully
than she felt. "You've got to make the best of things for a little
while."

"A little while!" Phyllis echoed. "It has been months!"

"Well," Gale laughed, "if you are looking for an argument with me you
are going to be disappointed. I refuse to quarrel. I----"

"Gale!" Phyllis whispered frantically. "The window! There is a ladder
being propped against it!"

Gale ran to the window and threw it open. "Someone is climbing up," she
said smiling.

"Who?"

"I think you know," Gale laughed.

A dark head followed by broad shoulders hove above the window sill. A
laughing voice spoke out of the November dusk.

"Hi, Phyl."

"David!" Phyllis cried. "David!"

"In person," he assured her.

"But how----"

"I have the Dean's permission to call on you properly tonight at eight,"
he said laughing, "but I couldn't wait. She would probably chase me out
if she could see me now, though. I met Carol and Janet on the campus a
few minutes ago and they very helpfully suggested this method. It is
effective if startling."

"I'm going down for my dinner," Gale said and disappeared.

Gale had her dinner and then went out on the campus. She could see David
on the ladder and Phyllis at the window. She waited in the darkness
until she saw David descending the ladder. She joined him when he was
safely on the ground.

"When did you get here, David?" she asked shaking hands.

"This afternoon," he replied. "I went immediately to the Dean's office.
I didn't know whether I could see Phyllis or not. She is nice, your
Dean."

"Staying in the village?" Gale asked.

"Yes. I'm going to stay until after Thanksgiving," he answered. "The
Dean said I might entertain Phyllis while the girls are gone for the
holiday."

"She needs someone," Gale said. "I'm glad you're here, David."

"I gathered that," he said seriously. "She seems pretty depressed."

"Did you see her Aunt?" Gale asked. "You know I wrote you what she had
said and asked you to see her. Did you?"

David shook his head. "She hasn't been in Marchton since I received your
letter. I went to the house and asked the woman who cooks for her when
she expected Miss Fields back. She doesn't know."

Gale sighed. "It seems we are balked at every turn. I intend to find out
what it is all about when I get back to Marchton. If not now, at
Christmas."

"I'll try to keep Phyllis cheered up until you get back," David
promised.

Gale returned to the sorority house then. She had to help Ricky set the
stage for their party. Phyllis would see David again at eight o'clock
while the other girls were upstairs. Gale would see that they had the
living room to themselves for a long talk. She knew Ricky would aid her
if there was any difficulty in engineering a serene night for Phyllis.




                              Chapter XII

                          FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS


Gale tramped through the snow feeling light-hearted and gay. Snow always
seemed to have such a psychological effect upon her. Whether it was the
lightness of it, or the brightness of the sun shining on the surface of
the snow she did not know. At any rate she felt at ease with the world.

College had resumed at high speed for the short time between
Thanksgiving and Christmas. Now it was but a week until the Christmas
holidays. Gale felt joyfully elated. Last night she and Phyllis had
carefully wrapped Christmas presents and hidden them in their trunks.
There was a spirit of excitement in the air. The girls went about with
mysterious bundles and smiles.

Even Phyllis seemed to be nearly back to her old cheerful spirits. Ever
since Thanksgiving when David had appeared at the college Phyllis was
happier, calmer. Gale was glad. She had had absolutely no success in
Marchton. Miss Fields had not been at home. It had been as David said.
No one knew where she had gone or when she was coming back.

Gale ran lightly up the steps and disappeared into the Dean's office.
The Dean's secretary was absent so Gale knocked on the door to the inner
sanctum where the Dean had her private office.

"Come in."

Gale opened the door and stepped within.

"Oh, Gale." The Dean looked up. She was just slipping into her coat. "Be
seated. I want to mail this letter. It must get off immediately."

"I'll mail it for you," Gale offered.

"No, I'll drop it myself. It will only take a moment. Wait for me."

Gale looked about the empty office. There was a typewriter next to the
Dean's desk. Her curiosity getting the better of her Gale inserted a
sheet and typed a few words. It was not the smoothness or noiselessness
of the machine that attracted her, but the letters themselves. The
letters were even, in perfect alignment, all but the R. That was
slightly raised. Gale could scarcely believe her eyes. She jerked the
paper from the machine and brought the old mysterious note from her
pocket. There was no question about it! The two had been written on the
same machine! But it was impossible--incredible!

The Dean had not sent them that note, had she? Certainly not! But who
then? Her secretary? Gale looked dubious. There was more in this
situation than she had guessed. That she decided before--but now! How
had this note been written on the Dean's typewriter? She put both sheets
of paper into her pocket again as she heard footsteps in the outer
office.

"Now, Gale, what is it?" The Dean removed her coat and seated herself
behind her desk.

"Phyllis. She has decided she doesn't want to go home for Christmas. She
would rather stay here. David, Mr. Kimball, wants to come to Briarhurst
again and see Phyllis over the holidays." Gale drummed lightly on the
space bar of the typewriter. "A nice typewriter, Dean. Just new?"

"Yes, my secretary bought it yesterday."

Yesterday! Gale added that to the storehouse of facts in her mind.
Yesterday! Yet she was sure the mysterious note had been written on it
months before! She scarcely heard the Dean's permission for David to
come to Briarhurst as he had done on Thanksgiving, so busy was she
turning over this new development.

Her business with the Dean concluded, Gale left. She had dinner with
Janet and Carol at the East Campus Dormitory and after that they all
went to the chapel to hear the Freshman's musical Christmas
entertainment.

The organ was playing when the girls entered. The chapel was decorated
with holly and poinsettias. In the corner a mammoth Christmas tree with
the traditional white star at the top sent out a fragrance of spruce and
Christmas cheer.

The girls sang carols and there were several solos. But the best liked
soloist was a mystery. From the region of the organ, behind the holly
and spruce display, came a girl's voice. The others listened spellbound.
Such richness and expression! Every note was as clear as a bell. The
music rang through the chapel and brought a new understanding and
appreciation of Christmas to the listeners.

"Who is it?" Janet was simply bursting with curiosity.

"She is superb!" Gale echoed. "I never heard a voice like that."

Valerie was sitting beside them, the smile of sweet satisfaction on her
face a mystery.

"You were on the committee, Val, who is it?" Carol coaxed.

"It is a secret," Valerie said. "But isn't she fine?"

"Wonderful," Gale agreed. "I wish Phyllis could hear her."

"Why didn't Phyllis come?" Madge whispered.

"She said she was too tired."

"Shshshsh," Janet warned as the soloist began again. "I could listen to
her for hours. Is she somebody from the college, Val?"

"Of course," Valerie nodded.

"Oh, if I only had a voice like that!" Carol sighed.

"Then you would get some place," Janet agreed. "That girl will be
famous."

Valerie smiled to herself.

When the quiet, musical evening was over the girls voted it a huge
success. They doubted if even the play on the next night could hold them
as enthralled. The Juniors and Seniors who had been present were quite
as enthusiastic.

"We want that singer in the Glee Club," Adele Stevens said firmly. She
was the active president of the organization and she did not intend to
miss adding such a fine voice to the group.

"I don't know," Valerie said dubiously. "We had a hard time persuading
her to sing tonight."

"But why didn't she come out from behind the shrubbery?" Carol
complained. "We want to know what she looks like."

"Shrubbery!" Janet said horrified. "Carol Carter! To call our
decorations that after the time we had arranging them!"

"Sorry," Carol laughed. "Who put the star on the top of the tree?"

"Madge," Janet giggled, "and she almost pulled the tree over a half
dozen times."

The girls paused in front of the sorority house.

"Perhaps we shouldn't come in if Phyllis is tired," Janet said.

"Come along," Valerie said lightly. "She can bear it this once. No one
should be tired around Christmas time."

The girls trouped up the stairs singing as they went. They found Phyllis
sitting at her desk, her cheeks flushed and eyes bright.

"Greetings, my little sugar plum," Carol said lavishly. "You don't know
what you missed tonight."

"What?" Phyllis asked.

"A singer--and what a singer! Honestly, that girl could be the musical
sensation of the year."

Valerie and Phyllis exchanged glances then they both started to laugh.

"What's so funny?" Janet demanded.

"Either you girls are awf'ly innocent or you haven't the brains I
thought you had," Valerie said between laughs. "Don't you see? Phyllis
was the singer. She was the soloist tonight."

"Phyllis!" Gale echoed.

Janet and Carol howled together: "And you never told us!"

"A fine pal you are!" Janet grumbled.

"I'm disgusted with you," added Carol. "Hiding a voice like that! We
knew you were good--but never that good!"

"I didn't want to do it," Phyllis confessed. "But Valerie said I didn't
have to appear before all of you. No one would know who I was. I thought
it would be fun to surprise you."

"You certainly did," Carol declared. "So much so that Adele Stevens
wants you in the Glee Club."

"Never more can you be the shrinking violet," Janet nodded. "Now you
will blossom forth in notes of song and we shall see you never more. Ah,
me, such is the price of fame."

"Wait a minute," Phyllis laughed. "I sang tonight but that was only
because Val wouldn't give me a moment's peace, otherwise. I don't intend
to join the Glee Club."

"It would be good for you," Gale said. "You've always liked music,
Phyl."

Phyllis yawned. "But now I believe I would like bed better."

"Just a gentle hint," Carol chaffed. "It seems we are always getting put
out of here."

"You shouldn't come at such late hours then," Phyllis said.

"Tell me," Janet said, "since you are surprising us, you aren't going to
be Santa Claus in the play tomorrow night, are you?"

Phyllis giggled. "Hardly!"

"Of course not," Carol said indignantly. "She hasn't got a beard."

Gale opened the window. Voices drifted up on the night air. The sorority
girls were just ending their sorority song.

                   "We link our hands in friendship,
                   The girls of Omega Chi."

"I hope we get elected to the sorority," Carol said. "Then perhaps we
can move in here with you next term."

"We aren't even members," Gale reminded them. "We are here only on the
recommendation of Miss Relso. If she hadn't written for us we would
never have gotten rooms in Happiness House."

"If we aren't elected to the sorority in May we will have to move,"
Phyllis added.

"What's that?" Carol shrieked as she backed away from the window.

"What?"

"Two eyes--staring in at me out of the darkness," she pointed to the
window.

Phyllis and Gale laughed.

"Only an owl in the tree out there," Phyllis said. "He is often there at
night."

"Why don't owls sleep at night?" Janet wanted to know. "Are they afraid
to sleep in the dark?"

"And do deers ever blow their horns?" Carol questioned. "We better go to
our own domicile," she added at the dark glances from her friends. "Au
revoir, ma ch√©rie," she murmured in her very best French.

From the window Gale and Phyllis watched the girls disappear in the
direction of the East Campus Dormitory.

"You were wonderful tonight, Phyl," Gale declared earnestly. "And were
we surprised! When did you decide to sing?"

"Valerie talked me into it," Phyllis laughed. "She said I should do
something like that--so I would have a part in the Christmas celebration
I really enjoyed it."

"Phyllis--are you sure you won't go home with me for Christmas?" Gale
asked sitting on the bed beside Phyllis. "I would love to have you."

Phyllis shook her head. "No. I can't go to my Aunt's place--I could but
I don't want to, so I'll stay here. Besides," she said, eyes twinkling,
"David is coming. I won't be lonesome."

"That reminds me," Gale said, "I meant to tell the other girls, too.
Tonight when I went to the Dean's office I had to wait a while for her.
While I was waiting I tried her typewriter. Guess what I discovered!"

"What?"

"Our mysterious note was typed on her machine. What do you deduct from
that? I didn't tell her because I wanted to think about it for a while.
It seems strange."

"Her own typewriter!" Phyllis echoed.

"And she told me she bought the typewriter only yesterday!"

"It can't be," Phyllis frowned. "There is something wrong someplace.
Whom did she buy the typewriter from?"

"She said her secretary bought it," Gale said slowly. "I wonder if her
secretary is everything she should be?"

"Certainly she wouldn't eat candy she knew was poisoned," Phyllis said.
"She was sick from it, remember."

"If it was poisoned." Gale ran slim fingers through her hair. "The whole
thing is beyond me. I'm not such a master mind after all."

"We will let it wait until after Christmas," Phyllis said.

The girls were forced to do that. Nothing more could be discovered at
present and there was too much excitement with the holidays to bother
about it.




                              Chapter XIII

                             STARTLING NEWS


Gale opened one eye and peered at the clock. The next instant she was up
and hurriedly dashing through her usually methodical routine of
dressing. It was Christmas morning. She was home with her parents and
Brent was here! Last night had been the most glorious Christmas Eve she
had ever experienced. The Adventure Girls, with the exception of Phyllis
of course, and Brent and the other boys had gone carolling. After that
there had been sandwiches and hot chocolate in the Howard living room
where they could admire the big Christmas tree. Then, when the others
had gone, a long intimate talk with Brent, learning all about his work
in Washington and telling him all about her college life.

Now she pictured Brent waiting downstairs and, important enough too, a
lot of mysterious packages beneath the Christmas tree just waiting to be
opened. With a final approving look at the laughing, gray-eyed girl in
the mirror, Gale dashed out into the hallway. With a cheer she slid down
the banister and landed right in Brent's arms.

"Merry Christmas!" she said gaily.

"Merry Christmas yourself. Your Dad and I had about decided you were
going to sleep all day." He tucked her arm within his. "How about some
breakfast? I'm famished!"

"Before we open our presents?" she demanded. "I should say not!"

Saint Nicholas had been more than generous in his gifts to Gale and the
others. After a long time spent examining and exclaiming over what the
boxes disclosed they went to church. Then a long walk home through the
brilliant sunlight and a most satisfying dinner.

"You know," Gale confessed to Brent, "I keep thinking about Phyllis. I
told you what her Aunt said that day, didn't I? Let's go see Miss
Fields. I want to ask her what she meant--if she is home."

"As you say," Brent agreed.

The two walked up the long hill arm in arm. The air was cold and
invigorating. Gale felt she must burst with personal happiness yet she
found time to think of Phyllis and wish, as often before, that there was
something she could do.

The house on the hill was gray and silent, just as she had pictured it
when she was at Briarhurst. The shutters were closed on most of the
windows and there was a forlorn, deserted look about the place.

"I think you will be disappointed," Brent said. "It looks as though it
is closed up for the winter."

"I hope she is here," Gale said.

Brent used the old iron knocker vigorously. They could hear the sound
echo in the room beyond. They waited several minutes before Brent
knocked again. To their surprise the door was opened almost immediately
and by Miss Fields herself.

"H-Hello," Gale began uncertainly. "I want to talk to you, Miss Fields."

"I'm sorry, I'm busy," the woman said.

"I've got to talk to you!" Gale insisted. "About Phyllis."

Grudgingly the woman opened the door farther and Gale took advantage of
it to slip within. Brent followed and then there was nothing for Miss
Fields to do but lead the way into the cold, dark front room.

Gale shivered as she sat on the edge of an old-fashioned stuffed sofa
beside Brent. This was a terrible place, so cold and damp and dark. She
wagered no sunlight had been inside the house since Miss Fields took
residence there, and that was years and years. Brent reached over and
took Gale's hand in his warm grasp. It seemed to be what she needed.

"Well?" Miss Fields' voice was frigid and she sat stiffly in her chair.

"I--that is----" Gale began lamely. "We, the girls, are anxious to help
Phyllis all we can. We can't do it without your aid."

"Well?" Miss Fields repeated.

"We want to know why you won't help," Gale said quickly.

Miss Fields grew even more frigid if that were possible. She regarded
Gale with the utmost disdain and Gale was glad of Brent's presence. She
felt she would have withered away under such a glare if she had been
alone.

"I told you that day at Briarhurst it was impossible," she said.

"I know," Gale agreed, "but we want to know why. You must think we are
impertinent, but you see we think an awful lot of Phyllis. Something
must be done."

"It will do you no good to question me," Miss Fields returned. "If that
is all I will wish you good day."

"Wait!" Gale cried when the woman would have left them.

"You have no right to make Phyllis suffer because of a promise you made
years ago. She can be cured and you can help! There is no promise
important enough to stop that!"

A cool glance was all the reply she got.

"You've got to help Phyllis," Gale insisted doggedly. She took a deep
breath and looked at the woman almost pityingly. "I had no idea anyone
could be so hard-hearted--so unfeeling! No wonder Phyllis hates you!"

To the utter amazement and consternation of Gale and Brent, Phyllis'
Aunt sank into a chair and covered her face with her hands.

"I know she hates me," Miss Fields said in a dry whisper, "but I'd do
anything for her."

Gale looked at Brent and he looked at her. Was she hearing aright? Was
this the cold stern woman whom they had always accused of having no
feeling whatever--of being cruel to Phyllis? It seemed Gale's words had
released a spring of words that had been harbored too long.

"I've raised Phyllis since she was two years old. I've never meant to be
cruel but I've been afraid I would lose her," Miss Fields continued
staring at the floor. "I was jealous and afraid of the friends she
made--it seemed to take a part of her away from me. I wanted to know
what she was doing--I wanted her to love me."

Gale refrained from commenting on the fact that Miss Fields had taken a
mighty strange manner of showing her love for Phyllis. She listened
incredibly to the story of this strange lonely woman who had raised
Phyllis. It was a cry of a heart which had at last broken through the
cast of steel and ice which had so long encased it. It was hard to
believe that Miss Fields really possessed a genuine affection for
Phyllis. But, Gale admitted slowly to herself, it might be possible for
one, such as Miss Fields, to want to have Phyllis' affection solely for
herself, to be jealous of the girl's outside activities and friends
because it meant a branch of life in which she could not share. She had
overlooked, in her blind striving for all of Phyllis' companionship, the
girl's craving for friends her own age and the other interests of
younger people.

"I realize what this--this accident has meant to her," Miss Fields
assured them. "I would help--I've tried to think of a way--but I can't.
My hands are tied."

Brent leaned forward and spoke for the first time.

"Phyllis is not really your niece, is she, Miss Fields?"

Gale looked at him in surprise. This was a new angle! Phyllis not really
Miss Fields' niece? What did he mean?

Miss Fields stared at Brent. Her eyes had the hunted look of an animal
caught in a trap.

"What do you mean?" she asked fearfully.

"You might as well tell us everything," Brent pursued kindly. "We only
want to help straighten matters out. Phyllis isn't really your niece, is
she?" he insisted.

Miss Fields looked down at her hands clasped together tightly in her
lap. Finally she raised her head.

"No," she said.

"I thought so," Brent murmured. "You had better tell us about
everything. All about what happened years ago----"

Miss Fields fixed her eyes on the opposite wall and started to speak. It
was as if she had forgotten the young people to whom she was talking,
merely repeating a story that had been lodged in her mind for years.

"Years ago I was secretary to a Doctor. He had a wife and a little girl.
One day his wife was killed in a bad railroad accident. Before she died
she made me promise to stay with Phyllis. The Doctor was heart-broken
and partly to forget, partly to further his ambition, he decided to go
to Europe to study surgery. He left his little girl with me and enough
money to keep her until he should return and longer."

"Didn't he ever return?" Gale asked anxiously.

"I lived in his house with Phyllis for two years. Then one day I
received a wire that he was returning. I thought of all sorts of
things--that I might be discharged--I might never see Phyllis again. I
was lonely--I had no family, and I had grown to love the little girl
like my own daughter." She looked sadly at Gale. "I brought Phyllis
here. I've hidden her all these years----"

"Her father?" Gale asked.

Miss Fields bowed her head. "He returned to Europe after a few
years--when he didn't find us. I've always been afraid someone would
discover who she was--that is why I didn't want Phyllis to make
friends--I was afraid. Now you know everything--what do you propose to
do?"

Gale looked speechlessly at Brent. Her head was whirling with the new
discovery. What a story had been here in their midst! Phyllis was the
heroine of a story as incredible and fantastic as any fiction. What were
they to do first?

"Who is her father?" Brent asked.

Miss Fields looked at him silently for a long moment. "Doctor Philip
Elton," she said finally.

"The famous surgeon?" Brent echoed in surprise.

Miss Fields nodded. "But no one knows where he is. When I learned
Phyllis needed money for an operation I tried to get in touch with him.
I was willing then to let him know about Phyllis because I couldn't help
her any more--but he could. It was impossible. He is somewhere in
Europe."

"We've got to find him," Gale said excitedly. "Think what it means to
Phyl----"

Brent rose. "We will start a search immediately. When he is found he can
decide what is to be done," he told Miss Fields.

Gale and Brent went out into the sunshine leaving the woman sitting
alone in the cold forlorn house.

"To think of all that being hidden for years and years," she murmured as
they walked toward her home. "Because Miss Fields was so selfish. She
didn't think what it might mean to Phyllis----"

"I'll start the search for Doctor Elton," Brent planned. "I suppose
David will want to help when he returns."

"Do you think we should tell Phyllis now?" Gale asked. "Or do you think
it would be better to wait until her father is found?"

"Perhaps it would be wiser to wait a little while," Brent agreed.

They reached Gale's home and entered the warm living room.

"Why don't you take your overcoat off?" Gale asked. "You are going to
stay a while, aren't you?" she continued humorously.

Brent shook his head. "No. I'm flying back to Washington this
afternoon."

"Brent!" she wailed. "You didn't tell me."

"I wanted it to be the happiest sort of Christmas," he replied. "Some
day you will be going with me."

"Some day," she agreed.

When Brent had gone Gale curled up in the corner of the divan and
watched the flames of the fire in the fireplace. She let her dreams run
rampant. Some day she would be flying to Washington with Brent. She
remembered what a thrill it had been flying to Canada with him last
year. She remembered, too, the night of the Senior Prom when she and
Brent had strolled in the garden.

But even over-riding all her rosy dreams was the astounding news she had
heard about Phyllis that afternoon. It was like a fantastic fairy story.
To think that Phyllis was the daughter of a famous surgeon, really a
wealthy girl who had been hidden away in this small town all these years
by a strange, selfish woman who claimed affection for the girl. Think
what it must have meant to Phyllis' father--to return to his home to
find the woman, whom he had entrusted with the care of his little girl,
had disappeared taking his daughter with her. It must have been
heart-breaking! But think what a reunion there would be when they met
now--after all these years! How would Phyllis receive the news?

Gale pictured all sorts of ways to bring Phyllis and her father together
yet the one which actually was to happen was even more dramatic.

Gale went to the telephone and put a long distance call through to
Briarhurst. A few minutes later she heard Phyllis' voice.

"Merry Christmas!" Gale said gaily. "How are you? What did you do with
yourself?"

"David hired a sleigh drawn by two horses and we had a long ride in the
country," Phyllis said happily. "It was glorious."

They talked for a few moments and then Gale hung up, feeling satisfied
that Phyllis had really enjoyed her Christmas after all. She had said
nothing of her interview with Miss Fields, that would come later. Gale
even doubted if she would tell the other Adventure Girls yet. It would
be a secret between herself and Brent and David until Doctor Elton was
found and could be produced.

She went back to her position before the fire. In ten days she would be
going back to college. Then to pick up the threads of mystery concerning
the Dean. This would be the spring term. Her riding lessons would start
and she was anxious for them. Her only regret was that Phyllis would not
be able to join her. Perhaps if her father was found and there was an
operation performed Phyllis would eventually be as active as she had
been. But not now!

Gale opened a book and nibbled on a chocolate caramel. She was perfectly
content with her present position. A book was always a treasured
companion to her. She could find much delight in following the
adventures of a printed hero and heroine. Their adventures were always
more dangerous, more glamorous than events in real life.

But alas, her composure and peace were not to last. There arose a loud
clatter outside and the doorbell pealed long and loudly. Gale
resignedly, smilingly, closed her book. Only the Adventure Girls would
make so much noise.




                              Chapter XIV

                               DISCOVERED


"Look!" Carol pirouetted gracefully for the benefit of her friends.

"I'm speechless," Janet said appreciatively.

"Wait until I get my sun glasses," pleaded Phyllis. "I'm dazzled."

Carol was arrayed in the scarlet lounging pajamas she had received for a
Christmas present. The Adventure Girls were all gathered in her and
Janet's room viewing the display with mingled exclamations.

"And wait----" Carol murmured diving into the closet.

"More to come," Madge said shaking her head. "If it is as terrific as
those pajamas, don't show it to me. My nerves won't stand it."

"My riding habit," Carol said proudly.

Janet laughed. "All you need now is the horse."

"I've heard they have a merry-go-round in the next village park,"
Valerie put in. "Perhaps they would let you practice there."

Carol made a little face at her. "Just the same, I am all prepared."

"What time is it?" Phyllis asked suddenly. "Heavens! I have to go. I
promised Adele to go with her to the Glee Club meeting this afternoon."

"Ah, our singer is blossoming out," Janet said gleefully. "What did I
tell you!"

"I'll go with you," Gale said. "I have to see Professor Lukens about our
Chemistry assignment tomorrow."

The two girls went down to the campus. Gale saw Phyllis safely to the
Glee Club meeting before she went on to the Chemistry Hall. The
corridors and rooms were for the most part empty. She went to the
classroom where the Professor often spent his afternoons going over
papers. He was not there so Gale went on to the laboratory.

At the door she drew back hastily into the corridor. Someone was in the
room but it was not the Professor. It was Miss Horton, the Dean's
secretary, and the girl was fussing with the lock on the cabinet where
the experimental materials were kept. Gale watched her cautiously
through a crack in the door. The glass doors were suddenly opened. A
small glass vial found its way from the closet into the pocket of the
girl's coat.

Gale turned and fled down the hall. Outside she waited. Miss Horton came
out. With a glance about she hurried down the steps and set off in the
direction of the Dean's office. Gale followed, hurrying her steps to
keep the girl in sight. At the corner of the building Gale bumped into
Valerie.

"Going to a fire?" Valerie asked. "Say, Gale, do you know where I can
find----"

"Can't stop now," Gale said. "Val, something is going to happen. Find
Doctor Norcot. Bring her to the Dean's office right away. Hurry!" Gale
urged when Valerie hesitated.

Valerie broke into a run. Gale hurried on her way. Miss Horton was
disappearing into the building. Gale followed and it was not until she
was in the building that she realized she had no definite idea at all
why she was so alarmed. True, it was strange that Miss Horton should
break into the Chemistry cabinet and take something--Gale wasn't sure
what. Could it have been Miss Horton who hurled that acid out the window
at the Dean so many weeks ago? Could it have been Miss Horton who wrote
that mysterious note to the girls? Could she have cut the rope to set
Dean Travis' canoe afloat?

Yes, all those things were quite possible. But what was she up to now?
There were a lot of things in that Chemistry cabinet--things which in
the wrong hands could cause a lot of damage.

On tiptoe Gale approached the door to the outer office. Miss Horton was
stirring a white liquid in a glass. On her desk was the discarded vial
from the Chemistry laboratory--empty! The contents had been put into the
glass with something else. Gale watched the silent actions of the girl
within the room. Miss Horton was nervous, erratic, in her movements. She
appeared slightly crazed with an inner obsession. The telephone rang,
the bell startling both Gale and the girl inside.

Miss Horton stared at the instrument for a moment then picked up the
receiver. She sank into her desk chair.

"Sarah! Why did you call? Of course I'm all right. Don't worry. Do you
understand? Don't worry! And Sarah--you will be Dean of Briarhurst
someday."

With those words Miss Horton replaced the receiver. She looked about the
room and stood up. Grasping the glass again she walked toward the Dean's
office. She opened the door and spoke. Gale could clearly hear her
words.

"This will help your headache, Dean Travis."

Gale lost no time. She dashed wildly into the office, knocking the glass
from the Dean's upraised hand, thinking at the same time what would
happen if she was wrong in her suspicions!

"Don't drink it!" she cried.

The glass crashed to the floor and made a dark stain on the carpet. Miss
Horton gazed at Gale in horror, shrinking toward the door.

"Gale! What does this mean?" the Dean gasped.

"It means Miss Horton broke into the Chemistry laboratory and took a
vial--poison probably. She mixed it in that glass," Gale continued
accusingly.

"Is this true?" the Dean asked, looking from Gale to her now sobbing
secretary.

The girl did not answer. Doctor Norcot and Valerie appeared in the
doorway.

"What is going on?" the Doctor demanded breathlessly. She held up the
empty vial which had been on the secretary's desk. "Whom does this
belong to?"

"Gale----" Valerie said in mystification.

"It is all right now," Gale said, "Miss Horton almost poisoned the Dean.
I followed her here from the Chemistry laboratory."

"Yes, I meant to poison her," Miss Horton said desperately,
hysterically. "If it hadn't been for her my sister would be Dean of
Briarhurst. She worked years to have the position, she studied in
Europe, everything to fit herself for this. Then you came along," the
girl said to Dean Travis, "and were appointed. It nearly broke my
sister's heart."

"You thought if you could get rid of me your sister would still have a
chance," Dean Travis said slowly. "Is that it?"

"Yes. Now I've failed. You might as well know, I took the money from
your safe, too. I meant to put it back--but I couldn't right away. Now
you will probably send me to prison."

The Dean smiled in sympathetic understanding. "No, but if you return the
money, pack your things and leave tonight, we will forget the whole
incident."

"Now," Valerie pounced upon Gale when they were outside. "Tell me what
happened? It was all a mystery to me yet you seemed to know all about
things."

"Simple," Gale grinned. "Miss Horton's sister wanted to be Dean at the
same time as Dean Travis. You know who won. Miss Horton evidently sought
revenge for her sister. She was doing these things to frighten Dean
Travis into leaving. Once she left, Miss Horton's sister stood a good
chance of being appointed in her place."

"But Dean Travis didn't scare so easily, is that it?" Valerie asked.

"Right," Gale agreed.

"So Miss Horton was going to murder the Dean," Valerie shivered. "How
horrible!"

"She didn't really know what she was doing," Gale said.

"And the Dean forgave her as if it were nothing at all," Valerie said.
"Attempted murder is a criminal offense."

"Miss Horton was too scared to ever do anything like it again," Gale
said. "There was no use punishing her farther. After all, no harm was
actually done."

"You forget the note and the mysterious man that night back of the
Chemistry Hall," Valerie reminded her. "And what of Phyl's accident? Did
someone push the lumber that day?"

"That we will probably never know--about the man I mean," Gale said.
"She must have had someone with her. But I think she wrote the note. As
for the lumber that caught Phyllis, I believe that really was an
accident."

"Will the girls be surprised!" Valerie said. "Anyway, I'm glad I was in
at the finish."

The girls were gathered in the living room of the sorority house. One of
the Seniors had a small radio and she was fussing with it while the rest
listened and idled away the time until dinner. Just as Gale entered and
joined Phyllis and Ricky a voice from the radio proclaimed:

"Flash! An unconfirmed report has just been received that Doctor Philip
Elton, the world renowned surgeon, is lost in the jungles of Brazil.
Doctor Elton sailed from Liverpool, England, a month ago for a vacation
cruise on his yacht, the _Tornado_."

"Some fun," Ricky commented. "I've heard all sorts of things about those
jungles."

"Is he any relation to you?" Valerie asked of Phyllis smilingly. "Same
name."

Gale held her breath until Phyllis had replied.

"Not that I know of," Phyllis laughed. "No relation of mine is fortunate
enough to own a yacht."

Gale moved away. If she stayed with the girls another minute she would
tell them the truth or burst!

"Hi, Gale!" A voice called. "Telephone!"

Gale shut the door to the small closet-like room which the girls had
converted into a telephone booth.

"Hello? Yes."

It was Brent.

"Oh, Brent, I just heard the news about Doctor Elton. Phyllis heard it,
too, and she doesn't suspect a thing."

"I called to tell you," Brent said. "David and I are flying down
tonight. The South American government is sending out a searching party
and we want to help."

"Take care," Gale pleaded. "The jungle is so dangerous."

"Who was it?" Ricky demanded, when Gale emerged.

Luckily the dinner summons saved Gale the necessity of an explanation.
After dinner the girls retreated to their rooms to devote much needed
time to their studies.

Gale looked up from her books to Phyllis. Phyllis was bent over a
mathematics problem; her cane lay beside her chair and she looked very
tired.

"Do you ever hear from Miss Fields, Phyllis?" Gale asked suddenly.

Phyllis looked up in surprise. "She sends me a monthly allowance. That
is all, why?"

"I wondered. Did you always live with her, Phyl?" Gale continued slowly.

"I can't remember anyone else," Phyllis said. "Very faintly I recall a
big house and a dog. We used to have grand times together. But I never
had a dog in Marchton," she said, "so perhaps it is all a dream."

"Is Miss Fields your mother's or your father's sister?" Gale asked next.
She knew the woman was neither, but she wanted to have Phyllis' thought
on the subject.

Phyllis twirled her pencil between her fingers. "Perhaps you will think
I'm funny, but sometimes I think she isn't even my Aunt."

"Why?" Gale asked intently.

Phyllis shrugged her shoulders. "I can't explain it. The feeling is just
there. She never speaks about any of those things."

"Hmmm," Gale said.

"But this isn't getting my mathematics done," Phyllis sighed.

"Nor my Latin," Gale agreed.

The girls resumed their studies, but Gale's mind insisted on wandering
off to picture an airplane bearing two young men toward South America.
David and Brent were off to aid in the search for the famous
surgeon--Phyllis' father! What if the Doctor wasn't found? Gale looked
across at Phyllis. Practically all of Phyllis' future hinged on the news
announcement they had heard downstairs and the girl did not know it!

"What are you going to do after college, Phyl?" Gale asked dreamily.

Phyllis laughed. "What's the matter, isn't the Latin interesting?"

"Terribly," Gale smiled. "But what are you?"

"I haven't the faintest idea," Phyllis confessed.

"Neither have I," Gale admitted, "unless it is to be a doctor. Anyway,
you can go back to your mathematics." She turned her attention to her
book again, but she couldn't concentrate on it. She wandered out of
their room and downstairs. She found the Senior still at her radio
listening to a popular comedian.

"Any more news flashes?" she asked.

"Nope."

Gale went back upstairs. She was restless. She wished she was with Brent
and David. It was hard to wait for news. It was so much better to be in
the center of the activity. But now it was doubly hard for her because
she was the only one here who knew about Phyllis' father. If there was
only someone she could talk it over with! But it was to be a secret and
she would keep it. Still, sometimes she felt she must tell Phyllis that
things would be brighter for her.

For days Gale's suspense continued. She attended classes, basketball
games, club meetings, and every afternoon walked to the little village
for an evening paper. There was very little news printed about Doctor
Elton and his trip into the Brazilian jungle. Neither did Gale receive
any word from Brent. She had not heard a thing since the night he
telephoned her. Now she had an additional worry. Not only was she
concerned about Doctor Elton, but more so about Brent's safety.

Day after day she scanned the newspapers, listened to news reports on
the Seniors' radio and looked for a letter, but none of them yielded the
news she hoped for. She tried to conceal all anxiety from Phyllis and
the other Adventure Girls, but she wasn't very successful. They could
not help but notice her sudden absorptions in newspapers and the radio.
However, try as they would, they could not drag forth any explanation.
Gale laughed all their questions aside.

Then one day came a thick letter from Brent. Gale received it in the
living room and raced to the privacy of the girls' sanctum to read it.
Lying on the bed, her chin propped on her hands, the letter against the
pillow, Gale read it through once and then again. She rolled over on her
back and stared at the ceiling.

Doctor Elton was found and Brent and David were flying him to
Briarhurst. They would arrive on the seventeenth. This was already the
fifteenth! They had told the Doctor Phyllis' story--also that she was
his daughter. Brent said very little of what a revelation it must have
been to the Doctor. She searched out a particular paragraph again.

"'Doctor Elton is willing to perform Phyllis' operation himself, but she
is not to know until afterward that he is her father. Why he makes that
reservation I do not know--unless it would be more of a trial and an
ordeal for her knowing who he was. So, Gale, dear, it is up to you to
get Phyllis ready to meet the Doctor. He wants to do things right
away.'"

"Why so deep in thought?" Phyllis asked, when she entered.

"Phyllis----" Gale sat up. "Phyl, suppose you had the chance to have the
operation that might make you all right again, would you go through with
it?"

Phyllis grew a little pale.

"What do you mean?"

"Just that," Gale pursued. "Suppose the biggest doctor in the country
said you had a chance--a very good chance, if your leg was operated on
and reset, of walking again as you used to. Would you take it?"

"Would I take it?" Phyllis gasped incredulously. "Oh, Gale, need you
ask? I'd take any sort of chance--even the slimmest."

"It means weeks again of convalescence--time in the hospital," Gale
reminded her gently.

"But it would be worth it," Phyllis said. "Gale, tell me what you mean!"

Gale hugged Phyllis rapturously. "It means, Phyl, that Doctor Elton, the
surgeon, is coming to Briarhurst to see you. He is going to perform it."

"When?"

"He arrives day after tomorrow."

"But the money?"

That momentarily stumped Gale.

"He is interested in you," Gale explained lamely. "Brent met him and was
telling him about you and he----"

"An experiment, is that it?" Phyllis asked.

"Um--ah--sort of," Gale agreed. "But think what it will mean, Phyl!
You'll even be back on the hockey team next year," she added gayly.

"Who will be on what hockey team?" Valerie asked, entering. "Greetings,
Madam President and Madam Pro Tem. What did I interrupt?"

Phyllis breathlessly told her and went off happily to tell Ricky.

"How come, Gale?" Valerie asked, mystified. "To have Doctor Elton, THE
Doctor Elton----"

"It is a long story," Gale said, swallowing a lump in her throat. "I'll
tell you sometime, Val, but the main thing now is Phyllis--she is so
happy."

"It is going to take a lot of courage to go through it all again," Val
said. "I suppose there is no doubt about the success of the operation?"

"If Doctor Elton can't do it, it can't be done," Gale said firmly. "He
is the best, Val. Besides that, he is her----"

"Her what?" Valerie asked interestedly.

"Nothing," Gale said hastily. "Here comes Phyl. Let's go tell Doctor
Norcot and Dean Travis now," she proposed.




                               Chapter XV

                             PHYLLIS' STORY


Gale leaned her hot cheek against the coolness of the window pane.

The rain beating against the outside tinkled in her ear. She closed her
eyes and swallowed a big yawn. From her position she could see the small
town of Weston spread out before her. Lamps gleamed yellow gold,
reflected on the shining wetness of the streets. Automobiles crawled
past like bugs on a sheet of black paper.

"Do you suppose he will ever come out?" Gale asked wearily.

"It has been three hours," Valerie sighed. "It will scarcely be much
longer."

David paced up and down the waiting room while Brent sprawled lazily in
a leather chair and stared at the ceiling. The girls turned from the
window and contemplated the room. They had come there early in the
afternoon with Phyllis and Brent and David. At the hospital, for the
first time they met Doctor Elton. He was a middle-aged man, good looking
and dignified. Gale could see a strong resemblance between Phyllis and
her father. The Doctor had immediately taken Phyllis away with him,
being professionally kind, but not at all fatherish as Gale had remarked
to Brent.

"That will come later," Brent told her.

The four of them had elected to wait until the operation was over. They
had not seen Phyllis again. Now it was long past their dinner time and
they were waiting for Doctor Elton to tell them of the success or
failure of his work.

Gale argued with herself that there could be no thought of failure.
Doctor Elton was skillful, the most marvelous surgeon of his kind in the
world. But a little demon of pessimism reminded her that any operation
could fail--no matter how skillful the physician. But not to Phyl! Not
to Phyl! she repeated over and over. Phyllis certainly deserved a reward
for all her bravery and courage.

The minutes dragged away into hours. The grayness of the world outside
was seeping into the room. A nurse came in and quietly, efficiently
lighted the lamps, straightened a group of magazines, and disappeared
again.

"If somebody doesn't come to us soon," Valerie threatened, "I'm going
hunting for Doctor Elton. Do you suppose he could have forgotten about
us?"

Gale shook her head and turned again to the window. She did not relish
the ride home to the college in the rain. They had been forced to bring
Phyllis to Weston because it was the nearest town with a modern,
sufficiently equipped hospital for Doctor Elton. Doctor Norcot was here,
so Phyllis' father said. The girls had not seen her as yet, but Gale
wished she would bring them some kind of news now.

"We better go out and get our dinner," Brent said finally. "We may have
to wait quite a while yet."

"I couldn't eat anything," David said decisively, flinging himself into
a chair, only to get up and walk restlessly about again.

"Nor I," Gale said.

She wondered if Doctor Elton proposed to tell Phyllis who he was
tonight. Hardly, she decided later; this was scarcely an opportune
moment. It would be a bit of a shock to find after all this time that
Phyllis had a father, and that it should be Doctor Elton would be more
stupendous still.

There were footsteps in the hall. All of them came to attention. Doctor
Elton entered. His face was grave and pale. He looked more tired than
anyone Gale had ever seen. It was as if all the cares in the world were
on his shoulders. He seated himself in a chair and looked at them.

"Well?" David said impatiently.

"She will be well again," the Doctor pronounced. "Two months should see
her back on her feet as before her accident. She is wonderfully brave,"
he murmured. "I have never seen such gay courage. I have just left her.
She wants to see you," he added to the girls. "But only for a moment,"
he added warningly, "she must not be excited. The nurse will take you."

"I'll wait," Valerie said unselfishly. "Two of us might be too much."

Gale followed a white uniformed nurse down the narrow hall past numerous
closed doors. At last the nurse halted and motioned for Gale to enter a
corner room. Slowly Gale did so. Phyllis smiled at her.

"Hi!" her friend said faintly. "I came through, Gale."

"Splendidly!" Gale said. "Oh, darling, we're so glad for you. Gosh," she
sniffed, "I'll cry in a minute. In that case I'll be put out."

"Do you suppose you can arrange it so I might see David for a few
minutes?" Phyllis whispered.

Gale's eyes twinkled. "I'll try."

Twice a week after that for five weeks Gale made trips to the hospital
to visit Phyllis. Sometimes Doctor Norcot drove her, sometimes she took
a local bus, but on two occasions the Dean herself drove Gale.

One afternoon when Gale was making her visit alone Doctor Elton called
her into the office before she saw Phyllis.

"So will you tell her, Gale?" the Doctor asked in conclusion. "I can't
just rush in and say 'I'm your father.' It would be too dramatic and
much too abrupt. Probably she won't believe it at first. I can hardly
realize myself that I have a grown daughter."

At his frank smile Gale felt aglow with friendliness. The more she saw
of Doctor Elton the more she liked him. She could see now where Phyllis
got her capacity for making friends, her radiating smile and her sense
of humor. Doctor Elton had spent all his time here in Weston, ever since
the discovery of his daughter. But as yet Phyllis was ignorant of whom
he really was.

"I'll tell her," Gale agreed. "But you had better be close at hand
because I'm sure she will want to talk to you right away."

"I'll stand outside the door," he promised. He straightened his tie
nervously. "Do you think she will like her father?" he asked with a
smile.

"From what I have seen of you two together," Gale said, "she already
likes you a lot."

Phyllis was in a chair by the window. The sun was streaming in. There
were magazines and newspapers in profusion, but Phyllis was busy with
none of these. She had a sketching board propped up before her and with
charcoal was rapidly transferring the view from the window to the paper.
The low buildings and the farther hillside upon which spring was already
awakening trees and plants were pictured with exactly the right delicate
shadows and lights.

Gale opened the door and closed it softly behind her. Phyllis did not
hear her at all, so engrossed was she in the work at hand. Gale tiptoed
across the room to look over Phyllis' shoulder.

"Splendid!" she commented gayly.

Phyllis was so startled the pencil dropped from her hand and rolled on
the floor. Gale rescued it.

"You have been hiding things from me," Gale accused. "First a glorious
voice and now real artistic ability. I am discovering that I hardly know
you at all."

"Gale!" Phyllis welcomed her eagerly. "Sit down." She made room for Gale
on the chaise-longue. "Did you hear? Did the Doctor tell you? I'm coming
back to Briarhurst next week."

"You are!" Gale said joyfully. "I'm so glad."

"He thinks by the first of May I should be as good as new--no canes or
crutches or anything."

"He is a wonderful man," Gale commented.

"Doctor Elton?" Phyllis murmured. "He is--he is--oh, words fail me," she
laughed. "But I can never repay him for what he has done--or you either,
for that matter."

"Me?" Gale gasped.

"You and David and Brent," Phyllis nodded. "I just know it was you who
were responsible in bringing Doctor Elton to see me at all."

"It wasn't us alone. It was something much more important," Gale said
slowly. She thought this was probably the best opportunity she would
have to tell Phyllis about her father. "I've a story to tell you,
Phyl--it is more interesting than a fairy story--and it is true.
Remember that, it is true!"

"Reading fairy stories again, Gale?" Phyllis laughed. "Go ahead, I'm
listening."

Gale took the sketching board and laid it on the floor, then she grasped
both Phyllis' hands tightly in her own.

"It seems about nineteen years ago a little baby girl arrived at the
home of a certain young doctor and his wife. The doctor was ambitious
and wealthy. The three were supremely happy. But one day his wife was
killed in a railroad accident. The doctor was broken-hearted and could
really find peace of mind only in his work. He decided to go to Europe
to study surgery--the height of his ambition. He entrusted his little
girl to the care of a woman who for years had been his secretary. He
gave her money and told her to look after the baby until he returned."
Gale paused for breath. Phyllis was regarding her with steady, clear
eyes.

"This woman grew to love the little girl," Gale continued, determined to
be as charitable as possible to Miss Fields. "For two years the doctor
remained in Europe making a name for himself--becoming famous. When he
decided to come home the woman got panicky. She was afraid something
would separate her from the little girl. She decided to run away and
hide and take the girl with her. She found a small town and a lonely old
house. The doctor returned to the United States, to his home, to find
the woman and the child gone. No one knows exactly how long he searched
before giving up in despair. Then he returned to Europe and his work
again. Meanwhile, the woman and the girl remained hidden. The girl grew
up into a sweet young lady and went away to college."

"Gale--what are you saying?" Phyllis whispered faintly.

"Don't you see, dear?" Gale asked gently. "You're the little girl--the
doctor, your father, is Doctor Elton."

"Oh, no!" Phyllis said. "Gale, it can't be true--if you are teasing----"

"But it is true," Gale insisted smilingly. "I know it sounds fantastic
but such things can happen. It has happened. Your Dad is here, Phyl, and
he is never going to let you out of his sight again. He is waiting
outside----"

"Bring him in," Phyllis said quickly. "Oh, please, Gale----"

"I won't bring him," Gale said, "I'll send him. I'm off to school again
but I'll be back on Thursday."

Gale softly closed the door upon Phyllis and Doctor Elton. Smiling she
went out into the sunshine and boarded the bus. She felt all vivid with
joy herself to think that she had been able to help a little in giving
Phyllis her new happiness--for there was no doubt that Phyllis was
happy. Her eyes and face had told Gale that much.

Gale scarcely felt the bruises she acquired while being bounced around
in the bus en route to Briarhurst. She was in a rosy dream-world where
magical wishes and lovely thoughts came true. She descended in the
little college town and walked up to the college still in blissful
joyland. She found Carol and Janet and Valerie standing before the
sorority house arguing.

"We are not going to tell her now and spoil everything!" Carol said
conclusively.

"Tell who what?" Gale wanted to know.

"You know we have been saving the news of our equestrienne ability as a
secret for Ricky. Being western born and bred she thinks she is the only
one here who knows anything about a horse," explained Carol.

"I want to tell her about our summer in Arizona when we learned to ride
like Indians," Janet put in. "She teased me unmercifully this afternoon.
Told me tomorrow in our first riding class I wouldn't know one side of
the horse from the other. I won't stand for it!"

"But it will only be for a few hours now," Valerie soothed her. "Imagine
her surprise tomorrow when we calmly jump into the saddle and gallop
off."

"Where have you been?" Carol asked Gale. "To see Phyl? How is she? I'm
going with you on Thursday."

"She is on top of the world," Gale said happily. "All taken up with the
discovery of her father."

"Ricky said----" Janet was continuing with her original theme when the
import of Gale's words was borne in upon her. "Phyl is all taken up with
what?" she asked.

"Yes, why don't you speak distinctly?" Carol added laughingly. "I almost
thought you said something about Phyl's father."

"I did," Gale acknowledged calmly.

"But she hasn't----" Valerie began. "Wait a minute! Gale Howard! Have
you been doing detective work on something unbeknownst to us?"

"It is a long story, gals," Gale said. "Come up to my room and I will
unfold a tale that will make you throw away your latest detective novel
for lack of interest."

Comfortably ensconced on her bed beside Valerie, while Carol and Janet
hovered at comfortable if ungraceful angles on Phyllis' cot, Gale told
them the story she had earlier unfolded to Phyllis. The girls were as
astounded and as sceptical as Phyllis at first had been. However, they
were all glad things had turned out so happily and profitably for
Phyllis.

"Imagine," Carol said dreamily, "he gets lost in the jungles of Brazil
and comes home to meet his daughter whom he hasn't seen for nigh onto
eighteen years."

"He hasn't been lost in the jungle all these years," Janet corrected her
friend.

"No," Carol admitted, "but isn't it wonderful?" she repeated. "Do you
suppose," she continued hopefully, "he would lend us his yacht to go
cruising this summer?"

"And get ourselves lost in the jungle as he did?" put in Janet. "No
thanks! I have no desire to get eaten by a ferocious tiger."

"I just mentioned it," Carol said soothingly. "Besides, he wasn't eaten
by a tiger."

"It was only a matter of time," Janet said knowingly. "He probably would
have been eventually."

"Who knows," Carol said argumentatively, "perhaps he would have eaten
the tiger."

"Oh, dry up!" Valerie said explosively. "When is Phyllis coming back to
school, Gale?"

"Next week," Gale replied. "She won't be able to start classes right
away and she will have to use crutches for two weeks or so, but the
doctor thinks by the first of May she will be as fit as a fiddle."

"Coming back next week?" Carol sat up in inspiration. "We'll give her a
surprise party."

"Fine," Janet agreed. "But there is one surprise I am more interested in
right now--the one we are going to give Ricky tomorrow."

A week ago horses had arrived for the students. The girls had all
inspected the ten mounts and each privately had her own decided upon.
Surprisingly there were not many girls who were interested in the
classes. A lot of them, especially the upper classmen, already were
horsewomen or had their rosters so full they could not find time for any
more after-hour activities. Not so the Adventure Girls, however. They
were fully determined to ride as were Gloria and Ricky. The Adventure
Girls had ridden a lot the summer they spent in Arizona. They could
stick in the saddle of their mount at no matter how fast a pace on a
flat stretch of road. At hurdles is where they encountered their
difficulties and this is what they wanted to learn. They wanted to learn
to take fences and broad jumps as easily as the riding instructor. It
promised lots of fun as well as healthful exercise.




                              Chapter XVI

                            THE FIRST LESSON


"Now don't be frightened when the horse looks at you," Ricky advised
Janet patronizingly as the five Adventure Girls with Ricky and Gloria
walked to the new stables to meet the other two members of the class and
their instructor.

"The horse will probably be frightened when Janet looks at it," Carol
giggled shamelessly.

Janet favored them both with a look of utter disgust and settled her hat
at a more rakish angle.

At the stables the girls found the two grooms with saddled mounts ready
and waiting. Their instructor was already mounted. Several upper
classmen had come down to watch the Freshmen get their first
instructions. Among them was Marcia Marlette and Gale thanked her lucky
stars that she knew something about riding. She would not look foolish
before Marcia. The other two members of the class arrived and the girls
took the reins of their mounts.

"Just watch me," Ricky whispered to Janet. "I'll show you how to mount."

Janet murmured something under her breath which Ricky innocently did not
hear. Ricky swung into the saddle with the easy familiarity of being
used to horses. Janet followed suit.

"Excellent!" Ricky applauded. "It almost looked as though you had done
it before."

"I'm crazy about the merry-go-round," Janet explained, coughing away a
giggle. "What do we do now?"

"Get the correct hold on the reins," Ricky instructed.

With the most guileless of expressions Carol and Janet, especially, went
through the pantomimes of beginners. The upper classmen spectators were
getting a lot of enjoyment out of the scene.

The horses were spirited mounts but easily handled by the girls. At last
the instructions were beginning to pall upon Carol and Janet. They
didn't like the leisurely pace they were forced to maintain for the
class as a unit. When they came to an open stretch in the road Carol and
Janet urged their horses alongside the instructor. They talked in low
tones for several minutes; finally she nodded smilingly.

"Yipee!" Janet cheered. "Now, Ricky, we'll show you some riding!"

Side by side Janet and Carol spurred their horses on. The mounts, fresh
and eager, galloped away sending up a cloud of dust in their wake. Ricky
watched the two girls in amazement.

"Where did they learn to ride like that?" she gasped to Valerie.

"On the western plains," Valerie laughed. "We spent a summer there.
Janet has been bursting to show you."

"Look at them go!" Gloria cried. "They really are good."

"On flat roads, yes," Madge smiled. "Let them come to a jump--and watch
out."

"Let's catch them," Gale proposed.

An acquiescent nod from the instructor with a word of caution, and the
Adventure Girls with Ricky were off in pursuit of their friends.

Carol and Janet were racing neck and neck down the road. They were
trying recklessly to outrun one another. Their horses seemed to enter
into the spirit of the occasion and raced ahead. The girls bent low in
the saddles. They had not had so much fun since they were in Arizona.

"Race you to the old mill," Janet shouted.

"Be there ahead of you," retorted Carol.

Around a bend in the road ahead there was an old deserted water mill.
Its water wheel was still now and the stream from which it had once
secured current was a mere trickle of water through the woods. The girls
had discovered the old mill on one of their jaunts about the
countryside. Now Janet and Carol decided it would be a good spot at
which to bring to a close their race.

"They must be heading for the old mill," Valerie cried to Gale as they
followed their friends' trail of dust.

Ricky reined in her horse. "Girls, I, was there yesterday," she said
excitedly. "There is a big oak tree down across the road. If they don't
see it and jump----"

"Come on." Gale spurred her horse on anew.

She and the others could picture what might happen. Janet and Carol
coming around the bend suddenly, totally unprepared for the tree across
the road, might have a bad fall. If their horses did not make the jump
there would most certainly be an accident. Even if their horses did
clear the tree that did not say the girls would. They needed plenty of
time to prepare for a jump and time to think of what to do. Horsemanship
was not as instinctive with them yet as with Ricky. She could have
cleared the jump without hesitating, but not so the other two Freshmen.

Carol, her head down, whispering encouragingly to her horse, felt that
she was having the most marvelous time of her college term. She had
always loved thoroughbred horses. Inch by inch her mount pulled ahead of
Janet. Gleefully she observed that at this rate she would win the race.
They were rounding the bend of the road. Not much farther to go! Carol
glanced over her shoulder at Janet. Her friend was gesticulating wildly
and endeavoring to rein in her horse. Carol mistook her friend's
gestures for enthusiasm and waved in return.

"Look out, Carol!" Janet shouted. "The tree! Jump!"

Janet saw her friend turn. Carol's horse was almost upon the huge trunk
of an oak tree lying directly across the road. Carol stiffened, then
bent forward on her horse's neck. Together, in marvelously graceful
form, Carol's mount carried both himself and his rider over the fallen
tree successfully.

However, Janet, surprised at the appearance of the tree and in her
effort to warn Carol, had neglected to check her own mount. He raced
ahead. Now it was too late to stop him.

The pursuing girls rounded the bend. Their horses raised a cloud of dust
as they were brought to an abrupt halt by their riders.

"Janet!" Madge screamed.

The girls saw Janet's horse try to take the jump. He rose into the air
but with an inexperienced rider his jump was not successful. His hind
feet caught on the trunk, throwing both him and his rider heavily to the
ground. The horse scrambled to his feet, leaving his rider prostrate on
the ground.

Carol was off her mount in the twinkling of an eye. The other girls
scrambled over or walked around the fallen tree which had caused the
accident.

"Are you all right, Jan?" Carol asked anxiously.

Janet ruefully inspected herself. "I guess I'm all here," she
acknowledged.

"I should have warned you about that tree," Ricky said. "You're really a
good rider," she added.

"Of course, ow--oooo--ouch!" With mingled exclamations Janet managed to
get to her feet with Carol's help. "And I wanted to show off!" she
giggled. "How did the horse make out?"

"He is all right," Valerie said.

"We got our signals mixed," Janet continued laughingly. "He saw a green
light and I a red one."

"How are we going to get the horses back over the fallen tree?" Carol
asked. "I don't care to jump mine again."

"I'll jump them for you," Ricky said promptly.

The girls rode back to their instructor and the other girls. At the
stables they dismounted again and watched while their horses were
trotted away to their stalls.

In the sunset they limped toward their dormitories--Janet by far the
most exhausted.

"I think I'll take a pillow the next time," she declared. "Then if the
horse and I decide to separate I will have something soft to land on."

"The object is not to separate," Carol informed her. "Do you want to go
riding tomorrow, Janet?"

"Riding!" Janet echoed distastefully. "I am not on speaking terms with
my horse. No more riding for me this week! Tomorrow I shall go in for
something gentle like baseball."

Carol laughed. "Baseball! You can't come within five feet of the ball
with your bat."

"Woe is me," Janet said, gently depositing herself upon the dormitory
steps. "Do I have to prove everything? Come to the athletic field
tomorrow and I'll show you I can hit a home run."

Carol laughed derisively.

"I can, too," Janet insisted. "I hit you, don't I, when I throw a book
at you?"

"Except when I duck and it goes through the window," reminded Carol.

"Don't sit there," Madge prodded Janet firmly. "We have to dress for
dinner."

"And we have to get back to Happiness House," added Gale to Ricky and
Gloria, but making no movement toward home.

"Isn't spring the most glorious time of the year," sighed Valerie. "When
the grass is growing, the buds budding----"

"And the brooks brooking," Carol finished. "Come along," she urged
Janet. "We have to dress and I'm hungry."

"I will be black and blue tomorrow," Janet prophesied gloomily. "My
chagrin is mountainous. To think I had to fall off when we were going so
good."

"Console yourself," Valerie soothed. "We shall probably all fall off
sooner or later."

"I will live in hopes," Janet said brightly. "What are we going to do
tonight?" she asked.

"I am going to study my history," Valerie said firmly. "Spring exams are
just around the corner and I find my knowledge of dates strangely lax."

"Me for my geometry," Ricky said sorrowfully.

It developed that all the girls had more or less studying to do for the
spring finals. Gradually they separated, Janet and Carol to drift
upstairs to dress for dinner, Madge and Valerie to follow more
leisurely. Gale walked to the sorority house with Ricky and Gloria. They
separated only to meet again at dinner. Afterward Gale went off alone to
the solitude of her room to study. She would be glad to have Phyllis
back with her again.




                              Chapter XVII

                               OMEGA CHI


May brought not only the round of festivities on May Day but the
knowledge that they were in the last stages of the term. Freshmen were
looking forward eagerly now to the time when they would be Sophomores.
Seniors were looking forward with mingled joy and regret to the day when
they would receive their diplomas.

One evening in May was always devoted to the sororities and clubs. It
was then new members were chosen and new officers elected for the next
term. The Omega Chi sorority always celebrated with a big party for
their members. During the evening the newly elected members were sought
out and informed of their good fortune in being selected to fill the
vacancies left by Seniors going out.

The Omega Chi was eagerly sought by all the Freshmen. It meant not only
belonging to the most popular group on the campus, but the girls were,
for the most part, honor students, students likely to succeed in campus
activities as well as their chosen profession later. There was no
discrimination for the wealthy girls. The officers sought girls who were
honorable, pleasant, and had a sense of humor. The standards they
secretly set were sometimes hard to surpass and it was the reason the
sorority had not a larger membership than it had.

On this night the officers of the Omega Chi were secreted in the dining
room. Freshmen had been banished to their rooms. Other sorority members
lounged about the living room or on the veranda outside. The tinkle of a
guitar and the hum of girlish voices rose to Gale and Phyllis at the
window of their room.

Phyllis had returned to the campus two weeks ago. As yet she had not
been out of her room. That was something Gale could not understand.
Doctor Elton had been so sure, so positive, that the first of May would
see Phyllis as well as ever. Yet here she was still tied to her armchair
at the window.

"A glorious night, Phyl," Gale said dreamily. "Did you ever see so many
stars--or see them so close?"

"Listen to the girls singing," Phyllis said.

"'The girls of Omega Chi!'" The last words of the sorority song floated
up to them.

"Do you suppose we would be fortunate enough to be elected to the
sorority?" Gale asked.

Phyllis laughed. "If we aren't we will probably have to move next term."

"Perhaps I had better start packing," Gale laughed. "But seriously--I
want terribly to get into Omega Chi. I like all the girls so much----"

"All the girls?" Phyllis asked lazily. "Even Marcia Marlette?"

"Don't spoil my evening!" Gale said quickly. "I refuse to think of her."

"You have to think of her," Phyllis laughed. "She might be president
next term when Adele is no longer here."

"I hope not!" Gale said aghast. "The girls would never elect
her--surely!"

"Funny things can happen," Phyllis reminded her.

"Phyllis----" Gale rested her chin on her hand and gazed at the moon.
"Is your father coming to see you tomorrow?"

"Yes, why?"

"I've got something to ask him," Gale said. "Do you suppose Janet and
Carol will get into the sorority?"

"What do you want to ask my Dad?" Phyllis interposed. "Is it--about me?"

"Yes," Gale said firmly, decisively. "He told me you would be hopping
about like a sparrow by the first of May. You aren't and I want to know
why," she said bluntly, watching Phyllis closely.

"I know," Phyllis said, bowing her head. "He told me too. He has done
everything he can. It is my own fault that I'm not."

"What do you mean?"

"I'm afraid to try it," Phyllis said. "I'm afraid everything won't be as
perfect as he says it will."

"But, Phyl, there is nothing to be afraid of----" Gale said gently. "It
is all up to you now. You are only holding yourself back."

"I know," Phyllis said faintly. "But the day I came back to the
campus--I tried to walk. The doctors and nurse made me get up and walk
across the room--at least try to. I didn't make it. I fell and now--I'm
afraid to try again."

"But that was natural for the first time," Gale soothed. "Darling,
you've got to try it again."

"I'll try it when I get enough courage," Phyllis sighed. "But I'm
running rather low on courage right now."

"But----" Gale began.

"Hist!" Ricky hissed from the door. "I have secret information that the
new candidates have been selected," she informed them.

"Who are they?" Gale asked eagerly.

"Well," Ricky acknowledged, seating herself beside Gale, "that is still
a mystery."

"They bring the girls from the other dormitory houses here, don't they,
for the celebration?" Phyllis asked.

"Yes," Gale answered. "Look!" She pointed out the window. "There go two
of the girls now--I'll wager they are going after some Freshmen."

The campus gradually became alive with girls, figures moving back and
forth, each intent upon some errand. Suddenly two figures stepped out of
the night below the girls' window. A few seconds later two more joined
the first.

"Hi!"

They recognized Carol's gay voice and knew it was the remaining four
Adventure Girls.

"Yes?" Gale called.

"We made it!" Carol shouted. "We're in!"

"And we are coming right up to see you," added Janet.

At the same moment a knock sounded on their door. An upper classman
informed them that they, too, had been elected full-fledged members in
the Omega Chi, and since one of their number was not able to come
downstairs to partake in the reception for the Freshmen, they would
bring the reception to their room. Gale's and Phyllis' room became the
reception place for twenty new members. Adele, in her position of
president, calmly took possession of Gale's desk over which to transact
the business of her office.

The little group listened attentively to the purposes of the sorority as
extolled by their president, and paid strict attention while the
constitution and list of new officers were read to them. They were
humorously reminded, before they broke up, that their initiation would
take place at the beginning of the new term.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next afternoon after classes Gale made her way to the lake. Doctor
Elton had promised to have Phyllis there in the sunshine. Gale had made
a flying visit to her room to don a bathing suit for a swim, and finding
Phyllis absent, concluded that the Doctor had kept his word.

Gale had been thinking over what Phyllis told her last night. What a
struggle had been going on in Phyllis' mind these past weeks and none of
them had guessed! Just those few words on the night before had brought
home to Gale the knowledge of what Phyllis was up against. The girl was
afraid--terribly afraid that the miracle Doctor Elton had performed
would not hold. Something must be done! The girls must do something to
bring back Phyl's self-confidence. But what? Only Phyllis herself could
really go through this trial. She must try her own strength. That was
the only way she could ever possibly be sure of herself again.

Phyllis and her father were sitting on a bench overlooking the lake.
Gale waved as they saw her approaching. Phyllis' hand was in the crook
of her father's arm and she looked very happy. Gale told herself that
the discovery of Phyl's father had worked miracles--all but the most
important one.

Doctor Elton strolled away from Phyllis and approached Gale. Just out of
earshot of the girl on the bench they stopped. They talked together for
several minutes and then Gale came on to Phyllis while Doctor Elton went
toward the campus.

"Glorious afternoon," Gale said dropping beside Phyllis.

"So nice and warm in the sunshine," Phyllis agreed. "Where did my Dad
go?"

"Said he had a date with Doctor Norcot, but he will be right back. Have
you seen Janet or Carol today?"

"No. Valerie told me they were riding again. Ricky flew away to join
them when she heard of it."

"Been here long?"

"No. I waited for my Dad to bring me down," Phyllis said.

Gale looked at Phyllis, at the crutches lying on the grass at the side
of the bench, and then away across the blue waters of the lake. Her eyes
were narrowed in silent thought. She saw the thick growth of trees on
the farther shore, the calm waters along the grassy bank almost at her
feet, and the treacherous current farther out in the center of the lake,
but it was not of these things she was thinking.

"Have you tried to walk today?" she asked.

"No."

"Why not?"

Phyllis sighed. "I'll try it some time--but now I'm too peaceful here."

"Doesn't your father want you to try?"

"That is all I hear," Phyllis said wearily. "He insists--and he is a
great insister," she added smilingly.

"But you are just as determined to wait," Gale laughed. "Well, when you
decide let me know." She stretched lazily. "I think I'll go for a swim."

From the pocket of her jacket she drew a red bathing cap and slipped it
over her curls. She divested herself of her jacket and waved to Phyllis
as she darted away.

"Don't go out too far and get caught in the current," Phyllis warned.

"I'll be all right," Gale called back.

Phyllis watched the blue waters close over her friend. With a little
sigh she leaned back. She wished heartily she could be in there with
Gale. However, she couldn't, so why worry about it?

Gale was having a glorious time. The water was cold but she did not mind
it. Her strokes cut the water cleanly and swiftly. The water along the
shore was calm and little ripples drifted up to the bank. Slowly and
carefully Gale worked her way out a little farther, always mindful of
the whirl of waters which swept continually to the falls at the farther
end of the lake. Gale used to swim often in the waters of the bay near
her home. She was an excellent swimmer and diver, one of the champions
on the team at High School but she had not entered into the competition
here at Briarhurst.

The sun was sinking farther into the west all the time and Phyllis was
becoming impatient to get back to the sorority house, but she did want
to wait for her father. Gale said he promised to return immediately, but
so far he had not come. Gale was in the water a long time and Phyllis
was thinking of calling her to suggest going back to Happiness House
when she noted signs of distress from Gale. All was not well with her
friend.

"Help, Phyl!"

Faintly Gale's voice came over the blue waters of the lake that
separated them. Phyllis gripped the bench hard. Gale was struggling in
the water to keep her head on the surface. Anxiously Phyllis looked
about. The two girls were alone at this point. Phyllis called aloud but
her voice echoed hollowly back to her. The frantic splashes in the water
were becoming fainter as Gale grew weaker. Once again Phyllis shouted,
but there was no answering call.

Gale was a good swimmer, she would pull through, Phyllis assured
herself. But she was also reminded that even good swimmers had been
known to drown--and Gale was being swept nearer and nearer to the
swirling current. Phyllis uttered a swift silent prayer that help would
miraculously come from somewhere--but it didn't.

The woods remained silent except for the little rustle of leaves and the
twitter of birds. The water lapped the shore just as gently and
undisturbedly.

Horror stricken, Phyllis saw Gale's red cap disappear beneath the
surface. Anxiety, an urge stronger than herself to help Gale, gripped
Phyllis. She forgot about the crutches lying on the grass, forgot that
she was afraid to walk. Her eyes were on the water--seeking sight of the
red cap. It bobbed to the surface and she rose to her feet. The cap
disappeared beneath the blue waters again and Phyllis took several hasty
steps toward the shore.

Miraculously her father appeared from a clump of shrubbery while from a
little farther back in the growth of trees came Doctor Norcot.

"Oh--hurry--Gale----" Phyllis began desperately.

Doctor Elton let out a shrill whistle. Gale's red cap appeared on the
surface and with clean-cut strokes the girl swam for the shore. She
climbed dripping wet up the bank.

"Gale----" Phyllis began.

"Sorry to frighten you so, Phyl," Gale said lovingly, "but I didn't
drown after all. Our plan worked, Doctor Elton," she added triumphantly.

"Your plan?" Phyllis murmured when for the first time she became aware
that she was standing unassisted--she had actually walked alone for
several paces!

Gale put a wet arm about Phyllis. "Darling, you did it!" she exclaimed.
"You forgot yourself and walked."

"Then you weren't really in danger!" Phyllis echoed. "But I was so
frightened I couldn't think of anything but----"

"Helping me," Gale finished. "That was exactly what we counted on."

Phyllis took a deep breath. "Now I'm going to walk back to the sorority
house," she said determinedly.

Phyllis slipped her arm within her father's. With his help she led the
way back to the campus. Doctor Norcot and Gale followed more slowly.

"Do you think she is doing too much at once?" Gale whispered.

"Doctor Elton knows best," the college physician replied.

Phyllis was in the most excellent of spirits when they reached Happiness
House. She was tired but she would not admit it and insisted upon going
down to the dining room for dinner to sit in her old place beside Gale.
The girls greeted her with hilarity and a warm welcome. Even Marcia
Marlette expressed her pleasure at seeing Phyllis back. But after dinner
Phyllis went upstairs with Gale and immediately to bed. She was worn out
not only with the unaccustomed physical activity but the mental strain.

Gale sat at the desk and wrote a long letter to Brent. Afterward she
knelt at the window and let the May breeze ruffle her hair while she
watched the lights in the other dormitories slowly being extinguished.

From the room upstairs came smothered giggles and a thump. Marcia
Marlette and her roommate were having a party. Gale frowned at the
night. Marcia, much to Gale's and the other girls' amazement, had been
elected to the office of president of the sorority for the next term.
How the feat had been accomplished Gale did not know, but she was not
enthusiastic about it. Marcia could never be the friendly president that
Adele Stevens had been this term. Gale rebuked herself. She mustn't
believe the worst until it happened. Marcia had been exceedingly nice to
Phyllis this afternoon. Perhaps the responsibilities of her new office
would bring out the better side of Marcia's nature. But Gale doubted it.
The next term did not look very bright for the sorority with Marcia at
the helm of the organization.

Gale yawned and crawled into bed. The next term would have to take care
of itself. Right now there was the question of whether Marcia and her
friends would break through the ceiling.




                             Chapter XVIII

                              CAROL SLIDES


The balmy May afternoon saw the baseball game between the Freshmen and
the Sophomores taking place on the athletic field behind Carver Hall.
The players were most enthusiastic about this latest undertaking of
theirs. It seemed most of the girls in the school had turned out to see
this tussle between two feminine baseball teams and to hail the victor.

Janet, with supreme confidence in her own ability, had elected herself
pitcher for the Freshmen. The girls had played several games and Janet
had been pretty good, if not particularly brilliant. Carol, to support
her pal, was catcher. Valerie was acting first baseman and Madge was
shortstop. Their gymnastics teacher was the umpire and the Freshmen were
sometimes suspicious of her friendly feeling toward the Sophomores.
However, the nine Freshmen elected "Do or Die!" as their motto and went
into the game with all the vigor and speed at their command.

But alas, the Sophomores were also good. They had experience added to
their playing ability and for the first three innings scored four runs
to the Freshmen's one. Janet, finding herself up against excellent
batting ability, became nervous. Her throws to the home plate were a
little wild and two girls walked to base.

Carol met Janet halfway between the pitcher's mound and the home plate
where the next Sophomore stood swinging her bat.

"Are you good!" Carol scoffed. "I thought you were the world's wonder
woman pitcher. I'm beginning to believe you are the world's worst."

"That's gratitude for you!" Janet sighed. "Here I nearly throw my arm
out of joint and I get no credit from you."

"I told you to throw them a little low for Agnes and you didn't. You
deliberately threw the ball at her bat. All she had to do was stand
still and let it hit. It cost us another run."

"So what?" Janet said wearily.

"Come on, toots, do your stuff," Carol encouraged. "We've got to strike
this girl out."

                      "Brackity saxe, saxe, saxe,
                      Brackity saxe, saxe, saxe,
                      Y-e-a, Freshmen!"

The spectators chanted loudly and enthusiastically. Gale and Phyllis led
the Freshmen rooting section in an uproarious cheer. They yelled with
all the abandon of children on a spree.

Janet beamed upon the crowd and swung the ball.

"St-uh-rike one!"

Carol ran out and handed the ball to Janet.

"Swell, pal!" she declared.

Janet beamed again and threw the ball.

"St-uh-rike two!" The Instructor was having as much fun out of the game
as the girls were.

Janet, concentrating on the batter before her, had momentarily forgotten
the girls on first and second base. The Sophomore on second base was an
adventurous soul and now she took advantage of the pitcher's absorption
to steal to third. Halfway there Janet saw her and threw the ball wildly
to Madge, the short stop. The Sophomore dived for the base. The baseman
received the ball from Madge while the Sophomore turned and dashed madly
back toward second. The ball went again to Madge. The Sophomore tried
once more for third base. The runner see-sawed back and forth until she
was finally caught and pronounced out.

The Freshmen were jubilant, especially Janet and Carol. The pitcher
returned to the work at hand and the batter-up was struck out.

The innings went on until the ninth. At that time the score stood twelve
to ten in favor of the Sophomores. Janet had been relieved in the
pitcher's position by another Freshman. However, in the last inning she
returned.

Somehow the Freshmen managed to keep the score the same. They did not
let the Sophomores score again and the side retired. The Freshmen were
at bat.

"I don't like the wicked look in that pitcher's eye," Janet said as she
stood beside Carol watching Valerie at bat.

"You probably won't hit the ball either," Carol pronounced sadly as
Valerie struck out.

"Is that so?" Janet bristled with indignation. "Maybe I haven't made a
home run this game yet but I've been waiting for a crucial moment."

"It looks like this is it," Carol laughed. "There goes another one of
our girls--out!" She sighed. "Ho, hum, we might as well give in. We need
two runs, but we'll never make them with only one more girl--and you are
it."

Janet frowned on her. "I'll hit that ball if it is the last thing I do!"

Carol's eyes twinkled as she watched Janet take her place before the
catcher.

"She is angry," Madge commented.

"I tried to make her mad," Carol confessed. "When she is stirred up she
plays much better."

"St-uh-rike one!"

Carol made a wry face at Janet. The latter frowned more viciously and
gripped the bat securely in both hands. Carol nudged Madge
significantly.

"She is really cross now."

The spectators were hushed. The game depended on Janet and what she did.

"St-uh-rike two!"

"Woe is me!" Carol murmured. "My psychology didn't work."

"She has one more chance," Madge said. "If she only gets on base and
then someone else makes a run----"

"Two runs to tie the score! It might as well be ten," Carol said
pessimistically.

"Look! Look!" Madge cried gleefully. "She did it! She socked that old
ball way out----"

Janet had swung with all her strength and hit the ball squarely, sending
it high into the air over second base. The Sophomore in her effort to
get it overshot the mark and fumbled. Janet was away like a shot to
first base, past first and safe on second!

"I hope I do as well," Carol remarked.

She was the next batter up. The Freshmen were still howling with delight
over Janet's hit. The first was a foul ball. The second attempt Carol
missed. But the third time! Like Janet, the necessity for action brought
cool determination and steadied her. She hit the ball a resounding smack
that sent it bounding along the third base line.

Janet was off to third base while Carol sped to first. Both girls were
safe.

Now the game looked particularly bright for the Freshmen. With two girls
on bases they had a good chance to even the score. But if one more was
pronounced out the game was over and lost. Another Freshman stepped up
to the home plate. She was nervous but determined.

Janet took several steps away from third base but kept a wary eye on the
pitcher. She simply must get in and score! She looked at Carol.

Carol was edging away from the security of first base. The pitcher was
looking at Carol. Janet went a little farther toward home. Carol
suddenly dived toward second. The pitcher threw the ball to the second
base. The baseman missed it and it bounded a few feet away. By the time
the ball was secured Carol was safe on second base and Janet had stolen
home.

The Freshmen fans were wild. They cheered lustily. Their team needed
only one run to tie the score now!

The Sophomore pitcher seemed to have lost her grip on the situation. The
Freshman at bat walked to first base. The next girl also walked. That
forced Carol to third base. What a chance now to tie the score--even to
win the game!

Carol watched the pitcher closely. She edged away from the base. The
baseman followed. It all happened very suddenly. Carol in her exuberance
and confidence in having stolen to second base once, thought she could
do the same thing again. The pitcher was watching the strange motions of
the girl at first base when Carol dived for the home plate. With
lightning rapidity the pitcher whirled and tossed the ball. In a cloud
of dust and cinders Carol slid into the catcher.

"Out!" the umpire said firmly, indisputably.

The Sophomores were jubilant, their team had won! The Freshmen were
downcast, but they did their best to hide it.

"Of all the dizzy tricks----" Carol derided herself.

"You did great," Janet defended surprisingly. "We gave them a thrill
anyway."

"But I had to spoil our big chance," Carol wailed. "If I had only
waited----"

"What's the difference?" Valerie said gayly. "They only beat us by one
point."

"And I hit the ball," Janet reminded her friend. "What did you say about
my not being able to even see it?"

"I take it all back," Carol said humbly. Then she bristled with
indignation. "I think I was safe at home, and I also think the umpire
was on the Sophomores' side!"

"Tush!" Janet said. "Let's change and join Gale and Phyl."

For all of the other girls' levity Carol was inconsolable. She felt
responsible for the girls losing the game and even though they in no way
chided her or scolded she blamed herself.

"It was the best ball game I ever saw," Phyllis declared when they were
all united on the East Campus Dormitory steps. "I never thought girls
could play such good baseball."

"You have no idea what we can do," Janet told her condescendingly. "You
should see us pull taffy."

"Whoops! How exciting," Madge laughed.

"Exciting or not, it is a good idea," Janet said. She beamed upon Gale
and Phyllis. "If you two sorority sisters could find a way to come up
and see us tonight we might have a taffy pull."

"We'll be there," Phyllis promised promptly. "Nothing could induce me to
miss it."

"See you tonight then," Carol yawned. "I'm going to get some last minute
studying in on my Geometry. Tomorrow is our final exam."

The other four girls disappeared within the dormitory house while Gale
and Phyllis strolled toward Happiness House in the afternoon sunset.

"Let's go see White Star," Phyllis proposed. "We have plenty of time
before dinner."

White Star was the mount in the stables which Phyllis had chosen for her
own when she first started to ride two days before. She had long before
visited the stables with the other girls and made friends with the black
horse who had the white star on his forehead from which he got his name.
She had ridden, too, that summer in Arizona but just two days ago had
she begun her proper training at Briarhurst. Every day found her
participating more and more in the activities which she had at first
pursued when she came to college. Gale, too, did not need to act for
Phyllis any more as president pro tem of the Freshman class. Phyllis was
now able to attend to all the business in which she was involved.

There were no riding classes this afternoon and all the horses were in
their stalls with only one groom on guard. White Star whinnied softly at
the girls' approach. He was a magnificent animal--sturdy, and his satiny
coat was smooth and shiny. He nuzzled Phyllis' shoulder with his soft
nose.

"Get away, old softie," she said smiling. "Want some sugar?"

Eagerly the horse thrust his nose into her hand and secured the white
lump.

"Do you carry a supply of sugar with you?" Gale laughed. "Every time you
come here you have some and White Star knows it. He would follow you
back to the sorority house if he could get out."

Phyllis rubbed White Star's forehead.

"He is a great horse," she said, "the only one I'll ride here at
school." She brought forth another piece of sugar from her pocket. "That
is the last!" she warned.

With a final pat for White Star the girls left the stall. The horse sent
a soft whinny after them.

"The Dean is a lot more popular with the girls now than she was before,
isn't she?" Phyllis murmured. "The new organ in the chapel, these riding
lessons--everything has won the girls over."

It was true. The resentment against the Dean had miraculously faded with
the realization that everything she planned was really for the benefit
of the school and the girls there. All trouble had ceased with the
departure of Miss Horton. Now Briarhurst was the most peaceful and
harmonious spot in the world. But sometimes even the most blissful peace
is rudely disturbed.




                              Chapter XIX

                               WHITE STAR


The taffy pull was most successful. With due secrecy Gale and Phyllis
had managed to get out of Happiness House and into their friends'
dormitory without being discovered. What really might happen if they
were found would be serious but they were skylarking and they did not
think of the consequences of their act. They were too intent on having a
good time.

The high spot of the evening came when Carol's hands were both occupied
with pulling the golden strands of sticky mass.

"Ooooo," she cried, "my ear itches. What'll I do?"

"Scratch it," Janet suggested practically.

"And get my golden curls all full of molasses?" Carol demanded. "Think
of something else. Only hurry up--ooooooo!"

Valerie came to the rescue. She was the only one who had available a
hand which was not entangled in the taffy.

After that they ate and pulled to their hearts' content. The evening
flew away. When the lights-out bell rang Gale and Phyllis decided it was
high time for them to be getting back to Happiness House. It would be
quite a puzzle for them to get safely back to their room unseen. They
hoped the door was not yet locked.

With the stealth of criminals they left the dormitory house. Once on the
campus they paused in the shade of the trees to breathe freely. From a
window Janet and Carol waved to their two friends and silently
disappeared within the darkness of their room. The girls on the campus
strolled leisurely toward the darkened Happiness House. They were really
in no hurry and it was such a nice evening.

Some imp of mischief whispered in their ear and they turned toward the
lake. They stood on the shore and watched the moonlight make little gold
ripples on the waves. They explored the dark shadows of the thick growth
of trees along the lake and shivered at the eerie noises.

Finally Gale became sleepy and they decided that they really must go
back to their room. Tomorrow they had a difficult examination to pass,
for which they had studied for days and days. It was important that they
should be fresh in the morning.

"We really shouldn't have gone to that party tonight," Phyllis yawned.
"I haven't a blessed Geometry thought in my head."

"We had fun though," Gale said. "I never ate so much taffy in my life."

"What would happen if we were caught in another dormitory house?"
Phyllis wanted to know. "We wouldn't be expelled, would we?"

Gale made a wry face. "Why must you think of those things?"

Phyllis put a hand on Gale's arm. In the darkness of the trees they
stood listening. They could hear the gentle lapping of the lake water
almost at their feet. From over their head an eerie voice demanded:

"Who-o-o-o."

A pair of eyes glared down at them like green electric light bulbs
suddenly flashed on and turned off then flashed on again as an owl
blinked through the night.

"Doesn't he scare you?" Phyllis shivered. "He reminds me of a Hallowe'en
goblin."

"We really should go to bed," Gale said once more, "as much as I hate to
admit it."

"We've had a lot of fun this term, haven't we?" Phyllis sighed. "It is
hard to believe that our Freshman year is almost over."

"Fun!" Gale echoed. "I wouldn't say you had so much fun," she added.

"On the whole I did," Phyllis declared, "and I even found a father! He
is going to Marchton to see Miss Fields and move all my belongings," she
continued.

"He is! What is going to happen to Miss Fields?" Gale asked.

"I asked him not to do anything about her," Phyllis said. "All I want is
never to have to go back there."

"Then we won't see you much this summer," Gale sighed. "Marchton will
seem different."

"Oh, I'll see you all right," Phyllis said but she did not explain
further then.

The girls had left the wood shore line behind them and come out again
upon the campus. Now they could see the stars above them twinklingly
close.

"Look at that red glow back of the Chemistry Hall," Gale said suddenly.
"What do you suppose it is?"

"I can't imagine," Phyllis said. "Something at the stables. Let's
investigate."

Keeping in the shadows so as to be out of sight of any wandering teacher
the girls crept around the Chemistry Hall. What they saw froze them
momentarily to the spot with horror. Flames were curling around the
corner of the main stable and smoke was pouring from a shattered window.
From the groom's quarters stumbled one of the attendants. The other
regular man was not on the grounds today.

"Gale," Phyllis said urgently, "there is a fire alarm attached to Carver
Hall. Sound it! Tell the Dean----"

"Right!" Gale said promptly, not waiting to hear any more, and sped
away.

Phyllis ran forward. "Are you all right?" she demanded of the man.

"The smoke----" he choked.

A frightened whinny from the stables brought Phyllis up short. The poor
trapped horses! She couldn't stand there and do nothing!

"Get the fire apparatus working!" she shouted and dashed for the
stables. Madly she dashed back again. "Got a knife?" she asked the
groom.

Dazed from the smoke and the sudden confusion, where an hour ago had
been peace, the man nodded his head and struggled to get a pen knife
from his pocket. Once it was secured Phyllis dashed again to the nearest
stall. The horses were trampling, rearing, whinnying in fright. The
smoke was thick and it was impossible to breathe freely.

Phyllis was hurled against the side of the stall as the horse rose on
his hind legs pawing the air wildly with his forehoofs, straining at the
rope which tied his bridle to the stall. She picked herself up from the
straw mumbling unintelligible things when she discovered she had dropped
the knife. Her fingers found the rope but it was impossible under such
conditions to untie the knot. Quite by accident, a lucky accident, her
foot came in contact with the knife as she dodged another flying hoof.
She picked it up and cut the rope. Pulling and coaxing she got the horse
into the open air. She tied him securely to the hitching post where the
girls were wont to dismount after their classes. It was a sufficient
distance away from the burning stables to make him safe. It was
absolutely necessary to tie him, although it wasted several precious
minutes. Otherwise, with the queer trait of his breed, he would
immediately have dashed back into the building.

Once more Phyllis returned to the stable. The groom had disappeared,
probably in search of help and fire extinguishers. The uproar of the
horses beat in her ears. Their frightened whinnies were even more
pitiful than human cries might have been. The animals were so helpless!
The second horse was led and tied to the post beside the first. She felt
bruised where another flying forefoot had caught her off guard. The
flames were roaring like a furnace now. The straw in the stables would
be excellent food for the flames. Luckily the fire had started in the
groom's quarter and must work up through the harness room. If it had
started in the heart of the stables themselves she would never have been
able to get near the horses.

One by one Phyllis brought the horses out. When the last one was secure
she leaned weakly against the post. The alarm bell was tolling now. It
had been ringing for several minutes but in her absorption she had not
heard it. Soon the girls would be on the scene and the fire apparatus
would be in play. Phyllis felt as if she would never again get the smell
of smoke out of her system.

One--two--three--she counted the horses neighing and rearing at their
posts. Nine! There should be ten! With a sinking of heart she looked at
them all again. White Star was not there! White Star! The best of the
group! How could she possibly have missed him?

Without another thought but that of her favorite mount Phyllis dashed
back into the stables. One--two--three--stalls empty. Nothing but
silence and the crackling of flames--flames creeping closer, destroying,
and smoke.

Her head was whirling and she felt choked. Once she stumbled wildly over
something and fell to her knees in the straw. She sat there several
seconds, dazed. She had better find White Star soon or they would both
be trapped! Why didn't help come? Though only a few minutes could have
elapsed since she and Gale first sighted the fire it seemed like hours.
What was that?

An excited whinny came to her, followed by the sound of crashing blows
against wood. White Star! And he was trying to kick his stall to pieces!
Despite the terribly desperate situation Phyllis could not help but
smile. White Star proposed to fight! She stumbled to her feet and went
on prowling through the smoke until she came to the stall in which all
the uproar was taking place. She felt as though all the strength in her
body was leaving her. White Star was bucking and kicking with all his
might. The smoke was like a blanket smothering everything and through
which Phyllis felt her way to White Star's head. She took hold of his
bridle and he nuzzled against her shoulder affectionately. He seemed to
recognize his friend. With her last remaining strength Phyllis cut the
rope that held White Star. She turned him around and gave him a stinging
blow.

"Go it, boy!"

The horse reared and plunged out through the door of his stall, leaving
Phyllis a huddled figure on the straw.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Gale, after turning the electric switch that automatically sounded the
fire alarm, had sped to the Dean's office. She found Dean Travis working
late. After excitedly blurting out the news Gale dashed again to the
stables, stopping for nothing. She was just in time to see White Star
appear.

The horse bounded out of the smoke into the cool night air. He stopped
short, raised his head and whinnied, pawing the ground with his
forehoof. He glanced at the other horses, straining at their ropes,
tossed his head, and turning, dashed back for the burning stable.

"Phyl----" Gale shouted.

There was no reply. Gale saw the groom and another man playing a stream
of water upon the flames on one side of the building. She went closer.
Through the smoke she could see White Star.

Gale could not explain White Star's actions. She had read of how horses
always dashed back into the burning building from which they were
rescued, unless they were tied outside. It was evident that Phyllis had
tied the others, why not White Star? This was her favorite!

Gale looked at the other struggling horses and wondered at the strength
of her friend. Horses were strong at any time--frightened, terrorized as
they were now, she did not see how Phyllis had managed to get them all
out.

White Star appeared out of the smoke and almost ran her down. He stood
for a second looking at her, pawing the ground and tossing his head.

Gale remembered seeing a wonder horse in the movies who acted like this
when he was summoning help for his master. Was it possible---- White
Star was a magnificent animal. She had always acknowledged that, but she
had never actually credited him with super intelligence. However, now
his eyes seemed to be pleading with her; the crazy way he dashed about
made her think he was trying to tell her something.

"Phyllis!" Gale shouted again.

"Ahoy." Carol and Janet dashed up breathlessly.

"We got here first because we didn't have to stop to dress seeing that
we weren't yet undressed--if you understand me," Janet said.

"We might have known you would be here," added Carol. "Where's Phyl?"

"Look at that horse!"

The groom had taken it into his head to rescue White Star and tie him
beside the other horses. But White Star had other ideas. He raced madly
past the flames and into the smoke.

"I think I know what he wants!" Gale cried and the next time White Star
dashed into sight she followed him.

"The crazy----" Carol began. "Gale, come back!"

Gale bumped into White Star. She was unable to see him clearly, the
smoke hurt her eyes, and she was choking for breath. With one hand on
his bridle she let him pull her along. The horse trotted forward until
he came to his stall. There he stopped.

"W-What now?" Gale coughed. Dimly through the smoke she became aware of
a figure lying on the ground. "Phyl!" she screamed. "Phyl!"

A burning rafter crashed to the ground at some little distance. White
Star reared and plunged away but a second later he was back, trembling
and whinnying. Gale lifted Phyllis and put her across White Star's back.
Necessity and fear had lent her strength and now she pulled White Star's
head down to her shoulder. With a tight grip on his bridle she started
forward at a run. The horse plunged after her. How she managed to dash
out through the smoke Gale didn't quite know but thankfully she had come
at last to her friend.




                               Chapter XX

                          THE END OF THE TERM


"I am personally going to buy White Star a whole box of sugar for his
very own," Carol said positively. "The horse is a hero."

"And he speaks a language all his own," added Janet. "Gale understood
him but we didn't."

"It is lucky for me that Gale did understand him," Phyllis said lazily.

It was the last day of classes, weeks after the fire at the stables. The
girls were gathered on the campus after their last classroom session,
discussing the high points of their college term. The miraculous way
White Star had summoned help for Phyllis never ceased to be a thing of
wonder to them. Neither Phyllis nor Gale had suffered other than a
slight sickness from smoke. New stables had been erected and riding
classes had gone on as before, with the exception of White Star's
sensational rise in popularity.

"All the girls want to ride him," Madge laughed, "but he seems to prefer
Phyllis."

"Ah, yes, brothers under the skin," Carol giggled daringly. "What is
this power you have over horses, Phyl?"

"The same you have over Chemistry professors," Phyllis retorted. "What I
want to know is, why did Professor Lukens pass you?"

"Because I'm brilliant," Carol said modestly.

"More likely because he wanted to be rid of you," Janet put in. "You
asked more questions in class than----"

"Let's go down to the village and get a soda at the drug store," Madge
proposed peacefully.

"An excellent suggestion," Carol said immediately. "Why don't you think
of things like that?" she asked Janet.

"Because walking doesn't appeal to me," Janet said promptly. "Now
if--behold!" she said in astonishment.

The girls were at the edge of the college grounds. Mounting the hill to
the gate was a new, shiny bus which declared in broad white letters on
the side "Briarhurst College." At the wheel was the same old fellow who
had met them in his dilapidated contraption when they arrived at
Briarhurst and who had been so against the new Dean because she wanted
to buy him a new bus.

"Say, did somebody leave you money?" Janet shouted.

He stopped the bus and opened the door. "Want a ride to the village?
Ain't she a beauty?" he asked next when the girls had accepted his
invitation with alacrity and tumbled into the vehicle. "The new Dean's
responsible. Course," he added condescendingly, "she ain't as good as
old Lizzie but she's sure spiffy!"

Janet and Carol chortled with glee.

"Spiffy is exactly the word!" Carol declared.

At the foot of the hill he let them out and went on his way.

"Miracle number two," Carol laughed. "Remember how fond of his old bus
he was?"

"Now he is even more proud of this one," Madge agreed.

"Lead me to the drug store," Janet said firmly.

"What are we going to do this summer?" Valerie asked over her chocolate
soda.

"Let's go camping," Madge proposed. "We can have a lot of adventures
that way."

"Hm," Janet agreed unenthusiastically.

"My dad," Phyllis said slowly, "has offered to let us use his boat--if
we want to."

"If we want to," Janet echoed gleefully.

"Carol Carter! Did you suggest it to Doctor Elton?" Gale asked, trying
to be stern but failing.

"Well," Carol murmured, "it might have slipped out in my conversation
with him. You see I----"

"We see," Valerie laughed.

Suppose we leave the Adventure Girls here, discussing their plans for
the summer. We shall join them again for more excitement in The
Adventure Girls on Vacation.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE GIRLS AT HAPPINESS HOUSE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one‚Äîthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG‚Ñ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away‚Äîyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‚Äúthe
Foundation‚Äù or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù appears, or with which the
phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work in a format
other than ‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‚ÄúPlain
Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    ‚Ä¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, ‚ÄúInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.‚Äù
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        works.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‚ÄúDefects,‚Äù such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‚ÄúRight
of Replacement or Refund‚Äù described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‚ÄòAS-IS‚Äô, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢‚Äôs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation‚Äôs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state‚Äôs laws.

The Foundation‚Äôs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation‚Äôs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.